URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QADT/2009/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KW v B G Limited, DP & DF [2009] QADT 7 (21 April 2009)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL QUEENSLAND
KW v B G Limited, DP & DF
[2009] QADT 7
Complainant
First Respondent
Second Respondent
Third Respondent
PROCEEDING:
Final Hearing
DELIVERED ON:
21 April 2009
DELIVERED AT:
Member Hogan
HEARING DATES:
29,30,31 October 2007; 1 November 2007; 3,4,5 March
in respect of the complaint of sexual harassment against the Third Respondent,
the First and Third Respondents, as joint and
several debtors, pay to the
Complainant the sum of $23,425.00 within 28 days of the date of this Order.
the complaint of victimisation is dismissed.
the complaint of sexual harassment against the Second Respondent be
the First Respondent provide, to every member of its Board of Directors, a copy
of this decision.
save for compliance with the terms of paragraph 4 above, the disclosure of the
identity of the Complainant, the Respondents or
any of the witnesses in the
proceedings is prohibited.
in the event that the Complainant seeks costs from any Respondent, the
Complainant file and serve written submissions as to costs
within 14 days.
any Respondent from whom the Complainant seeks an order for costs and upon whom
the Complainant serves a copy of the written
submission seeking the same or any
Respondent seeking an order for costs file and serve written submissions within
14 days of the
receipt of the Complainant’s written submission.
in the event that the Second Respondent seeks costs from the Complainant, the
Second Respondent file and serve written submissions
as to costs within 14
in the In the event that the Second Respondent seeks costs from the Complainant,
and serves the Complainant with written submissions
as to costs, the Complainant
shall file and serve written submissions in response within 14 days of the
receipt of the Second Respondent’s
written submission.
CATCHWORDS:
Sexual harassment; victimisation; responsibility of management to act on
informal complaints of sexual harassment; damages.
CASES CITED
Hopper v Mt Isa Mines Ltd & Ors
[1997] QADT 3
Caton v Richmond Club Limited
[2003] NSW ADT 202
Webb v State of Queensland
[2006] QADT
Wadsworth v Akers and Woolworths Ltd t/a Big W Discount
[2007] QADT 17
Bogie v The University of Western Sydney
(1990) EOC 92-313
NSW Equal Opportunity Tribunal
Shaikh v Commissioner, New South Wales Fire Brigades
per the NSW Equal Opportunity Tribunal
Sivananthan v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Service
per the New South Wales Administrative Decisions Tribunal Equal
Opportunities Division
Hautlieu Pty Ltd trading as Russell Pathology v McIntosh
WASCA per the Western Australian Court of Appeal
Damiano & Anor v Wilkinson & Anor
[2004] FAMCA 891
Cockin v P&N Beverages Pty Ltd
[2006] QADT 42
Morrison-Liddy v The Director Department of Technical and Further
(1989) EOC 92-246
per the South Australian Equal Opportunity
(supra) @ 78,146;
Bailey v Australian National University
(1995) EOC 92-744
Simpson v Boyson & Belli Park Stud P/L
[2003] QADT (27 October 2003)
Lang v Nutt
[2004] QADT (23 November
Wilkinson v Buchan & Abre P/L
[2003] QADT (16 July
Schillert v Mackenzie and Nicksam P/L trading as Shafston Hotel
[2002] QADT 18
(24 September 2002)
[2006] QADT 18
(9 May 2006)
Dale, Larkin and Lofter v Shearer and Anor
[2006] QADT 1
(16 January 2006)
Fischer v Byrnes v
[2006] QADT 33
(8 August 2006)
LEGISLATION CITED:
Anti-Discrimination Act
REPRESENTATION:
Mr P B de Plater for the instructed by Kerin & Co. for the
Complainant.
Mr J Dwyer (directly instructed) for the First and Second
Respondents.
Third Respondent appeared in person.
Complainant, who had previously completed an apprenticeship in carpentry and
joinery, commenced employment as a team member (the
equivalent of a sales
person) with the First Respondent in September 2001.
was working at the C complex in 2004, primarily, in the outdoor timber
department (“Outdoor Timber”). The complex
was open from
approximately 7.00 am until 9.00 pm (Monday to Friday) and from
8.00 am until 5.00 pm (Saturday) and from 9.00 am until
6.00 pm (Sunday). The Complainant generally worked from 6.00 pm until
9.00 pm on weekdays and for the entirety of the weekend opening
Third Respondent was a co-ordinator employed by the First Respondent at the C
complex also – initially, in the Heat section
and, subsequently, as the
co-ordinator of Outdoor Timber. In the role of co-ordinator, the Third
Respondent was responsible for
‘managing’ (in the sense of composing
the rosters and being the immediate person to whom the team members would report
and from whom they would obtain assistance) the relevant section. This meant
that he was, for the majority of the relevant period,
the Complainant’s
immediate supervisor.
Second Respondent was, during the latter half of 2004, employed by the First
Respondent as the Operations Manager for the C complex.
He was the person to
whom the Third Respondent, as co-ordinator, reported. He was also the
Complainant’s supervisor.
structure of the First Respondent’s organisation was such that the
Operations Manager of any store would report directly
to the Complex Manager who
was, at some of the relevant times, a Mr WL.
Complainant makes a number of claims of sexual harassment against the Second
Respondent and the Third Respondent. In respect
of these claims, the
Complainant asserts that, pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act
(“the Act”), the First Respondent is vicariously liable for
the acts of the Second and Third Respondents.
Complainant also asserts that she was the subject of actions for which the First
Respondent is responsible, which amounted to
victimisation in contravention of
of the Act.
THE WITNESSES
Complainant
evidence and was cross-examined. Her Husband, Mr GW, also gave
cross-examined. The Complainant also relied upon the evidence of
co-worker at the C complex),
worked with the Third Respondent at another complex prior to him working at the
C complex),
worked with the Third Respondent at another complex after he worked at the C
complex) and
psychiatrist who examined her for the purpose of providing a report for use in
this proceeding.
commenced employment with the First Respondent in June 2003. She did not know
the Complainant, nor had she ever worked with
or spoken to
however, worked with the Third Respondent at the First Respondent’s EP
complex (prior to the events complained of
by the Complainant).
said that she initially got on well with the Third Respondent (who was the
co-ordinator of the trade desk – the section
in which she worked) but that
he then started to become ‘overly friendly’ with kisses and hugs
which she at first brushed
Ms ET agreed with the suggestion put to her by the Third Respondent that,
during the working relationship the two of them had,
they engaged in making
jokes with a sexual connotation, she did not agree that they engaged in
said that, in June 2003, the EP complex was about to close and the Third
Respondent (who by then was working at the R complex)
offered her a prospect of
a job at the R complex. The Third Respondent put to Ms ET that, during a
telephone conversation on the
morning of the night that they met at the hotel,
she said to him ‘If I wasn’t with my boyfriend, it’d be all
Ms ET denied that she had said
I accept her
evidence in this respect.
said that they arranged to meet at a hotel one night after work and, when the
Third Respondent arrived, he suggested a hug,
she agreed and he hugged her and
when he pulled away, kissed her on the side of the
also said that, as they were walking up the back stairs into the hotel, the
Third Respondent grabbed (like a pat) her bottom.
Third Respondent stated that his hand came into contact with Ms ET’s
hip and not her bottom as she suggests and that, when
Ms M recorded his
explanation for this event as being ”patted her on the bum with the back
of my hand, saying ‘up you
go’, making her walk up the stairs
first”, she had done so
incorrectly.
said that, once inside the hotel, the Third Respondent had a beer and they
talked about work. As the conversation progressed,
there were jokes about
sexual favours [from her to the Third Respondent: namely, how she should perform
‘oral’] to get
the job and she started to get pretty uncomfortable
and made an excuse to leave. As she was departing, the Third Respondent gave
her another hug (which was reciprocated by her) and an unreciprocated kiss (a
slight mouth open from the Third Respondent) on her
mouth and there was talk of
her breasts. The Third Respondent put to Ms ET that he kissed her on the
cheek but she maintained that
it was on the side of her mouth.
also thought that the Third Respondent actually touched her
understood him to suggest that, whilst his hand was near her breasts, he did not
actually touch them. The Third Respondent
whilst his hand was near or close to Ms ET’s breast, there was no
actual contact. He stated that she was lying when
she said that he had grabbed
her breast.
(the Third Respondent’s wife), however, said, during her cross-examination
by Mr de Plater, that, when the Third Respondent
had come home that
evening, he told her that he may have upset Ms ET because, when they were
leaving he went to pat her on the shoulder
to say good-bye, she turned at the
same time and his hand accidentally touched her breast. She was quite clear in
saying that her
understanding from what he told her was that there had been some
account corroborates Ms ET’s account of events in this respect on
that occasion and is completely at odds with the account
given orally by the
Third Respondent during his evidence.
said that the next day she told a friend who also worked at the EP complex what
had happened and that, whilst they were talking
in her car, the Third Respondent
called her on her mobile to see if she was ok and saying that it wasn’t a
work matter and
stated he was just checking to see that she didn’t take
offence to his jokes because they were just
Respondent accepted that he had called Ms ET.
also said that the Third Respondent had said that what had happened, happened
because she had led him on and he thought it was
what she wanted. After that
conversation, Ms ET went into the complex and spoke with her superiors,
including a Mr BM (the complex
subsequently spoke with the Third Respondent about his behaviour (in the
presence of her friend
and she said that he said she had led him
said that she also told the Third Respondent that, if she heard of inappropriate
behaviour by him toward other employees,
she would make a formal complaint about
his behaviour. The Third Respondent suggested to Ms ET that such a comment
was never made
but she disagreed with that suggestion.
any event, these two things came to pass. Ms ET made her formal complaint
to Mr WL and Ms JV became involved in the process.
that she was later told that the Third Respondent had decided to leave the
employ of the First
Respondent.
said that she next had contact with the Third Respondent at the EP complex
break-up function. When asked by him to provide
a copy of her CV, she did so.
She accepted that she had consumed alcohol but denied that she had approached
the Third Respondent
from behind and grabbed his chest and squeezed
said that she was standing next to the Third Respondent at the time that
account supports that provided by the Third Respondent in this regard.
Third Respondent did not accept the suggestion made by Mr de Plater that,
if Ms ET was accurate in what she said during her evidence
attendance at the hotel, such behaviour would not amount to sexual harassment
because it was ‘mutual flirting that
happened outside of work
accepted that, if true, her allegations would amount to sexual harassment which,
because they occurred away from the work premises
and outside work hours, would
not breach the First Respondent’s sexual harassment policy.
Third Respondent said that he had engaged in a bit of mutual
‘flirting’ with her, had hugged her and had kissed her
(the point in
dispute being whether this was on the cheek – as he said- or the side of
the mouth – as Ms ET
that the Third Respondent himself described Ms ET as a good work mate,
jovial and a nice person, it is difficult to see why
she would simply
‘invent’ the events which she has recounted. I accept and prefer the
evidence of Ms ET to that given
by the Third Respondent in so far as what
Ms ET has said occurred between the two parties. I am not persuaded that
the conduct between
them involved ‘mutual flirting’ – rather,
I conclude that this was the perception placed upon the events by the
Respondent alone. I note, in particular, that he is significantly older than
Ms ET and, at the time of these events, was employed
in a position superior
to hers. In these circumstances, I am persuaded that matters unfolded in the
manner described by Ms ET.
EVIDENCE OF MS LeM
did not know the Complainant, nor had she ever worked with or spoken to
commenced work for the First Respondent in May 2005 and had worked with the
Third Respondent (who was her direct supervisor)
at the R complex operated by
the First Respondent (in the time after the events complained of by the
Complainant).
said that initially her relationship with the Third Respondent was pretty much
fine and he had made her feel comfortable with
his handling of a worker’s
compensation matter in which she was involved.
she said that this changed when she started working more closely with the Third
Respondent (within a month of her commencing
work) – she recalled an
occasion where the Third Respondent picked up a very large marking pen and, on
putting it up to his
ear saying ‘it’s not humming, it mustn’t
have any batteries in it’ (a reference she took as being to a
emphatically did not agree with the Third Respondent’s suggestion that his
comment to her was ‘it’s
was the first comment in what Ms LeM regarded as a change in the Third
Respondent’s behaviour toward her.
was clear in stating that there was a lot of joking, generally of a
‘disgusting nature or sexual orientation’ going
on in the workplace
and that most times people had a laugh and joined in. However, she said that
she regarded things changing when
she regarded the Third Respondent as becoming
personal in his comments to her.
said that the Third Respondent said to her, (at a time when her husband worked
away a lot) that, if she wasn’t getting
enough at home, she could get some
from him and when she asked him what he meant, he replied ‘sex, of
also said that, in the first couple of weeks in July 2005, when she was setting
up a display at the front of the complex, the
Third Respondent came up behind
her and grabbed her on the backside – she told him to ‘fuck
off’, leave her alone
and not do it again and he responded by laughing.
Ms LeM said that she told a friend of hers (Ms L) with whom she had
gone through
induction about this
said that in mid July 2005, she had to attend other stores with the Third
Respondent for merchandising purposes. She says
that, during the drive, the
Third Respondent made very direct lewd comments of a sexually suggestive nature
to her and, when she
did not join in the conversation, said that she was a moody
bitch and asked her whether she had her
said that, as they drove into the EP complex carpark and were parking, the Third
Respondent commented as to how he liked ‘tits’
tits man’) and reached over and grabbed her right breast – she got
out of the car as it was still
moving. She said the Third Respondent said
‘what?’ and laughed. Ms LeM denied that she had made any
comment to the
Third Respondent about whether he knew what a Brazilian wax
said that conversations between herself and the Third Respondent relating to sex
persisted at his instigation and that, toward
the end of telephone conversations
between them on the portable (in-complex) telephones, he would say things to her
me that you love me. Tell me that you want to fuck me. Tell
me that you want to have sex with
denied that she at any time put the Third Respondent’s arm around her
shoulders; rather, she said that he had come up
beside her and put his arm
around her shoulder and grabbed onto her right
said that, after an occasion where she spoke to the complex manager about a
merchandising issue, the Third Respondent was called
upstairs. She said that he
later called her on her mobile and said that he was a bit worried about being
called up and seeing her
up with the manager at the same time and said
‘You wouldn’t dob me in now, would
Ms LeM said that she told him that, if he left her alone, he’d have
nothing to worry about.
subsequently spoke to the complex manager, who advised her to put her complaint
into writing which she did. She said that
the complex manager then told her
that she needn’t come back to the complex until he could be 100% certain
that she would not
come into contact with the Third Respondent and she was put
onto paid leave. Ms LeM returned to work at her insistence about a couple
of days later.
She then provided information (consistent with what I have summarised above but
also including a concern that the Third Respondent
also made things
uncomfortable and applied pressure to her by his comments), via an email to
July 2005 (approximately 6-7 months after the culmination of the events
described by the Complainant).
said that she had also received a number of text messages around this time which
she showed to Ms JV who transcribed
messages were sent in the period from 15 July 2005 until 19 July 2005
and involved invitations to contact the Third Respondent
on work and non-work
numbers. Ms LeM accepted, during cross-examination by the Third
Respondent, that one of them (sent 18 July
2005 telling her to ring co-ord
on duty and call him after 8) was received by her after she had informed
the Third Respondent that
she was unable to make it to the complex on a
Third Respondent suggested to Ms LeM that she had sent sexually suggestive
text messages to him. Ms LeM accepted that she had
sent text messages but
did not recall the content of the
She did not
recall sending a text messages in the terms suggested by the Third Respondent
and did not believe she would have sent
messages of that
12 October 2007, the Third Respondent became aware that Ms LeM was to
be called by the Complainant in the proceedings. At about
10.30 pm that
evening, a telephone call was made to Ms LeM’s mobile telephone by a
friend of the Third Respondent’s who
was visiting him that evening. The
Third Respondent says that there were discussions about her, that her number was
in his phone (under an identifier of ‘Merch’)
and that, upon him indicating to his friend (‘M’) that it was
number, M called the number. He said that his wife was present at the time of
Ms PF said that she did not see who initiated the call (as she was out of
the room) but saw M on the phone when she came into the
room and was told who
Third Respondent denied that he made the call to Ms LeM or that he had said
to her words to the effect of ‘why are you doing
this to me?’, but
agreed with Mr de Plater’s suggestion that he had been thinking that
sentiment and considered that
the evidence by the Complainant, Ms ET and
Ms LeM, all amounted to a conspiracy by them against
contrast to his account, Ms LeM said that when she answered her telephone
and upon asking who it was (as she did not recognise
the voice), heard a comment
‘It’s [the Third
Respondent]’.
She also said that, before the telephone was disconnected, the Third Respondent
said ‘Why are you saying these things about
Third Respondent accepted that, if what Ms LeM asserted was true, such
events could amount to a breach of the First Respondent’s
he asserted that the two of them had engaged in ‘mutual flirting’
which encompassed dirty, smutty talk, and rude
or sexual jokes. Whilst the
Third Respondent denied calling Ms LeM a moody bitch or suggesting that she
was menstruating, or grabbing
her breast, he admitted telling her that he was
Third Respondent also
when spoken to by the area manager (Mr M) and the head of HR in Q
(Ms F) about the allegations made by Ms LeM, he told them
that he was
investigating a relationship (or friendship) with Ms LeM outside of work
and had ‘done something silly’ by
approaching her. I do not accept
that what he meant at the time he told Mr M and Ms F this he was
referring to a ‘friendship’
with Ms LeM but, rather, that he
was investigating something of a more intimate nature.
ADDUCED BY THE SECOND RESPONDENT
Second Respondent gave
cross-examined. He (where relevant) and the First Respondent relied upon
evidence given by Ms JV (the Human Resources coordinator
for the regions
within which the C complex is
Mr WL (the C Complex
were required for cross-examination by the Complainant.
worked with the Complainant at the Mo complex from May 2005 until she left the
store. She came to provide her statement because
she was asked by the First
Respondent’s National HR Manager to talk to him about the Complainant and
what it was like working
in essence, says that the Complainant had a changeable personality which
involved her being pleasant on one occasion and yelling
on the next because she
was unhappy about
said that she considered the Complainant to be rude, in her tone of voice, on
some occasions to both customers and staff
said that the Complainant consumed a lot of alcohol outside of work hours and
that, on one occasion, she was so drunk she attempted
to kiss Ms EA and
that she pushed her away and told her to go to
did not report this event at that time to anyone at her work.
also says that she remembers a work function (the Awards night in August 2006 at
which the Complainant won an award for ‘integrity’
and placed second
in an award for being the most enjoyable person to work
Complainant was so drunk (she could barely stand up, according to Ms EA)
that she had to be removed by others, and stayed
at Ms EA’s house
because she was too drunk to go
Complainant and Ms EA differ in their respective accounts as to what
happened at the function that night – the Complainant
says that Ms EA
and another female were sitting on each other’s husband’s laps and
she told them this was not appropriate
whereas Ms EA denies that any of
this occurred.
was the builders’ co-ordinator at the Mo store and the person to whom the
Complainant reported for a period of approximately
12 months (in the period
after she left the C complex). Mr JH said his experience of the
Complainant was that she was loud and he
thought she meddled in relationships by
gossiping. He gave an example of her telling team members that a team member
with had tried to “
crack on to her
” when this
gave evidence of a function which he believed was in August 2006 when he was in
the male toilets when the Complainant walked
in and asked him why he was still
single, and suggested to him that they should just get it over with and
” – which he took to mean sleeping
Mr Hyde said that the type of behaviour described by him was not out of
character for the Complainant as she was “
quite flirtatious at
EVIDENCE ADDUCED BY THE THIRD RESPONDENT
Third Respondent gave
cross-examined. He called his wife
Mr MD (who had worked with the Complainant at the Trade Desk at the C
were also cross-examined.
could not specifically remember meeting the
Complainant.
accepted that any reference in her document to what the Complainant might have
said or done was based on what she had been told
by her husband and
confirmed during cross
examination
he had commenced working with the First Respondent in 2005 (after the
Complainant moved interstate). However, he also said
that, whatever the
worked with the Complainant and considered that she had loud, crude behaviour
whose name he did not recollect
at the time of giving evidence. He also said that he had overheard the
Complainant and another female
employee discussing details of sexual partners at
the trade desk but did not report this to anyone. He denied that he had given
his statement based on what the Third Respondent told him to
who worked at the C store at the trade desk with the Complainant said that he
found her to be open and explicit in her general
conversations (that is, sexual
innuendo) and gave very personal descriptions of her own personal sex life
between herself and her
husband. He found in summary that her behaviour was
very changeable within the work environment.
think it relevant to note at this stage that the Third Respondent’s case
was that any comments, conduct or events suggested
by the Complainant simply did
not happen.
being the case, evidence given by him as to the Complainant’s manner, use
of language in the workplace and alleged involvement
in conversation/s
containing sexual innuendo and the like is of little assistance to me.
Similarly, much of Mr MD’s evidence
(which sought to cast a negative
light on the Complainant’s behaviours) was of little assistance. However,
I consider it relevant
that, whilst he considered the Complainant to be very
open and explicit in her general conversations and very personal in descriptions
of her personal life, he had not found her behaviours to be
‘inviting’ of
‘intimacy’.
the same reason, I consider that the evidence of EA, JH, PF and JF was of
limited assistance. Even if I accepted the tenor of
their collective evidence
as to the Complainant’s behaviour in its entirety, it does not seem to me
to be of much assistance
in determining whether the conduct alleged by her in
fact happened or not – the situation may have been different if the Third
Respondent’s case was that the conduct occurred but in circumstances where
a reasonable person would not have anticipated the
possibility that the
Complainant would be offended, humiliated or intimidated by
THE LEGISLATION
of the Act provides that a person must not sexually harass another
term ‘sexual harassment’ is defined in
of the Act as
Sexual harassment happens if a person--
(a) subjects another person to an unsolicited act of physical intimacy; or
(b) makes an unsolicited demand or request (whether directly or by
implication) for sexual favours from the other person; or
(c) makes a remark with sexual connotations relating to the other person;
(d) engages in any other unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature in relation
to the other person;
and the person engaging in the conduct described in paragraphs (a), (b),
(c) or (d) does so--
(e) with the intention of offending, humiliating or intimidating the other
(f) in circumstances where a reasonable person would have anticipated the
possibility that the other person would be offended, humiliated
or intimidated
by the conduct
of the Act provides as follows:
The circumstances that
are relevant in determining whether a reasonable person would have anticipated
the possibility that the other
person would be offended, humiliated or
intimidated by the conduct include--
(a) the sex of the other person; and
(b) the age of the other person; and
(c) the race of the other person; and
(d) any impairment that the other person has; and
(e) the relationship between the other person and the person engaging in
the conduct; and
(f) any other circumstance of the other person
reaching the decisions in this matter, I do so on the basis that it is for the
Complainant to prove, on the balance of probabilities,
that the Respondents
contravened the
it may initially appear, in one sense, to be taking matters out of turn, I
propose to deal with the allegations made by the
Complainant against the Third
Respondent first.
Third Respondent accepted that if the Complainant’s allegations were
accurate, the allegations would amount to sexual
harassment.
also accepted that, if he had in fact engaged in the behaviours alleged by the
Complainant, this would amount to a breach of
the policies instigated by the
Respondent.
CLAIM AGAINST THE THIRD RESPONDENT
Complainant alleges that the Third Respondent contravened
(which provides
that a person must not sexually harass another person) of the Act by subjecting
her to comments and conduct which
amounted to sexual harassment within the
definition of that term in
of the Act.
so far as the Third Respondent is concerned, this case is not one in which the
Complainant and the Third Respondent differ simply
as to conduct occurring
without the intention referred to in
of the Act or in circumstances
where it is suggested a reasonable person would not have anticipated the
possibility that the Complainant
would be offended, humiliated or intimidated by
the conduct.
it is a case in which the allegations of conduct made by the Complainant are
denied by the Third Respondent who asserts that
such conduct simply did not
happen at all. There is, on his case, no scope for
‘misinterpretation’ of events.
will deal with each particular allegation in turn.
14 JUNE 2004:
THE QUEEN’S BIRTHDAY WEEKEND
Complainant
or about 14 June 2004, the Third Respondent asked her if she was
‘wearing any underwear’.
Complainant had been performing her usual work in the timber yard on this
particular day. She was originally wearing her usual
uniform of shirt and
shorts. Later in the day she ‘had a go’ at being ‘the
Queen’ (i.e. dressing up in a
costume as part of a Complex promotional
event at which lollies were handed out to children present in the
person whose job it was had said that she’d had
the Complainant’s
on this occasion, the Third Respondent approached her at work, whilst she was
dressed as ‘the Queen’, and asked
her if she was wearing any
underwear. She asserts that she was “completely shocked” by the
when called by Mr de Plater to give oral evidence before the Tribunal, the
Complainant corrected this account, saying that
the Third Respondent had, in
fact, said to her that he could see through her
made by him of the word
‘underwear’.
She said that she had then said (to herself in effect): ‘shit, I’m
not wearing any
and gone upstairs to change out of the costume she was wearing into her usual
work attire. I conclude from this account that the
Complainant did not realise
the sheer nature of the costume.
cross-examination by Mr de Plater, the Third Respondent denied that he had
ever told the Complainant that he could see through
her dress. He said that he
did not make any comment at all about the dress she was
Complainant also asserted that, approximately 30 to 40 minutes after she
had changed from the costume into her usual work attire,
two people from the
‘Heat’ section of the complex approached her and said ‘We hear
you don’t wear
underwear’.
The Complainant said that she then approached the Third Respondent and asked how
people, from the section he was then working in,
had found out she wasn’t
wearing any underwear. She said that he admitted that he had told them and
thought it was a joke
and, when she told him that she didn’t think it was
funny (as she ‘didn’t want the whole world to know’),
apologised, saying that he was sorry and ‘just didn’t think it was
This is, in essence, consistent with what she had previously asserted in her
Third Respondent said that, when the Complainant (dressed in the Queen’s
costume) came down the stairs, she spoke to a group
of about five team members
and told them that she was not wearing any underwear. He said that she
indicated that there were no underwear
that he was not the only person she told that day, and at the time, it was seen
to the Third Respondent, therefore, any later comment by others about this topic
arose because of the Complainant’s
own comments to others (and not from
anything he had
cross-examination by Mr Dwyer on behalf of the First and Second
Respondents, the Complainant admitted that:
(a) it was only
during her oral evidence before the Tribunal that she had ever alleged that the
Third Respondent had said ‘I
can see through your
giving evidence orally before the Tribunal, her account of events was that the
Third Respondent had asked her whether she
was wearing any
Complainant said, by way of explanation for this change, that, when she was
going through her affidavit prior to the hearing,
she remembered that,
initially, the Third Respondent only began asking her if she was wearing any
underwear after this particular
weekend and
Second Respondent’s evidence (which I accept about this issue) is that the
Complainant did not, at the time of the incident,
report to him that the Third
Respondent had asked her whether she wore
the Complainant’s oral evidence as to what happened on this occasion, this
is unsurprising. The Complainant’s
failure to mention this event to the
Second Respondent at the time she spoke with him is more consistent with her
account of what happened on this particular weekend.
note that, in outlining this particular event orally, the Complainant
spontaneously reiterated that the Third Respondent had apologised
telling members of his section that she wasn’t wearing underwear –
an action I find inconsistent with the
idea that the Complainant has simply
invented this allegation against the Third Respondent.
accept the revised account provided by the Complainant orally. I accept that
she was correcting the account that had previously
been given by her. Such an
action had the very real potential to be damaging to her own case, given that so
much of it depends upon
her account of events being accepted. I am not
persuaded that the Complainant was doing anything other than providing her best
given the account of the Complainant given orally about this event (which casts
it in a very different light to that that
which appears from a reading of it in
her affidavit), I am not persuaded that the comment made by the Third Respondent
was made either
with the intention of offending, humiliating or intimidating the
Complainant or in circumstances where a reasonable person would
have anticipated
the possibility that she would be offended, humiliated or intimidated by the
comment and, consequently, am not persuaded
that it amounts to an act of sexual
harassment.
BEING ASKED IF SHE WAS WEARING ANY UNDERWEAR
Complainant asserted, during cross-examination, that, following the
Queen’s Birthday weekend, there were around about 8
occasions (in the
period from June 2004 until she left the C complex in November 2004) when the
Third Respondent asked her if she
was wearing any
said that the Third Respondent would come up to her whilst she was working and
whisper this question in her ear.
said that she could remember specific details of two of these occasions,
(a) when the
Third Respondent was doing her change of employment to casual (in November 2004)
– after the paperwork had been
done, the Third Respondent asked her if
she was wearing any underwear, she replied she was and walked
(b) one day
after she told him to ‘fuck off’ and leave her alone –
probably two days after she had confronted the
Third Respondent in around late
September/early October 2004 about his conduct toward
Third Respondent denied these allegations and said that he never mentioned the
topic of the Complainant’s underwear at
records the Complainant as telling him that the Third Respondent had asked her
if she wore any underwear under her shirt.
said that he remembered the Complainant saying, whilst at the trade desk, that
she did not wear
accept the Complainant’s evidence that the Third Respondent asked her on a
number of occasions over time whether she was wearing
any underwear. I
consider, given his evidence outlined above that the Complainant’s lack of
underwear was seen as a joke,
that it is more likely than not that this comment
was made to her. I am persuaded that in asking such a question on a number of
occasions, the Third Respondent made a remark with sexual connotations relating
to the Complainant and that such remarks were made
with either the intention of
offending or humiliating the Complainant or in circumstances where a reasonable
person would have anticipated
the possibility that the Complainant would be
offended or humiliated. I am satisfied that this conduct amounted to sexual
harassment,
within the meaning of the Act, of the Complainant by the Third
Respondent.
ASKING THE COMPLAINANT TO HAVE A DRINK/GO ON A
Complainant said
that, sometime in July 2004, the Third Respondent asked her to go on a
‘date’ with him. She says that she was upset
and angry that the
Third Respondent thought that he could ask her this, but that, as he was her
“boss” and she had a
strong aversion to conflict and didn’t
want to make him angry, she approached the matter by telling him firmly, but
courteously,
that she did not want to go on a date with
her oral evidence in
Complainant said that the Third Respondent asked her out on a ‘date’
on ‘numerous’ occasions - he would
just ask her if they could go out
for a drink so that he could get to know her better. She said that she told him
that, if it was
with other team members that would be fine, but that it
wasn’t ‘really advisable’ (I infer, if it was without other
team members) and that when she asked him why he wanted to go out and have
drinks with her, he told her it was because she was a
nice person and he wanted
to get to know her better.
her cross-examination by Mr Dwyer, the Complainant readily accepted that
there was nothing particularly offensive or sinister
by the Third Respondent, in late June or early July, to have a drink with him
because he thought she was
a nice person and wanted to get to know her
I understand her case, however, it was really that he
her out for a drink after she told him that she was not interested in joining
him that caused her offence.
Second Respondent asserted that the Complainant did not report to him at the
time of the incident that this had
accept this evidence. It is, I think, consistent with the Complainant’s
concession to Mr Dwyer as outlined above and with
the evidence of
Dr GL (referred to below) to the effect that the Complainant was a person
who thought she could ‘sort things
out herself’.
Third Respondent denied that he asked the Complainant out on a
‘date’ on any
said that he never asked the Complainant to join him outside of work hours,
either alone or in the presence of others. Consequently,
I am confident that,
whether described as a ‘date’ or an ‘invitation to have a
drink’, the Third Respondent’s
position is that this never happened.
However, I note that the Third Respondent has, on another occasion, met with a
person (Ms ET)
with whom he had worked outside of work hours. This
suggests, to me, that it would not have been completely out of character for
to have suggested a similar type of meeting with the Complainant and that he is
not the type of person who maintained a strict
and unyielding delineation
between ‘work’ colleagues and friends.
Having considered all of these matters, I prefer the evidence of the Complainant
in this respect. I accept that it is more likely
than not that the Third
Respondent initially asked the Complainant to have a drink with him after work
because she was a ‘nice
person’ and he wanted to ‘get to know
her better’.
the Complainant herself acknowledged (as referred to above), she did not think
it ‘particularly offensive’ for the
Third Respondent to ask her, the
first time, to have a drink with him because she was a nice person. In these
circumstances, I am
not persuaded that the initial request amounts to an act of
sexual harassment as defined in the Act. I am not persuaded that such
(on the first occasion) amounted to an unsolicited demand or request for sexual
remark with a sexual
connotation
unwelcome conduct of a sexual
if I am wrong in this conclusion, I am not persuaded that, in making the first
request for the Complainant to join him for a
drink because she was a nice
person and he wanted to get to know her better, the Third Respondent did so with
the intention of offending,
humiliating or intimidating the Complainant or in
circumstances where a reasonable person would have anticipated the possibility
that the Complainant would be offended, humiliated or intimidated by such
Accordingly,
I am not persuaded that the initial request amounts to an act of sexual
harassment as defined in the Act
ALLEGATION OF REQUESTS FOR
‘DATES’ AND CUDDLES
Complainant
after the first (late June/early July 2004) request to go on a
‘date’, the Third Respondent
to ask her out on
‘dates’ and/or to go for a drink with him. Mr WL records the
Complainant telling him this on 15 November
2004 at the time she made her
formal complaint. The Third Respondent denies this behaviour.
Second Respondent said that the Complainant approached him on 24 October
2004 (approximately 3 weeks before making her ‘formal’
complaint to Mr WL) and told him that the Third Respondent was repeatedly
asking her out and asking for a
this occasion, he asked her if she wanted him to talk to the Third Respondent
want him to do anything and he
left it to her to take action as she assured him that she wanted to go and speak
to the Third Respondent and tell him to stop the
next day (25 October 2004), the Complainant spoke with the Second Respondent
again. He said that she again said that she wanted
to speak to the Third
Respondent and that he told her that he wanted to follow up with her on the
Thursday to see how she felt.
The Second Respondent said that the Complainant
told him on the Thursday that she had spoken to the Third Respondent and was
that the behaviour would
accept the account given by the Complainant and supported in one sense by the
evidence of the Second Respondent. I am not persuaded
that the Complainant was
lying when she approached the Second Respondent to tell him that the Third
Respondent had been asking her
out and for a cuddle. I am not persuaded that,
in telling the Second Respondent that she wanted to handle ‘it’, the
Complainant was carrying out a plan to accuse the Third Respondent, falsely, of
actions which did not happen. I am not persuaded
that the Complainant reported
spoken with the Third Respondent
and that she had handled it) as this seems, to me, to be a very complicated and
approach if one was going to fabricate actions emanating from
seems to me that, if what the Third Respondent alleges is true (namely that he
never asked the Complainant out or on a ‘date’
or for a cuddle), the
Complainant would have to have decided to report (falsely) to the Second
Respondent that the Third Respondent
was asking her out and for cuddles and then
determine to positively ask him not to do anything about it and then, having
not to take action because she would, report back
things were sorted out. I am not persuaded that this is the case.
I am persuaded that the Third Respondent continued to ask the Complainant to
have a drink with him outside of work hours after
the Complainant told him that
she did not think it ‘advisable’. I am persuaded that, by
persisting with this invitation,
the Third Respondent committed an act of sexual
harassment as defined in the Act.
Complainant also said that the Third Respondent asked her for cuddles. This
assertion may have seemed somewhat incongruous without
the evidence that, on an
occasion when the Third Respondent was upset about another event unrelated to
her, the Complainant had,
in fact, given him a hug.
records the Complainant telling him that the Third Respondent had made a comment
to her about not giving him any more hugs.
Third Respondent said that, at no time, did he ask for, or offer, any form of
intimacy with the Complainant. During cross examination
by Mr de Plater,
he said that he had never asked the Complainant for hugs or cuddles but that she
had hugged him on an occasion.
He said that, despite telling Mr WL or the
Second Respondent, during their investigations of the complaint, that, because
Maori descent, he was used to greeting and farewelling others and sharing
emotion in a caring manner, he did not hug the
Complainant.
accept the Complainant’s evidence that the Third Respondent asked her for
cuddles after she had given him a hug. I am persuaded
that this, when
considered in the context of the requests to go for a drink (which were refused
by the Complainant), amounted to
a remark with sexual connotations relating to
the Complainant carried out in circumstances where a reasonable person would
have anticipated
the possibility that he Complainant would be offended,
humiliated or intimidated by such request and, as such, constituted sexual
harassment within the meaning of that term in
ALLEGATION OF LINE MARKING NIGHT – AUGUST 2004
Complainant asserted that, on “line marking night” (which was a
night where the painted lines used to delineate certain
areas within the Outdoor
Timber area at the complex were repainted) in August 2004, the Third Respondent
put his hand on her leg
whilst she was on a
Complainant’s
that, whilst she was using a forklift to move timber so that other employees
could do line marking at the C complex, the Third
Respondent (who was then the
co-ordinator of her
approached her, reached into the cabin of the forklift, told her to do something
and placed his hand on her leg. At the time this
occurred, she was wearing a
‘golf’ shirt, shorts and boots.
Complainant said that she moved her leg to escape his hand as she could not
drive away abruptly in the forklift and that his behaviour
offended her and made
her nervous and
Third Respondent put to the Complainant that the event did not
not accept this and maintained her account.
cross examination by Mr de Plater, the Third Respondent said that he had no
idea whether the Complainant was driving a forklift
and denied putting his hand
Complainant made no mention of this incident to either Mr WL or the Second
Respondent at the time she complained to each of them.
the Complainant’s husband, Mr GW, said that, in a period of about six
(6) weeks from about mid-September 2004 onward,
the Complainant came home,
visibly upset and disturbed, and told him of a number of matters she said the
Third Respondent had done:
namely, that he had put his hand on her leg while she
was seated in a forklift, asked if she had underwear on, reached through the
window of the car and kissed her and asked to see her outside of work
accept the evidence given by the Complainant’s husband in this
accept that the Third Respondent acted in the manner described by the
Complainant. Taken in another context, his action in putting
his hand on her
leg in the manner she described may well not amount to an act of sexual
harassment. However, in the context of events
as I have found them to have
occurred, I am persuaded that the Third Respondent’s action in putting his
hand on the Complainant’s
leg amounted to an act of sexual harassment as
defined in the Act.
INCIDENT ALLEGED TO HAVE OCCURRED IN
SEPTEMBER 2004: KISSING THROUGH THE CAR WINDOW
Complainant
on a night sometime in September 2004, the Third Respondent approached her
whilst she was in her car, bent down, leaned through
the window and kissed her.
This occurred at approximately
and in circumstances where she had previously asked the Third Respondent to open
through which she had to pass in order to drive her car from the premises.
said that she was disgusted and angry as a result of this conduct, but said
nothing to him. She drove home and told her husband
what had happened. The
Complainant’s husband confirms that he was told by the Complainant of this
event. I accept his evidence
Third Respondent said that he never wanted to, nor had he ever wanted to, kiss
the Complainant and that her claim was not only
preposterous, but insulting
(because he didn’t like her,
particularly
He said that he opened the gate for her to get her car out, she drove straight
through and he returned to the front
denied kissing her on that occasion or at
Complainant maintained her account that he had kissed her during his
cross-examination of
Complainant asserted that, on 19 September 2004, she told the Second
Respondent about the
Second Respondent
this was the case. He made some
this conversation shortly
thereafter.
perusal of these notes (Annexure ‘DP1’ to his affidavit) reveals the
Complainant told him that, a few weeks ago, the Third Respondent kissed her on
the cheek. He asked was she “
” and she replied
”; he asked her why the Third Respondent would do such a
thing, and she said “
A few weeks ago the
[Third Respondent]
feeling down, there was stuff going on within here with other co-ordinators and
team members so
gave him a hug and told
.” She thought he had family issues as well.
(b) He (the
Second Respondent) asked the Complainant how the kiss happened and she said
that, as she was leaving one night, the Third
Respondent was leaving at the same
time – she was in her car and he was chatting to her through the window
– he leaned
in and kissed her on the cheek. She said that she was very
surprised that he did that.
(c) The Second
Respondent said to her that it was ‘not on’, as the Third Respondent
was a manager and that the behaviour
was not acceptable. The Second Respondent
asked the Complainant if she wanted him to speak to the Third Respondent the
and that she told him “
No way, please don’t its okay, I
don’t care, I just wanted to tell you. I’m not interested in him
.” The Second Respondent told her that if she wanted him to
talk to the Third Respondent, he would, but he would not without
her consent.
The Complainant told him that she didn’t want to cause any trouble for the
Third Respondent because he wasn’t
feeling good at the time. The Second
Respondent said that he told the Complainant he would do what she wanted (i.e.
not speak to
the Third Respondent on her behalf) but he asked her to let him
know if it happened again, or let him know if she wanted him to chat
Third Respondent about it.
Second Respondent recorded in ‘DP1’ that the Complainant was
laughing and “stuff” whilst telling him about
this event, and that
she did not seem (to him) to be serious at
cross examination by Mr de Plater, the Second Respondent accepted that the
Complainant told him, on 19 September 2004, that
the Third Respondent had
kissed her through the window of her
that he had thought her to be telling him a bit of gossip or scuttlebutt but
said, despite that, and the matters referred
to in the preceding paragraph, it
occurred to him, at that time (19 September 2004), that it was a potential
sexual harassment
said that he asked the Complainant whether she wanted him to report this matter
and record it and speak with the Third Respondent
but that she persistently kept
saying that she would deal with it. As noted, the Second Respondent accepted
that his first reaction
to the Complainant telling him this was to see it as
‘at least’ a potential harassment
think it is very relevant that the Second Respondent confirms that the
Complainant told him that the Third Respondent kissed her
in the manner outlined
above. I accept the Complainant’s evidence that the Third Respondent
leaned in through her open window
and kissed her. I do not accept that she
invented this event and then, some weeks, later deliberately and falsely told
Respondent about it, especially in circumstances where she then asked
the Second Respondent not to record it and not to speak with
Respondent about her allegation.
find, in the circumstances as I have already found them to be, that such an act
amounted to sexual harassment within the definition
of that term in the
dealing with this event in evidence given orally before the Tribunal, the
Complainant also said that, when the Third Respondent
was standing beside her
car window, he said words to the effect of ‘why don’t we ...you
know.. just get it over with
and go up the back
I understand that the Complainant asserts that this statement amounted to the
Third Respondent suggesting that they engage in some
form of physical intimacy.
The Third Respondent denied ever suggesting to the Complainant by any means
whatsoever that the two of
them have intimate sexual
is clear that the Second Respondent did not record the Complainant telling him
that the Third Respondent had said to her, at the
time she said he leaned
through the window and kissed her, any details of the conversation summarised in
the preceding paragraph
the Complainant‘s own affidavit makes no mention of this comment alleged
by her to have been made by the Third Respondent.
During cross-examination by
Mr Dwyer, the Complainant asserted that she had remembered details of the
conversation between herself
and the Third Respondent leading up to him kissing
her and that he did not ‘just walk up and kiss me. There was a
conversation
beforehand’.
When pressed by Mr Dwyer for a reason for the omission of this
comment/conversation from her affidavit, the Complainant responded
that she had been propositioned by the Third Respondent a ‘few
times’ and that there was ‘probably heaps’
that she had left
out [of her affidavit] that she just couldn’t
Complainant told Mr WL (when he interviewed her on 15 November, 2004)
that the Third Respondent had said to her: “When are
we going out? Why
don’t we just go up the road after we finish’ and that, when she
refused such invitation, the Third
Respondent said ‘You’re not very
nice to me anymore, you don’t give me hugs anymore’ to which she
‘I don’t have any hugs left’ and the Third Respondent
distinction sought to be drawn by Mr Dwyer was that there was a significant
difference between the comment ‘When are we
going out? Why don’t we
go up the road after we finish?’ and ‘Why don’t we just get it
over with and go up
the back’. I appreciate the distinction that is
sought to be made. I am not persuaded that the Third Respondent made the
comments the Complainant alleged, in oral evidence, that he made – I
consider that her account to Mr WL, being much closer
in time to the event
than her evidence before the Tribunal, is more likely to be the more accurate
recounting of what occurred on
that occasion.
it seems to me that, even on this account [which sees the Third Respondent
making the comments in the terms recorded by Mr
WL in his notes - as
recounted by the Complainant to him on 15 November 2004], as I have
accepted the Complainant’s evidence
that she had, by then, told the Third
Respondent that she did not want to go out with him for a drink alone, such
comment was another
request to go for a drink or on a ‘date’ and
amounted to sexual harassment as defined in the Act.
RESPONDENT’S BEHAVIOUR IN THE PERIOD FROM SEPTEMBER 2004 TO OCTOBER
Complainant asserted that the Third Respondent began, and kept, loitering around
her work area in Outdoor
asking her on dates and if she wore
Complainant says that she took steps to ensure that she was not alone with the
Third Respondent, including asking a friend and
colleague (Ms McI) if she
would help her close up her area. She said that Ms McI could assist on
some occasions and this helped,
but this was not completely successful because
Ms McI had her own
responsibilities.
Complainant also asserted that in this period, the Third Respondent was
appointed Outdoor Timber co-ordinator which meant that
he was her immediate
superior. She was concerned by this because it meant that he would have
legitimate reasons to be in her work
Third Respondent suggested, during his cross-examination of the Complainant,
that his presence in her work areas was as a result
of this supervisory role and
that, in essence, he was not doing anything other than perform his duties as a
co-ordinator.
The Complainant did not accept this suggestion
Complainant said that she eventually told Ms McI that she wanted her help
to close up because she was nervous about being alone
with the Third
Respondent.
said that, in September and October 2004, she observed that the Complainant
would start “freaking out” and become
visibly upset when she was
left to close up Outdoor
Ms McI says that the Complainant told her that the Third Respondent was
intimidating her and harassing
her evidence in this respect.
who herself did not witness any behaviour by the Third Respondent toward the
Complainant that was ‘not
appropriate,
said, during cross-examination by the Third Respondent, that she did not believe
that the Third Respondent was in the timber yard
because of management issues
with two other staff members. She based this belief upon the fact that he was
the co-ordinator for
the opposite end of the
accept her evidence in this respect.
said that the Complainant told her about the Third Respondent ringing her at
Complainant also told Ms McI that she had asked the Third Respondent to
stop and that she would see the Second Respondent or
Mr WL if she
couldn’t get him to
this evidence from Ms McI.
Complainant said that she told her husband what was going on at work and her
husband told her to report the Third Respondent.
However, the Complainant said
she didn’t do that because she didn’t want the Third Respondent to
get into trouble –
she simply wanted him to stop his behaviour towards
consider that the attitude evidenced by this response is consistent with the
evidence of Dr GL (referred to later) about the Complainant
being a person
who likes to sort issues out herself.
said that, in a period of about six (6) weeks from about mid-September 2004
onward, the Complainant came home, visibly upset
and disturbed, and told him
that the Third Respondent had put his hand on her leg while she was seated in a
forklift, asked if she
had underwear on, reached through the window of the car
and kissed her and asked to see her outside of work
accept the evidence given by Mr GW as to what he was told by the
Complainant.
do not accept that the Complainant simply invented these matters and then
proceeded to tell Ms McI, her husband, the Second Respondent
(in part) and
finally Mr WL about some or all of them.
Complainant asserted that, on 24 October 2004, when she was waiting to see
the Second Respondent (for the purpose of speaking
with him about the Third
Respondent’s behaviour towards her) at 6.30 pm, the Third Respondent
came up to see her, asked he
what she was doing, and she told him it was about
her move to Melbourne. She says the Third Respondent then asked her, in a
if she wanted him to tell everyone how much he liked her. She said she
got really angry said “
Yes, I do want you to tell
The Complainant considered that this was an act on the part of the Third
Respondent designed to intimidate her.
Complainant asserted that, on 24 October 2004, she told the Second
Respondent about the Third Respondent’s conduct; asking
for cuddles,
asking about her underwear, asking her out on dates and also that he would not
stop doing this despite her asking him
said the Second Respondent asked her if she’d like him to speak to the
Third Respondent about his behaviour but she said
No, I think I can
handle this. I don’t want to cause any trouble; I just want it to
Complainant says that the Second Respondent said to her that he had a
responsibility to talk to the Third Respondent because she
had previously made a
complaint to
Complainant says that she was not convinced that it would be in her best
interests for the Second Respondent to talk to the
Third Respondent (because she
was concerned she would be victimised by the Third Respondent if the Second
Respondent did) and so
she told the Second Respondent that she was going to talk
to the Third Respondent again for the last time, very sternly, and if he
didn’t stop, she would allow him to “take it
Complainant says that the Second Respondent told her that the Third Respondent
would probably be a bit nasty to her, to which
she responded words to the effect
I don’t care, I can handle that. I can also handle his remarks.
I just want a normal working
relationship
Complainant asserted that, whilst she was having this conversation with the
Second Respondent, the Third Respondent phoned the
Second Respondent on his
telephone. The Second Respondent indicated to her to be quiet whilst he was
talking to the Third Respondent.
The Complainant said to the Second Respondent
that the Third Respondent was checking up on her and wanting to know why she was
to him. She says that the Second Respondent told her to be careful
– that the Third Respondent wasn’t stupid and she
should document
all of it. She said that she was by telling
the Complainant says that, on this occasion (24 October 2004) she
considered that the Second Respondent did not think what
she had reported was
anything serious, she also said that she, herself, didn’t really think it
was serious
Third Respondent said that the Complainant never confronted him at work about
any of the issues dealt with in this proceeding
and never asked him to stop
asking her out or harassing her because there was no reason for her to talk to
him in this manner - he
had done nothing and so there was no reason for her to
Third Respondent said that the first occasion he had any inkling that the
Complainant had issues about him or his attitude toward
her was when Mr WL
and/or the Second Respondent raised her complaint with him on 18 November
accept the Complainant’s evidence as to these conversations with the Third
Respondent.
THIRD RESPONDENT’S CONDUCT: 25 OCTOBER 2004
– NOVEMBER 2004
Complainant said that, on about 25 October, 2004, she told the Third
Respondent not to ring her at home, ask her out, touch her
and not to intimidate
her. The Complainant says that she told the Third Respondent that she
understood his personality
” and that she did not consider
or even some sexual comments as
”, but under no circumstances was he to ring her
at home, ask her out, touch her or try to intimidate
Respondent denies that any such conversation occurred.
Complainant said that three (3) days after this (that is, on about
28 October 2004), she told the Second Respondent that she had
spoken very
firmly to the Third Respondent, telling him to stop his
This is corroborated by the evidence of the Second Respondent.
Complainant asserted that, after the conversation on 25 October 2004 with
the Third Respondent, the Third Respondent made comments
” to her and other people, and still asked her if she was wearing
underwear. However, she said that she ignored this because
he didn’t ask
her out, didn’t ring her at home (at least until 13 November 2004, as
referred to in paragraphs 161 to
164) and didn’t come close to her, so she
felt that “
he did leave me alone for a
accept the Complainant’s evidence in this regard and find that she did
speak with the Third Respondent and tell him not to
ring her at home, ask her
out, touch her or try to intimidate her. I accept her evidence that the Third
Respondent’s behaviour
toward her improved for a period of time after this
conversation.
COMPLAINANT’S ASSERTION THAT THE THIRD
RESPONDENT TELEPHONED HER AT HOME
Complainant
in the period from after June to 14 November 2004, the Third Respondent
telephoned her at home on two
Third Respondent accepted that he had called the Complainant twice at home
during the time that he had been the building co-ordinator
but said that, on
both occasions, it was to gauge her availability for work. He also said that he
had called a number of other employees
Therefore, on the Third Respondent’s account, there was nothing
‘untoward’ in his actions in telephoning the Complainant
Complainant said that, on the first occasion the Third Respondent telephoned her
at home, he told her that he was not even at
work and they talked generally and
not about work
said that she wanted to keep things friendly and allowed him to talk mostly
dog, his brother who had died
and how “every day you’ve got to go for the things you want”.
Complainant said that she heard this comment in a manner that suggested that the
Third Respondent was saying that they should
She asserted that this was something she was not interested in and that she
didn’t want the Third Respondent even as a friend.
note that the Complainant does not suggest, in that part of her affidavit
recounting this incident, that the Third Respondent, in
fact, made the
suggestion that he and she should “get it on”. Rather, as I
understand it, it was something
thought he was saying from his
comments about going for things that you want.
it cannot be forgotten, that her ‘interpretation’ of this event was
against the background (as I have found it
to be) of the Third Respondent having
previously repeatedly asked her out for a drink and for cuddles and having put
his hand on
her knee, I am not persuaded, even against this background that, on
the Complainant’s own account of it, the comment made by
Respondent was one which amounted to an act of sexual harassment within the
definition of that term in the Act.
Complainant said that the second time the Third Respondent called her at home
was on 13 November 2004. She was engaged in packing
up the house in
preparation for the move interstate. Her husband was present, having flown from
M. The Complainant said that the
Third Respondent rang her and said words to
the effect “
How are you, what’s it like not to have your husband
On her account, there was no discussion of work-related matters.
Complainant said that, when she got off the telephone, she told her husband that
it was the Third Respondent. The Complainant’s
husband (Mr GW)
confirmed this, and said that he noticed that the Complainant had become quite
urged the Complainant to make a formal complaint because he saw how intimidated
and uncomfortable she was.
Third Respondent said that he had called the Complainant at home to see if there
was a chance that she could work on Friday, 26
November. He said that he
did this because the Complainant had told him, when she changed her plans, to
let her know if they were
short, and she would help out. He says that he
started by saying that he was sorry about ringing her at home and asked her if
was able to work the shift, to which she said “
noted above, the Complainant denies that there was any conversation relating to
work issues during this conversation.
Third Respondent said he had asked the Complainant how the packing was going and
she said that it was fine, but she’d been
packing for a while now; she
then made some comment about children and said she had to go, but she’d be
down later to pick
up her son. He said that, later, when she attended at the
store, she made some comments to a group of people about her wanting to
to work as soon as
Second Respondent said that the Complainant spoke with him on Monday,
15 November 2004 (2 days after the telephone conversation).
appeared distressed and told him that the Third Respondent had called her at
Second Respondent made notes of the
conversation
which I have had regard in considering the matter.
Relevantly,
the Complainant told the Second Respondent that the Third
Respondent:
(a) had called
her at home and asked her how the packing was going and what it was like to be a
mother without her husband there;
(b) had engaged
in non-work related conversation; and
(c) had walked
up to her when she arrived later that day to collect her son from work at the
complex and asked her how she was.
Second Respondent told the Complainant that he would go and speak to Mr WL
immediately and notify him of the situation and that,
then, the two of them
would speak to the Complainant for further instructions on how she wanted the
matter resolved. The Second
Respondent’s notes also say that the
Complainant was feeling very stressed about the situation (but) she
want anything bad to happen to [the Third
Respondent]’. I consider that such an attitude (as recorded by the Second
Respondent)
is highly inconsistent with a person who has deliberately and
maliciously invented this allegation.
accept the Complainant’s account of what occurred during the telephone
conversation. I accept and find that the Third Respondent
commented to the
effect of ‘what’s it like not to have your husband at home?’.
Whilst such comment may, depending
on the circumstances, be perfectly
inoffensive, I am persuaded, in the context of the surrounding events as I have
found them to
be, that such comment amounted to a remark with sexual
connotations and was made in circumstances where a reasonable person would
anticipated the possibility that the Complainant would be intimidated.
Consequently, I am persuaded that such remark amounted
to an act of sexual
harassment within the meaning of the Act.
Complainant said that it was the accumulation of the events, discussed above,
culminating in the Third Respondent calling her
at home, which led to her making
a ‘formal’ complaint about his
management. She also asked her husband to put gates on the front driveway so
she could lock them because she was scared that
the Third Respondent would come
to her home whilst her husband was away and she wouldn’t be able to keep
Mr GW confirmed this
and I accept
the evidence in this respect. I consider this piece of evidence to provide a
compelling insight into the impact of
the Third Respondent’s actions (as I
have found them to be) on the Complainant.
‘FORMAL’ COMPLAINT AND INVESTIGATIVE PROCESS
he had told the Complainant he would, the Second Respondent told Mr WL that
he had received a complaint from the Complainant about
Respondent’s conduct. This was the first occasion (namely,
15 November 2004) that Mr WL (the Complex Manager) had
knowledge of
any complaint by the Complainant against the Third
Respondent.
it represented the culmination of a course of events which had commenced with
the Second Respondent being told by the Complainant,
on 19 September 2004,
that the Third Respondent had kissed her. It is clear, I consider, that two
months passed in the period from
when the Second Respondent first thought to
himself that there might be a sexual harassment issue to when a
complaint was made. It is equally clear, I consider, that,
apart from asking the Complainant on the two occasions she told him that
Third Respondent had acted in manner which she found inappropriate whether she
wanted him to speak with the Third Respondent
taken by the Second Respondent to prevent further conduct by the Third
Respondent.
said that he and the Second Respondent sought guidance from Ms JV, the
Human Resources manager, as to how to conduct the
investigation.
Ms JV confirms that, on 15 November 2004, she was contacted by the
Second Respondent, who advised her that he was making the Complainant’s
complaint ‘formal’ regarding various matters alleged against the
Third Respondent. Ms JV advised the Second Respondent
allegations to the Third Respondent and allow him an opportunity to respond to
Complainant spoke with Mr WL at approximately 1.30 pm on
15 November 2004. Mr WL took notes during the course of their
discussions
and told her that it was a very serious matter. He asked her to
outline the conduct of the Third Respondent and took a full statement
had regard to the contents of that statement and refer to them specifically
where appropriate.
statement taken by Mr WL does not contain any mention of the following
assertions made by the Complainant:
touching on the leg whilst driving the forklift on the night of
line-marking
(b) the comment
although, as noted above, the Second
Respondent said that the Complainant told
him that the Third Respondent had asked her what it was like to be a mother
without her
it is clear from a perusal of the statement taken by Mr WL that the
Complainant told him about the Third Respondent asking
her out, asking for hugs;
saying that she was attractive (in context of asking her out for a drink),
asking her if she wanted him
to tell everyone, asking her if she wore underwear
under her shirt; calling her at home and telling her that he wasn’t
on her last day and so wouldn’t see her.
also records that the Complainant told him that she had told the Third
Respondent that he was annoying her and to stop and that
she asked him (the
Third Respondent) not to ‘muck around’ with her being kept on the
books so she could get a job interstate.
statement prepared by Mr WL contains the following account of events (as
provided by the Complainant):
(a) around June
2004, she had given the Third Respondent a hug after a conversation about a work
(b) after that,
the Third Respondent started to ask her out;
occasion, when she was leaving the carpark, the Third Respondent asked her when
they were going out and why didn’t
they just go up the road after they
finished and kissed her – she told her husband and then spoke to the
Second Respondent
(d) she asked
the Second Respondent not to get involved or approach the Third Respondent and
said that she would speak with him.
told the Complainant that he and the Second Respondent would put her allegations
to the Third Respondent, give him time to think
response the next day, at which time he would be called upon to say whether he
admitted or denied
allegations.
also told her that, if the Third Respondent denied the allegations made by her,
the matter would go to the Human Resources department
which would investigate.
She was not told how long the process would take. The Complainant said that, at
this time she felt much
better, having told Mr WL because she was, at that
time, convinced that her complaint would be handled professionally and quickly
and she was very comfortable with the way Mr WL proposed handling the
the nature of her complaint, the Complainant was not assigned to a different
work area to remove her from the immediate supervision
of Third Respondent, and,
having spoken to Mr WL as outlined above, the Complainant returned to work
Third Respondent remained as the Complainant’s supervisor throughout the
time the investigation was
undertaken.
Complainant travelled to Melbourne on 16 November 2004 and told her husband that
she had made a formal complaint to Mr WL about
Respondent.
She says that she was “beside herself” with anxiety and stress. I
accept that it was a very stressful time for her.
16 November 2004, the Complainant’s husband telephoned Mr WL and
left a message, asking him to make contact. Mr WL returned
Complainant’s husband’s call not long thereafter and there was a
discussion between the two of them during which
her husband asked Mr WL
what had happened since the meeting. The Complainant says that Mr WL told
her husband that the Third Respondent
had denied the accusations and that the
matter was now in the hands of the State manager and the HR State manager, and
that he could
provide a contact number the next
17 November 2004, the Complainant had her husband contact Ms McI to
cancel a “going away” event planned for her. She
had no contact
from anyone employed by the First
Respondent.
was called by Mr WL on 17 November 2004 and advised that the Third
Respondent had denied the allegations.
18 November 2004, the Complainant telephoned the C complex and asked to
speak to Mr WL. She was told that he was no longer working
at C and was
now working at
Complainant then contacted Mr WL at EP to ask what was going on and, after
he apologised for not contacting her, he told her
that the matter was now out of
his and the Second Respondent’s hands and was with the State manager and
the HR State manager.
The Complainant says that they agreed that it was a
matter of just
Complainant then telephoned Human Resources directly and spoke to Ms JV who
told her that she was aware of the situation and that
it was in the hands of
Mr WL and the Second Respondent. The Complainant was annoyed because this
advice contradicted what she had
just been told by Mr WL and she told
Ms JV this. Ms JV confirmed that contact was made with her by the
Complainant on 18 November
2004 and that the Complainant queried why the
process was taking so long.
Complainant said that, during this first conversation between them, Ms JV
asked her a series of questions such as “
Did anyone see any of these
happenings?
” to which she responded that nobody had bothered to talk
to her to ask how she was and, if they wanted more information they
arranged to speak to her. The Complainant said that she told Ms JV words
to the effect of ‘this isn’t a conspiracy
The Complainant said that she felt that Ms JV was not taking the matter
Complainant said that Ms JV asked her if she felt she needed counselling
and that she replied by saying that she didn’t
know what she needed.
Ms JV told her that she would speak with Mr WL and the Second
Respondent and get them to move things along,
and that either she, Mr WL or
the Second Respondent would ring her back
straightaway.
consider that, whether Ms JV intended it or not, the Complainant regarded
Ms JV’s response to her and the manner and tone
in which it was made
as being somewhat hostile and questioning and treating her as if she was some
sort of problem. The Complainant
clearly did not consider Ms JV to be
Ms V’s tone and
this contact from the Complainant, Ms JV contacted the Second Respondent on
18 November 2004. She noted that she asked how
the meeting with the Third
Respondent had gone and told the Second Respondent that the Complainant had
recorded that the Second Respondent told her that the Third Respondent denied
the alleged kiss and a number of comments and
disagreed in relation to the
context of a number of the other allegations, asserting that he believed it was
all good fun as the
Complainant “flirts” with him. This is in
direct conflict with his complete denial of events in these proceedings.
advised the Second Respondent to contact the Complainant that day and to provide
her with certain
information
Complainant waited three (3) hours on 18 November 2004 for a return call
from someone in management. However, she was not contacted
and subsequently, she
rang HR again and asked to speak with Ms JV but was told that she had left
for the afternoon and would not
be back until Monday. The Complainant became
angry and felt that nobody was concerned about what was happening for her and
on her and her
Second Respondent and Mr WL spoke with the Third Respondent about the
Complainant’s allegations on 18 November 2004. He
responded to the
allegations then. The Second Respondent said that when he and Mr WL
confronted the Third Respondent about the Complainant’s
allegations he was
very surprised, thought it was a joke and couldn’t believe
the Second Respondent said that he took notes at the interview, these have been
lost and were not before the Tribunal. The
Second Respondent recalled, however,
that the Third Respondent either denied the allegations or placed them into some
context. He said that the Third Respondent denied any
sexual harassment and appeared quite “surprised” at the
allegation.
speaking with the Third Respondent on this occasion, the Second Respondent was
unable to come to a conclusion about whether
the alleged conduct had occurred or
Second Respondent contacted the Complainant on 19 November 2004 to tell her
what was happening with the matter. He records that
the Complainant was
becoming ‘anxious’ about the time the matter was taking. He says
that he reassured her that it was
only a number of days and that she would have
an outcome by the end of the week.
He told her that JV and ‘M’ from HR were involved and he also was
involved in looking after the matter. The Complainant
said that she told the
Second Respondent she’d been happy about the way things had been handled
at first. The Second Respondent
said that these things usually took at least
14 days. The Complainant says that she was not concerned about the amount
but rather about what she perceived to be a lack of concern for her
during all of this and that, if it were “standard procedure”,
left a lot of room for improvement. She told him that no-one from HR had even
information. She says that the
Second Respondent sensed that she was not comfortable with him handling the
matter and told her that,
if at any point, she wanted him to hand it over to
someone else, it would not be a problem.
Complainant said that she told him that he was sensing the wrong thing and that
she was highly stressed and couldn’t function.
She says that she told him
that she realised that the Third Respondent was a friend of his and that she did
not want to put him
in a compromising position. She says that the Second
Respondent said that her matter had nothing to do with his friendship with
Third Respondent and he did not feel compromised. The Complainant says that the
Second Respondent told her she would have an
answer Friday afternoon or Monday
and until then, she should try to stop stressing. She says that at this time
she already knew
it would not be Friday because she’d had previous advices
from HR that Ms JV hadn’t been in the office from Thursday
until Monday
Third Respondent also provided the Second Respondent with a written response on
19 November
response, the Third Respondent denied that he had sexually harassed the
Complainant and made what were, in essence, counter-allegations
behaviour toward him and the behaviour generally within the complex. When
cross-examined by Mr de Plater, the Third Respondent
said that, when he
wrote in his response to the allegations made against him by the Complainant
that he ‘realised he was not
faultless’, he meant that he had
listened and laughed at rude jokes and been in groups with people at the complex
asserts that he was not responsible for making the final decision as to the
investigation because he had moved location and
it was the Second Respondent who
responsibility.
He said that, apart from receiving the Complainant’s complaint and
speaking with the Third Respondent on 18 and/or 19 November
couldn’t remember whether it was on two occasions), he had very little to
do with the
is, perhaps, unfortunate given that it was, I consider, clear, from her
evidence, that the Complainant held Mr WL in high regard,
going so far as
to say that, if he had handled her complaint, she did not believe that she would
litigation.
Second Respondent also said that he considered he was not responsible for making
decisions about the investigation or, I infer,
the outcome of the same, but that
he had to implement whatever decisions were
any event, the Second Respondent met with the Third Respondent again on 19
November 2004. He outlined the serious nature of the
allegations and reminded
the Third Respondent of the harassment policy. He also told the Third
Respondent that the complaint was
closed, but that, if the Complainant was to
bring forward any more issues, then she would have the right to seek assistance
HR or the Equal Opportunity
Commissioner.
Second Respondent’s notes indicate that, as at 19 November 2004, the
matter was considered ‘closed’ and a decision
that the complaint
would not progress had been made and this was communicated to the Third
Respondent.
the decision had been made not to ‘progress’ the complaint any
further, the Second Respondent had the Third Respondent
sit with him while he
read the sexual harassment policy to the Third Respondent who acknowledged that
this was done. He said that
he asked the Third Respondent, as he went through
each page, whether he understood and reinforced briefly what each page
Second Respondent’s notes indicate that, as at 19 November 2004, the
matter was considered ‘closed’ and a
decision that the complaint
would not progress had been made and this was communicated to the Third
Respondent.
Third Respondent asserts that the First Respondent had wanted him to attend a
counselling session (after its investigation in
relation to the complaints) but
that he told the Second Respondent that, if the complaints could not be
substantiated, there was
nothing to be counselled for and he would not attend
such a session.
22 November 2004, the Complainant was told of the outcome of the
investigation by Ms JV – that is, that it was closed. Ms
said they’d spoken to the Third Respondent and he was aware that, if a
situation occurred again, there would be consequences.
Ms JV told the
Complainant that she could now go back to work and that, if anything occurred,
she must report it.
Complainant asked Ms JV if the Third Respondent was still working there,
and was told that he was employed with the First Respondent.
She was also told
that he was still working at the same store and was still the builders’
co-ordinator.
The Complainant said that Ms JV did not raise with her whether the Third
Respondent would be working on
29 November
and that, even if she had been told by Ms JV that he was not rostered on to
work, she would not have attended on that day because
not working was a better
option than having to go in and face questions from other staff about what had
happened and run the risk
of ‘running’ into the Third Respondent who
often popped in to the complex on days
Complainant says that Ms JV then asked her if she had any questions to
which she said she was ‘taking everything in’.
Ms JV asked the
Complainant (for the second time) if she needed counselling and the Complainant
said she still needed time to think
then said that, if she needed anything else, then she was to phone
Complainant said that she then rang her husband in M and was distraught about
the fact that it appeared to her that the First
Respondent was not going to do
anything further about her
that day (22 November 2004), the Complainant’s husband emailed the
area manager, Mr BM, and operations Manager, Mr RC,
telling them that
it was unacceptable for the First Respondent to expect the Complainant to work
with the Third Respondent, and recommending
that the Third Respondent be
transferred out of her area.
The Tribunal
did not receive evidence from either Mr BM or Mr RC and I accept the
Complainant’s evidence as to the actions
taken by her husband on her
Complainant says her husband informed ‘them’ (senior employees of
the First Respondent) that she was very upset about
the lack of support and
counselling and the lack of explanation about the investigation, proceedings and
the lack of
accept this evidence.
Complainant obtained a doctor’s certificate for 29 November and did
not attend at the C complex for her last rostered shift.
Complainant stated that she considered that the First Respondent could have
ensured that it spoke with her and kept her informed
rather than keeping her on the ‘outer’. She felt this because, once
Mr WL was no longer responsible
for handling the investigation, her contact
was with Ms JV - an occurrence which did not, from her perspective, go well
in that she
felt, from Ms V’s tone and manner, that she was being
unfairly challenged about her complaint (in the sense that she was asked
there were any witnesses to the events she complained about).
Complainant also asserted that the First Respondent failed to act reasonably in
its management of her complaint against the Third
Respondent by failing to
reassign her to a different work area or provide her with a different
supervisor. The First Respondent
refutes this by saying that, at the time the
Complainant was informed by Ms JV of the outcome of the investigation (i.e
on 22 November),
she had only one shift remaining at the C complex (i.e.
29 November) and the Third Respondent was not rostered to work on that
Second Respondent accepted that, whilst he was in a position to have done
19 November 2004, he did not take any action to:
(a) ensure that
the Complainant and the Third Respondent would not be working on the same
(b) tell the
Complainant that she would not be working on the same shift as the Third
Respondent;
(c) take any
action to ensure that the Third respondent would not be the Complainant’s
co-ordinator.
Second Respondent also accepted that he did not think of, nor did he mention to
the Complainant, the possibility of appointing
an employee assistance officer to
Complainant.
acknowledged that he did not:
(a) appoint an
employee assistance officer to help the Complainant (as was provided for in the
First Respondent’s Sexual Harassment
(b) make any
changes to the Complainant’s roster or the Third Respondent’s
(c) tell the
Complainant that he’d checked the rosters to see whether she would be
working with the Third
Respondent.
Complainant asserted that, on 3 December 2004, her husband emailed
Mr RC again and raised issues with the way in which the First
had managed the entire incident. She asserts no response was received from
anyone from the First Respondent to either
herself or her
accept this evidence.
so far as the management of the events by the First Respondent is concerned, the
Complainant said, during cross examination by
(a) after she
had made her complaint to Mr WL on 15 November, she met with him that
afternoon for about an hour and a
(b) at the end
of the meeting, Mr WL gave her an indication of the manner in which he
proposed to handle the matter and she indicated
her agreement with the suggested
(c) at that
time (the afternoon on 15 November), she was not seeking assistance or
counselling from anyone and, in fact, felt ‘very
safe’ once she had
spoken with
Complainant travelled interstate the next day (16 November) for an
overnight stay before returning home. On 18 November, the
Complainant
telephoned Ms JV to ask what was
Complainant accepted that, at the end of this conversation between them,
Ms JV that she didn’t know what she wanted (as
she was very upset).
Complainant accepted that, within three days of having made the complaint about
the Third Respondent’s behaviour toward
her, she was offered counselling
by one of the First Respondent’s senior HR staff (i.e.
Complainant said that she did not take up the offer of counselling made by
Ms JV as she was seeking her own counsel, did not feel
comfortable and did
not have trust when it came to the First
Respondent.
Complainant accepted that, during a telephone conversation instigated by
Ms JV to discuss the ‘outcome of the investigation’,
offered her counselling a second time – on 22 November 2004 (some
7 days after she had lodged her formal complaint against
Respondent).
Complainant had, by then, clearly decided that she would not avail herself of
any counselling offered to her by the First Respondent.
Instead, she attended
upon a medical practitioner who referred her to a psychologist, upon whom she
attended for two or three occasions
before she travelled interstate in late
November 2004. Once interstate, the Complainant said that she was feeling a lot
so did not pursue
counselling.
THE FIRST RESPONDENT VICARIOUSLY LIABLE FOR THE ACTIONS OF THE THIRD
RESPONDENT?
Complainant asserts that, pursuant to the terms of
of the Act, the
First Respondent is vicariously liable for the Third Respondent’s
contravention/s of the Act.
is a defence to a proceeding for a contravention of the Act under
the Respondent proves, on the balance of probabilities, that the Respondent took
reasonable steps to prevent the worker or agent
contravening the
is clear that the emphasis here is on what steps the First Respondent took to
prevent the contravention rather than those steps
taken to mitigate the effects
of the contravention or what steps were taken to provide treatment or
counselling for the victim.
First Respondent seeks to discharge this onus by relying on the “extensive
policies” (received into evidence by the
has which prohibit sexual harassment.
essence, the First Respondent says that it has discharged the onus
policies in place regarding prohibiting sexual harassment;
policies are available in each complex;
(c) a copy of
the policy is available to all employees via the intranet service;
(d) a hard copy
of the policy is available in each store;
employee (including the Third Respondent) is trained in the policies during
their induction;
(f) employees
are advised (via Powerpoint presentation) during training that a breach of the
policies may result in termination of
their employment;
(g) the Third
Respondent was shown the Powerpoint presentation referred to above on
25 February
(h) the Third
Respondent was trained in the policies on 30 April 2004;
(i) the Second
Respondent offered on at least two occasions, to speak with the Third Respondent
on the Complainant’s behalf
(offers which she refused on the basis that
she didn’t want to cause trouble and would speak with him
Second Respondent was the first person ‘in authority’ that the
Complainant complained to about the behaviour of the
Third Respondent.
Complainant said that, when she raised her concerns about the Third
Respondent’s behaviour with the Second Respondent, he
asked her, on the
first two occasions that she spoke with him, whether she wanted him to speak to
Respondent.
Complainant accepted that, on each of these occasions, the Second Respondent
encouraged her to make a complaint against the Third
Respondent and that she
refused this suggestion, saying that she would deal with it
accepted that she refused his assistance on the basis that she had decided to
deal with the ‘issues’
Second Respondent said that the only basis upon which he felt comfortable about
not intervening at that’s stage was because
the Complainant told him that
she was going to speak to the Third Respondent; that he asked her to report back
to him about what
happened and that she did so after close to five
it is relevant to note that the Second Respondent was, to some extent,
constrained in the manner in which he could deal with
the Complainant’s
complaints to him about the Third Respondent’s conduct because of the
Complainant’s position
(as outlined above) that she did not want him to
say anything to the Third Respondent, it is not the complete answer to the issue
to be determined.
making of a ‘complaint’ is not a pre-condition to the obligation of
an employer to act so as to prevent harassment.
I adopt the statements to this
effect made by this Tribunal in
Hopper v Mt Isa Mines Ltd &
the New South Wales Tribunal in
Caton v Richmond Club
Webb v State of
Member Roney said, at para 53 of the decision:
however recognised in the decision in Caton, if the time the making of a formal
complaint is the first time the employer is
made aware of the conduct and the
employer takes appropriate and immediate action in response, including
reasonable steps to prevent
further contravention, the employer is more likely
to have met the requisite statutory standard. If, however an employer is made
aware informally of potentially harassing behaviour, for example by observations
of staff made to management prior to a formal complaint
being made, and the
employer takes no action until a formal complaint is made, the fact that the
employer takes appropriate and commensurate
action in response would not be
sufficient to avoid liability.
is, I consider, clear (and I find) on the evidence that:
‘Discussing Harassment in the Workplace’ policy and procedures
manual was kept in the complex manager’s office;
(b) persons
commencing employment with the First Respondent are required to undergo an
induction process which involves them being
made aware :
company policy which prohibited sexual harassment;
(ii) that there
was a process by which employees could make a complaint about acts of sexual
harassment.
induction process involves the provision of a folder of documents encompassing
information about a number of topics including
the sexual harassment policy,
which was worked through by the ‘inductor’ reading the information
contained in the folder
together with the showing of videos and working through examples in a work
(d) when an
employee arrives at a particular complex, they are required to sit down with the
complex manager or a nominated person
and go through a module entitled
”Induction – your store” which provides an opportunity for
discussion about what
has been learned during
(e) persons
employed as managers by the First Respondent undergo the ‘ordinary’
induction process referred to above and
also complete an 8 week process
during which they receive training in the sexual harassment
complex manager at the relevant time., Mr WL provided the Third Respondent
with his management induction (via on-the-job
training) on 30 April 2004 -
this involved him taking the Third Respondent through the written policy
documents (Harassment Policy
and Procedure) from the HR
totality of the training received by Mr WL in relation to sexual harassment
matters was that which was provided to him during
his three day induction (in
July 2000), when he initially started work, as an operations manager, with the
a day long refresher course, presented by Ms JV, undertaken by complex
managers in relation to sexual harassment or discrimination
policy prior to
procedure implemented by the First Respondent (which saw the complex manager
provide information and training about sexual
harassment to managers) means that
the First Respondent relies on the complex manager’s understanding of the
harassment Policy
(i) the Third
Respondent himself had, in the course of conducting inductions of other staff,
gone through the sexual harassment policy
with new inductees in the manner
outlined above;
(j) the policy
included that the First Respondent would appoint a staff member as an employee
assistance officer for a complainant
in a matter such as this – this was
not done in the present case;
(k) at the time
the Third Respondent was acting toward her in the manner she alleges (as
outlined above), the Complainant was aware
of the process by which she could
make a complaint;
(l) when the
Complainant first raised issues with the Second Respondent (management’s
representative), he offered to talk to
the Third Respondent for her and, in
essence, offered to deal with the Third Respondent’s behaviour on her
(m) at least
during the September/October conversations with the Second Respondent about the
Third Respondent’s behaviour toward
her, the Complainant decided that she
would deal with this herself and made this decision because, until
24 October (the time of
her second complaint to the Second Respondent), the
impact of the Third Respondent’s conduct upon her was not such that she
felt it necessary to make a formal
(n) despite
considering, as at 19 September 2004, that he might be dealing with a
potential sexual harassment issue, the Second Respondent
took no steps to ensure
or attempt to ensure that the Third respondent would not contravene the Act
until after the Complainant ‘formalised’
her complaint on
15 November 2004;
(o) after the
‘investigative’ process undertaken by Mr WL, the Second
Respondent and Human Resources was completed, the
Third Respondent was asked
(i) re-read the
harassment policy and acknowledge the same;
(ii) participate
in further training in respect of sexual harassment which he refused on the
basis that the internal investigation
undertaken by the First Respondent had
returned an ‘unsubstantiated’
Complainant was offered counselling by Ms JV;
(q) contrary to
the terms of the First Respondent’s Sexual Harassment
steps were taken to appoint a ‘properly trained’ Employee Assistance
Officer to assist the Complainant – no
person (however trained) was
(r) there is
nothing to suggest that any person in ‘management’ (be it the Second
Respondent, Mr WL or Ms JV) informed
staff (including the Complainant)
of the identity of the appointed Employee Assistance Officer by newsletter or
memo – contrary
to the requirement to do so outlined in para 1.4.3(g)
of the Sexual Harassment Policy;
(s) there is
nothing in the evidence to suggest that the Complainant was made aware of the
identity of the Employee Assistance Officer;
(t) given the
evidence of Ms LeM (which I accept and prefer wherever it conflicts with
evidence given by the Third Respondent), the
actions of the Third Respondent as
outlined in subparagraph (o) above had little (if any) impact upon his
the Second Respondent accepted that he was aware from the contents of the First
Respondent’s policy document [DP6]
that one of the effects of harassment
might be that an employee experiencing harassment might try to ignore the
situation or take
action to change
that, knowing this, he tried to do something more than the Complainant told him
to do – by prompting her and asking
for her side of what happened and
suggesting to her that the matter needed to be reported and
consider that he really needed to do more than that.
the Second Respondent said that he needed the Complainant’s
‘permission’ to report and elevate the matter
told him and she did not give that – hence, he did not take that step
himself. Further, it was his understanding
of the Sexual Harassment Policy that
it was up to the Complainant to make the choice about how the matter was to be
consider that, whilst one of the ‘responsibilities’ of a supervisor
(such as the Second Respondent) pursuant to the
terms of the Sexual Harassment
act with ‘respect for the wishes of the complainant’ in any given
situation in attempting to remedy the situation
without implicating any party,
this does not mean that a decision to ‘elevate’ a matter considered
by the supervisor
to have the potential of amounting to a claim of sexual
harassment (as was the case here) should be left entirely to the Complainant.
adopt the comments of Member Roney in
(supra) at para 58 of the
“.....It would not have been sufficient in my
view for it to discharge the obligation to take reasonable steps to prevent a
contravention to inform the complainant that she should speak to him and ask him
to stop his behaviour, but do nothing else to ensure
that [the Respondent]
understood his responsibilities to ensure that his conduct fell within
reasonable limits.
consider that, given that this was the Second Respondent’s clear
understanding of his role (as supervisor) in the matter,
the First Respondent
has not taken reasonable steps to ensure that persons employed by it as
supervisors fully appreciate that it
is their primary responsibility to act so
as to provide a work environment free from harassment and that the
to be accorded to the wishes of complainants should be
subservient to this overriding responsibility.
Second Respondent accepted, in essence, that whether what the Complainant had
told him happened had happened or not, it was his
responsibility to take control
of the situation and take the matter further – either to protect the
Complainant from the Third
Respondent or to show that the Complainant was a
person who makes false complaints against a
However, this was only done once the Complainant had said that she wanted to
make the complaint ‘formal’.
am not persuaded, in the circumstances of this matter, that the First Respondent
has proved, on the balance of probabilities, that
it took reasonable steps to
prevent the Third Respondent contravening the Act. It follows that I consider
that the First Respondent
is vicariously liable, pursuant to
Act, for the Third Respondent’s contraventions of the
COMPLAINANT’S ALLEGATIONS AGAINST SECOND
Complainant said that she had wanted to speak with the Second Respondent (who
was, at the relevant time, the operations manager
at the C complex) about the
fact that the Third Respondent was “looking after her transfer and
paperwork”. She said
that she felt she had difficulty seeing him at work
(because she felt the Third Respondent was watching her) so she rang him at work
and asked him if they could meet for a coffee out of work
Second Respondent confirmed that, in or about late October 2004, the Complainant
asked him about meeting for coffee outside of
work. She said she wanted to talk
says that he thought it was a bit unusual, but wasn’t concerned because he
considered them to have a good working relationship
and he just got the
impression that she needed a
Second Respondent said that he was not aware that the Complainant wanted to talk
Second Respondent said that he
was of the understanding that the complainant wanted to talk about personal
issues relating to her
relocation to Melbourne, and not her transfer in work
accept this. It is perfectly possible for the Complainant to have intended to
raise work issues with the Second Respondent away
from work and for him not to
be aware of that fact.
Complainant said that the Second Respondent agreed to meet with her away from
work and said that she could come to his place.
An arrangement was made for her
to visit him on his day
Complainant said that when their pre-arranged day arrived, she felt bad about
intruding on the Second Respondent’s day off
and contacted him by
telephone suggesting that she could catch up with him at work. The Second
Respondent said to her that, once
he woke up, he’d be
Complainant travelled to the Second Respondent’s home after contacting her
husband to tell him that was what she was doing.
In the course of this
conversation, when her husband asked her if she felt comfortable about that, she
replied that she didn’t
see a problem because it wasn’t as though
the Second Respondent would do anything to her because he was
Complainant said that, when she arrived at the Second Respondent’s unit,
he was happy and showed her around his place and
that they then drove to a
coffee shop around the corner at which stage she “brought up [the Third
Respondent] and her concerns”,
but that the Second Respondent didn’t
seem to think it was a big
this subject, the Second Respondent said that the Complainant tried to discuss
work while they were at the coffee shop but that
he steered away from the
consider it more likely than not that both parties are describing the event
truthfully from their own perspective: i.e. that the
Second Respondent steered
the conversation away from a discussion about the Third Respondent and that the
Complainant concluded,
from this, that he ‘didn’t seem to think it a
big problem’.
cross-examination by Mr Dwyer, the Complainant said that she thought she
had spent about 3 hours with the Second Respondent
accepted that she possibly spoke with him about her concerns and conflict about
that, when she tried to speak with him about her concerns about the Third
Respondent handling her files and information, he told
her not to be silly and
that she was being
Complainant said that she then stopped talking about the issue of the Third
Respondent because she thought that the Second Respondent
might be right and she
didn’t want to spoil his day off. She accepted that the Second Respondent
would not engage with her
in discussions on that day about the Third
Respondent.
Complainant said that at that time, she was “a little disappointed”
by the Second Respondent’s reaction, but
didn’t want to go on about
it because she knew that the Second Respondent liked the Third Respondent and
she, herself, trusted
the Second Respondent’s view of things. She says
that she thought “maybe he [the Second Respondent] is
Complainant said that they then drove back to the Second Respondent’s unit
(stopping on the way at a solicitor’s office)
and that, at that time, it
was getting close to the time at which she had to collect her children from
school. She says the Second
Respondent invited her inside before she left, and
that they were just talking about things in general. When she said she had to
Respondent said to her words to the effect “
Before you go, come and
look at this
”. He then went over to his computer (which was fitted
with a Webcam
and turned it on. The Complainant said that, immediately before she went over
to the computer, she and the Second Respondent had
been discussing how he (the
Second Respondent) had met his
Complainant said that she joked, saying “
I hope it’s not porn,
I’m not really into that
” to which the Second Respondent replied
Have a look at this
”. The Complainant says that the Second
Respondent went on to a site, typed in some stuff and was ‘talking’
someone overseas live. She says he got a guy on live and asked him to show
his penis. She said that the fellow on line (who she
thought was from Canada)
Second Respondent refused to
do so and that the guy from Canada (the fellow on
line) proceeded to
masturbate.
Complainant says that she was shocked and could not believe that the Second
Respondent had done this because she found it so bizarre.
She also says that
she was shocked, but not so much about the Second Respondent, but about what
happens on the
Complainant said she was somewhat upset because she considered that, in showing
her the pornography on the internet site, this
implied that the Second
Respondent would not take her complaint against the Third Respondent as
seriously as he
Complainant initially denied that the Second Respondent had been explaining to
her that he had met his partner over the internet
and explained internet dating
sites and took her over to the computer to show her such a site – she
asserted that the Second
Respondent ‘spontaneously’ went to the
computer and started downloading porn in front of
she then agreed with Mr Dwyer’s suggestion that there was a
conversation about how the Second Respondent met his
partner; that in that
context, the Second Respondent possibly told her about dating sites on the
internet and that the Second Respondent
then showed her an internet
that they looked at profiles for three to four minutes but denied that they were
that he did not recall showing her a site where a blond haired male masturbated
and accepted that, if he had done so, it
would be something that he would
Complainant emphatically denied that the site shown to her by the Second
Respondent contained no pornographic images or that it
did not have a male
person masturbating. She provided a detailed description of what she says she
saw on the screen which included
details such as the colour of the man’s
hair, the fact that he did not remove his underwear completely, that he was on
right hand side of the screen and had a bed behind
consider this detail to be persuasive in that I consider it unlikely that a
person who was simply inventing what they saw would
go to the trouble of
pretending that the person masturbating over the internet was only partially
Complainant told Ms McI about ‘the pornography’. She did not,
however, make a complaint about the Second Respondent
and this event to
Mr WL when she spoke with him on 15 November 2004. She said that this
was because she trusted the Second Respondent,
believed he was professional and
thought he was a jovial, nice
Complainant
during cross examination, that it was not so much what she saw on the computer
that upset her or made her angry but the fact that
she felt, by showing her such
an image, the Second Respondent was not taking her complaints about the Third
behaved in an unprofessional manner. I consider that her real complaint about
this event was that she felt that the Second Respondent
was not taking her
the Complainant saw Dr GL on 11 July 2007 for the purpose of the
preparation of his report, she told him that, when she saw
the ‘gay porn
site’ shown to her by the Second Respondent, she ‘
just thought,
wow, not that that offended me but I just thought, yeah, whatever, It
wasn’t like Oh my god, I’ve never
seen anyone naked before, it was
him. I thought that’s not professional...I just thought anything I’m
saying to you you’re
not even taking
Second Respondent agreed that, if the Complainant had been at his premises to
discuss work matters and he had shown her pornographic
images, such an action
would have been inappropriate but denied that she was there for work purposes or
that he had shown her pornographic
said that the parties viewed membership profiles and that there is no way, prior
to opening the profile, that one can determine
the type of photos people attach
to the membership. He asserted that,
they flicked
through some profiles, they saw a naked picture. He said that they only looked
at the site for a few minutes before
leaving for coffee at Gloria Jean’s
Second Respondent says that the Complainant came to his house, and they talked
general life issues
”. He recalls that she seemed very
conflicted about the decision to move to Melbourne and was not sure if she
wanted to go
at all. He says that she did raise some issues about the transfer
and the Third Respondent, but he steered her away from work topics.
that they were in each other’s company for approximately three (3) hours,
and the vast majority of the topic of conversation
was completely unrelated to
Second Respondent said that at some stage, they were talking about how he had
met his partner, Ivan, and that he explained to
the Complainant that he had met
him on an internet chat site. He says that, as his computer was set up in the
lounge room, he invited
the Complainant to look at the site or a similar site.
He says the site was a dating or chat site, nor a pornographic site, and
were no pornographic photographs of him on the
Second Respondent asserted that the Complainant was an employee who regularly
discussed matters of a sexual nature with other
staff. He says he recalled
having to informally counsel her about an inappropriate nature of a conversation
she was having with
regard to a co-worker’s penis
asserted that, on more than a few occasions (whilst he cannot recall the exact
number), he spoke to the Complainant about
the use of inappropriate
was not challenged in cross examination about these assertions and I accept
consider that it is more likely than not that the Second Respondent showed the
Complainant an internet site which resulted in her
being shown a picture of a
naked man. I accept the Second Respondent’s evidence that the internet
site operated in such a
way that it was not possible for those accessing it to
have any forewarning as to the nature or content of the photographs attached
the profiles featured on the site. However, I am not persuaded that the Second
Respondent intentionally showed the complainant
an image of a naked man
masturbating but am persuaded that she saw such image when the site was
accessed. I am not persuaded that
the Second Respondent’s action in
showing the complainant an internet site was an action undertaken with the
intention of offending,
humiliating or intimidating the Complainant or that,
taking into account the factors set out in
section 120
of the Act, a reasonable
person would have anticipated the possibility that she would be offended,
humiliated or intimidated by such
am not persuaded that the Second Respondent sexually harassed the Complainant
within the meaning of the Act and I dismiss the complaint
IS THE FIRST RESPONDENT VICARIOUSLY LIABLE FOR THE ACTIONS
OF THE SECOND RESPONDENT?
Complainant asserted that, pursuant to the terms of
of the Act, the
First Respondent was vicariously liable for the Second Respondent’s
contravention of the Act.
order for vicarious liability to be found in respect of the action/s of the
Second Respondent, I would have to find that there
were actions which
contravened the Act and that such action/s were performed by the Second
Respondent in the course of work or whilst
acting as an agent for the First
Respondent.
noted above, I am not persuaded that the Second Respondent sexually harassed the
Complainant within the meaning of the Act. It
follows from this conclusion that
there is no sexual harassment for which the First Respondent is vicariously
if I am wrong in this conclusion (and the action of the Second Respondent
amounted to sexual harassment within the meaning of
the Act), I am not persuaded
that such act occurred in the course of his employment by the First Respondent,
in the course of work
or whilst he was acting as an agent for the First
Respondent.
Consequently,
I am not persuaded that the First Respondent is vicariously liable for this
action of the Second Respondent.
THE VICTIMISATION
Complainant asserts that, in contravention of
of the Act, the First
Respondent permitted the Third Respondent to victimise her in that
(a) permitted
him to remain as her supervisor whilst he was under investigation for repeated
allegations of sexual harassment towards
(b) permitted
him to manage the share allotment scheme in circumstances where he was under
such investigation and where she was known
by him to be a person who would
ordinarily be eligible for a share allotment;
(c) permitted
him to ignore the Complainant’s eligibility to participate in the share
allotment scheme and exposing her to financial
detriment as a consequence
(d) failed to
issue a direction to the Third Respondent that he was to cease telephoning the
Complainant at her home for non-work-related
of the Act defines when vicitmisation occurs:
Meaning of victimisation
(1) Victimisation happens if a person (the respondent) does an act, or
threatens to do an act, to the detriment of another person
(the complainant)--
(a) because the complainant, or a person associated with, or related to, the
complainant--
(i) refused to do an act that would amount to a contravention of the Act; or
(ii) in good faith, alleged, or intends to allege that a person committed an
act that would amount to a contravention of the Act;
(iii) is, has been, or intends to be, involved in a proceeding under the Act
against any person; or
(b) because the respondent believes that the complainant, or a person
associated with, or related to, the complainant is doing, has
done, or intends
to do one of the things mentioned in paragraph (a)(i), (ii) or (iii).
(2) In this section, a reference to involvement in a proceeding under the Act
(a) making a complaint under the Act and continuing with the complaint,
whether by investigation, conciliation, hearing or otherwise;
(b) involvement in a prosecution for an offence against the Act; and
(c) supplying information and producing documents to a person who is
performing a function under the Act; and
(d) appearing as a witness in a proceeding under the Act.“
are three separate elements which must be established before an allegation of
victimisation is made out:
person does or threatens to do an act;
detriment of another person;
(c) That there
is a causal nexus between any detriment suffered and the matters outlined in
130(1)(a) or (130) (b) of the Act.
the first element is made out in each particular case is a factual issue and
will depend upon the evidence in that case.
term “detriment” is not defined in the Act.
Wadsworth v Akers and Woolworths Ltd t/a Big W Discount
Member Wilson set out a number of authorities from other
in which the meaning to be given to the term has been discussed.
have relied upon those authorities in reaching my decision that, in order to
establish detriment, the Complainant must show, on
an objectively- assessed
basis, that she has suffered loss, damage or injury in a matter of substance (as
distinct from a trivial
consider that, in order to establish the necessary causal nexus between the
detriment suffered and the relevant
s.130(1)(a)
or (b) matter, it is not
necessary for the Complainant to establish that the matter was the sole reason
for the detrimental conduct.
Rather, the Complainant must establish that such
matter/s were a “substantial reason” for the detrimental
THIRD RESPONDENT TO REMAIN AS COMPLAINANT’S SUPERVISOR
Third Respondent asserts that he never supervised the Complainant again after
finding out about the allegations against him and
that she had only one shift
left before leaving the store and did not attend for that shift but was paid for
find that the evidence establishes that:
(a) the Second
Respondent made the complaint official on 15 November 2004;
(b) at this
time, the Complainant was a casual team member rostered to work on Mondays
Complainant was given Monday, 22 November 2004, off (on pay) whilst the
investigation was taking place;
Complainant was due to return to work on 29 November 2004 for her last
shift at the C store;
(e) the Third
Respondent was not rostered to work on 29 November 2004;
Complainant did not attend her shift on 29 November 2004, but was still
paid for the rostered
(g) No action
was taken by any supervisor or other person in authority employed by the First
Respondent to move the Third Respondent
to another position.
the circumstances as I have found them (as outlined above), I am not persuaded
that the failure to move the Third Respondent to
another area of responsibility
was ‘because’ the Complainant had alleged that the Third Respondent
had contravened the
Act. Consequently, I am not persuaded that this allegation
of victimisation has been established on the evidence by the
Complainant.
THE SHARE ALLOTMENT SCHEME
I perceive it, the Complainant asserts that she was victimised by the First
Respondent because it permitted the Third Respondent
to manage the share scheme
and that he acted in a manner which caused her to suffer detriment.
am not persuaded on the evidence that the First Respondent permitted the Third
Respondent to manage the share scheme or that he,
in fact, ‘managed’
the share allotment scheme or was in a position to ‘ignore’ any
eligibility that the Complainant
may have had to participate in the employee
share allotment scheme. I accept the evidence of Ms JV (referred to in
more detail below)
that there was no discretion as to the implementation of the
eligibility requirements for participation in the share scheme.
am not persuaded, on the evidence, that the elements necessary to establish the
alleged act of victimisation have been made out.
FAILING TO ISSUE
THIRD RESPONDENT A DIRECTION NOT TO CALL COMPLAINANT AT HOME
is, I think, clear that the First Respondent did not direct the Third Respondent
not to call the Complainant at home. However,
I am not persuaded that the First
Respondent failed to do this ‘because’ the Complainant had alleged
that the Third Respondent
had contravened the Act. Consequently, I am not
persuaded that this allegation of victimisation has been established on the
by the Complainant.
COMPENSATION FOR LOSS OR DAMAGE
CAUSED BY CONTRAVENTION OF
Non Economic Loss
Complainant said that she suffered embarrassment, stress, anxiety and
humiliation as a result of the Third Respondent’s
actions toward her. I
accept her evidence in this regard. She said that she did not attend at the C
complex on her last day of work
(29 November 2004) as she had obtained a
medical certificate (because of the stress and anxiety she was under as a
consequence of
the Third Respondent’s harassment of her and the manner in
which her complaint had been handled by the First Respondent) and,
consequently,
lost the opportunity of participating in a ‘going away’
Complainant also said that she suffered an impairment in her ability to provide
care for her children’s every day needs
because of the impact of the Third
Respondent’s behaviour on her emotional state. She said that she
frequently whilst he was interstate in order, I infer, to
obtain his support for her emotional distress and anxiety
Complainant said that, on 22 November 2004, she visited her doctor and told
her about the Third Respondent’s conduct and
the investigation. She said
that she was referred to a psychologist who she saw on a number of occasions
before she moved to
evidence was called by the Complainant from the psychologist.
Complainant says that, once she returned to Brisbane she re-engaged with the
psychologist she had seen previously and was referred
psychiatrist.
No evidence was received from any psychiatrist other than Dr GL upon whom
she attended for the preparation of a medico-legal report
for use in these
proceedings.
examined the Complainant on 11 July 2007 for 1 hour in order to prepare a
report dated 17 July
considered that the Complainant had suffered a sufficient degree of subjective
distress and functional impairment to allow a
diagnosis of a mental disorder:
namely, a reactive state of chronic depression and anxiety features that met the
criteria for a Major
Depressive Disorder that has been partially treated. He
found that the mental state examination was marked by anxious and depressed
and a marked degree of hyper-vigilance.
considered that the Complainant had experienced ‘severe’ trauma as a
consequence of the sexual harassment she discussed
because the development of a
psychiatric disorder (as he diagnosed) was assessed as a very serious
said that he considered, given the presentation of the Complainant at the time
he saw her, that there remained unresolved symptoms
which would warrant some
form of psychiatric
said that he considered that the need for treatment arose because of residual
unresolved anger and depressive features which
she linked (in the history she
provided to him) to her work with the First
Respondent.
accepted, during cross-examination by Mr Dwyer that the accuracy of his
report depended largely upon the accuracy of the information
provided to him by
the Complainant.
confirmed that, in so far as the complaint against the Second Respondent is
concerned, the Complainant did not recount to him
that she was upset about
seeing a gay porn site but rather that she was upset that, from her perception,
the Second Respondent was
not taking her
accept this evidence and find that, even if I am wrong in the conclusion I have
reached that the conduct of the Second Respondent
toward the Complainant did not
amount to sexual harassment within the Act, the Complainant suffered no loss or
damage as a result
of the Second Respondent’s action in showing her the
internet dating site.
said that, at the time he commenced the interview ‘proper’ (i.e. the
substance of the interview) with the Complainant,
he was in no doubt at all that
she was aware of the five specific questions he had been asked to address in his
report. He did not,
however, simply ask her to answer those questions directly
but, rather, allowed a narrative to develop during which he covered those
stated that he considered that what the Complainant found most upsetting or
offensive about the Third Respondent’s conduct
toward her (as she alleges)
was her inability to get him to stop the behaviour rather than the type or
nature of the behaviour
However, clearly, if there was no behaviour to stop, then the Complainant would
not have felt ‘upset’ at her inability
to stop it.
consider that the tenor of Dr GL’s evidence was that, despite matters
in the Complainant’s personal history which pre-existed
the events at the
C complex in mid-late 2004 and which were relevant to and increased the risk of
her suffering some later-life psychiatric
disturbance (such as anxiety or
depression), she had not in fact, to his knowledge, suffered any such
to the events at the C complex.
also consider that Dr GL thought that the Complainant was
thought ‘I’m going to sort out what to do here’. She could
not achieve this goal and, I find, this inability
(which arose because of the
actions toward her by the Third Respondent) caused her to suffer anger, distress
and emotional upset.
said that, as he had not been asked to provide an opinion in respect of specific
incidents and their specific contributions
to the Complainant’s condition
as diagnosed by him, he did not do
said, during cross examination by the Third Respondent, that behaviours of the
Complainant which followed her leaving the C
complex (such as confronting a male
person in the male toilets) could be a reaction to what had occurred at the C
complex; it could
be explained as a reaction to the psychiatric state which
evolved after the event at C and, thus, could in fact be supportive of
opinion he had expressed in his report.
did not depart from the diagnosis of a Major Depressive Disorder nor from the
opinions summarised by me in paragraphs 299, 302,
303 and 305 above.
Dr GL considered that the Complainant’s prognosis was guarded and
that there was a moderate risk that the ‘psychic
trauma’ experienced
by the Complainant may result in a degree of permanent impairment due to
residual anxiety and depressive
symptoms that will not respond to treatment. He
opined that an end to the litigation would not ‘suddenly see’ the
Complainant
accept Dr GL’s evidence.
Plater submitted that an award of general damages in the amount of $40,000.00
(aggregated for both the sexual harassment and
victimisation claims prosecuted
by the Complainant against the First Respondent) was an award which would
compensate the Complainant
for the damage suffered by her as a consequence of
the matters complained of by her and relied on
Simpson v Boyson & Belli
Wilkinson v Buchan & Abre
referred me to
Schillert v Mackenzie and Nicksam P/L trading as Shafston
Dale, Larkin and Lofter v Shearer and
Webb v State of
have had regard to these decisions in forming a view as to the appropriate award
for compensation which ought to be made to the
Complainant.
regard to the offence, embarrassment, humiliation and intimidation suffered by
the Complainant as noted above, I consider that
an amount of $15,000.00 is
appropriate to compensate her for the damage she has suffered as a result of the
Third Respondent’s
conduct. I assess interest on the amount of $10,000.00
at 2%, giving $850.00.
Economic Loss
Complainant asserts that she suffered economic loss as a result of the Third
Respondent’s harassment of her and the manner
in which her complaint was
handled by the First Respondent in that:
(a) she was
‘forced’ to leave the C complex and relocate interstate without
adequate opportunity to arrange an ‘at
level permanent transfer’ to
a complex in M;
(b) she was
forced to move interstate rather than continuing to remain in B and suffered the
loss of an entitlement to higher wages;
(c) she lost
the financial benefits of the share option plan;
(d) she lost
future opportunities for promotion and higher pay in the employ of the First
Respondent.
is clear on the evidence that the Complainant’s husband had moved
interstate for work purposes in 2004. However, the Complainant
said that they
had decided that she and their children would remain living in B until at least
the end of 2005 in order to allow
their son to complete Year 12 without
interruption.
recalled that, in or about late October 2004, the Complainant advised that she
intended to relocate interstate. At that time,
she was planning to leave in
January 2005 and was attempting to work out a transition to a complex in
this evidence.
at some time prior to 5 November 2004, there was a discussion between the
Complainant and the Third Respondent in relation to
the management of the
Complainant’s status after she ceased working at C in January 2005 (the
originally proposed date). A
perusal of Exhibit JV3 leaves me to conclude the
(a) Originally,
the Complainant was intended to be rostered until early January 2005, at which
time she would take three (3) weeks
(b) She had
requested that she stay suspended within the C complex system and employ until
she could find work at a complex in M;
(c) The process
decided was that she would work 20 hours (part-time) until 3 January,
go on holidays for three (3) weeks, be suspended
in the system for three (3) to
six (6) months during which time she would find work in M;
(d) Subsequent
to this arrangement, the Complainant notified the First Respondent that her
circumstances had changed and that she
could no longer work 20 hours per
week, and could only work between 9.00 am and 5.00 pm one (1) day per
(e) That the
Complainant needed to change her leaving date from 3 January 2005 to
29 November
the Complainant
proposition put to her by Mr Dwyer that her decision to change status to
casual and her notification of her planned leaving date
were part of a
pre-determined decision to join her husband in Melbourne and that it was not
‘forced’ upon her because
of the matters she alleged happened, I am
not persuaded that this is the case.
am not persuaded that the Third Respondent’s actions toward her caused the
Complainant to cease her employment at the C complex
and move interstate. I
consider that it is more likely than not that she had decided to move interstate
to be with her husband in
note that the Complainant said that she had told her employer about her
husband’s relocation to M and asked whether, if she
decided to go with
him, she could be ‘transferred’ to a complex in M at the end of
am not persuaded that the events at the C complex ‘forced’ the
Complainant to move interstate, I am persuaded
that the situation was such that
the Complainant expedited her move so that she ceased working at the C complex
on 29 November 2004
rather than at the end of 2004. As noted above, from
8 November 2004, the Complainant was only working each Monday from
to 5.00 pm. Consequently, I consider that, at most, the
Complainant lost the opportunity to work for four days as a result of the
matters discussed earlier. Consequently, I assess and quantify this loss
(together with an allowance for loss of superannuation
entitlements and
the amount of
I consider it relevant that Dr GL confirmed that, during his interview with
the Complainant, she did not recount to him that
she was ‘forced’ to
relocate to V because of the matters she alleged had
Dr GL did not form the view that the move interstate was particularly
bothersome to the
Complainant
that she had relocated in order to avoid working with the Third
Respondent.
Complainant applied for a job with the First Respondent’s M complex on New
Year’s Eve 2004 and commenced work there,
in a casual position, in January
2005. She later obtained a permanent part-time position at the M complex. She
accepted that she
was not in any way limited in terms of her capacity to work at
that time and that her decision to work Monday to Friday (from 9
2.30 pm) was taken solely because of her family
responsibilities.
The Complainant also accepted that the reduced hours she initially worked at the
M complex arose because of an unavailability of
hours and not from any
incapacity on her
her employment at the M complex, the Complainant won an award for
“integrity” at an awards night held at the M
Complainant lodged a complaint with the Anti-Discrimination Commission on
continued in her employment with the M complex until leaving there to return to
B in about August 2006. There is nothing to
suggest that she suffered any
impediment in her employment with the M complex as a consequence of having
commenced proceedings against
the First Respondent in the Commission.
Complainant said that the Third Respondent was given the
“responsibility” of doing whatever paperwork was necessary
that this transfer took
the Third Respondent may, as the Complainant’s immediate supervisor, have
had responsibility for some paperwork involved
in an employee taking up a
position at another complex, I am not persuaded, having heard the evidence of
witnesses called by the
First Respondent, that he was given the
‘task’ of arranging a transfer interstate for the Complainant.
her evidence at the hearing, it was, I think, clear that the Complainant
accepted that
person employed at a complex operated by the First Respondent can seek out a job
at another complex, make an application for that
job and, then, if successful in
that application, retain the same employment number and have their
file/paperwork transferred from
the old complex to the new complex. No employee
can be ‘transferred’ from one complex to another without their
Further, no employee can assume that they will be accommodated at a
new complex without first being interviewed by the appropriate
management staff
at that complex and being offered the job.
Complainant also
during her cross-examination by Mr Dwyer, that the Third Respondent did not
in fact ‘handle’ her ‘transfer’
to the M complex for
her but rather facilitated holding a job open for her at the C store (by keeping
her on the books of that complex)
while she was looking for a job interstate.
She accepted that the Third Respondent was not controlling her access to
with the First Respondent interstate, that she obtained employment at
the M complex within about 6-8 weeks of her last day of employment
complex and that this was done without any impediment by the Third Respondent.
said that the process in “transferring” employment is that an
has to locate and obtain a job at another store first. Once
they get, and accept, an offer of employment, then the employee can
“transferred” across. If, however, the employee is unsuccessful in
securing another job, before an employee’s
intended departure date, the
employee has to resign from the store for which they are then working, as it is
not normal practice
for a complex store to retain someone “on the
indefinitely.
I accept this evidence.
First Respondent does not have any formal policy with regard to inter-store
transfers. Further, in the context of the First
Respondent’s employment
practices, there is no such thing as a “transfer”. This is because
each store operates
independently in relation to its employment. Each
store/complex manager has full authority in relation to the employment and
termination
of staff, provided those decisions are undertaken in accordance with
established general
seems that whilst each complex manager has the power to
“independently” hire and fire staff, once staff are employed,
employee is employed by the same national corporate
Further, the use of staff employed by one complex manager at another complex is,
it would seem, not uncommon as there is an intranet
service upon which positions
vacant at complexes around Australia are
advertised.
said (and I accept) that for an employee to move from one store to another, the
employee must apply successfully for the position
at the other store. This
application process involves reference checks, etc and it is as much an
interview as it would be for any
applicant for the
employee is successful in obtaining the position, then the paperwork is
completed by the store management team and the team
member is at liberty to
accept or reject the offer to take up employment at the new store. If the
employee accepts the offer, then
they are allocated to the new store and their
employment at the previous store
said (and I accept) that the Complainant was not able to “transfer”
from the C complex to a complex in M. Rather,
in accordance with what is set
out above, it was incumbent upon the Complainant to apply for whatever position
might be available
in M and, if successful and accepting of the offer, then a
change in her ‘allocation’ from C to a store in M would occur
she would cease her employment with the C complex
spoke with the Complainant on 15 December
course of the conversation (which was initiated by the Complainant) the
Complainant outlined her concern and distress at
the manner in which the
investigation was being handled. Ms JF records that she informed the
Complainant that it was not company
policy to arrange transfers for team members
moving interstate because there was no guarantee of positions in other States
complex manager does not tell another complex manager who they should
also says she informed the Complainant that she was not aware at any given point
in time of vacancies that exist in stores in
other States. Ms JF also
offered to contact the Second Respondent and Mr WL in relation to the
Complainant’s transfer to ensure
that any subsequent reference checks from
complex managers in V were handled appropriately. She further advised the
Complainant
how to apply to the V stores and advised that regular follow-up with
those stores would be
worthwhile.
Third Respondent asserted that he was never given the task of assisting and
co-ordinating the Complainant's transfer to Victoria
as there was not a transfer
option within the First Respondent’s
only role, as the Complainant’s supervisor, was to approve her request for
a change in employment status. The Second
Respondent also denied that the Third
Respondent was ‘looking after’ the Complainant’s transfer to
this evidence.
accept the evidence given in the hearing that there is no ‘transfer’
system as between complexes operated by the First
Respondent. Rather, it is the
responsibility of each employee, should they wish to work at a different
complex, to obtain a position
at that complex. Once this is done, the employee
is ‘transferred’ (in the sense that they take with them their
number and entitlements). I am not persuaded on the evidence that it
was the responsibility of any person other than the Complainant
employment at a complex other than the C complex if that was her wish.
think it clear that the ‘transfer’ of documentation is really a
procedure designed to prevent the necessity of issuing
new employment numbers to
staff who have previously been employed by the First Respondent at one complex
and who, after applying
successfully for a position at another complex, are
successful in obtaining that new position.
Complainant said that she spoke to the Third Respondent about getting a transfer
to M as quickly as she could. She says that
he told her that she should go
“casual” because it would improve her prospects of getting a
position in M if she was
not “permanent part-time”. She says that
the Third Respondent told her that Mr WL (the complex manager) had told him
that this was the correct procedure and that she accepted that because she
said that, whilst he did not direct or recommend that the Complainant convert to
casual employee status, he recalled suggesting
to the Third Respondent that she
could do so.
Mr WL helped the Complainant complete the relevant Employee Change of
Details form which she submitted on 5 November
form requested a change of status from permanent part-time to casual
employment.
Third Respondent signed the form approving the change in the Complainant’s
employment status. A consequence of the Complainant’s
change in employee
status to casual was that she no longer had the right to participate in the
employee share plan because, as the
evidence clearly established, such
participation was never available to casual employees but was restricted to
permanent employees
Complainant asserted that, had it not been for the Third Respondent’s
behaviour and the First Respondent’s failure
to manage this and provide
her with a different supervisor, she would never have surrendered her permanent
status and could have
taken up an entitlement to the share plan
not persuaded on the evidence that this is the case.
evidence establishes that the employee share offer closed on 3 December
2004. Eligibility was confined to all permanent team
members (full-time and
part-time) over the age of 18 years with one (1) full year of service on
that date. As the Complainant’s
request to become a casual employee became
effective on 15 November 2004, she was not eligible to participate in the
offer. Further,
the evidence establishes that management of the scheme is the
responsibility of the human resources department and manager in each
the present case, Ms JV), which seeks assistance from the management team
at each complex.
said (and I accept) that there was no scope or authority for managers or
co-ordinators employed at complexes to negotiate around
the basis upon which
employees were eligible to participate in the offer because it emanated from
Wesfarmers which imposed the conditions
accept this evidence
said (and I accept) that, in or about September 2004, she issued a memo/notice
to all complex managers outlining the details
of employee entitlements pursuant
to the share plan. Each complex manager was required to post the memo on the
communication notice board at each store. Mr WL received
the memo relating to the employees’ share scheme from Ms V on or
the lunch room at the C
the following terms:
Wesfarmers Share Offer
During November all full-time and part-time team members aged 18 and over
who have completed 12 months continuous service as at 3
December 2004, will be
invited to participate in the Wesfarmers Share Plan.
If you plan to be absent during November and wish to take advantage of
this offer – you will need to obtain a ‘power of
form and complete it as soon as possible.
Complainant
one from the First Respondent explained to her any effect that might flow from a
change of her employment status from permanent
part-time to casual. She said
that no-one told her about the effect that such a move would have on her
entitlement to shares under
the employee share
during cross-examination by Mr Dwyer, the Complainant said
(a) as at 2004,
she knew that the share plan option was open to participation by people who had
been employed for over a year and
were employed on either a permanent full-time
or permanent part time
(b) at the time
prior to her changing from permanent part-time to casual, she was too stressed
and wouldn’t have cared whether
she got shares or
document executed on 5 November, and effective from 15 November, she
elected, with the ‘guidance’ of the Third
Respondent who told her
that this was what Mr WL recommended, to become a casual
(d) given that
she had informed the First Respondent that from 5 November she was only
going to be available to work Mondays between
9am and 5pm and would not be
available from 29 November onwards (meaning that she was only available to
work three days in that remaining
period), this ultimately led to her decision
to go casual – it was, in her words: ‘due to my
availability’;
(e) once she
became a casual employee she lost her entitlement to participate in the share
plan and that she knew was a consequence
Complainant then appeared to assert that she had been unaware of the existence
of the share plan, stating that, if she had been
aware of it, she would have
remained permanent part-time as long as she could until she ‘got’
said that she first became aware of the existence of the share plan after she
left the C complex and after she made the
complaint (i.e. well after executing
the change of employment status paperwork on
5 November).
Third Respondent asserts that he did not know about the change in share options
at the time of completing the Complainant's paperwork
and therefore could not
have advised her about how to manage the situation. The Third Respondent also
says that it wasn't necessarily
his role to inform her about things in this
matter unless he was told to do so by the Second Respondent.
Complainant alleges that the Third Respondent told her that it would be best for
her to ‘go casual’ and that he had
obtained the advice from
She said that she accepted this because she trusted
The benefit of going casual was linked, in the Complainant’s mind, to
facilitating an easier transfer from the C store to
a store interstate in the
event that she decided to join her husband there.
Complainant stated that she spoke with her husband about becoming a casual
employee (rather than remaining as a permanent part-time
also spoke with the Second Respondent about the topic when she met him for
stated that, when he assessed her, the Complainant had not given him the notion
that the change from permanent to casual employee
was of concern to her –
rather, the focus of her concerns was about the C
was nothing in her presentation to suggest that the Complainant was traumatised
by relinquishing her permanent position for
consider it more likely than not the Complainant made the decision to change her
employment status from permanent to casual because
she thought that would assist
her in obtaining a position at a complex in M.
the basis of the evidence summarised above and my findings in respect of it, I
am not persuaded by the Complainant’s claim
for loss of opportunity in so
far as the share scheme is concerned.
Medical expenses
further examination in chief by
Complainant asserted that:
commenced taking Efexor approximately 6 weeks to a couple of months after
arriving in V (i.e. commencing about mid to late
February 2005) at a cost of
$30.00/month [a total of approximately $540.00 for the period from February 2005
until August 2006];
(b) the cost of
her Efexor prescription increased to about $60.00/mnth from the time of her
total of approximately $1,860.00 for the
period from August 2006 until the present time];
attended upon a psychologist on 2 occasions before moving to V and once
upon her return to B at a cost of approximately $80.00/session
and a rebate of
attended upon a general practitioner on about 8 to 10 occasions in V
at a cost to her of about $22.00/visit [a total of approximately
$176 -$220.00]
attended a psychiatrist on an occasion in V at a cost to her of about
attended upon a psychiatrist in B on 2 occasions at a cost to her of about
$40.00 per visit [a cost to her of approximately
(g) she has
attended upon a general practitioner every 5 months for the basis of
obtaining a renewal of her prescription and on 3-4
occasions due to stress.
the basis of the evidence summarised above, and doing the best that I can with
it, I quantify the expenses incurred by the Complainant
(together with an
allowance for interest) at say, $2,900.00.
Future medical
suggested that the Complainant receive psychotherapy with a psychiatrist (with
or without the assistance of a psychologist)
and envisaged that there was a need
for approximately
The total cost of this, on the basis of about $250.00/visit, would be
approximately $5,000.00.
He considered that there may be a need for a psychologist to assist and opined
that this might also entail about 20 visits at
a cost of about $150/visit
– a cost of about $3,000.00.
evidence does not persuade me that it is more likely than not that all of this
will be taken up by the Complainant. On this basis,
I discount the total future
cost of treatment and allow $4,000.00.
Summary of Compensation
summary, I order that the First and Third Respondents, as joint and several
debtors, pay compensation to the Complainant in the
sum of $23,425.00 calculated
as follows:
(a) General
damages in the sum of $15,000.00;
(b) Interest on
general damages in the sum of $850.00;
economic loss (inclusive of interest on the same) in the sum of $675.00;
(d) Special
damages (inclusive of interest) in the sum of $2,900.00;
medical costs in the sum of $4,000.00.
s.209(1)(d) of the Act
Complainant sought a written apology from the First Respondent
behaviour of the Third Respondent;
admission made by the Second Respondent that she was not believed when she
complained of harassment;
(c) the conduct
of the Second Respondent in breaching the First Respondent’s Sexual
Harassment Policy; and
(d) the manner
in which the First Respondent chose to prosecute its defence against the
Complainant.
have found that the Second Respondent did not sexually harass the Complainant.
Given the difficulties confronting employers such
as the First Respondent in
dealing with complaints made by one employee against another and the necessity
for all parties involved
in such a situation to be accorded natural justice and
an evaluation of the complaint without preconception as to veracity on the
of one party or the other, I am not persuaded that that I should order that the
First Respondent apologise to the Complainant.
Notification to
Board of Directors: s.209(1)(c) of the Act
Complainant seeks that the First Respondent be ordered to provide, to every
member of its Board of Directors, a copy of this decision
for the purpose of
informing them of the need to implement, actively, the Sexual Harassment
order that the First Respondent provide, to every member of its Board of
Directors, a copy of this decision.
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal Queensland
Affidavit of Complainant filed 30 May
Exhibit 10:
Affidavit of GW filed 8 June
Exhibit 11:
Affidavit of McI filed 8 June
evidence given
Oral evidence
: Report dated 17 July
Transcript 457
Transcript 220
A matter with which the Third Respondent
Transcript 222
Transcript 223
Transcript 229
Transcript 458
Transcript 270
Transcript 277
Transcript 231
Transcript 233
Transcript 244
Transcript 233
Transcript 234
Transcript 236
Transcript 244
Transcript 237
Transcript 250
Exhibits 14 and
Transcript 460
Transcript 265
Transcript 241
Transcript 242
Transcript 272
Transcript 280
Transcript 283
Exhibit 28: Affidavit of Second respondent filed 31 August
39: Affidavit of JV filed 31 August
38 : Affidavit of EA filed 31 August
31: Affidavit of WL filed 31 August
30: Affidavit of Joshua Hyde filed 14 September
Transcript 517
Paragraph 5, Affidavit of EA filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit 38.
10, Affidavit of EA filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit 38; Transcript
Paragraph 11, Affidavit of EA filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit 38.
Paragraph 6,
Affidavit of Josh Hyde filed 14 September 2007; Exhibit
8, Affidavit of Josh Hyde filed 14 September 2007; Exhibit
8, Affidavit of JH filed 14 September 2007; Exhibit
17: Affidavit of Third Respondent filed 12 September 2007; Exhibits 18 &
Exhibit 33:
Affidavit of PF filed 12 September 2007; Exhibits 33 & 34 (affidavits filed
30 October 2007); Exhibits 42 & 43
35: Affidavit of JF filed 12 September
41: Affidavit of MD filed 12 September
Transcript 452
Transcript 452
Transcript 467
opposed to a case which challenged the matters outlined in s.119(f) of the
Transcript 270
Transcript 257
Paragraph 13, Points of Claim filed 22 February
Paragraph 20, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
1: Paragraph 19, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Transcript : p.31, line
of which she was aware at the time she changed from her usual work attire into
the Queen’s dress: Transcript
Transcript 381
Transcript p.34, line
Transcript p.34, line
Paragraph 20, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Paragraph 8, Affidavit of Third Respondent, filed 12 September 2007: Exhibit
DP7, Second Respondent’s Affidavit [being response provided by the Third
Respondent on 19 November 2004]; Exhibit
Transcript: p.67, line
Transcript: p.67, line
Transcript: p.67, line
Paragraph 13, Points of Defence of the Second Respondent filed 24 March
Transcript 67, line
Transcript 168
Transcript 67, line 53- p.68
Transcript 384
Transcript 540
Exhibit 1: Paragraph 21, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Exhibit 1: Paragraphs 22 and 23, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Transcript p.34, line 50 – p.35, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.72, line
Paragraph 14, Points of Defence of Second Respondent filed 24 March
Transcript p
s.119(b) of the
c ) of the Act
Exhibit 1: Paragraph 23, Complainant’s Affidavit filed 30 May
the Third Respondent denies that the Complainant ever spoke to him about any
Paragraph 15, Points of Claim filed 22 February
1: Paragraph 25, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Transcript p.35, line
Transcript p.42, line
Exhibit 1: Paragraphs 25 and 26, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Paragraph 3, Affidavit of GW filed 8 June 2007.
Paragraphs 27 and 28, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Transcript 29/10/07: p.45, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.46, line
Annexure DP7, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
28 [being Third Respondent’s response for meeting
dated 19 November 2004];
Exhibit 28.
Exhibit 1: Paragraph 33, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
See Annexure DP1 to the Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August
2007; Exhibit
also : Paragraph 8, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007;
Exhibit 28.
Transcript 29/10/07: p.46, line
Transcript p.71, line
Transcript p.73, line
Exhibit 31 : Annexure
Exhibit 1: Paragraph 29, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Exhibit 1: Paragraph 34, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Exhibit 1 : Paragraph 30, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Exhibit 1: Paragraph 31, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Paragraph 32, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Paragraph 4, Affidavit of Ms McI filed 8 June
Paragraph 5, Affidavit of Ms McI filed 8 June
Paragraph 12, Affidavit of Ms McI filed 8 June
Paragraph 12, Affidavit of Ms McI filed 8 June 2007.
32, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
3, Affidavit of GW filed 8 June
Exhibit 1: Paragraph 36, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Exhibit 1: Paragraph 37, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Paragraph 38, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
38, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
38, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
38, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
37, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
1: Paragraph 39, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
1: Paragraph 40, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Exhibit 1: Paragraph 41, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Exhibit 1: Paragraph 43, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Exhibit 1: Paragraph 23, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
DP7, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Exhibit 1: Paragraph 23, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Paragraph 60, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007; Transcript
Paragraphs 10 to 13, Affidavit of GW filed 8 June 2007.
DP7, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Paragraph 16, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Annexure DP3, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Transcript p.102, line
Exhibit 1: Paragraphs 61 to 63, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Paragraphs 15 to 17, Affidavit of GW filed 8 June 2007.
Paragraph 12, Affidavit of WL filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Paragraph 25, Affidavit of
Paragraph 13 and Annexures WL3 and WL4, Affidavit of WL filed 31 August 2007;
Exhibit 31.
reference is made to an invitation to discuss ‘forklift guidelines’
over a drink but no reference is made to an act of
The statement records a comment to the effect of ‘What’s it like to
be a full-time
Paragraph 65, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Paragraph 66, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
67, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
70, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
Paragraphs 71 to 74, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
75, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
76, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
77, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
JV11, Ms JV’s Affidavit.
29/10/07: p.90, line
Paragraphs 78 and 79, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
Transcript 29/10/07: p.90, line
Annexure JV12, Ms JV’s
as outlined in Exhibit JV12 to the affidavit of Ms
Paragraphs 81 and 82, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
Paragraph 22, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Paragraphs 83 and 84, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
exhibited as Annexure DP7, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August
2007; Exhibit
Transcript p.111, line
Annexure DP5, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Paragraph 85, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
Paragraphs 86 and 87, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
89, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007.
90, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007.
90, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007.
Paragraphs 100 to 101, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007.
29/10/07: p.76, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.76, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.76, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.77, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.77, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.77, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.78, line
Section 133(2) of the Act
Annexures JV5 and JV6 to Ms JV’s
Paragraphs 20 to 24 and Annexures JV5 to JV9 to the Affidavit of
Transcript 29/10/07: p.84, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.84, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.8, line
[2003] NSW ADT
the Complainant’s evidence (at Transcript p.102); the Third
Respondent’s evidence (at Transcript 257); the evidence
(Transcript 242); the evidence of
See the Third Respondent’s evidence at Transcript
evidence of the Second Respondent (Transcript
Transcript 439,
Transcript p.102, line
Transcript p.103, line
1.4.3, Annexure ‘JV5’, Affidavit of JV: Exhibit
p.22, ‘JV5’ : Exhibit
Paragraph 47, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
30, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Paragraph 30, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Paragraph 48, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
49, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit 1; Transcript
29/10/07: p.86, line
Paragraph 49, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
50, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
Transcript p.85, line
Transcript p.86, line
Transcript p.85, line
Transcript p.86, line
Paragraph 50, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
51, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007.; Transcript: p.86 line 48
– p.87 line
Transcript p.87, line
Paragraph 52, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
53, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
53, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
Transcript 29/10/07: p.88, line
Transcript p.88, line
Transcript p.89, line
Transcript p.114, line
consider that this concession diminished the potential relevance of the evidence
Transcript p.88, line
Transcript p.89, line
Paragraph 22, Points of Defence of Second Respondent filed 24 March
Paragraphs 31 and 32, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007;
Exhibit 28.
Paragraphs 33 and 34, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007;
Exhibit 28.
Paragraph 28, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Paragraph 29, Second Respondent’s Affidavit filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
[2007] QADT
v The University of Western Sydney
(1990) EOC 92-313
per the NSW Equal
Opportunity Tribunal;
Shaikh v Commissioner, New South Wales Fire
(1996) EOC 92-808
per the NSW Equal Opportunity Tribunal;
Sivananthan v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Service
[2001] NSW ADT
per the New South Wales Administrative Decisions Tribunal Equal Opportunities
Hautlieu Pty Ltd trading as Russell Pathology v McIntosh
WASCA per the Western Australian Court of Appeal;
Damiano & Anor v
Wilkinson & Anor
[2004] FAMCA 891
per Baumann
Cockin v P&N Beverages Pty Ltd
[2006] QADT 42
per Member Rangiah;
Morrison-Liddy v The Director Department of Technical and Further
(1989) EOC 92-246
per the South Australian Equal Opportunity
(supra) @ 78,146;
Bailey v Australian National
(1995) EOC 92-744
(supra) @ para
Paragraph 34, Points of Defence filed 24 March
Paragraph 91, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
113, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
QADT (27 October
[2004] QADT (23 November
[2003] QADT (16 July
[2002] QADT 18
(24 September
[2006] QADT 18
[2006] QADT 1
(16 January
[2006] QADT 33
[2006] QADT 8
Paragraphs 11 to 14, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
6, Affidavit of Wayne Loft filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Exhibit JV3, Ms JV’s Affidavit – a file memo prepared by the
Respondent.
As per the contents of Exhibit JV2 to Ms JV’s
This information was contained in a hand-written note directed from the
Complainant to the Third Respondent : Exhibit JV2, Ms JV’s
Paragraph 15, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
Calculated using a daily rate of
Transcript 29/10/07: p.77, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.77, line 45- p.79 line
107, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May
Paragraph 47, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
Transcript: p.91, line
Transcript: p.93 line
Paragraph 7, Affidavit of WL filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Paragraph 6, Ms JV’s
Paragraph 7, Ms JV’s
Paragraph 8, Ms JV’s
Paragraph 9, Ms JV’s
Paragraph 10, Ms JV’s
Paragraph 11, Ms JV’s
Annexure JV15, Ms JV’s
See the contents of Annexure JV15, Ms JV’s
Para. 11, Affidavit of Third Respondent, filed 8 July
Paragraph 56, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
9, Affidavit of WL filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Paragraph 10, Affidavit of WL filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Paragraph 58, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
58, Complainant’s affidavit filed 30 May 2007: Exhibit
Paragraph 5, Affidavit of WL filed 31 August 2007; Exhibit
Annexure JV1 to the Ms JV’s
Transcript: p.50, line
Transcript: p.51, line
Transcript p.103, line
Transcript p.103, line
Transcript p.104, line
Transcript p.106, line
Transcript p.107, line
Transcript p.107, line
Transcript p.107, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.73 line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.74, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.75, line
Transcript 29/10/07: p.75, line
Transcript 483 for the details as to the manner in which such therapy should
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter