URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTMH/2009/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:33:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hutton v Hannigan as representative for residents of Bridge Street Resort Village [2009] QCCTMH 23 (30 October 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
HUTTON v HANNIGAN AS REPRESENTATIVE FOR RESIDENTS OF BRIDGE STREET
RESORT VILLAGE
[2009] CCT MH009-09
HUTTON Peter & Nancy
HANNIGAN Keith AS REPRESENTATIVE FOR RESIDENTS OF BRIDGE STREET RESORT
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
30 October 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
7 October 2009
DECISION OF:
Mrs G Spender
CATCHWORDS:
Manufactured homes – site rent increase.
Manufactured Homes
(Residential Parks) Act 2003
sections 69
REPRESENTATION:
APPLICANTS:
RESPONDENTS:
Mr Hannigan
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
this application Peter and Nancy Hutton who are the owners of Bridge Street
Resort Village, Toowoomba (“the park”)
seek approval under
Manufactured Homes (Residential Parks) Act 2003
Act”) for site rent increases based on a market review of site rent. The
respondents are the owners of 116 manufactured
have not accepted the proposed site rent of $115.00 per week which was notified
to them in December
2008, with the increased site rent stated as coming into
effect on 1 March 2009. Some home owners accepted the increase and have
site rent at the increased level of $115.00 per week since 1 March 2009. New
of the filing of this
application in March 2009 have been paying site rent of $115.00 per week.
the time of the giving of the
notice, the different passing rents
being paid in the park were $98.67, $107.98, $111.28 and $115.00. The
respondents were paying
either $98.67, $107.98 or $111.28 at the time of the
filing of the application.
issue to be determined is whether the proposed site increase is in all the
circumstances fair and reasonable.
Legislative provisions
provisions relevant to this application are
sections 69
of the Act which provide:
“69 Notice of increase in site rent
(1) This section applies if a site agreement—
(a) provides
for an increase in the site rent payable under the agreement; and
how the amount of the increase is to be calculated.
(2) If the park owner wishes to increase the site rent under this section,
the park owner must give the home owner a notice stating
amount of the increased site rent;
(b) how the
increased site rent has been calculated;
(c) the day
the increased site rent is first payable (the increase day);
tribunal, within 28 days after receiving
the notice, for an order reducing the
amount of, or setting aside, the increase.
(3) The increase day must not be earlier than 28 days after the notice is
(4) The increased site rent is payable from the increase day.
70 Home owner may apply to tribunal for order about site
rent increase
(1) This section applies if—
(a) the park
owner for a residential park gives a home owner notice, under
increase in the site rent payable under the site agreement between the parties;
(b) the home
owner considers the increase is excessive.
(2) On application by the home owner made within 28 days after receiving the
notice, the tribunal may make any of the following orders—
(a) an order
reducing the amount of the increase by a stated amount;
(b) an order
setting aside the increase;
(c) an order
confirming the increase on the conditions, if any, the tribunal considers
appropriate;
(d) another
order the tribunal considers appropriate.
(3) In deciding the application, the tribunal may have regard to the
range of site rents usually charged for comparable sites in comparable
residential parks in the locality of the park, or if
there are no comparable
residential parks or sites, the range of market rents usually charged for
residential accommodation in the
increased site rent compared to the previous site rent;
frequency, and amount, of past increases in the site rent payable under the
increase in the CPI number during the previous site rent period;
amenity or standard of the common areas and communal facilities;
withdrawal of a communal facility or service previously provided at the
addition of a communal facility or service not previously provided at the
increase in the park owner’s operating costs for the park during the
previous site rent period;
(i) whether
the increase is fair and equitable in all the circumstances of the
(j) anything
else the tribunal considers relevant.
(4) If, in deciding the application, the tribunal makes an order mentioned in
subsection (2)(a) or (b), the park owner must refund
to the home owner any
overpayment of the site rent since when the increased site rent has been
Maximum penalty—10 penalty units.
(5) An amount payable to the home owner under subsection (4) is recoverable
(6) In this section—
CPI means the all groups consumer price index for Brisbane
published by the Australian statistician.
previous site rent means the site rent payable under the agreement before
the increase.
previous site rent period
means the period commencing on the first
day the previous site rent was payable and ending on the day the tribunal
decides the application.
71 Notice of proposed increase in site rent
(1) This section applies if—
(a) the park
owner for a residential park wishes to increase the site rent payable under a
site agreement; and
does not apply to the proposed increase.
(2) The park owner must give the home owner for the site a notice stating the
amount of the proposed increased site rent;
basis for the proposed increase;
(c) the day
the proposed increased site rent is first payable (the increase day);
(d) the home
owner must, within 28 days after receiving the notice, give the park owner a
written response indicating whether or not
the home owner agrees to the proposed
(3) The increase day must not be earlier than 2 months after the notice is
(4) The home owner must within 28 days after receiving the notice give the
park owner a written response indicating whether or not
the home owner agrees to
the proposed increase.
(5) If the response indicates the home owner agrees to the proposed increase,
the proposed increased site rent is first payable on
the increase day.
(6) If the home owner does not give a written response under subsection (4)
within the 28 days, the home owner is taken to have not
agreed to the proposed
(7) If the park owner and home owner do not agree on the proposed increase
within the 28 days, the park owner may apply to the tribunal
for an order about
the proposed increase.
(8) In deciding the application, the tribunal may have regard to the matters
mentioned in
section 70(3).
(9) Also, in deciding the application, the tribunal may make any of the
following orders—
(a) an order
reducing the amount of the proposed increase by a stated amount;
(b) an order
setting aside the proposed increase;
(c) an order
confirming the proposed increase on the conditions, if any, the tribunal
considers appropriate;
(d) another
order the tribunal considers appropriate.
(10) If the tribunal makes an order mentioned in subsection (9)(a) or (c),
the order must also state the day from which the increased
rent is first
evidence establishes that at the time of the filing of this application there
were 136 manufactured home sites within the over-50’s
resort-style and
purpose-built manufactured home park. The village fronts the Warrego Highway
and is about five kilometres from
the Toowoomba city centre. It is on the
north-western periphery of Toowoomba in an area adjacent to the Airport, and
development adjoins the southern boundary.
facilities include: -
Community Centre
with large furnished hall, kitchen, indoor pool, and decks;
Recreation Centre with tennis, croquet, four rink artificial bowling green and
indoor bowls;
workshop – equipped;
barbeque areas; and
Free trailer,
caravan and boat parking
and benefits available include:-
emergency assistance / Phone call monitoring
Information
Village bus
To the door mail
delivery – Australia Post
connectability
Provision of
water coolers in common facilities
supermarket anchored shopping centre
Adjacent service
park was purchased by the applicants in early 2000 and at that time only 40
development of the new park.
In 2001 Stage Two consisting of an additional 50 sites was completed, and
subsequently Stages Three
and Four have been completed. There are now 33
approved sites in Stage Five which have not yet been developed.
majority of sites in the park have a 12 to 15 metre frontage, an 18 to 24 metre
depth and have an average area of 200 to 250 square
metres. New homes are being
sold at prices up to $220,000.00 while the sale price of older homes is in the
range of $130,000.00
to $199,000.00.
of a total of 136 sites, although all of the site agreements contain a provision
for annual site rent reviews, only about 50%
have provision for three yearly
market reviews. Most of the respondents’ site agreements do not contain
market review provisions
and, in any event, those that do contain market review
provisions do not allow for a review in 2008 and 2009.
Market value of rent
the Increase Notice under
, the applicants stated that in calculating
a market rent of $115.00 per week they had considered factors in
section 70(3)
of the Act including:
(i) The objects of the Act, as set out in
(ii) The site rent that new home owners commencing to reside at the park
have been prepared to pay evidencing the market rate ($115.00
(iii) Site rents charged by the other park in the locality of the park
which is reasonably comparable to the park for sites which
are reasonably
comparable to your site being: Kingfisher Gardens Lifestyle Village, with a
current rental of $121.50 per week....
(iv) GST on services provided to you as home owners are, and have been,
absorbed by the park owner and not passed onto you.
(v) The improved standard of the common areas and communal facilities
over recent years at the park and the additional communal
facilities that have
been provided and installed at the park over that time
applicants’ market rent assessment has been corroborated by a report of Mr
B Duncan, a certified practising valuer, dated
25 February 2009. Mr Duncan in
undertaking his market research and comparative analysis of parks took the view
that the most appropriate
guide to the market rent was the site rent paid in
over-50’s manufactured home parks in the Sunshine Coast, Moreton Bay and
the north side of Brisbane. His analysis of eight parks in those areas
indicated that site rents ranged from $121.95 at Palm Lake
in Deception Bay
(prior to a market review in 2009) to $185.00 per week under new 2008 site
agreements at Gateway Village, Brisbane.
Duncan found that there was only one other manufactured home park in Toowoomba,
Kingfisher Gardens, but that park was not a useful
guide to a market rent
because it was a first quality village where homes sell for $245,000.00 to
$265,000.00, and he regarded that
park as superior to the subject park. The
weekly site rents at Kingfisher Gardens for owner-occupied homes presently
ranged from
$120.00 to $132.00, while there were 25 permanent rentals of homes
owned by the park owner at $225.00 to $240.00 per week.
Tribunal accepts Mr Duncan’s unchallenged opinion that the proper market
rent is $115.00 per week, based essentially on
the fact that home owners who
have recently entered the park have been prepared to do so on the basis of a
site rent of $115.00 per
question remains however whether the fixing of rents at market is fair and
equitable in all the circumstances when
section 70(3)
matters are taken into
consideration.
Section 70(3)
The range of site rents usually charged for comparable sites in the
locality of the park
Tribunal finds that the “
” of the park is the city of
Toowoomba and its environs. There is only one other purpose-built manufactured
which is Kingfisher Gardens, and the Tribunal finds that
that park is superior to the subject park in the quality of homes, the quality
of facilities and location. The subject park, unlike Kingfisher Gardens, is
built adjacent to an industrial area under the flight
path of the adjoining
Toowoomba Airport.
Tribunal disregards the site rents in parks outside the Toowoomba area referred
to by Mr Duncan. Homeowners in parks in Brisbane
City and Gold and Sunshine
Coast areas have lifestyle advantages not enjoyed by residents of a park in an
inland provincial city.
In the circumstances the only reliable evidence of a
proper market rent here in the Tribunal’s view is the rent which new
The increased site rent compared to the previous site
1 July 2009 the applicants increased the respondents’ site rent pending
the determination of this application, in accordance
with the annual site rent
increase provision in the respondents’ site agreements. This meant that
at the time of the hearing
of this application the site rents being paid by all
Number of units
From 01/03/09
From 01/07/09
Percentage increase
Amount of increase on 01/07/09
Proposed further increase to $115.00
slightly less than 4%
applicants state that they wish to standardise rents throughout the park at
$115.00 per week, and that if an approval of the site
rent backdated to 1 March
2009 is granted, they will not seek to adjust that rental upwards to take into
account the further increase
due to them in accordance with the annual site rent
increase on 1 July 2009.
applicants point out that the proposed increase means that for respondents
paying $98.67, the increase sought would be $16.33
per week for the four month
period from 1 March 2009 to 30 June 2009, but only $12.39 for the 12 month
period from 30 June 2009 to
30 June 2010. For those respondents currently
paying $107.98 the increase would be $7.02 for the four month period from 1
2009 to 30 June 2009, but only $2.70 per week for the 12 month period from
30 June 2009 to 30 June 2010. For those respondents paying
$111.28 as at 1
March 2009 there would be no increase for the year 30 June 2009 to 30 June 2010
because the 4% increase in July 2009
has taken their weekly site fee to $115.00
which will be a capped fee on the applicants’ undertaking until July 2010.
The increase
for these respondents which is sought is $3.72 for the four month
period from 1 March 2009 to 30 June 2009. As at the date of the
hearing, there
were 54 units in the park in respect of which the weekly site rent was $115.00
and 22 of those units were owned by
respondents.
Any increase in the CPI number during the previous site rent
evidence establishes that the percentage CPI increase from June to June each
year for Brisbane All Groups Index is:
June 2004 – 2.7%
June 2005 – 2.5%
June 2007 – 2.1%
June 2008 – 4.5%
table above shows that the average CPI increase in the period June 2003 to June
2008 was 3.1%. The Tribunal notes that the 4%
per annum site rent increases
which have been imposed by the applicants since 2003 have been considerably in
excess of the average
CPI increases.
The amenity or standard of the common areas and common
Tribunal finds that there is some substance in the respondents’ complaints
that the landscaping in common areas is not maintained
to an adequate standard.
The photographic evidence provided by the respondents suggests that at the time
the photographs were taken
gardens and lawns in common areas were not being
regularly and properly maintained.
Tribunal also accepts the respondents’ view that the community centre is
no longer large enough to house the expanded population
of the park which is
presently about 180 home owners. The single swimming pool is also of inadequate
size given the large numbers
of home owners now residing in the park.
despite the shortcomings highlighted by the respondents, the Tribunal accepts Mr
Duncan’s evidence, supported by photographic
evidence, that the amenity of
the park overall is of a good standard.
Withdrawal of a community service previously provided
of the grounds upon which the respondents rely in arguing that the site rent
increase as proposed by the applicants is not justified
is that they have been
caused hardship as a result of the withdrawal of a park bus service which
formerly provided two trips per
week, one to the large Wilsonton Shopping Centre
and the other to the Central Business District of Toowoomba.
applicants state that a 23-seat bus was purchased by the previous park owner
because there were no shopping facilities in the
area. The Wilsonton shopping
centre which is approximately two kilometres from the park had not at that time
been enlarged to create
the modern shopping mall it is today. The former park
owner operated the bus one day per week to make the 5 kilometre journey into
city centre of Toowoomba and charged a fare of $3.50 for the round trip. Some
months after purchasing the park, and after consultation
with some residents,
the applicants increased the shopping trips to twice per week and made these
trips free to all park residents.
However in 2007 the weekly shopping trips to
the city were discontinued because the City Sunbus rerouted its operation
through the
park and a large shopping centre directly across the road from the
park was constructed. Since 2007 the park bus has been made available
charge to residents for any social outings the community wishes to arrange, as
well as for any city functions that residents
may wish to attend.
Tribunal accepts however the respondents’ evidence that the adjacent
Bridge Street shopping centre is inadequate to meet
their reasonable needs
because there is no post office, bank or medical surgery. Also using those
shops involves a steep uphill
walk and the crossing of a busy road, which means
that many homeowners are not physically able to access that shopping centre.
arrangement by which Mr John White, the park liaison officer, is available to
take any homeowner to the Wilsonton shopping centre
at 9:30am every Tuesday and
Friday in his 7-seater vehicle free of charge is not in the Tribunal’s
view a comparable service
to that which was originally promised to home owners,
as that arrangement makes no provision for the return journey to the park with
the result that homeowners are faced with the expense of catching a taxi home.
Tribunal finds on the basis of the evidence before it that there has been a
diminution in the quality of community services as
a result of the loss of the
regular park bus service, although homeowners must accept some responsibility
for this state of affairs
because they have not patronised any service in
adequate numbers.
respect to the alleged failure by the applicants to provide promised
hairdressing and medical services, the Tribunal accepts
the applicants’
evidence that they have done their best to encourage outside professionals to
use the rooms available, but
that lack of patronage by residents has resulted in
the unwillingness of professionals to attend the park.
respect to alleged shortcomings in on-site management, the Tribunal again
accepts the applicants’ evidence that adequate
management is provided by
themselves when they live on-site from time to time, and by a resident couple
who in the applicants’
absence act as managers on their behalf.
Any addition of a communal facility or service not previously
provided at the park
Tribunal finds that the only new facilities in the village since 2007 have been
an electric chair lift installed in June 2009
to allow access to the second
storey of the sports hall; and a new barbeque in the community centre and a
water cooler in both the
community centre and sports centre installed in
Increase in operating costs
applicants have not adduced any evidence of increases in operating costs, but
the Tribunal is entitled to take judicial notice
of the fact that there have
been significant increases in operating costs for all parks in recent years and
one of the objects of
the Act is to encourage the growth and viability of the
residential park industry. The park is a commercial investment and the
are entitled to a fair return from their business. There has been no
review to market in the park since 2002.
Whether the increase is fair and equitable
of the respondents speak in their statements of the financial hardship which
they will suffer if an increase in site rent of
the magnitude proposed by the
applicants is approved by the Tribunal. It is not in dispute that some 90% of
are the recipients of government pensions. The Tribunal
finds that not all of the respondents will be entitled to full rent assistance
to ameliorate the effect of a large weekly increase. The Tribunal considers
that the unexpected increase, outside the terms of their
site agreements, of the
magnitude proposed by the applicants would cause hardship to most of the
respondents.
Tribunal has reached the conclusion, upon a consideration of
section 70(3)
factors, that the larger increases sought are not in all the circumstances fair
and equitable. The Tribunal considers that there
should be a $5.00 per week
reduction in the $12.39 increase sought in respect of the bulk of respondents
who are paying $102.69 weekly
as from 1 July 2009. The Tribunal finds however
that the $2.71 increase sought to bring a smaller number of respondents’
to a standard rent of $115.00 is fair and equitable, but the increased
site rents which the Tribunal will approve will be effective
on 1 November 2009
rather than on 1 March 2009. The Tribunal will order that those respondents who
are currently paying 102.62 as
from 1 July 2009 will have their site rent
increased to $110.00 per week including GST, effective on 1 November 2009.
Those respondents
paying $112.29 as from 1 July 2009 will have their site rent
increased to $115.00 per week including GST, effective from 1 November
at the date of the hearing the applicants were not seeking any further increase
in respect of the site rent of those respondents
whose rent was increased to
$115.00 on 1 July 2007 but sought backdating of the $115.00 rent to 1 March
2009. The Tribunal is not
satisfied that it would be fair and equitable to
approve such backdating and in those circumstances the application in respect of
those respondents will be dismissed.
site rent of respondents’ sites with site rent as from 1 July 2009 of
$102.62 is increased to $110.00 per week including
GST, effective as from 1
November 2009.
site rent of respondents’ sites with site rent as from 1 July 2009 of
$112.29 per week is increased to $115.00 per week
including GST, effective as
from 1 November 2009.
application is otherwise dismissed.
______________________________
MRS G SPENDER
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (870 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter