URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2020/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
YFG Shopping Centres Pty Ltd as Tte & Anor v Valuer-General; Shayher Alliance Pty Ltd as Tte v Valuer-General; Leda Commercial Properties Pty Ltd as Tte v Valuer-General; Lipoma Pty Ltd as Tte v Valuer-General [2020] QLAC 6 (15 December 2020)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF
YFG Shopping Centres Pty Ltd as Tte & Anor v Valuer-General; Shayher
Alliance Pty Ltd as Tte v Valuer-General; Leda Commercial
Properties Pty Ltd as
Tte v Valuer-General; Lipoma Pty Ltd as Tte v Valuer-General
[2020] QLAC 6
YFG Shopping Centres Pty Ltd as Tte
ABN 56 853 411
(appellant)
Trondage Enterprises Pty Ltd
ABN 92 067 120
(appellant)
Valuer-General
(respondent)
Land Court No LVA182-17
Shayher Alliance Pty Ltd as Tte
ABN 96 113 268 198
(appellant)
Valuer-General
(respondent)
Land Court No LVA183-17
Leda Commercial Properties Pty Ltd as Tte
ABN 70 092 070
(appellant)
Valuer-General
(respondent)
Land Court No LVA211-17
Lipoma Pty Ltd as Tte
ABN 65 002 203 581
(appellant)
Valuer-General
(respondent)
Land Court No LVA212-17
Land Appeal Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
Appeal from the Land Court of Queensland
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
15 December 2020
DELIVERED AT:
8 October 2020
Kingham FY, President of the Land Court
McNamara JR, Member of the Land Court
appeal be dismissed.
the parties wish to make submissions on costs, the parties are to file and serve
written submissions, limited to three pages, within
seven days of the date
the filing of any submissions on costs, each appellant pay the
respondent’s costs of the appeal, to be assessed on the
CATCHWORDS:
REAL PROPERTY – VALUATION OF LAND – OBJECTIONS AND APPEALS
– QUEENSLAND – OTHER MATTERS – where each
of the appellants
own commercial property, in the nature of a shopping centre – where each
of the appellants objected to the
respondent’s valuation – where the
respondent declined the objections on the ground that each valuation was
by a comparison to similar properties – where the appellants
challenged the decision of the respondent in the Land Court –
appellants appeal the decision of the Land Court on the grounds that the Member
erred in adopting an approach of looking
for error in advance, without detailed
consideration of the valuation evidence; failed to properly consider the
valuation evidence;
failed to give adequate reasons and denied natural justice
– whether there was error on the part of the Member in the application
the applicable test or in failing to properly consider the evidence as a whole
Land Valuation Act 2010
Chief Executive,
Department of Natural Resources and Mines v Kent Street Pty Ltd
[2009] QCA 399
Department of Natural Resources & Mines v Spender
[2003] QLAC
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
Ipswich City Council v Wilson
(2011) 32 QLCR 357
Players Pty Ltd v Corporation of the City of Adelaide
[2001] SASC
APPEARANCES:
G Beacham QC, with J Byrnes (instructed by Colin Biggers & Paisley) for
each of the appellants
D O’Brien QC, with J Hastie for the respondent
[1] THE COURT: YFG Shopping Centres Pty Ltd as TTE &
Trondage Enterprises Pty Ltd, owns real property in Redland Bay Road, Capalaba
(Capalaba Park). Shayher Alliance Pty Ltd as TTE, owns real property in
Lorraine Street, Capalaba (Capalaba Central). Leda Commercial
Properties Pty
Ltd as TTE, owns real property in Morayfield Road, Morayfield (Morayfield).
Lipoma Pty Ltd as TTE owns real property
in Bunker Road, Victoria Point
(Victoria Point). Each property is a commercial property, in the nature of a
shopping centre.
2015, the respondent issued valuations for those real properties. The
valuations were to take effect on 30 June 2016. Each
of the appellants objected
to the respondent’s valuation.
[3] In 2017, the
respondent declined the objections on the grounds that each was supported by a
comparison to similar properties and
their sale prices.
[4] Each of the
appellants challenged those decisions in the Land Court. Their respective
appeals were heard together having regard
to the similarities in the grounds of
appeal. The appeals, in respect of Capalaba Park, Capalaba Central and Victoria
Point, were
dismissed. The appeal in respect of Morayfield was allowed, with
the valuation amended from $43 million to $41,292,480.
[5] Each of the
appellants appeal the decision of the Land Court. A number of grounds of appeal
are identified in each appeal. In
essence, those grounds contend that the
Member erred in adopting an approach of looking for error in advance, without a
consideration of the valuation evidence; failed to properly consider
the valuation evidence in determining each appeal; failed to
give adequate
reasons; and denied natural justice.
[6] Evidence was
given by two valuers, Mr Ladewig (engaged by the appellants) and Mr Weir
(engaged by the respondent). Whilst each
valuer applied the same primary
valuation methodology, differences arose as to the ranking and use to be made of
comparable sales
and as to the allowances to be made for relevant matters, such
as, agreements for lease.
appellants contended the valuations were excessive, did not properly reflect the
characteristics of the properties, were based
on erroneous methodologies and
were not supported by sales evidence.
respondent’s valuations for Capalaba Park ($21 million), Capalaba Central
($25 million amended to $23,900,000 after
receipt of the joint expert report),
Victoria Point ($21 million) and Morayfield ($45 million amended to $43 million
after the delivery
of the valuers’ joint expert report) were the subject
of valuers’ assessments of $18,800,000; $21,400,000; $18,800,000
$30,800,000 respectively by Mr Ladewig, and $21,100,000; $23,900,000; $21
million and $43 million respectively by Mr Weir.
[9] Whilst Mr
Ladewig and Mr Weir applied the same primary valuation methodology, they reached
differing conclusions as to the rate
for the unencumbered site area for each of
the subject properties. Mr Weir assessed Capalaba Park, Capalaba Central,
Victoria Point
and Morayfield at $280 per square metre; $250 per square metre;
$250 per square metre; and $350 per square metre respectively, whereas
Ladewig assessed the rate for each of those properties as $250 per square metre;
$225 per square metre; $225 per square metre;
and $275 per square metre.
[10] In reaching
those rates, each used the same unencumbered rate for all but three of the
comparable sales, being properties at
Hope Island, Karalee and Delacombe in
Victoria. The different rate in respect of these properties arose by reason of
different treatment
of agreements for lease.
Weir’s approach was to take account of the hypothetical purchaser’s
apportionment of the worth of the
He accepted the
hypothetical purchaser would normally be an experienced
By contrast, Mr Ladewig
relied on the actual purchaser’s mind and the actual figures for the
agreement for lease, taking a
midpoint between the relevant
[12] Mr Ladewig
and Mr Weir also differed in their ranking and use of comparable sales at
Meadowbrook, Loganholme and Banyo. Mr Weir
treated Meadowbrook as a secondary
sale, expressing concern about a buy-back clause in the contract, but relied on
Loganholme. Mr
Ladewig considered Meadowbrook an inferior sale and gave
Loganholme less weight as it was older and had questionable circumstances.
Ladewig did not consider the terms of Meadowbrook to be overly unusual.
[13] Both Mr
Ladewig and Mr Weir assessed the Banyo sale at a similar unencumbered rate and
agreed it was a superior comparable sale
but disagreed as to the extent of
adjustment required to account for the size of Banyo compared to the subject
properties.
[14] Mr Ladewig
and Mr Weir also differed in their approaches to the type of shopping centre and
the relevance of its catchment.
Mr Weir considered a property’s place in
the retail hierarchy (major regional, subregional and neighbourhood) and its
essential factors in both valuing the subject properties and
considering comparable sales.
[15] Mr Ladewig
considered those factors not relevant when determining the value of the subject
properties, valuing subregional and
major regional shopping centres according to
the size of the site and having regard to catchment on the basis it was limited
immediate locality.
[16] Mr Weir
also had regard to a centre’s trading performance. Mr Ladewig had no
regard to such information, as a valuation
is to be determined as if there were
no improvements on the land.
Primary decision
[17] The Member
observed that, although a valuation appeal is a two-step process, the appellant
bore the onus of establishing error,
the first step in the process. Further,
whilst there were several grounds of appeal, the only ground upon which evidence
was as to the valuations being excessive, having regard to comparable
sales. There was no evidence presented to the effect that
the valuations were
erroneous in principle or tainted by significant error of fact.
[18] The Member
accepted that each valuer had undertaken a process of valuation by comparison of
the subject land to values disclosed
by previous sales. However, Mr Ladewig had
undertaken that task by looking at the sales and scaling them to the size of the
without explaining how the size of the site affected his scale of the
value. The Member found that, whilst there may not be a mathematical
when scaling for size, an explanation is important so that the Court may
understand a valuer’s process of reasoning
and analysis.
[19] The Member
found Mr Ladewig did not have regard to the retail hierarchy of shopping centres
and did not accept that census data
for a suburb was a relevant consideration in
determining value, whereas Mr Weir’s approach did involve an examination
within the context of a retail hierarchy, including a needs-based
analysis on the demographics of the catchment, the retail size
the land could
support and where the site sat in the retail hierarchy. The Member expressed a
preference for that more nuanced approach
to valuation.
[20] The Member
recorded that the parties had identified three common issues to each appeal.
First, the value added by intangible
improvements, namely agreements for lease.
Second, the comparability of sales evidence and the retail hierarchy. Third,
the relevance
of trading performance.
[21] As to the
first, the Member found that, whilst both valuers agreed that an existing
agreement for lease would affect the price
a party may pay for a site and affect
the way in which that site would operate as a comparable sale, Mr Ladewig
adjusted the sales
by reference to the purchaser’s view of the value of
the agreement for lease, whereas Mr Weir adjusted the sale by reference
industry standard.
[22] As to the
second, the Member found that, whilst both valuers agreed that the highest and
best use was “retail in line with
its current use”, Mr Ladewig had
no regard to the designation of the shopping centres in the retail hierarchy,
because he assessed
the properties as a vacant block of dirt, whereas Mr Weir
assessed the subject sites having regard to the size of the catchments
shopping centres of a different use of order.
[23] As to the
third, the Member found that the valuers disagreed as to the relevance of
trading performance. Mr Weir relied on the
centre’s trading performance,
whereas Mr Ladewig contended that was not a proper approach as a site’s
value is its expected
realisation under a bona fide sale, assuming all non-site
improvements for the land had not been made.
[24] Having
found these differences in approach, the Member held that the respondent’s
valuation for Capalaba Park was not so
obviously excessive that a taint or error
must be inferred, such that the appellant had not satisfied its onus of proof of
in the valuation.
[25] The Member
held that the respondent’s valuation for Capalaba Central acknowledged the
effect of the presence of easements,
flood impact and design constraints and the
evidence did not otherwise establish that the respondent’s valuation was
[26] The Member
observed that the difference between that valuation and the valuation contended
for by that appellant “is close
to what is an acceptable margin of
error”, a reference to an earlier submission by the respondent that a
valuation was not
excessive if the two valuations contended for fell within a
range of ten per cent. That difference merely established that different
valuers had different views and that no error had been established in respect of
the respondent’s valuation of Capalaba Central
[27] The Member
found, in respect of Victoria Point, that the difference in the valuations of
each valuer did not demonstrate error
as it did not show that the
respondent’s valuation was obviously excessive. Accordingly, the
appellant had not satisfied the
onus of proof.
[28] Finally, in
relation to Morayfield, the Member noted that the valuers disagreed on the rate
per square metre for the unencumbered
site area, the discount to be applied to
the flood impacted land and to the suspended slab land. Mr Weir had undertaken
a subjective
assessment based on his experience, whereas Mr Ladewig adopted an
agreed mitigation strategy. The Member accepted that latter approach
logical and transparent and found there was error in the respondent’s
assigning a valuation for Morayfield, the Member noted that Mr Ladewig had no
regard to where the site fell in the hierarchy
of shopping centres and took no
account of the centre’s catchment, portraying the site as if it were a
neighbourhood centre,
whereas Mr Weir had regard to the site being a higher
order shopping centre, of sufficient size to draw from a very wide catchment,
rendering the site superior to almost all of the comparable sales. The Member
found that Mr Weir had sufficiently identified the
different market and amended
the valuation accordingly.
Appellants’ submissions
appellants submit that the Member erred in adopting an approach of looking for
error in advance, without detailed consideration
of the valuation evidence.
Whilst it was correct that each appellant had the onus of proof in respect of
the grounds of appeal,
satisfaction of that onus was to be assessed on all of
the evidence, not in advance of any consideration of that evidence. The Member
also adopted a gloss to the standard of proof by requiring, in respect of error,
that the valuation be obviously excessive.
appellants further submit that the Member erred in treating the
appellants’ valuation evidence as merely establishing
a different
valuation rather than making out that the valuations were excessive as this
conclusion was made without the Member considering
the valuation evidence in any
appellants submit that success in a valuation appeal from the Land Court
requires an appellant to demonstrate error on a
consideration of the whole of
the evidence before the Court. Establishment of error does not involve a
two-step process. This Court
must conduct a real review of the evidence to
determine whether error below has been established in fact or law. If a
consideration
of that evidence establishes that the valuations were excessive,
error is established by an appellant. There is no requirement for
an appellant
to establish that the valuations were “obviously excessive”.
appellants submit that a consideration of all of the relevant circumstances, in
the context of the evidence presented to
the Court as a whole, establishes that
the respondent’s valuation in each appeal was excessive. Once that
conclusion is reached,
there were good reasons to accept Mr Ladewig’s
valuations in respect of each property, justifying a valuation materially lower
than that propounded for by the respondent.
appellant, in respect of the Victoria Point property, further contends that the
Member erred in relying upon the sale of
the Victoria Point property in 1999.
The parties were not advised of an intention to rely upon that sale and were not
given an opportunity
to invite submissions regarding that issue. Procedural
fairness required the parties be given such an opportunity.
appellant, in respect of the Morayfield property, further submits that error is
established by consideration of the evidence
as a whole. The Member erred in
expressing a preference for Mr Weir’s valuation opinion as three aspects
of his evidence rendered
that opinion evidence unreliable. Mr Ladewig’s
evidence was not affected by those errors and ought to have been accepted in
the circumstances.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the Member properly held that none of the appellants
successfully discharged their onus of establishing
that the valuations were
excessive in respect of the Capalaba Park, Capalaba Central and Victoria Point
properties. Further, the
Member properly accepted the respondent’s
valuation of the Morayfield property, subject to an adjustment for the flood
respondent submits that the Member properly rejected Mr Ladewig’s
valuation methodology as erroneous. Once the Member
properly had grounds to
reject Mr Ladewig’s methodology, there was no evidence upon which to
conclude that the valuations were
respondent submits that, whilst this Court is obliged to conduct a real review
of the record and reasons, and draw its own
inferences and conclusions about the
correctness of each valuation the subject of appeal, each appellant bears an
onus of establishing
that the orders below are the result of some legal, factual
or discretionary error warranting the setting aside in whole or part
respondent submits that a fair reading of the Member’s reasons supports a
conclusion that the Member gave a detailed
consideration of each of the
valuer’s evidence and of the issues relevant to the appeals. The reasons
in respect of each appeal
must be read in the context of the reasons as a whole,
including the Member’s earlier, detailed discussion of the evidence
the issues arising on appeal.
respondent submits that the Member did not apply a gloss by using the words
“obviously excessive”. Whether a
valuation is excessive involves a
challenge against an opinion in which there is ordinarily room for inferences
and inclinations.
As such, a difference in values of sufficient quantum is
necessary to conclude that a valuation was excessive. The Member’s
reference to the evidence merely establishing a different valuation for the site
must be read in the context of the Member’s
clear rejection of Mr
Ladewig’s valuation approach.
respondent submits that the Member did not deny natural justice in referring to
the 1999 sale of a Victoria Point property.
The observation in respect of that
sale was made after a conclusion that the evidence of the valuers did not
demonstrate error and
did not establish that the valuation was excessive.
[42] Finally,
the respondent submits that the Member did not err in a determination of the
Morayfield valuation. Mr Weir compared
sites with sites, in order of hierarchy,
adopting an approach which made best use of the sales evidence. Mr Weir also
risks and rewards of developing a major regional shopping centre.
His square meterage rate was supported by a consideration of the
sales as a whole.
Applicable Principles
[43] An appeal
to this Court from the Land Court on a valuation appeal must be by way of
This Court may confirm
the valuation or reduce or increase the valuation to the amount it considers
necessary to correctly make
the valuation under the
[44] The appeal
is to be determined on the evidence before the Land Court, with this Court
undertaking a real review of the trial
record and reasons, drawing its own
inferences and conclusions, and giving the judgment which, in the opinion of the
Court, ought
to have been given at first
[45] To succeed,
an appellant must establish error, be it legal, factual or discretionary,
warranting the setting aside in whole or
part of the
An error of valuation
principle is an error of law, as is a failure to make a finding on a material
fact in issue.
Consideration
[46] Whilst the
appellants contend that error is established by reason of a failure by the
Member to undertake her own independent
assessment of the evidence, a
consideration of the Member’s reasons do not support that contention.
reasons, although brief in the actual determination of each appeal, contained a
discussion of the relevant principles,
as well as a detailed discussion of the
methodology of each valuer and the differences in the approach adopted by each
relation to the issues identified as relevant to the appeal.
[48] A reading
of the reasons as a whole supports a conclusion that the Member did undertake
the process of considering the evidence,
drawing her own inferences and
conclusions, before concluding that the appeals in respect of Capalaba Park,
Capalaba Central and
Victoria Point should be dismissed and that the appeal in
respect of Morayfield be allowed with an amended valuation.
[49] The Member
also did not err by imposing a gloss in determining whether each appellant had
established that the valuation was
excessive. The reference to “obviously
excessive” was a convenient, short form acknowledgment that a valuation is
discretionary determination. The reference to “the difference between
the two valuations is close to what is an acceptable
margin of error” was
an acknowledgment that there are a range of values within a proper exercise of
that discretionary determination.
references, when read in the context of the Member’s reasons as a whole,
correctly record that it is only where the
evidence establishes that the
valuation given can properly be said to fall outside of a proper exercise of
that discretionary determination
that an appellant establishes error warranting
intervention on appeal.
[51] The Member
also did not err by denying the appellant natural justice when referring to the
1999 sale of Victoria Point. That
appeal was dismissed on the basis that the
evidence of the valuers did not demonstrate error, a conclusion supported by the
rejection of Mr Ladewig’s methodology. The subsequent reference to
the 1999 sale did not materially affect the Member’s
reasons for
dismissing the Victoria Point appeal.
[52] Further, on
a consideration of the record as a whole and of the Member’s reasons, no
error is established in the dismissal
of each of the appeals in relation to
Capalaba Park, Capalaba Central and Victoria Point.
Ladewig’s methodology did not have regard to the retail hierarchy of
shopping centres or of that centre’s catchment.
He undertook the process
of an assessment of valuation by looking at the basket of comparable sales and
scaling them according to
the size of the site. A proper valuation necessarily
requires an examination of the sites, in the context of the retail hierarchy
in the further context of a needs-based analysis of the demographics of that
catchment. A site is more than a block of dirt.
Its value is not affected
solely by the size of that site. Such an approach is properly to be described
as overly simplistic.
simplistic approach infected Mr Ladewig’s use of comparable sales of what
were, largely, neighbourhood centres whereas
the subject properties were
sub-regional shopping centres. Whilst one comparable sale, Delamore, was in
that category, it was properly
given little weight by either valuer, meaning it
did not materially impact upon the central criticism of Mr Ladewig’s
methodology.
[55] It is also
open, on a consideration of the evidence as a whole, to accept Mr
Ladewig’s approach to the significance of
agreements for lease but find
that Mr Ladewig’s evidence as a whole did not support a conclusion that
the respondent’s
valuations were excessive. Such a conclusion follows
from the rejection of Mr Ladewig’s overall methodology.
[56] Similarly,
whilst a consideration of the evidence as a whole supports a conclusion that Mr
Weir’s reliance upon trading
performance was properly to be disregarded,
the rejection of Mr Ladewig’s methodology rendered it open to reject his
opinion and accept Mr Weir’s valuation opinion, notwithstanding
Mr Weir’s reliance on trading performance.
[57] Once Mr
Ladewig’s methodology is rejected and Mr Weir’s methodology is
accepted, there was no evidence upon which
it could be properly found that the
evidence supported a conclusion that the respondent’s valuations for
Capalaba Park, Capalaba
Central and Victoria Point were excessive.
[58] Nothing in
the evidence founds a conclusion that “a taint or error must be
inferred” from the respondent’s
evidence was cogent and supported each of the respondent’s valuations,
negating any basis for a conclusion
that that valuation was excessive.
[59] Different
considerations apply in the assessment of the record as a whole and of the
Member’s reasons in respect of Morayfield.
In respect of that property,
the Member specifically did not accept Mr Weir’s deduction for the flood
affected area and an
area that requires a suspended slab, yet preferred Mr
Weir’s assessment of the base rate per square metre for the unencumbered
[60] Whilst
these conclusions may appear inconsistent, a consideration of the Member’s
reasons of the evidence supports a conclusion
that the Member’s findings
were adequately explained in the reasons and consistent with the accepted
evidence as a whole.
Member’s acceptance of Mr Ladewig’s approach to the deduction for
the flood affected area and the area that requires
a suspended slab did not
prevent an acceptance of Mr Weir’s base rate. A preference for, and
acceptance of, Mr Weir’s
assessment of the base rate was explained by Mr
Ladewig’s failure to consider Morayfield’s place in the retail
and failure to take into account the centre’s catchment. The
acceptance of Mr Weir’s evidence as to the base rate was
consistent with the Member’s earlier rejection of Mr Ladewig’s
methodology and acceptance of, and preference
for, Mr Weir’s
acceptance was open on a consideration of the evidence as a whole. Central to
Mr Weir’s evidence was the nature of
Morayfield’s site and
catchment. As Mr Weir observed in evidence, “the better shopping
centre sites are generally in
that three to four hundred dollars a square
metre”. Mr Weir considered Morayfield to be in the category of a better
centre site, having regard to its presence as a major regional site
with a substantial existing catchment.
Weir’s evidence as to the significance of Morayfield’s place in the
retail hierarchy and its catchment supports
a conclusion that it was open on the
whole of the evidence to accept Mr Weir’s base rate of $350 per square
metre. That rate
was at the midpoint of the rates attracted by shopping centres
of the nature of Morayfield.
[64] Once it is
concluded that it was open, on a consideration of the evidence as a whole, to
accept Mr Weir’s opinion as to
the base rate applicable to Morayfield,
there is no basis to conclude that the Member erred in fixing the amended
valuation of $43
Conclusions
[65] The Member
properly concluded that the appellants in Capalaba Park, Capalaba Central and
Victoria Point failed to establish error,
warranting a conclusion that the
respondent’s valuation in respect of each of those properties was
[66] Further, a
consideration of the record as a whole and of the Member’s reasons
supports a conclusion that it was open on
the evidence to find that none of
those appellants had established that the respondent’s valuations in
respect of each of those
properties was excessive. There was no error on the
part of the Member in the application of the applicable test or in failing to
properly consider the evidence as a whole.
[67] No error
has also been demonstrated in the Member’s determination of the amended
valuation for Morayfield. A consideration
of the record as a whole supports a
conclusion that it was open to accept Mr Weir’s base rate for Morayfield,
notwithstanding
the rejection of his evidence as to the deduction applicable to
areas of that site.
appeal be dismissed.
the parties wish to make submissions on costs, the parties are to file and serve
written submissions, limited to three pages, within
seven days of the date
the filing of any submissions on costs, each appellant pay the
respondent’s costs of the appeal, to be assessed on the
Appeal Book p 35, l 40
Appeal Book p 36, l 1.
Appeal Book p 35, l 20.
Land Valuation Act
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
Department of Natural Resources & Mines v
[2003] QLAC 86
Chief Executive, Department of Natural
Resources and Mines v Kent Street Pty Ltd
[2009] QCA 399
(2009) 171 LGERA 365
[2009] QCA 399.
Ipswich City Council v
(2011) 32 QLCR 357
[2011] QLAC 6.
Players Pty Ltd v
Corporation of the City of Adelaide
[2001] SASC 369
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (208 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter