URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2009/76.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:38:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HAE, Re [2009] QGAAT 76 (2 October 2009)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION, QUEENSLAND
[2009] QGAAT 76
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Review of the Appointment of an Administrator on the Tribunal’s
Approval of a Financial Management Plan
Compensation
Application - Tribunal Initiated
In the matter of HAE
MATTER NUMBERS:
GAA4372-09 GAA4373-09 GAA5651-09
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal.
DATE OF HEARING:
28 August 2009
DATE OF ORDER:
28 August 2009
DATE OF REASONS:
2 October 2009
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
J Allen Presiding Member
L Clarkson Member
CATCHWORDS:
ADMINISTRATION-DIRECTION-Where administrator did not act prudently-Where
administrator may have to compensate adult
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Public Trustee Act 1978
Trusts Act 1973
Trustee Companies Act 1968
ADMINISTRATION
the administration order made by the Tribunal on 25 September 2007 is changed by
appointing HJ as administrator for HAE for managing
all financial matters
(a) The award of damages made pursuant to the order of the Supreme
Court of Queensland in August 2008 number S0000/XX.
Tribunal directs HJ to provide accounts to the Tribunal eight (8) weeks prior to
the anniversary of this appointment and annually
thereafter.
the Tribunal orders otherwise, the appointment of HJ remains current for five
APPROVAL OF A FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN OF TRUST COMPANY OF
AUSTRALIA LIMITED
Tribunal approves the investment recommendations set out on page 26 of the
Financial Management Plan dated 26 June 2009.
Tribunal declares that in 2008 Trust Company of Australia Limited did not
adequately model the investment structure of HAE, in
particular Trust Company of
Australia Limited did not take proper account of the advantages of making a
superannuation contribution
under s292-
Income Tax Assessment Act
Tribunal directs Trust Company of Australia Limited on each occasion that its
appointment as administrator for HAE is reviewed
to provide to the Tribunal
modeling prepared by an independent expert of a comparison between:
(a) the assets then under its administration for HAE excluding any
real property; and
(b) the assets that would nominally be under its administration if variously
20%, 40%, 60% or 80% of the amount of initial funds
held under its
administration excluding the provision for purchase of real property, namely
$3,141,695.00 had been contributed into
superannuation at the commencement of
its appointment in 2008.
the modelling to be based on the assumption that HAE could have satisfied
conditions of release for superannuation purposes in
That Trust Company of Australia Limited make an application to the Australian
Taxation Office for a Private Binding Ruling in respect
of the deductibility of
their administration fees and the eligibility of the care costs of HAE’s
for the net medical expenses
tax offsets and to provide a copy of such rulings
to the Tribunal within twenty-eight (28) days of their receipt by Trust Company
of Australia Limited.
NOTICE OF INTEREST IN LAND
Trust Company of Australia Limited shall within three (3) months:
by way of a search of the records held by the Registrar of Titles or other
means, any interest in real property registered
in the name of HAE (“the
with the Registrar of Titles a copy of this order and a notice notifying the
Registrar of any interest in land held by the adult
which is subject to this
administration order.
to the Tribunal:
(i) a copy of the search of records held by the Registrar
of Titles referred to above and;
(ii) a copy of the lodgement summary with the dealing number showing
lodgement of the order in respect of any interests in land held
by the adult
which is subject to this administration order.
That if any change is made in an interest in land held by the adult which is the
subject of this administration order or if there
are any further dealings in
land on behalf of the adult by the administrator, the administrator shall lodge
with the Registrar of
Titles within 14 days of the finalisation of such interest
a copy of this order and a notice (in a form prescribed by the Registrar
Titles), concerning such changes or dealings.
the administrator pay, from the adult’s funds, any fee associated with the
above notices.
COMPENSATION APPLICATION
Company of Australia Limited shall provide submissions to the Tribunal and other
active parties in regard to:
or not there has been any breach of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
in regard to their investment as administrator of HAE’s funds to
the date of this hearing;
calculation of any compensation properly payable by Trust Company of Australia
Limited to HAE under
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
such submissions to be provided within twenty-eight (28) days;
other active parties will have fourteen (14) days from the date of receipt of
the submissions of Trust Company of Australia Limited
to provide submissions in
reply to the Tribunal and all other active parties.
ADJOURNMENT
the hearing in regard to the compensation order is adjourned to a date to be
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
[1] HAE is 20 years old and is currently a long stay patient at a health centre.
HAE is permanently disabled as a result of brain
damage she suffered as a
fourteen year old while a patient in hospital following an acute brain
haemorrhage at home in September
[2] HAE’s parents, HJ and HE, were appointed her guardians and
administrators by order of the Tribunal on 25 September 2007.
[3] A personal injuries claim was pursued as a result of the injuries suffered
by HAE with HJ as her litigation guardian. A compromise
of this claim was
sanctioned by order of Justice Mullins of the Supreme Court of Queensland under
section 59(1)
Public Trustee Act 1978
in August 2008. Trust
Company of Australia Limited was appointed HAE’s administrator pursuant to
that order. The defendant
was ordered to pay HAE the sum of $4,250,000 in
damages and management fees in respect of her personal injuries claim together
her costs of and incidental to the proceeding to be assessed on the
standard basis.
[4] Trust Company of Australia Limited was ordered to give the Tribunal a
management plan for approval within 60 days of the order.
Various requests were
made by Trust Company of Australia Limited for extensions of time to lodge the
management plan. Trust Company
of Australia Limited submitted a plan dated 29
June 2009 to the Tribunal on 7 July 2009. It is noted that as from 1 January
management plans are referred to as financial management plans under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
[5] In accordance with Presidential Direction 2 of 2007, an oral hearing for
approval of the plan was set for 28 August 2009. In
accordance with that
Presidential Direction the purpose of the hearing is to consider the measures
that an administrator proposes
to implement to manage the adult’s funds.
[6] As HAE’s parents had previously been appointed her administrators a
review of their appointment as administrators was also
held as there was
currently a duplication of administrator’s powers.
The Issues and the Legislation
[7] In regard to reviewing the appointment of HE and HJ as administrators for
HAE, the Tribunal reviews the appointment of decision-makers
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(the Act) and in accordance
with sub-section 31(2) of the Act, the Tribunal must revoke its order making the
appointment unless it
is satisfied that it would make an appointment if a new
application were to be made.
[8] Therefore the Tribunal must be satisfied in respect of the matters set out
of the Act in respect of the appointment of an administrator as
12 Appointment
The tribunal may, by order, appoint a guardian for a
personal matter, or an administrator for a financial matter, for an adult if
tribunal is satisfied—
(a) the adult has impaired capacity for the matter; and
(b) there is a need for a decision in relation to the matter or the adult
is likely to do something in relation to the matter that
involves, or is likely
to involve, unreasonable risk to the adult’s health, welfare or property;
(c) without an appointment—
(i) the adult’s needs will not be adequately met; or
(ii) the adult’s interests will not be adequately protected.
The appointment may be on terms considered appropriate
by the tribunal.
The tribunal may make the order on its own initiative or
on the application of the adult, the adult guardian or an interested
[9] If the Tribunal is satisfied that it would make an appointment sub-section
31(3) of the Act sets out the options the Tribunal
has in regard to the
appointment of administrators as follows:
31 Appointment
review process
If the tribunal is satisfied there are appropriate
grounds for an appointment to continue, it may either—
(a) continue its order making the appointment; or
(b) change its order making the appointment, including, for
(i) changing the terms of the appointment; or
(ii) removing an appointee; or
(iii) making a new appointment.
[10] The Tribunal may remove an appointee in accordance with sub-sections 31 (4)
and (5) of the Act as follows:
31 Appointment review process
However, the tribunal may make an order removing an
appointee only if the tribunal considers—
(a) the appointee is no longer competent; or
(b) another person is more appropriate for appointment.
An appointee is no longer competent if, for
(a) a relevant interest of the adult has not been, or is not being,
adequately protected; or
(b) the appointee has neglected the appointee’s duties or abused the
appointee’s powers, whether generally or in relation
to a specific
(c) the appointee is an administrator appointed for a matter involving an
interest in land and the appointee fails to advise the registrar
of titles of
the appointment as required under
section 21(1)
(d) the appointee has otherwise contravened this Act.
[11] An administrator is required to give a financial management plan to the
Tribunal for approval in accordance with
of the Act. When approving a
financial management plan the Tribunal has regard to Chapter 4 of the Act and in
- to apply the General Principles,
honestly and with reasonable diligence,
- avoid conflict
transactions,
- remuneration of professional administrators,
- keep property separate and
- power to invest and continue
investments.
[12] In regard to the power to invest, the Act specifies that an administrator
may invest only in authorised investments. Authorised
investments are defined in
the dictionary of the Act as an investment which, if the investment were of
trust funds by a trustee,
would be an investment by the trustee exercising a
power of investment under the
Trusts Act 1973
Investments by
trustees under those provisions are said to be in accordance with the Prudent
Person Rule. The financial management
plan dated 29 June 2009 provided by Trust
Company of Australia was considered in accordance with the above provisions of
[13] The issues for the Tribunal are:
(a) Does HAE
continue to have impaired capacity for financial matters?
(b) Is there a
need to continue the appointment of an administrator? If so, should HJ and HE be
continued or another be appointed?
(c) Should the
Tribunal approve the financial management plan dated 29 June 2009 in accordance
of the Act.
THE PARTIES
[14] The active parties at the hearing were HJ, SR for
Trust Company of Australia Limited, MC for the Public Trustee of Queensland.
was given leave to represent The Public Trustee of Queensland. The following
interested parties attended the hearing, BS and EM
from Trust Company of
Australia Limited and OJ for the Public Advocate.
The Evidence
[15] In addition to the written material contained on the Tribunal file, all of
the parties attending the hearing were given the
opportunity to express their
views. These views, where specifically relied upon by the Tribunal, are
discussed below.
DOES HAE LACK CAPACITY FOR THE MATTER?
[16] HAE suffered an acute brain haemorrhage on 19 September 2003 which resulted
in her being hospitalised. HAE later had a seizure
in hospital which resulted in
significant brain damage. She is now severely disabled and requires 24 hour a
day care. HAE’s
disabilities include cerebral palsy, spastic quadriplegia
and blindness. HAE is currently cared for at a health centre. At the hearing,
confirmed that HAE requires full support in all of areas of decision-making and
with her activities of daily living. HAE has minimal
communication capacity due
to her physical and cognitive deficits.
[17] The Tribunal is satisfied that HAE has impaired capacity for financial
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF AN ADMINISTRATOR AND
WHO SHOULD THAT ADMINISTRATOR BE?
[18] HAE’s parents were appointed her administrators by the Tribunal on 25
September 2007 which was prior to the Supreme Court
of Queensland award of
damages. At that time HAE was in receipt of the disability support pension and
her major expense was for hospital
fees. At the time of the hearing, HAE had a
St George Bank account with a balance of $17,232 which was under the control of
HJ as administrators. Following the compromise of HAE’s personal
injuries claim her entitlement to the disability support pension
ceased and her
expenses are now being paid by Trust Company of Australia Limited (Trust
Company) as administrator for the settlement
sum. HE is no longer the husband of
HJ and he resides interstate. HJ informed the Tribunal that HE’s
involvement has recently
been limited to occasional telephone contact. HJ
confirmed that as administrator she has access to monies paid into HAE’s
account by Trust Company for HAE’s needs. The Tribunal was also
informed by HJ that an amount of $10,000 had been deposited
into a bank account
in her name by Trust Company for some minor work to a house purchased by them
for HAE. The Tribunal made the
parties aware that this practice was
inappropriate having regard to the requirement in
of the Act to keep
property separate. The Tribunal considered that it would be appropriate for any
funds which were to be used by
HJ on behalf of HAE be paid into an account in
HAE’s name and that HJ would account separately to the Tribunal in respect
those funds just as Trust Company was required to account for the funds while
they were under its control.
[19] HAE has received an amount of $4,250,000 in respect of her personal
injuries claim. That sum is being administered by Trust
Company in accordance
with the order of Justice Mullins of the Supreme Court of Queensland dated in
August 2008. HAE is unable to
participate at all in her financial affairs and
there is therefore a need for an administrator to ensure that when any payments
made to HAE’s bank account by her primary administrator that they are
used for her benefit. HJ confirmed to the Tribunal that
she was willing to
undertake the role of administrator for HAE for all financial matters except the
award of damages. Having regard
to the fact that HE has a limited role in HAE
life the Tribunal was satisfied that HJ was more appropriate for appointment as
administrator
in accordance with
section 15(1)(f)
of the Act as she is available
and accessible to HAE whereas HE resides interstate and has limited contact with
HAE. The Tribunal
therefore has changed its order made on 25 September 2007 by
appointing HJ as administrator for HAE for all financial matters except
award of damages made pursuant to the order of the Supreme Court of Queensland
in August 2008 number S0000/XX.
THE FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN
[20] Trust Company received the amount of $4,211,287 in respect of HAE’s
personal injuries settlement in September 2008. From
this amount, payments have
been made for outstanding legal fees of $143,973 and care fees as well as
$68,000 for the deposit on a
residence for HAE. The funds held by Trust Company
at the time of preparation of the financial management plan for HAE were
$3,941,695.
In preparing the financial management plan, Trust Company relied
upon information from HJ. The plan notes that HAE is receiving care
in a nursing
additional care services for her. The
fees charged by the hospital were $41 per
day up until April 2009 but as a result of the court settlement they increased
per day. It is stated in the plan that the increase in hospital bed fees
made it essential that alternative accommodation be found
for HAE. Trust Company
also stated that there had been some uncertainty in regard to HAE’s life
expectancy with variations
from 10 to 38 years with a general consensus in the
vicinity of 15 years. Trust Company identified the relevant goals and objectives
in respect of the plan in terms of providing HAE with her ongoing care at an
alternative location to the hospital. The cost of the
current care arrangements
were estimated at $275,000 per annum and it was stated that an alternative has
to be found that is satisfactory
to HAE’s needs and is sustainable from a
cost perspective. If HAE was to move to a home care situation it was estimated
she would require further income support of $5,200 per annum. After
consideration of several options an amount of $800,000 was to
be set aside for
the purchase of a residence with modifications for HAE. The plan notes a
contract had been entered for the purchase
of a suitable property for HAE for an
amount of $680,000. Trust Company also recommended that an amount of $300,000 be
retained in
at call funds to cover living expenses and emergencies for at least
12 months without having to sell down growth assets.
[21] In terms of the investment portfolio, Trust Company noted the following
important objectives – tax effective wealth creation,
achieve capital
growth, consider risk and return, portfolio diversification, investment
flexibility, portfolio liquidity. These are
some of the matters which are
expected to be taken into account in accordance with the Prudent Person Rule.
Trust Company discussed
the appropriate risk profile for HAE with HJ and it was
decided that a balanced risk profile would be appropriate. They stated that
risk profile is suitable for investors who have a medium to long term investment
timeframe and are prepared to accept a moderate
level of capital loss. It is
stated that this strategy aims to deliver a balanced portfolio in terms of
exposure between growth and
income securities.
[22] There was an alternative strategy mentioned of investing the funds in cash.
This strategy was discounted because there is no
potential for capital growth
and as such the ability to protect HAE’s assets from inflation is
[23] The specific recommendations in regard to the investment of the funds were
that they be held in a diversified portfolio of managed
funds within the Trust
Company Portfolio Management Service suitable for a balanced investor. The
advantages and disadvantages of
investing using a managed fund platform were
discussed extensively. The recommended investments are as follows:
Trust Cash Management Fund
Esanda Term Deposit
Perpetual’s Wholesale Monthly Income Fund
Macquarie Master – Diversified Fixed Interest Fund
Vanguard Australian Fixed Interest Index fund
BT Wholesale Australian Share Fund
Fortis Investments Australian Equity Fund
Russell Australian Share Fund – Class A
Zurich Investments Global Thematic Fund
Walter Scott Global Equity Fund
Vanguard International Shares Index Fund
UBS Property Securities Fund
Vanguard Wholesale – Property Securities Index Fund
[24] There was also an amount of $50,000 contributed to a Macquarie Super
Manager Account for HAE in the 2009 income tax year and
invested in the Russell
balanced fund. The funds held in the Esanda term deposit were earmarked for the
purchase of the residence
for HAE and the modification of it to suit her.
[25] Trust Company estimated that HAE’s total caring costs following a
move to independent accommodation would be $210,000
per annum (indexed) with
additional lifestyle costs of $5,200 per annum. On that basis and with an amount
of $800,000 set aside for
the purchase and modification of the house, they
calculated that the investment portfolio would provide for her needs for a
of 25 years. They also noted that at that time the house would be
available for realisation if HAE were to transition to hospital
or aged care and
the investments of the sale proceeds could generate further income. Trust
Company also calculated the life of the
fund if care costs were $250,000 per
annum (indexed) as 19 years. With the life expectancy of HAE being estimated at
15 years it
was noted that there was some scope for a range of possible caring
[26] At the time of the plan it was not possible to provide a final estimate of
care costs as that will require a care plan to be
prepared by the Cerebral Palsy
League and it will depend in particular on the level of qualifications required
by the carers, that
is, whether they are assistant nurses or registered nurses.
It is noted in the plan that a substantial portion of the care costs
eligible to be included in claimable medical expenses and therefore eligible for
the non-refundable tax offset of 20% for
net medical expenses over $1,500 per
annum. It is stated in the plan that this makes a significant difference to the
tax position
for HAE and impacts upon decisions as they relate to
superannuation. At the hearing Trust Company advised that they had not obtained
a ruling from the Australian Taxation Office in regard to the availability of
the net medical expenses offset to HAE and were relying
on general information
from the Australian Taxation Office.
[27] The plan noted superannuation as a concessionally taxed environment which
provides relief from taxation both in the accumulation
and pension stages. The
plan stated that where a party is in receipt of a personal injuries claim that
for contributions proceeding
from a personal injuries payment and for a person
with a permanent incapacity preventing gainful employment as attested by two
qualified medical practitioners and accepted by the trustees may be
exempt from the current non-concessional cap of $450,000 for
a three year
period. It was noted that timing was an issue as the contribution and trustee
acceptance must be completed within 90
days of the receipt of the personal
injury payment. It is stated in the plan that it was decided to make progressive
contributions
to a superannuation fund rather than an initial lump sum under the
special “personal injuries option” for the following
“We have a concern that with the current reviews of
taxation there will be a review of the ability to withdraw all funds from
pension account and therefore there is a legislative risk that the withdrawal of
funds may be limited to a percentage of balances
in the future.
An assessment of the appropriate care arrangements for HAE has taken the
family a considerable period of time to arrive at an appropriate
solution which
is to purchase a property and provide care in this residence. This has the
effect of there being a large claimable
medical expenses relating to the care
costs which result in a non-refundable net medical expenses tax offset estimated
conservatively
at $36,000 per annum. When this is taken into account along with
the deductible management fees and the refundable franking credits
should receive a tax refund in most years.
A progressive contribution to a superannuation account in this case
provides the opportunity to make financial decisions after proper
consultation and review the deductible or concessional contributions each
[28] There was a recommendation of an initial concessional contribution into a
suitable complying superannuation fund of $50,000
in the 2009 tax year and
$25,000 for the 2010 tax year.
[29] At the hearing, Trust Company advised that their concerns in regard to the
review of taxation were based on industry talk only.
CM submitted that it was
not appropriate to base decisions on such industry talk. MC queried whether
Trust Company had done any modelling
in respect of different investment
strategies for HAE. Trust Company confirmed that no such modelling had occurred.
Trust Company
later indicated that they had relied on advice developed for other
clients in regard to the appropriateness of various strategies
superannuation. CM submitted that it was not prudent for Trust Company not to
invest through a superannuation vehicle having
regard to the tax advantages such
an investment vehicle would provide HAE. CM also queried Trust Company in regard
to whether they
had any documentary proof that the decision not to pursue a
superannuation contribution strategy had been made within the 90 day
Trust Company confirmed that the decision had been made within the 90 days but
did not provide any proof of that.
[30] In regard to the fees of Trust Company, these were calculated in accordance
with section 41 of the
Trustee Companies Act 1968
which allows for
capital commission of $5.50 for every $100 of the capital value of the fund at
commencement and income commission
of $6.60 for every $100 of income received
each year. Trust Company decided to take the capital commission over a 10 year
stating that this will create an annual deductible amount of $23,162
based on an initial sum of $4,211,287. There would also be an
ongoing income fee
which was estimated in the plan at $8,320 per annum. At the hearing, Trust
Company advised that they had not obtained
confirmation from the Australian
Taxation Office that the management fees would be deductible to HAE.
[31] The projections prepared by Trust Company for HAE’s income and
expenses show a deficit of expenses over income of $140,773
in the first year
rising to $335,528 after 25 years. The primary tax liability is projected to
range from $29,000 to a high of $36,943
allowing for the full deductibility of
Trust Company’s fees with nil tax payable after the medical expenses tax
offset. There
is, also imputation tax credits available of about $7,000 in each
year to reduce the tax liability.
[32] HAE has received a sum of money which will primarily be required to fund
the cost of her care during her lifetime. Trust Company
have worked with HJ to
ensure that the best option for care is available for HAE and have formulated a
plan for the investment of
those funds in a balanced portfolio to provide income
and capital growth during HAE’s projected life expectancy. The Tribunal
notes that HJ supported Trust Company and stated that she had a good
relationship with them. A decision has been taken to purchase
a residence for
HAE at a cost of $800,000 after modifications as the alternative of hospital
accommodation became too expensive following
HAE’s receipt of the
settlement sum.
[33] When considering its plan, Trust Company complied with the General
Principles by consulting with HJ and in deciding that a community
would be the best option for HAE. In terms of acting honestly and with
reasonable diligence, it is clear that there were
complex matters to be
considered in regard to the care arrangements for HAE and that these contributed
to the delays in formulating
the plan. As the administrator is independent there
are no issues in regard to conflict transactions which arise.
[34] It was noted at the hearing that a payment of $10,000 had been made to an
account in the name of HJ for some initial work on
the house. The Tribunal made
it clear that this was in breach of section 50 of the Act and this should not
occur in the future. While
Trust Company has indicated that its fees will be in
accordance with the
Trustee Companies Act 1968
, they have assumed that
these fees will be tax deductible without obtaining any confirmatory ruling from
the Australian Taxation
Office. If the fees are not tax deductible, this may
result in HAE having to pay tax which will reduce the funds available for her
future care as she is projected to operate on a deficit in each year due to her
high care costs in comparison to the projected earnings
of the fund. As a result
the impact of taxation becomes an important issue for HAE and any financial
management plan for her should
carefully consider the impact of taxation.
[35] This leads to a consideration of the Prudent Person Rule and how well Trust
Company complied with it in making its investment
decisions for HAE. As
mentioned, the relevant considerations are set out in the
Trust Act 1973
and in particular section 24 of that Act
as follows (with amendment
for present purposes):
purposes of the fund and the needs and circumstances of the adult;
desirability of diversifying fund investments;
(c) The need to
maintain the real value of the capital or income of the fund;
(d) The risk of
capital loss or depreciation;
potential for capital appreciation;
(f) The likely
income returns and the timing of returns;
(g) The length
of the term of the proposed investment;
probable duration of the fund;
liquidity and marketability of the proposed investment during and at the end of,
the term of the proposed investment;
(j) The total
value of the fund;
(k) The effect
of the proposed investment for the tax liability of the fund;
likelihood of inflation affecting the value of the proposed investment; and
(m) The cost
(including commissions, fees and charges and duties payable) of making the
proposed investment.
[36] The Tribunal is satisfied that the investments proposed for HAE have
appropriate regard to all of the above matters apart from
the effect on the tax
liability of the fund. Trust Company has created a diversified portfolio of
investments to provide for HAE’s
care during her expected lifetime.
[37] The Tribunal, however, takes issue with the basis on which Trust Company
states it made its decision to shift its investment
strategy away from the
superannuation option. That is because the Tribunal considers it is neither
appropriate nor prudent to base
significant investment decisions on industry
speculation in regard to changes to superannuation rules and the availability of
deductions for administration fees and medical expenses offsets for which no
confirmation was obtained from the Australian Taxation
Office in regard to their
availability to HAE.
[38] There is provision under section 292-
Income Tax Assessment Act
(Cth) for the full contribution of the proceeds of a personal injuries
payout to superannuation within 90 days of its payment and
the availability of a
pension which is non-taxable if HAE satisfies a condition of release of
superannuation funds. Having regard
to her injuries, it is clear that she would
have a condition of release. While the funds are held in a superannuation
environment
for HAE there is also no capital gains tax payable. Trust Company
did not model the alternative scenario of investing the funds through
superannuation and said that they based their decision on work that they had
done in respect of other clients. Having regard to the
size of funds under
administration and the duties of an administrator and financial planner, it
would be incumbent that any decision-making
or advice used in the formulation of
a plan for HAE would be fully documented.
[39] Trust Company also relied on the deductibility of its fees and the
applicability of the net medical expenses offset to HAE as
a reason for not
investing in superannuation as there would be no need to use the superannuation
environment as there was no tax
payable by HAE. Trust Company did not obtain any
rulings from the Australian Taxation Office to confirm this. Trust Company
that the decision not to invest in superannuation was made within the
required 90 day period and it did not raise the issue of compliance
requirements of the 90 day period in terms of obtaining a condition of release
as being an issue for them.
[40] The Tribunal notes that a concessional contribution of $50,000 was made to
superannuation for HAE in the 2009 year and that
this would have been taxed at
the rate of 15% as opposed to a zero rate if the full amount had been
contributed within the 90 day
period. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that
as a result of the failure by Trust Company to properly consider the taxation
implications
of its investments that it has not complied with the Prudent Person
Rule. The Tribunal will therefore not approve the financial management
Trust Company dated 29 June 2009 while approving the investments set out on page
26 of the plan which is listed above. The
Tribunal also directs Trust Company to
obtain rulings from the Australian Taxation Office in regard to the
deductibility of its fees
and the net medical expenses offset for HAE.
[41] The Tribunal notes that CM made submissions that a loss could be determined
at this time in regard to the decision not to place
the funds in superannuation
and submitted that an independent administrator should be appointed for that
purpose. The Tribunal is
satisfied that the future impact of the decision of
Trust Company not to contribute HAE’s funds to superannuation is unknown
at this time. The Tribunal will make directions requiring Trust Company to
calculate the value of the funds held for HAE based on
certain of them being
held in superannuation each time its appointment is reviewed. If the value of
the funds would be greater if
they had been held in superannuation then a
compensation application can be considered.
COMPENSATION APPLICATION
[42] During the course of the hearing, Trust Company advised the Tribunal that
HAE’s funds were currently invested in their
at call fund at an interest
rate of 2% pending the decision of the Tribunal on the approval of the financial
management plan. They
stated that the relevant interest rate had been higher at
various times since the money was received in September 2008. Trust Company
stated that it was their view that they could not invest the funds in accordance
with the financial management plan until the plan
had been approved by the
Tribunal. It has not been the practice of the Tribunal to require this in the
past. The Tribunal makes directions
requiring submissions from Trust Company as
to whether its investment of the funds to the date of the hearing is in breach
Act and if so, its calculation of the compensation payable under section
59 of the Act for such breach. The other active parties
will have an opportunity
to make submissions in reply. The hearing in regard to compensation is adjourned
to a date to be fixed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (195 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter