URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/53.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
S69 and Department of State Development, Infrastructure and Planning (Office of Industrial Relations) [2025] QICmr 53 (25 August 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
S69 and Department of State Development, Infrastructure and Planning
(Office of Industrial Relations)
[2025] QICmr 53
(25 August 2025)
Application Number:
Respondent:
Department of State Development, Infrastructure and Planning (Office of
Industrial Relations)
Decision Date:
25 August 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS - EXEMPT
INFORMATION - INFORMATION GIVEN UNDER COMPULSION - ABROGATION
OF PRIVILEGE
AGAINST SELF-INCRIMINATION - records regarding investigation of a workplace
incident that resulted in death - sections
47(3)(a) and 48 and schedule 3,
section 10(3)
Right to Information Act 2009
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS - CONTRARY
TO PUBLIC INTEREST - information provided by or about other
individuals during
investigation -
sections 47(3)(b)
Right to Information Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied
to the Office of
Industrial Relations (
Right to Information Act 2009
for access to documents
regarding an investigation into a workplace incident which resulted in the death
of his child. The incident
occurred during an activity undertaken as part of an
educational program.
identified that all the information sought related to an ongoing prosecution and
to refuse access on the
basis that disclosure would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest. The
applicant applied
to the Office of
the Information Commissioner (
) for external review of this
the external review, the prosecution was finalised and OIR agreed to disclose
documents to the applicant, subject to the refusal
of information OIR
comprised exempt
information given under compulsion or contrary to public interest
information.
preliminary views to the
participants about the refused information, following which OIR agreed to
disclose further information to
The applicant provided
submissions to OIC
in support of
his position that access to the remaining refused information should be granted.
information that remains the subject of OIR’s disclosure objections
Description
Compelled Information
Information the OIR inspector compelled witnesses to provide during the
investigation
19, 23-26, 27, 70-71, 75, 76, 79, 938, 1139-1209, 1215-1286 and
Third-party Information
Identifying information of third parties, such as names and contact
details, and information they provided to the OIR inspector
2-3, 8-9, 12-15, 19, 23-26, 28, 30-31, 33-34, 36, 38, 41-42, 45-46, 51-53,
57-58, 60, 63, 66-69, 76-77, 79-81, 84-92, 93-94, 99, 119-120,
125-131, 133,
135-137, 147-148, 154, 178, 183, 186-187, 203-213, 218, 220, 222, 224, 226, 243,
245, 398-401, 418, 420-422, 424, 433-434,
436, 439, 444, 447, 480-486, 490-493,
494-503, 506-514, 549, 552-558, 562-563, 566, 574, 576-577, 580-581, 645-650,
654-684, 937,
942-950, 1101-1106, 1113-1121, 1125-1138, 1210, 1214, 1287-1364,
1365-1382 and 1465-1467.
on the information available to me, and for the reasons set out below, I have
decided to vary OIR’s decision by finding
that access to the:
Information may be refused under section 47(3)(a) and schedule 3, section 10(3)
of the RTI Act on the basis that it comprises
exempt information; and
Third-party
Information may be refused under section 47(3)(b) of the RTI Act on the basis it
comprises contrary to public interest
information.
making this decision, I have considered evidence, submissions, legislation and
other material as set out in these
I have also had regard
Human Rights Act 2019
), particularly the
right to seek and receive
information,
and in doing so,
have acted in accordance with section 58(1) of the HR
Exempt information
Relevant law
person has a right, under the RTI Act, to be given access to documents of an
subject to certain
limitations,
including grounds for refusing
It is Parliament’s
intention that the RTI Act is to be administered with a pro-disclosure
and that the grounds for
refusing access are to be interpreted
may be refused to exempt
information.
Schedule 3 of the
RTI Act sets out the categories of exempt information, the disclosure of which
Parliament has deemed is always
contrary to the public
Schedule 3, section
10(3) provides that information will be exempt where it is given in the course
of an investigation of a contravention
or possible contravention of the law
under compulsion under an Act that abrogated the privilege against
self-incrimination.
‘privilege against self-incrimination’
is a common law right
which provides that a person is not bound to answer any question or produce any
document if the answer or the
document would expose, or would have a tendency to
expose, the person to conviction for a
There are some occasions
where Parliament considers that it is necessary to override the common law
privilege against self-incrimination,
and compel a person to answer questions or
produce documents. On those occasions, Parliament may include specific powers
in legislation
to abrogate the privilege.
sections 155
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
), inspectors have the power to obtain information or require the
production of documents and answers to questions.
Where these powers
are used, section 172 of the WHS Act abrogates the privilege against
self-incrimination as follows:
172 Abrogation of privilege against self-incrimination
A person is not excused from answering a question or providing information or
a document under this part on the ground that the answer
to the question, or the
information or document, may tend to incriminate the person or expose the person
to a penalty.
inspectors rely on their powers of compulsion, there are a number of
requirements that must be followed. For example, the requirement
documents must be made by written notice unless the circumstances require the
inspector to have immediate
Further, before an
inspector can require a person to answer a question or provide information or a
document under part 9 of the
WHS Act, an inspector
identify himself
or herself to the person as an inspector (by producing the inspector’s
identity card or in some other way)
warn the person
that failure to comply with the requirement or to answer the question, without
reasonable excuse, would constitute
an offence; and
warn the person
self-incrimination) and also advise
the person about the effect of section 269
of the WHS Act.
Submissions
that in this matter,
‘Inspectors relied on sections 155 and 171 of the
to compel information from individuals and entities’
and access to the
Compelled Information
‘has been refused on the basis that this
information was given under compulsion in abrogation of the privilege against
self-incrimination
and it is therefore exempt under the RTI
applicant submits
disclosure of the refused information, including the Compelled Information,
would assist him with understanding the circumstances
surrounding his
child’s death, provide him with information for use in legal proceedings
he has commenced and assist with improving
safety awareness and preventing
similar incidents in the future.
have considered the Compelled Information. As set out at paragraph 5, it
comprises information obtained from witnesses during the
investigation. Some of
the information was obtained during interviews. I am satisfied that the
remaining Compelled Information was
provided in response to a notice issued
under section 155 of the WHS Act. Having considered the Compelled Information, I
satisfied that the inspector relied on the WHS Act provisions to
obtain the Compelled Information from witnesses and complied with
requirements as set out at paragraph
when doing so.
these reasons, I find that the Compelled Information meets the requirements for
exemption under schedule 3, section 10(3) of the
RTI Act and access may be
refused on that basis.
exemptions in schedule 3 to the RTI Act do not require nor allow consideration
of public interest factors. This is because, as
noted at paragraph 9, Parliament
has already determined that disclosure of these categories of information would
be contrary to the
public interest. If information falls within one of the
categories of exempt information prescribed in schedule 3, a conclusive
presumption
exists that its disclosure would be contrary to the public interest,
and no further consideration of public interest factors is
As I have found that
the Compelled Information comprises exempt information, I cannot take into
account the public interest factors
raised by the applicant’s submissions
at paragraph
Contrary to public interest information
Relevant law
to information may be refused under the RTI Act where its disclosure would, on
balance, be contrary to the public
refers to considerations affecting the good order and functioning
of the community and government affairs for the well-being of citizens.
means that in general, a public interest consideration is one which is common to
all members of, or a substantial segment of,
the community, as distinct from
matters that concern purely private or personal interests. However, there are
some recognised public
interest considerations that may apply for the benefit of
an individual.
RTI Act explains the steps that the decision-maker must take in deciding the
public interest
and identifies
factors in schedule 4 that may be relevant to deciding the balance of the public
interest. I have considered all these
factors, together with other relevant
information in reaching my decision, and discuss relevant factors
Applicant’s submissions
summary, the applicant
he has commenced
proceedings in another jurisdiction against the education program provider and
access to the information will be
indispensable for these proceedings
he believes that
the primary cause of death was the lack of safety management by the education
program provider and its employees
and holding them accountable is
the education
program provider and its employees have access to information that he does
seeking to disclose the personal information of third parties or identify any
particular individual, if there are privacy
concerns, names can be
rather, he is
seeking access to assist with understanding the circumstances that led to his
child’s death, including statements
provided by witnesses present at the
time of the incident which set out what happened, what was heard or said and
what actions were
taken before and after the incident
access to the
information will assist with improving safety awareness and preventing similar
tragedies in the future
proceedings in
Queensland against an employee of the education program provider and a service
provider have concluded; and
he is open to
restrictions being placed on the further dissemination of the
information.
Irrelevant factors
have not taken any irrelevant public interest factors into account in making
this decision.
Factors favouring disclosure
accept that OIR must be transparent and accountable in how it deals with
investigations of fatal workplace incidents. I am satisfied
that several
pro-disclosure factors relevant to enhancing OIR’s
transparency
arise in this case,
as discussed below.
Third-party Information comprises evidence that was provided to the inspector
and considered in reaching the recommendations detailed
in the investigation
report regarding the incident. I accept that disclosing this type of information
would advance the relevant
public interest factors to some degree as it would
provide the applicant with further insight into the nature and extent of
information
that was before the inspector for the purpose of making decisions in
connection with the investigation. However, I have also taken
into account the
information already disclosed to the applicant by
I am satisfied that
disclosure of that information has served to discharge the relevant public
interest factors by providing a moderate
level of transparency to OIR’s
processes and generally outlining how OIR dealt with the investigation. For
these reasons, I
consider the weight to be afforded to these factors as they
relate to the Third-party Information is moderate.
the applicant’s submissions, I have considered whether disclosing the
Third-party Information could reasonably be expected
to contribute to the
administration of justice for the
circumstances, information can be accessed under the RTI Act for litigation
but only if the weight
of the administration of justice factor is sufficient to outweigh other relevant
considerations, such as privacy
and flow of information as discussed
below. Where disclosure of the information
‘would assist
remedy, or to evaluate whether a remedy is
available, or worth
this will be
relevant to take into account in affording weight to this public interest
the circumstances, I am satisfied that the applicant has suffered a loss, it is
open to him to pursue legal proceedings, and having
access to all the remaining
information would inform preparation of his case, and enable him to put
additional information before
the relevant court. For these reasons, I am
satisfied the administration of justice factor applies. In affording weight to
this factor,
it is relevant to note that the applicant has commenced proceedings
(in another jurisdiction) against the education program provider
involved employees. This indicates that the applicant is already in possession
of information required to commence proceedings
and in this regard, I also note
the information which has already been disclosed to the applicant, including the
Investigation Report.
circumstances, I consider this factor has already been discharged to some degree
and I therefore, afford it moderate weight
in favour of
disclosure.
acknowledge the importance of providing the applicant with access to his
child’s personal
information
This factor carries
significant weight in favour of disclosure. However, the portions of the
applicant’s child’s personal
information are so closely intertwined
with the personal information of other people that they cannot be disclosed
without also disclosing
the personal information of others, raising factors
favouring nondisclosure which I consider
Factors favouring nondisclosure
RTI Act recognises that disclosing an individual’s personal information to
someone else can reasonably be expected to cause
a public interest
Further, a factor
favouring nondisclosure arises if disclosing information could reasonably be
expected to prejudice the protection
of an individual’s right to
noted above, the Third-party Information comprises the personal information of
witnesses which was obtained during the investigation
of the incident. It
comprises those individuals’ personal accounts of and emotional reactions
to events relevant to the incident.
Those individuals have not consented to the
information being disclosed. I consider that disclosure of the Third-party
Information
could reasonably be expected to prejudice the protection of their
right to maintain a level of privacy in relation to their involvement
investigation and cause a public interest harm by disclosing their personal
information in a sensitive context. On this basis,
I afforded significant weight
to these two nondisclosure factors.
further factor favouring nondisclosure arises where disclosure could reasonably
be expected to prejudice the flow of information
to a regulatory
I accept that disclosing
information voluntarily provided by individuals in relation to the investigation
under the RTI Act, where
there can be no restriction on its use, dissemination
or republication
reasonably be expected to erode confidence in the investigation process and
prejudice the flow of information from individuals
who would otherwise provide
relevant information. I am satisfied that this, in turn, could reasonably
be expected to adversely impact
OIR’s ability to effectively conduct
investigations of workplace incidents. On this basis, I afford significant
this nondisclosure factor.
Balancing the public interest
have had regard to the RTI Act’s pro-disclosure
and Parliament’s
intention that grounds for refusing access to information are to be interpreted
this case, I have afforded moderate weight to factors favouring disclosure
concerning OIR’s accountability and ensuring transparency
operations and decision-making, and the administration of justice for the
applicant. I have also afforded significant weight
to the applicant’s
ability to access his child’s personal information. On the other hand, I
have afforded significant
weight to the factors favouring nondisclosure
regarding personal information and privacy of other individuals, and the flow of
information
to OIR in the context of an investigation. Ultimately, I have found
that the nondisclosure factors carry determinative weight in
relation to the
Third-party Information.
balance, I am satisfied that the factors favouring nondisclosure outweigh the
factors favouring disclosure. Accordingly, I find
that disclosure of the
Third-party Information would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest
and access to it may be refused
OIR’s decision and
find that access may be refused to:
the Compelled
Information under section 47(3)(a) as it comprises exempt information under
section 48 and schedule 3, section 10(3)
of the RTI Act; and
the Third-party
Information under section 47(3)(b) of the RTI Act as it comprises contrary to
public interest information under section
49 of the RTI Act.
have made this decision as a delegate of the Information Commissioner, under
section 145 of the RTI Act.
Assistant Information Commissioner
August 2025
Access application dated 2
February 2023.
At the time, OIR formed
part of the Department of Education, however, following machinery of government
changes on 18 December 2023,
OIR became part of the Department of State
Development, Infrastructure and Planning and remains within the responsibility
administrative unit as at the date of this
On 1 July 2025 key parts of the
Information Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2023
(Qld) (IPOLA) came
into force, effecting significant changes to the RTI Act and the
Information
(Qld) (IP Act). References in this decision to the RTI
Act and IP Act, however, are to the those Acts as in force prior to 1 July
This is in accordance with Chapter 7 Part 9 of the RTI Act and Chapter 8,
Part 3 of the IP Act, comprising transitional provisions
requiring that access
applications on foot before 1 July 2025 are to be dealt with as if the IPOLA Act
had not been enacted.
Decision notice
dated 19 July 2023.
Submission dated 13 November
OIR disclosed the documents on 13
September 2024. Access to certain information was also deferred (deferred
information) as third
parties had objected to disclosure following consultation
by OIR in accordance with section 37 of the RTI
Letters to OIR dated 4 March 2025 and
14 April 2025 and the applicant dated 17 April
OIR confirmed the further
information was disclosed by email dated 26 June 2025. This disclosure also
included the deferred information
as the third parties did not maintain their
objections following OIC conveying preliminary views about access on 4 March
2025. Those
third parties are therefore, not listed as respondents to this
Submissions dated 21 October
2024, 24 January 2025 and 9 May 2025.
am limited in the extent to which I can describe the specific nature of the
remaining redacted information, due to the operation
of section 108 of the RTI
Section 21 of the HR
OIC’s approach to the HR Act
set out in this paragraph has been considered and endorsed by the Queensland
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal in Lawrence v Queensland Police Service
Section 23 of the
Section 47(3) of the RTI
Section 44 of the RTI Act.
Section 47(2)(a) of the RTI Act.
Section 47(3)(a) and 48 of the RTI
Section 48(2) of the RTI
Griffin v Pantzer
[2004] FCAFC 113
Section 171(2) of the WHS
Section 173(1) of the WHS
Section 269 is concerned with the
WHS Act not affecting legal professional
Submission dated 13 November
2024. I also note OIR’s submission dated 17 March 2025 which confirmed
that some information obtained
by the inspector ‘was not obtained under a
compulsive power, but through voluntary statements’ and therefore was not
captured by the compulsion exemption under schedule 3, section 10(3) of the RTI
Act. These pages do not form part of the Compelled
Information and were
disclosed to the applicant subject to the redaction of identifying information
of third parties, which is considered
as part of the Third-party Information as
set out at paragraph 5.
Submission to
OIR dated 21 October 2024 and submissions to OIC dated 24 January 2025 and 9 May
Under section 47(3)(a) of the RTI
Dawson-Wells v Office of the
Information Commissioner & Anor
[2020] QCATA 60
Sections 47(3)(b) and 49 of the
Section 49(3) of the RTI
Submission to OIR dated 21 October
2024 and submissions to OIC dated 24 January 2025 and 9 May
Schedule 4, part 2, items 1, 3
and 11 of the RTI Act.
For example, the
Investigation Report (including the majority of the evidence before OIR,
analysis of the evidence and recommendations
as to alleged offences under the
WHS Act) and statements and other material provided by third parties who have
consented to disclosure.
Schedule 4,
part 2, item 17 of the RTI Act.
relevant public interest consideration was identified and analysed by the
Information Commissioner in Willsford and Brisbane City
[1996] QICmr 17
(1996) 3 QAR 368
(Willsford)
Willsford at
Including the information
already released to the applicant. See footnote 33.
information’ is ‘information or an opinion, including information or
an opinion forming part of a database,
whether true or not, and whether recorded
in a material form or not, about an individual whose identity is apparent, or
can reasonably
be ascertained, from the information or opinion’ –
see definition in schedule 5 of the RTI Act and section 12 of the
Schedule 4, part 2, item 9 of the
Discussed below at paragraphs
Schedule 4, part 4, section 6(1)
of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 3,
item 3 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4,
part 3, item 13 of the RTI Act. See Setschnjak and Department of Justice and
Attorney-General (Unreported, Queensland
Information Commissioner, 25 May 2012)
at [24] and Suskova and Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2015] QICmr 31
November 2015) at [27]-[28].
FLK v Information
Commissioner
[2021] QCATA 46
Section 44 of the RTI
Section 47(2)(a) of the RTI
Under section 47(3)(b) of the RTI
Under section 110(1)(b) of the RTI
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (457 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter