URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2018/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WBD, Re [2018] QMHC 4 (21 March 2018)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of WBD
[2018] QMHC 4
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
21 March 2018
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
15 December 2017
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr FT Varghese and
Dr ASB Davison
DETERMINATION:
1. The facts material to the
opinions of Dr Butler and Dr Beech are so in dispute that it would be
unsafe to make a decision on
the reference;
2. The defendant is fit for trial; and
3. The proceedings for the offences the subject
of the reference should proceed according to law.
JD Briggs on behalf of WBD
SJ Hamlyn-Harris for the Chief Psychiatrist
MP Le Grand for the Director
of Public Prosecutions
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for WBD
Crown Law for the Chief Psychiatrist
The Director of Public Prosecutions
[1] This reference was in relation to two charges from 19 November 2014. One
was stealing as a servant and the other was fraud.
WBD was an 18 year old
babysitter who stole makeup and jewellery from the woman who employed her to
look after her child and sold
it at Cash Converters.
[2] The reference was supported by a report of Dr Jeremy Butler, dated 21 March
2016. The defendant told Dr Butler that she was
sexually assaulted by a
neighbour when she was 12 and had flashbacks which still persist. The defendant
told Dr Butler that she
hears derogatory voices coming from the middle of
her head, one male and one female. Both of them speak in the second or third
They tell her to hurt herself and hurt other people. They tell her she
is worthless and a loser. She told Dr Butler she thought
the voices were able
to make her do things, “as if they take over her body”. The
defendant has a history of suicidal
ideation and self-harming. She reports what
Dr Butler calls “depersonalisation” while self-harming. She
told him she
had taken up to 15 overdoses and once tried to hang herself (six
months ago).
[3] The defendant told Dr Butler she was seeing a psychiatrist every fortnight
and had a case manager. She was prescribed medication
to calm her and had
diagnoses of borderline personality depression and complex PTSD. The defendant
described a childhood where her
father left home when she was two-and-a-half
years old; saw her on a regular basis until she was 10 years old, and then
significantly
reduced contact with her. Her mother had another domestic and
sexual partner who left when the defendant was seven. Her mother
further two partners since then. The defendant said one of these men was
emotionally and occasionally physically abusive.
She described wanting to run
away from home. Although the defendant did not recall any specific abuse or
neglect during early childhood,
Dr Butler noted that her mother was only 16 when
she was born. Against that background, Dr Butler thought that the defendant was
insecure in her childhood attachments.
[4] The defendant told Dr Butler that she worked as a babysitter for the victim
of the offences for eight months from April 2014.
She also worked at a
childcare centre, but ceased working there, she told Dr Butler, because she
heard voices telling her to hurt
the children.
[5] As to the offences, the defendant told Dr Butler that she had been working
long hours for her employer, sometimes 15 hour shifts.
Her employer was a
single mother. She said there was no tension or anger in the relationship
between her and her employer and that
she believed her employer was a good
mother. However, she said that intrusive voices began to tell her that the
employer was not
a good mother because she never came home and that she (the
mother) did not need the jewellery. The voices, she told Dr Butler,
scream at her and tell her to steal the property. They said that if she did not
they would continue to scream at her.
She said she resisted the voices for
She said when
she took the property she was disconnected, “as if she did
not have control”.
[6] Dr Butler gave the opinion that the voices which the defendant reported were
“an intrinsic part of the post-trauma syndrome”.
He describes that
this has to do with a fragmented psyche, where parts of the defendant’s
personality have become disconnected
from her conscious mind, and so are
experienced by her as though it was someone or something separate from her. He
said that he
thought “the phenomenology of the voices was more intrusive,
persuasive and elaborated than the typology of voices which one
associates with
borderline personality disorder”. He gave the opinion that the
defendant’s capacity to resist the voices
was “often diminished to
the extent similar to what one would see in patients with schizophrenia and
other psychotic conditions”.
[7] Dr Butler thought that although the defendant had several features of a
borderline personality disorder, they were better regarded
as linked to her
post-trauma syndrome. He said:
“From her account, I
believe [WBD] was overwhelmed by the effect of these voices at the time of the
alleged offending and that
her judgment was
markedly impaired
albeit speculative
psychodynamic perspective, I believe that unconscious,
unacceptable, egodystonic anger directed towards her mother because of perceived
failures vis-a-vis her perceived inability to provide a safe, secure childhood
environment, was displaced onto her employer who was
unconsciously viewed as a
neglectful single mother. Although [WBD] understood what she was doing and that
she ought not commit the
act, I believe her ability to withstand and neutralise
the command voices became progressively depleted as a result of their
increasingly
loud, persistent and intrusive nature. Therefore, I believe that
[WBD] was deprived of the capacity to control her actions.
observations of her demeanour and her narrative
, I believe that [WBD] was
not dissimulating or exaggerating the voices upon her.” (my
underlining)
[8] Dr Butler gave a second report dated 31 October 2017 after he had seen the
reports of Dr Michael Beech. He maintained his opinion.
He gave the
opinion that the defendant’s “psychopathology” represented a
mental disease as defined under the
Mental Health Act 2000
“Although I believe that the phenomenology of the
voices occurs on the same general spectrum as those commonly experienced in
borderline personality disorder, I believe they are qualitatively different, and
not indicative of subjectively controllable thoughts
and are less amenable to
conscious control.
In my opinion, the separation of voices into either pseudo-hallucinations or
auditory hallucinations is neither diagnostically instructive
nor indicative of
the qualitatively compulsive element of the experience.
I believe that the voices which were loud, recurrent, and threatening had a
dramatic effect upon [WBD’s] psyche resulting in
a compulsion which
ultimately became irresistible.
I believe that the collateral history suggests that [WBD’s] reference
to the voices is not due to dissimulation.
I accept that it is a possibility that [WBD’s] describing the voices as
irresistible, to some extent, represent a retrospective
rationalisation of her
offending behaviour which alternatively could be construed as representing an
actual plan to obtain personal
gain per se.”
[9] In making the last comment Dr Butler took account of the fact that the
defendant told the complainant she had taken the property
because she was short
of money and needed it for her wedding. He discounted that because he thought
that the defendant would be
unlikely to want to tell her employer she was
hearing voices. It was the fact that she was anticipating being married at the
[10] Dr Beech gave a report to the Court dated 1 April 2017, together with two
supplementary reports, 28 August 2017 and 20 November
[11] Dr Beech noted that, at the time he examined her, WBD was a 20 year old
woman who lived with her four month old son. She was
unemployed and received
the single parent support benefit. She was not receiving any psychiatric
treatment and was not on any medication.
[12] The defendant gave Dr Beech a similar history so far as her disrupted
childhood relationships were concerned. She told him,
as she had told Dr
Butler, that she was raped by a neighbour when she was 12 years old. She said
that between the age of 12 and
17 years she suffered nightmares and flashbacks.
She said she engaged in self-harm from 13 years, and began hearing voices at 16
years. She described several incidents of selfharm by cutting and overdose.
She said that she had diagnoses of borderline personality
disorder, complex
post-traumatic stress disorder, depression and anxiety. She has been prescribed
psychotropic medications over
the years but told Dr Beech that none have
given her any relief from the symptoms she reports.
[13] She told Dr Beech that she heard the voices of an adult male and an adult
female almost constantly. They made negative comments
scream at her and tell her to kill herself. She said they would give her
commands and if she did not accede
to the commands she would feel sick; feel
pain; fall to the ground, and have to cover her ears and rock herself to calm
said that these days she can block out the voices better. The voices
are inside her head, but she did not think they were her own
thoughts. She
described sometimes arriving at a particular place without remembering how she
got there. That is, she described
minor episodes of dissociation.
[14] As to the offending, the defendant told Dr Beech that she had been working
for the complainant since about April 2014. Sometimes
the work involved long
hours from about 7.00 am to 11.00 pm. The work was reasonable and the pay was
good. Sometimes her employer
would return later than expected which meant that
the defendant missed her train home and stayed overnight at her employer’s
house. The defendant said she thought her employer was a sex worker because of
the late hours she kept. Over time, the voices she
heard started to tell her
that the woman was not a good mother and that the woman did not deserve the
things she had. The defendant
told Dr Beech that the voices told her to take
the jewellery. The voices told her to look through the woman’s jewellery
when she saw the particular rings (four) which she stole, the voices told
her to take them. She resisted the voices at first but
the voices persisted and
eventually “I basically cracked”. Dr Beech asked the defendant why
she did not simply quit
the job when the voices persisted. She said she stayed
in the job because she needed the money. She had only two shifts at another
childcare establishment, so she was finding it difficult to pay the bills. She
was living with a man at the time. He was an apprentice
and did not earn much
money, so the household struggled financially.
[15] The defendant told Dr Beech that after she had taken the jewellery, the
voices told her to sell the jewellery. Again she complied
with the voices
because she wanted to make them stop. The voices did not usually tell her to do
things like steal; they usually
told her to harm herself. She could not account
for why the voices gave her the commands to steal or sell the jewellery. The
took the jewellery to Cash Converters. When she was there she gave
false information. She told Dr Beech that the voices told her
to lie to the
Cash Converters’ staff. When she got the money from Cash Converters the
voices stopped.
[16] On another occasion the voices had told the defendant to take makeup from
her employer. The voices told the defendant that
her employer did not deserve
the makeup. So she stole it.
[17] Dr Beech specifically questioned the defendant about whether she took the
jewellery because she needed the money. She denied
[18] When the complainant noticed missing items she confronted the defendant.
The defendant confessed that she had taken the makeup
and gave it back. She
denied taking the rings. Then after further contact from the complainant, she
admitted that she did take
the rings and told her (the complainant) that she
needed money for her wedding. The defendant agreed to make a payment plan to
the value of the items taken, but she never made any payments at all.
[19] When interviewed by police about the matter the defendant said that she had
borderline personality disorder and the voices in
her head “made her do
it” because if she did not obey them they would scream at her. She told
the police she understood
that stealing was wrong.
[20] Dr Beech thought that the defendant had post-traumatic stress disorder and
a form of borderline personality disorder. Associated
with this latter disorder
were recurrent thoughts and acts of self-harm, and periods of depersonalisation
or dissociation. In Dr
Beech’s opinion, the voices which the
defendant reports hearing:
“... reflect internal morbid
phenomena associated with trauma and personality disturbance. While I accept
that they can become
intense, intrusive and distressing, the voices are not
primarily psychotic in nature. [WBD] is aware they are inside her head, and
there is nothing to indicate I believe any associated psychotic phenomena such
as delusional beliefs, disorganised speech and behaviour,
blunting of affect, or
recent deterioration in social functions. Indeed, at the time of the alleged
offences [WBD] was employed
as a childcare worker at the childcare centre and by
[the complainant]. She was involved in an intimate relationship. In her
with police, while she appears upset and sad, there is nothing to
indicate a psychotic process. Instead she is able to give a coherent
herself undistracted by internal voices or other cues, and unaffected by
distorted beliefs.
In my opinion [WBD] was not deprived of any relevant capacity that would have
rendered her of unsound mind at the time of the alleged
offences. There may be
psychodynamic reasons for her acting as she did. As Dr Butler indicates, she
may have perceived her employer
to be a neglectful woman and this may have
brought back memories and emotions related to her own childhood upbringing.
have intensified the voices, which I think ultimately are a morbid
representation of her own thoughts and emotions about herself
and others. These
voices may have become distressing, but she knew that it was wrong to steal.
She had alternative courses of action,
such as leaving her employment, or
seeking assistance. I believe that she was able to control her behaviour, and
in fact it was
quite organised and it occurred over a significant period of
time, from the moment she started to look for the items, stole them,
across town by bus, pawned them, and then lied about it.
As well, I think that it has to be said there is an alternate explanation for
her behaviour. [WBD] was in strained financial circumstances.
She had parttime
employment and she was living with her partner who was a poorly paid apprentice.
[21] In his report of 28 August 2017 Dr Beech gives a short review of the
numerous admissions which the defendant has had for self-harming
behaviour. He
notes particularly that on an admission between 11 April 2015 and 28 April 2015
there was a specific focus on reports
of auditory hallucinations and that one of
the goals of the admission was to clarify their nature. The defendant was
monitored during
the admission and it was concluded that the auditory
hallucinations were “non-psychotic in nature”. Dr Beech repeats
that he believes the voices are not hallucinations but pseudo-hallucinations,
non-psychotic in nature.
[22] Both Dr Butler and Dr Beech gave evidence at the hearing. Dr Butler
conceded that people do hear voices in the absence of psychotic
illness. He
conceded that people with personality disorder do hear voices which give them
simple commands. He thought it was on
a spectrum and that there was no sharp
division between this and people who heard voices as part of true hallucinations
in psychosis.
He conceded that the defendant understood that the voices were
not real. This is a major distinction in my view between what the
here describes and what people with psychosis experience. A psychotic person
experiencing voices as part of hallucinations
thinks they are real. The
defendant did not think the voices were real. Dr Butler seemed to think that
this distinction did not
matter in circumstances where he perceived, from what
she told him, that the voices have a strong effect on the defendant. It became
clear in cross-examination that he did not really push her about how real she
perceived the voices to be. He was able to say that:
she didn't perceive the voice to be coming from some alien source as part of
some delusion. Sometimes people who have
voices, they actually link it to a
delusional thought process where they believe, you know, the television, for
instance, is talking
to them, or a car driving past is talking to them, or
– or they’re sitting in a coffee shop and they can hear the person
next to them speaking about them. So in those cases it’s quite easy to
say, okay, we’re linking the voice or the hallucination
to some other
easily identified objective phenomenon, but often that’s not the case.
It’s not as simple as that.”
[23] Dr Butler conceded there were no delusional beliefs associated with the
voices which the defendant heard.
[24] Dr Butler, understandably, was cross-examined about his view that he
thought the defendant was probably lying to her employer
when she confessed that
she stole items because she needed the money. His view was that she was not
likely to explain the voices
to her employer. He could not explain in that
context why she then told the police almost immediately about the voices and, in
course of attempting to explain his position in this regard, said that by
the time she spoke to the police she had realised it was
not in her interests to
suppress her experiencing the voices. She had come to realise she should be
honest about what she was experiencing,
even if she did not feel comfortable
talking about it. In the course of that discussion, Dr Butler did concede that
he did “definitely”
see the other way of looking at it: viz, that
there was a dishonest motive for secondary gain in the stealing, but he thought
he spoke to the defendant that she was being genuine.
[25] Dr Butler did not take a detailed history from the defendant as to when she
stole the items, although he did have the rather
vague understanding that she
stole on more than one occasion and then separately took the jewellery to Cash
Converters to sell it.
These things were obviously relevant because if he
postulated that the defendant was out of control at the time she stole and the
stealing did in fact occur over, say, a week or two, the case he sought to argue
became very much more difficult.
[26] In fact I think the examination of Dr Butler by Dr Varghese really showed
that Dr Butler did not consider that what was described
by the defendant
was a real hallucination or a real delusion – see tt 1-18-19. Further, he
conceded on questioning from Dr
Varghese that the defendant’s experiencing
voices was amenable to some extent to her conscious control in a way which
experiencing schizophrenia or psychosis does not have – t 1-20.
He conceded that what was going on in the defendant’s
head (as she
reported it) was something which could be understood, in contrast to the way a
psychosis cannot be understood –
t 1-21. Dr Varghese’s advice
was that, “There’s a big gap between a pseudohallucination and a
true hallucination
and that gap is the gap of understandability, that you
can’t – you can understand if you can empathise with the borderline
patient the experiences they’re having. You can’t empathise and
understand what’s going on in the experience of
a person with
schizophrenia.”
[27] On examination by Dr Davison, Dr Butler found that he had noted the
defendant was being reviewed by a psychiatrist every fortnight
at the time of
the offending. It was apparent from Dr Butler’s answers that he did not
explore with the defendant how, to
quote Dr Davison, “... it was that she
was in this state of great distress with voices pressing her to commit crimes,
she was not able to engage support and assistance from the therapist
that she was working with?”
[28] Dr Butler also conceded on questioning from me that he had not tested in
any real way whether or not the defendant’s blaming
her conduct on the
voices was a rationalisation for what she knew to be unacceptable behaviour.
This is in the context where he
admitted that he knew his report was a
controversial one and the voices, on the defendant’s own account, had
never, apart from
this one instance, urged her to do more than harm herself or
harm others. That is, the voices had never urged her to commit property
offences before. Dr Beech was more sceptical. He did question the account
which the defendant gave to him, Dr Butler and to the
police. In fact it became
clear in his oral evidence (extracts below) that he did not believe the
[29] Even accepting the defendant’s account of the voices, Dr Beech
thought that there was no evidence that they in fact controlled
defendant’s actions. He said this:
don’t see that what she did was a made action in the psychotic ... sense
... I think what you could see is that
there’s, in fact, a very controlled
action. She searched for the jewellery in the boy’s room and in [the
employer’s]
room. She found the jewellery. She took it. She travelled
across town, went to the pawnbrokers, lied about owning it, took the
then spent it. That’s a very long arc for someone acting on
pseudo-hallucinations or nonpsychotic hallucinations.
Most of the time,
non-psychotic hallucinations are intense and can be distressing, but they are,
you know, ‘You’re stupid.
You’re worthless. Kill yourself.
Jump off – jump in front of the train. Jump out the window. Punch
Not this long arc of, ‘go search for some jewellery. The
woman doesn’t deserve to have it. Now you need to go out.
Take it to the
pawnbrokers. Lie to them. Take the money. Spend it. Lie to the woman when
she contacts you a couple of months
later about the missing items.’ That
all seems to me to be just a bit too neat and not generally in keeping with the
non-psychotic
hallucinations of a command nature that someone might get with a
severe personality disorder. And I think, in truth, not in keeping
[WBD’s] usual description of the voices that she has heard for most of her
life, which have been derogatory in nature
or telling her to harm herself or
possibly others.”
[30] Dr Beech explained the reason for his scepticism, explaining that there had
been times when the defendant had resisted the voices
“My concern is that first of all there is a
self-serving reason that she might have complied with these voices. There is
things that she could have done. She could have left her employment. She
could have walked out of the house. She could have done
many other things.
But, in fact, she continued on and pawned the items, took the money, spent it,
and then returned to work. There
are other things that she did during this time
which I think make it seem more indulgent that she took the makeup, some of the
and the mascara and things like that ... And finally, not to
minimise the extent of how severe - how distressing these voices might
don’t see that kind of level of distress is any different to what [we]
might see in other non-psychotic conditions such
as obsessive compulsive
disorder or panic disorder or things like that, and although you might feel
overwhelmed or stressed, it’s
not that you can’t control your
actions. It’s just that at some point you relent.”
[31] The type of simple voices which are experienced as pseudo-hallucinations,
or, in other words, by people who do not have a psychosis,
are different to the
usually derogatory voices urging
the person to self-harm, harm others, or making
derogatory comments about the person. Dr Beech said
“HER HONOUR: And that sort of very simple command or
very simple message that the voice is giving, hurt yourself, hurt someone
as you were saying, you’re bad, you’re ugly, you deserve harm, is
very derogatory?--- Yes.
Is that the kind of voice that would say she doesn’t deserve this
lovely jewellery, you deserve this lovely jewellery, why don’t
it? Is that a typical kind of thing that people with borderline personality or
post-traumatic stress would---?--- Your
Honour, I think if she had said voices
were screaming at me all the time, telling me I was bad and telling me that this
just like your mother and she’s really bad too and she
doesn’t deserve things, and there I was, cleaning up, and I saw
earrings on the bench and the voices said throw them out the window---
Smash them?--- Smash them. I would’ve thought, you know, I have some
sympathy to that, but they didn’t. They said search
doesn’t deserve these things, perhaps. Search the place. Search the
boy’s room. Search the woman’s
room. Find these things in the
drawer. See things on the shelf. Take them. Take the mascara while
you’re at it. And then
go across town and pawn them. This doesn’t
– this – I can see that she would have those thoughts, and I could
see that she would give those permission statements to herself, and they might
seem congruent with her world view because she might,
as Dr Butler who very
eloquently has written, you know, that she saw everything wrong with the
situation with her mother and somehow
this allows her to go ahead with these
thoughts that she’s having. But it’s different to the – I
would think the
command voices that you might hear, which is punch her, smash
the earrings, throw this stuff out the window.”
[32] Dr Beech thought that the defendant well understood that the voices she
experienced were not real but something that she experienced.
He said this was
evident in what she told the police in the police interview, and I agree with
that. She explained to police that
she understood that she heard voices in her
head as a result of her having borderline personality disorder. Dr
view was that when a patient experienced pseudohallucinations
the patient was always aware that the voices were part of themselves.
these type of voices may be distressing but were not of psychotic intensity that
would cause someone to do something one
did not want to do.
[33] So far as the difference between pseudo-hallucinations experienced by
somebody with a personality disorder and true auditory
hallucinations
experienced by someone with a psychotic disorder who believes that the auditory
hallucinations are real, Dr Beech
said that his opinion did not just rest on,
for example, whether the voices came from inside or outside somebody’s
head: “What
usually, in my opinion, causes deprivation when you have
auditory hallucinations is the delusional belief that goes with it as to
should do this. And I think that – and clearly throughout all the
material WBD has been clear that she knew what she
was doing was wrong.”
Dr Beech said that in someone with a borderline personality disorder or
dissociation, voices represented
distress, not the voice of someone or some
entity which had authority to command the person hearing the voice.
[34] In further explanation of this Dr Beech said:
said it seems to me that when you get deprived as a result of hallucinations,
it’s the delusional thinking that
goes with the hallucination that causes
the deprivation, not the voice itself. I’ll have to think through that,
and that may
not be the end of it all, but it seems to me that most times
it’s said, well, the voices made me do it, what was the voice?
telling me to do this, or I had to do the voices [sic] because if I didn’t
do what the voices said, the world was
going to end or something. There was a
delusion behind it. I don’t think there was a delusion behind
[WBD’s] behaviour
except that if she did what the voices said, that she
wouldn’t feel as distressed by them.”
[35] Dr Varghese advised that I should accept this evidence: his view was that
it was not hearing a voice that makes a person do
an act in response to a
command hallucination, but the meaning or authority which is attached to the
auditory hallucination, ie.,
it is that the hallucination is part of the
delusional system.
[36] In Dr Varghese’s opinion the evidence established that there was no
disease of mind. Dr Varghese thought that the central
issue in assessing
the patient was one of personality. He thought that the defendant’s
personality was fragmented, “so
that she doesn’t experience herself
as being a unitary self. There are aspects of herself she doesn’t like;
she experiences
as if they’re alien [to her].” Dr Varghese
said that if one assumes she does hear voices as she reports, they are
manifestations
of unacknowledged aspects of herself. In this case, aspects
which wished to punish the woman who employed her for similarities to
negative childhood, and to gain things of material value. Dr Varghese
said, “... she experiences, if you like, the
poorer angels of her
personality as being voices”.
[37] Were I to decide the issue of unsoundness I would prefer Dr Beech’s
evidence on the advice of my assisting psychiatrists
and find that there was no
disease of the mind or natural mental infirmity, and no deprivation of the
capacity of control. However,
I take the view that this case falls within s 269
Mental Health Act 2000
I think that the factual matters which
are material to the opinions of Drs Butler and Beech are in dispute. Dr Butler
believed the
defendant’s account to him of the voices; Dr Beech did not.
For myself, I am critical of Dr Butler’s approach for he
did not really
challenge the defendant about the things she said. In fact, he did not even
take a proper factual history as to the
number of occasions upon which offending
took place; the sequence of these acts, and the time over which they took place.
detailed history is, I think, needed before a useful analysis of the
likelihood of the defendant’s account could be made.
assumed a longer sequence of events and it can be seen that was material to his
disbelief that non-psychotic pseudo-hallucinations
could cause the defendant to
be deprived of the capacity to control herself over the entire time of the
[38] Before one could accept Dr Butler’s opinion one would have to reach a
range of factual findings favourable to the accused.
One would have to find
that she was experiencing voices as she said, notwithstanding the voices she
experienced had never before
told her to commit property offences. One would
have to accept that she acted in response to the voices, not in response to
necessity or in response to simply a childish envy and desire to take
jewellery and makeup. One would have to conclude that she
had no control over
her actions in response to the voices when (depending what the facts might
reveal about the time period and occasions
of the offending) she did have other
options available to her including leaving the house, leaving the employment,
seeking advice
from the psychiatrist she was engaged with, etc. One would have
to disregard her admissions to the complainant that she was sorry
and that she
acted out of financial want or need. At a more minute level, one would have to
consider whether one accepted the version
the defendant gave to the police or
the versions she gave to Drs Butler and Beech. These are all factual
questions to be determined
by a jury. This Court cannot determine them.
[39] In light of these conclusions my findings and orders are that:
facts material to the opinions of Dr Butler and Dr Beech are so in dispute it
would be unsafe to make a decision on the reference;
defendant is fit for trial, and
proceedings for the offences the subject of the reference should proceed
according to law.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (219 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter