URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/151.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ely Projects Pty Ltd v Stockton & Anor [2025] QDC 151 (24 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Ely Projects Pty Ltd v Stockton & Anor
[2025] QDC 151
Ely Projects Pty Ltd
ACN 642 077 183
(Plaintiff/Respondent)
Glenn Stockton
(First Defendant/Applicant)
Tonya Usher-Stockton
(Second Defendant/Applicant)
1578 of 2024
PROCEEDING:
Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Brisbane District Court
DELIVERED ON:
24 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
5 June 2025
Byrne KC DCJ
defendants’ first and third applications in the application filed 10 April
2025 are refused.
defendants’ second application in the application filed 10 April 2025 is
allowed, but only to the extent that paragraph
6 of the Amended Statement of
Claim is struck out. The plaintiff has leave to re-plead that paragraph within
28 days of the delivery
of these reasons.
plaintiff has leave, if it is required, under r. 377 of the UCPR to amend the
ASOC in any respect to provide clarity to the pleadings
in paras. 6 and 17 and
Schedules 1, 3 and 4.
defendants’ second application in the application filed 10 April 2025 is
otherwise refused.
time for the defendants to file and serve any Defence be extended to 28 days
after service of any amended pleading by the Plaintiffs.
will hear the parties as to costs.
CATCHWORDS:
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORIES –
PLEADINGS – STRIKING OUT – where the plaintiff and
defendant are
parties to a contract for the construction of residential premises – where
the plaintiff commenced proceedings
for damages for breach of contract or,
alternatively, a claim in quantum meruit – where the defendant’s
apply on several
bases to strike out the whole or part of the Amended Statement
of Claim (“ASOC”) – where the defendants have not
yet filed a
Defence – where the defendants apply for the whole of the ASOC to be
struck out because it discloses no reasonable
cause of action by virtue of a
void contract – where the defendants alternatively apply for the striking
out of parts of the
ASOC and in the further alternatively for further and better
particulars – whether the ASOC should be struck out in whole or
– whether the plaintiff should provide further and better particulars.
LEGISLATION:
Queensland Building and Construction Commission Act 1991
14, 18, 40, 41, 44.
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
ABB Power Generation Ltd v Chapple
(2001) WAR 158
Adani Mining v Pennings
[2021] QSC 343.
Barclay Mowlem Construction Limited v Dampier Port Authority
[2006] WASC 281
Boys v Imperial Homes (Qld) Pty Ltd
[2024] QCATA 35.
Dey v Victorian Railways Commissioners
(1949) 78 CLR 62.
Equititrust Limited v Tucker and Others
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125.
Kimberley College Ltd v Thomson
[2019] QSC 227.
Ooralea Developments Pty Ltd & Ors v Mackey Regional Council
[2022] QSC 75.
Perera v Bold Properties (Qld) Pty Ltd
[2023] QDC 99
(2023) 3 QDCR
Mr. J.R. Hunter KC with Mr M.S. Trim for the applicants.
Mr. P.D. Hay with Mr E. Mijo for the respondent.
SOLICITORS:
Holding Redlich for the applicants.
QC Legal for the respondent.
Introduction
[1] On 11 June
2024, the plaintiff commenced proceedings for breach of a contract concerning
the construction of residential premises.
It sought damages for breach of the
contract or, alternatively, made a claim in quantum meruit
defendants now apply to strike out the whole of the Amended Statement of Claim
”) filed 20 December 2024 on the primary basis that the
“cost plus” contract at the centre of the plaintiff’s
allegations is void by virtue of non-compliance with statutory requirements, and
hence the claim discloses no reasonable cause of
[3] Alternatively,
the defendants apply for the whole of the ASOC, or otherwise specific parts, to
be struck out because of inconsistencies
contained in the pleading and the form
of the pleading is difficult to follow and hence has a tendency to prejudice or
fair trial of the proceeding.
[4] Further in
the alternative, the defendants apply for the striking out of paragraphs 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24 and 25 and of Schedules 2, 3, 4 and
5 of the ASOC for want of pleading of material facts or particulars as required
[5] Further, or
alternatively, to the relief sought in [4] immediately above, the defendants
seek an order for further and better
particulars related to those identified
paragraphs and schedules of the ASOC.
Factual overview taken from
the Amended Statement of Claim
[6] There has
been no Defence filed to the ASOC and, hence, no Reply. Accordingly, the focus
of the application must be on the contents
of the ASOC. It must be presumed that
the factual allegations made by the plaintiff can be
established.
convenient to adopt, albeit in an adapted form, the applicant’s summary of
the ASOC for these purposes:
defendants are the owners of a residential dwelling at 11 Duke Street, Toowong;
plaintiff is a building company;
the contract
contract was in writing and wholly comprised by some structural and
architectural plans sent to the defendants on 23 May 2022
and a letter dated 5
August 2022;
plaintiff performed "
the construction work
" at the property in the period
from 20 February 2023 until 16 December 2023;
defendants gave directions to vary the scope of work to be completed under the
Contract between 14 September 2022 and 26 September
2023, and the scope of the
work was varied in accordance with those directions;
invoices were issued, and seven payments were made totalling $882,909.95;
were meetings at the property and correspondence exchanged resulting in what the
plaintiff asserts was a repudiation by the
defendants;
consequence the plaintiff elected to terminate the contract;
cost of the project was over $1 million and personnel from the plaintiff
allegedly spent over 1,600 hours working on the project
in the period from June
2022 until January 2024;
defendants have not paid the plaintiff monies owed by the defendants to the
plaintiff under the contract, totalling $451,921.73;
the time of termination, the project was incomplete and a further $911,000.00
would have been required to complete it;
the defendants not breached the contract, the plaintiff would have earned at
least another $91,000 in profit;
plaintiff has therefore allegedly suffered loss and damage;
Alternatively,
the plaintiff is "entitled" to be paid for the reasonable value" of the work it
completed – i.e. on a quantum
meruit basis.”
[8] The one-page
letter comprising part of the alleged breach of contract, as referred to in the
ASOC, relevantly contained the following:
“Using the plans
drawn to date but not yet completed we have compiled a budget amount of
approximately $970,000.00.
This final figure will be subject to final selections and changes made
throughout the construction process. It has been agreed by
all parties the best
way forward with this project during this highly volatile market is work on a
cost plus basis to avoid overcharging
to cover material and labour costs.
A figure of 10% margin added to all materials supplied for the project has
been agreed upon. A rate of $85+GST per hour for all hours
spent on the project
by Matt Ely in all capacities will be billed each fortnight.
A rate of $65+GST per hour for all administration completed for the project
will be billed each fortnight also.
The parties will meet a minimum of once per fortnight to discuss the project
and budgets along the way.
A schedule of work has been developed showing the basic workflow for the
project including the milestones for proposed scheduled payments
[9] It also
provided for a reconciliation of amounts paid as against the costs incurred as
calculated, and the refund or payment of
further funds, as required.
document tendered before me does not include the plans referred to, but it is
common ground that while they form part of
the asserted contract, nothing turns
on them for present purposes. It appears that the “schedule of work”
including the
“proposed scheduled payments” was sent to the
defendants by the plaintiff on 15 August
That document is not before
Should the whole ASOC be struck out for failing to disclose a
reasonable cause of action?
[11] In essence,
the applicants assert that the contract is contrary to the requirements of
of Sched 1B of the
Queensland Building and Construction Commission Act
the QBCC Act
”) in that, as the contract price is
it must contain a
warning, prominently placed on the first page of the of the contract schedule,
that the price may be changed under
a provision of the contract along with a
brief explanation of the effect of the provision allowing changes to the
contract price.
The applicants then
rely on s. 108D(2) of the QBCC Act, the effect of which is that a domestic
building contract, is void to the
extent to which it is contrary to the Act, or
purports to annul, exclude or change a provision of the Act, subject to any
intention in the Act.
They argue that the reasons in
Perera v Bold Properties (Qld) Pty
supports that
proposition.
recognising that s. 44 of Sched 1B provides that, “
unless the contrary
intention appears, a failure by a building contractor to comply with a
requirement under this Act in relation
to a domestic building contract does not
make the contract illegal, void or unenforceable
”, the applicants
submit that the express terms of s. 108D(2) of the QBCC Act provide the contrary
[13] While the
applicants appear to deny that the document is in fact a contract, it has been
pleaded that it is one and I must assume
that pleading can be made out.
Accordingly, I proceed on the basis that it is a domestic building contract, as
defined. Whether,
given its terms, it in fact is a domestic building contract,
as opposed to an agreement to contract in the future or some other record,
not a matter I need concern myself with for the purposes of the present
application.
[14] Given its
I accept that it is not a
fixed price contract. The plaintiff contends that s. 14(6) of Sched 1B does not
apply, that in the alternative
there has been compliance and in the further
alternative that the failure to provide a warning statement does not result in
the contract
being void.
[15] I accept
the respondent’s primary argument. The contract provides a method of
calculation of the contract price, as defined,
even though it will not be known
with precision until at or after the completion of the contract. While I accept
that the statute
should be construed beneficially so as to give the fullest
relief which the fair meaning of its language will
I do not accept that, in the
present circumstances, s. 14(6) of Sched 1B requires the inclusion of the
warning and explanation. I
read the phrase “
a provision
s. 14(6) of Sched 1B as referring to a provision other than the provision or
provisions that allow for “
” nature of the contract
interpretation does not detract from the beneficial nature of the legislation.
” basis for calculation of the eventual cost
price is plain on the face of the contract and, as it happens in the present
circumstances,
on the front page of the contract. There is no benefit to the
defendants by requiring that a warning and explanation be provided
on the same
sheet of paper regarding that which is already plain. There is however benefit
in requiring compliance with that requirement
if there is another provision that
alters the means by which the contract price will be changed, for example by
changing the means
by which it will be calculated if a stated event occurs.
There is no provision in the present contract that alters the means by which
contract price is to be calculated; it remains as cost plus 10%.
[17] Accordingly,
s. 14(6) of Sched 1B does not require a warning statement and explanation to be
found in the present contract.
defendants also point to the fact that the plaintiff has not pleaded compliance
with s. 18 of Sched 1B, which requires that
the building contractor must provide
the building owner with a copy of the consumer building guide before the
contract is signed.
While I doubt that compliance with that provision is a
matter that must be pleaded in the ASOC as it is not an element of the action,
it is not an issue I need decide. Section 108D cannot apply to non-compliance
with s. 18 of Sched 1B as the guide is separate to
the contract, even though it
may be attached to it pursuant to s. 18(3) of Sched 1B. Further, s. 44 of Sched
1B providess that the
contract is neither illegal, void nor unenforceable as a
result of non-compliance. The defendant’s application cannot be upheld
the basis of non-compliance with s. 18 of Sched 1B.
therefore is unnecessary to consider the other bases on which the primary
application is resisted.
[20] If I am
wrong about the above conclusions, I would not exercise the discretion to strike
out the whole of the pleadings, or even
those parts that do not attach to the
claim in quantum meruit.
[21] Although
the defendants concede that, if their application succeeds, the plaintiff should
be given liberty to re-plead, the concession
provides a false hope. The essence
of the action is a breach of contract which the defendants argue is
Re-pleading is
not going to change the essence of the cause of action, and the same issues will
remain. Indeed, the defendants conceded
in oral submissions that if the ASOC
were repleaded in the same, or substantially the same terms it may amount to an
abuse of process
and would be liable to being permanently stayed as an abuse of
[22] In those
circumstances, I accept that the present application should be approached on the
basis of it being tantamount to an
application for summary dismissal. The well
understood need for caution in the exercise of the discretion is therefore a
[23] The meaning
of the ASOC is apparent on its face and there is no apparent difficulty for the
defendants to plead that the contract
is void, illegal or unenforceable; i.e.
the very argument that have elucidated on the present
application.
The proceedings are
at an early stage. The defendants have not filed a defence and hence the
plaintiff has not had the opportunity
to reply to any issues raised in the
defence. This is a further reason to be cautious in effectively denying the
plaintiff its day
in Court arguing its
It is also relevant that,
had the defendants in fact applied for summary judgment, leave would have been
required under r. 135 of
[24] Even if my
construction of s. 14 of Sched 1B is erroneous, there are other arguable bases
of resisting the defendants’
complaints that I have not needed to
elucidate in these reasons given my findings on the construction point. These
arguments include
a submission that
Perera v Bold Properties (Qld) Pty
, on which the defendants place reliance, was wrongly decided. While I do
not need to reach a conclusion about that given the view
I have otherwise
reached, it appears to be an arguable point, and this Court is in any event not
strictly bound by that decision.
These factors all tend against granting the
application.
[25] For those
reasons, this is not an appropriate case to exercise the discretion to strike
out the whole of the ASOC on the basis
that it fails to disclose a reasonable
cause of action. Although not an application for summary judgement in form, it
is effectively
one in substance and the plaintiff should not be denied its day
in Court, at least until the issues have been joined by the pleadings
usual requirements for such a summary judgment application have been complied
completeness, there must be at least some doubt about the defendants’
submission as to the quantum meruit claim being
based on a legitimate
expectation that the defendant’s would pay on the basis of the cost-plus
terms of the contract if, by
that, it is meant that payment would be in
accordance with the terms of the
However, that is
unnecessary to determine as my refusal of the application to strike out the
whole of the ASOC on the basis that
it fails to disclose a reasonable cause of
action means that the, in effect, submitted domino effect of striking it out on
the quantum
meruit claim does not arise, and the quantum meruit claim remains
Are the pleadings in the ASOC unclear, inconsistent or
defendants contend there are reasons why the nominated paragraphs and Schedules
of the ASOC should be struck out and, when
the effect of the individual orders
for strike out are considered
, it is more efficient for the whole
of the ASOC to be struck and re-pleaded. In essence they contend that there is a
lack of clarity
and there are ambiguities or inconsistencies in the pleadings
that meaning that the pleadings have a tendency to prejudice or delay
trial of the proceeding.
principles in
Equititrust
at [6]-[14] are specifically relied on. In each
instance, and in the alternative, the defendants seek further and better
particulars.
assessment of these complaints necessarily involves impression and individual
judgment. Modern case management techniques
and the drafting rules and
requirements in the UCPR mean that pleadings will be read in a sensible manner,
and be subject to a less
technical and critical assessment than was the case in
earlier times. The object of the pleadings is to be borne in mind when
considering
objections to them. In particular they are to provide the skeleton
of the case to be put, and do not usually need to descend into
fine details of
the particulars to support the allegations made. Objections to pleadings which
pedantic and pettifogging in nature
are to be avoided.
Paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of the ASOC
[29] Paragraph 3
alleges the existence of a contract, that para. 4 pleads that it was contained
in two specified documents and that
para. 5 pleads the relevant terms of the
defendants complain that para. 5(d) asserts the incorporation into the contract
of terms from a third specified document,
a Schedule of payments. They complain
that thee is therefore an inconsistency in the pleadings as to what comprises
the contract.
They further complain that it is unclear what part of the asserted
contract provides the basis for the pleaded terms of the contract
in para. 5,
and contend that reference should be made in the pleading to the basis for or
origin of the pleaded terms. They submit
that they should not have to guess what
the origin of the pleaded terms is.
[31] As to the
first aspect of the complaints, I do not accept that, read sensibly, the
reference to the Schedule in para. 5(d) of
the ASOC is inconsistent and
confusing. The reference to a Schedule of basic workflow related to scheduled
payments by the bank appears
plainly on the single page letter dated 5 August
2022 which, consistent with para 4 of the ASOC, comprises part of the pleaded
It is, as far as I am aware, the only reference to a Schedule in the
pleaded contract. In those circumstances, there can be no confusion
para. 5(d) is referring to. There is nothing before me to suggest that the
defendants have been denied access to the document
following their request under
r. 222 of the UCPR dated 30 January
and so they are aware of
its contents, with precision.
[32] As to the
second aspect of the complaint, a plaintiff is not always required to reference
the source of the pleaded terms of
the contract, especially where, as here, it
is likely that the only document from which the terms can expressly arise is the
page letter, which does not have numbered paragraphs. I accept that in
the present circumstances, it is unnecessary to directly cross-reference
terms of the contract for the defendants to understand the allegations made.
There is no apparent difficulty in responding to
those allegations, as currently
Paragraphs 6 and 17 and Schedule 4.
[33] By way of
background, para. 6 of the ASOC alleges that “
the plaintiff
” certain construction work in the period 20 February 2023 to
16 December 2023. That claimed work is contained in a table that
forms part of
para. 6 that lists the date the work is said to have been
” and a brief summary of the nature of that work.
Paragraph 17 pleads a claim for damages in a way that shows that the work
pleaded in para. 6 was actually performed either by the plaintiff’s
employees, suppliers and subcontractors or the plaintiff’s
principal, Mr
[34] Schedule 1
attached to the ASOC particularises the costs incurred by the plaintiff to
suppliers and subcontractors, and references
that by the invoices received.
Schedule 2 lists the work alleged to have been performed by Mr Ely himself, and
Schedule 4 lists the
work alleged to have been performed by the
plaintiff’s employees. The schedules refer to a wider date range of work
than para. 6 is limited to.
[35] In essence,
the defendants complain that cross-referencing reveals discrepancies as between
the allegations in para. 6 and schedules
2 and 4 to an extent that means that
the allegations are vague and inconsistent.
[36] It is trite
to observe that the plaintiff, as a corporate entity, can only perform work
through individuals. If that were the
only complaint, there would be no
plaintiff submits that the schedules may not correlate because para. 6
states the date that each stage was completed, not the individual
dates of each day that work was undertaken
”. It also submits that the
schedules are not inconsistent with para. 6 as they “
patently relate to
different issues
[38] I cannot
accept the plaintiff’s responses. First, para. 6 initially alleges that
the plaintiff
” construction work on the
various dates, not that it was completed by the various dates. The table then
refers to when those
events were completed. If the plaintiff intended to convey
that those terms mean the same thing, it has, in my view failed. The ordinary
usage of the words conveys different meanings and can result in ambiguities and
inconsistencies when compared with the Schedules.
The defendants are entitled to
understand what work was done, when it was done and how the damages are
calculated without guessing.
[39] Second,
although the Schedules cover a wider date range, it is not clear to me that they
relate to different issues, patently
or otherwise. Leaving aside the issue of
the date ranges, they in fact appear to be dealing with the one and the same
issue, namely
proof of work undertaken.
inability to properly cross-reference and check the allegations in para. 6 as to
the work performed by the plaintiff with
the schedules of work completed results
in a relevant unfairness that justifies the striking out of para. 6.
[41] While I do
not perceive of a need to strike out para. 17 or Schedules 1, 2 or 4, the
plaintiff has leave, if it is required,
under r. 377 of the UCPR to amend the
ASOC in any respect to provide clarity to the pleadings in paras. 6 and 17 and
Schedules 1,
Paragraph 7.
[42] Paragraph 7
alleges that the defendants gave directions for certain variations to the scope
of work under the contract, and that
the variations were complied with
(presumably unless they were part of the uncompleted work at the time of the
termination of the
contract). It then sets out a table detailing the dates of
the directions, a summary of the variations and particulars of the emails
to evidence the variations.
defendants assert that the pleadings do not provide a clear and fair
articulation of the original work and how it has been
varied, resulting in a
level of ambiguity and unfairness that requires that para. 7 be struck out.
[44] I do not
agree. The scope of the original work is to be ascertained from the contract
itself. Paragraph 7 provides the framework
for the alleged variations,
importantly including by reference to correspondence which can be considered in
understanding the scope
of the variations. The pleading is sufficient to allow
the defendants to understand the nature of the allegations against them. I
that copies of all documents referred to in paras. 4-7 inclusive of the ASOC
were requested under rule 222 of the UCPR on 30
They can be presumed to be
aware of the allegations’ details.
[45] If they
maintain that the pleading is vague and unfair, that can be pursued by being
pleaded as the basis for a non-admission
Paragraph 16
[46] Paragraph
16 is a general pleading concerning calculation of damages. The defendants
contend that by its wording, the problems
raised in paras. 6, 7 and 17 intrude
into understanding its meaning. It is further contended that non-compliance with
41 of Sched 1B of the QBCC Act means that the term of the contract
pleaded at para. 5(b) as to payment of work done on any variations
is void and
unenforceable. This, it is argued, thereby affects the entire contract and the
paragraph should be struck out as creating
[47] I do not
agree. The defendants anchor this submission on the proposition that
non-compliance with ss. 40 and 41 of Sched 1B of
the QBCC Act. But that
overlooks the express provisions of s. 44 of Sched 1B, which precludes a finding
that the contract is illegal
void or unenforceable for failure to comply with a
requirement of the Act. My finding is consistent with the observations in
Boys v Imperial Homes (Qld) Pty
[48] Further,
the pleading at para. 16 is at a general level. It is not vague or ambiguous
simply because there may be some doubt
variations’ costs, particularly given the cost plus nature of the
contract. My findings
concerning para. 6 do not affect the current pleading,
given its generality.
Paragraphs 17 and 18 and Schedules 2 and
[49] These two
paragraphs are more specifically focused on the precise calculation of the
actual damages. Paragraph 17 specifically
refers to Schedule 2 of the ASOC as
detailing the hours worked on the construction project by Mr Ely, and Schedule 3
as detailing
the hours administratively undertaken by Mrs Warren. The defendants
are critical of the level of detail provided as to how the hours
were occupied,
making, it is asserted, the pleading too general, confusing and unclear.
criticism is not warranted. It can be accepted that the pleadings in the
Schedules are generalised in many instances. However,
the function of the
pleading has been satisfied by what is produced. Greater detail can be
established through the discovery processes,
at an appropriate time, and if that
leaves issue wanting, a request can then be made for further and better
particulars.
Paragraphs 19, 20 and 21 and Schedule
paragraphs allege loss of profit, based on the expected completion costs of work
not completed under the contract, as varied.
Schedule 5 lists, in a summary
fashion, the works the plaintiff alleges were not completed as at 18 January
2024. Its completeness
is subject to the express caveat at para. 5(b) which
pleads that “
further particulars of which will be provided following
site inspection by the plaintiff and receipt of disclosure in the
[52] As part of
the exchange of correspondence under rr. 444 and 445 of the UCPR, the plaintiff,
by email of 21 December 2023, sought
details of any works undertaken since 15
January 2024 and access to inspect the property. Both were sought for the
purpose of assessing
the completion
There is no suggestion
that either request has been fulfilled.
defendants assert that the details in Schedule 5 are imprecise in a number of
respects and that aspects of the means used
to estimate those costs lack the
necessary transparency. It is submitted that the defendants are thereby denied
the ability to respond
to the allegations.
[54] I accept
the plaintiff’s submission that the matters pleaded in Schedule 5 are the
best particulars that can be provided
in the circumstances. It has been accepted
that there will be, on occasion, instances where full particulars cannot be
provided until
after disclosure.
The plaintiff cannot be expected to plead that which it is incapable of
precisely quantifying, for reasons that include a lack of
access to the site
caused by the defendants and a lack of disclosure as to other works to be
allowed for when that inspection occurs.
It would be an odd result to strike out
the plaintiff’s pleading where the imprecision leading to the strike out
was caused,
or at least contributed to, by the defendants themselves. The
defendants’ submissions cannot be accepted.
22 to 25 inclusive.
paragraphs plead the quantum meruit claim. They refer back to earlier paragraphs
the subject of this application, namely
paras. 4 to 9 inclusive, and para. 6
particularly. I have already concluded that para. 6 should be struck out with
liberty to re-plead,
and made no orders concerning the other of those
paragraphs. Those latter paragraphs therefore apply unchanged to the quantum
[56] On the
assumption that para. 6 will be re-pleaded, it will also apply to the quantum
meruit claim, in its amended form. The issue
that caused me to strike it out
does not require that these paragraphs also be struck out. Once re-pleaded, it
will facilitate a
better understanding of the quantum of this aspect of the
defendants also complain that para. 23(b) pleads that the work done was
“for the benefit of the defendants”,
without explaining what that
benefit is.
[58] As the
plaintiff submits, it can readily be assumed that where one party seeks the
services of another, the first party can be
assumed to be seeking the benefit of
those services. Were the plaintiff to be alleging some different form of
benefit, the plaintiff
would be required to specifically plead that deviation
from the expected meaning, and it has not.
[59] In any
event, it is a matter that should be clarified, if it really requires
clarification, through a request for better particulars.
Nothing has been put
before me to establish that an earlier request for better particulars has been
refused or not complied with,
and it would be premature for me to make any such
order in those circumstances.
Conclusions
[60] The only
paragraph of the ASOC that is to be struck out is para. 6, for the reasons
outlined above. The plaintiff will be given
leave to re-plead within 28
[61] Given the
limited nature of the interference with the ASOC, it is not an appropriate
instance to strike out the whole of the
ASOC based only on the deficiencies in
para. 6. Put another way, contrary to the submissions of the defendants, the
issues with the
ASOC are neither deep nor
instance has the appropriateness of an order for further and better particulars
been established.
foreshadowed in the course of oral submissions, I will hear the parties as to
Equititrust Limited v
Tucker and Others
[2019] QSC 248
Equititrust
Relevant parts of that letter
are found at paragraph 8 herein.
Paragraph 5(d) of the
Section 14(5) of Sched 1B of
the QBCC Act.
Sections 14(6) and (7) of Shed
1B of the QBCC Act.
Sections 108D(3) and (5) of
the QBCC Act.
[2023] QDC 99
(2023) 3 QDCR
See paragraph 8 herein.
Perera v Bold Properties
(Qld) Pty Ltd
Defendants’ written
submissions at paragraph 3.
Ts 1-32 l 35.
Dey v Victorian Railways
Commissioners
(1949) 78 CLR 62
General Steel Industries Inc v
Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Equititrust
Equititrust
Paragraph 31 of the
defendants’ submissions.
ABB Power Generation Ltd v
(2001) WAR 158
Rule 171(1)(b) of the
Barclay Mowlem
Construction Limited v Dampier Port Authority
[2006] WASC 281
(2006) 33 WAR 82
, [9] cited in
Equititrust
Affidavit of Stephen
Clinton Burton sworn 9 April 2025, SB-02.
Affidavit of Stephen
Clinton Burton sworn 9 April 2025, SB-02.
[2024] QCATA 35
Affidavit of Antony Eaton
sworn 29 May 2025 at AE-02.
Kimberley College Ltd v
[2019] QSC 227
, [18]-[19];
Adani Mining v Pennings
cf Ooralea Developments
Pty Ltd & Ors v Mackey Regional Council
[2022] QSC 75
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (310 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter