URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QADT/2009/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KW v BG Limited [2009] QADT 6 (21 April 2009)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL QUEENSLAND
KW v BG Limited
[2009] QADT 6
Complainant
PROCEEDING:
Final Hearing
DELIVERED ON:
21 April 2009
DELIVERED AT:
Member Hogan
HEARING DATES:
30 & 31 October 2007, 1 November 2007, 3, 4 and
5 March 2008
complaint is dismissed.
disclosure of the identity of the Complainant, the Respondents or any of the
witnesses in the proceedings is prohibited.
the event that the Respondent seeks costs from the Complainant, the Respondent
file and serve written submissions as to costs within
the event that the Respondent seeks costs from the Complainant, and serves the
Complainant with written submissions as to costs,
the Complainant shall file and
serve written submissions in response within 14 days of the receipt of the
Respondent’s written
submission.
CATCHWORDS:
Victimisation – termination of employment – reneged agreement
to employ – allegations not made out on the facts.
CASES CITED
Wadsworth v Akers and Woolworths Ltd t/a Big W Discount Stores
[2007] QADT 17
Bogie v The University of Western Sydney
(1990) EOC 92-313
NSW Equal Opportunity Tribunal
Shaikh v Commissioner, New South Wales Fire Brigades
per the NSW Equal Opportunity Tribunal
Sivananthan v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Service
per the New South Wales Administrative Decisions Tribunal Equal
Opportunities Division
Hautlieu Pty Ltd trading as Russell Pathology v McIntosh
WASCA per the Western Australian Court of Appeal
Damiano & Anor v Wilkinson & Anor
[2004] FAMCA 891
Cockin v P&N Beverages Pty Ltd
[2006] QADT 42
Morrison-Liddy v The Director Department of Technical and Further
(1989) EOC 92-246
per the South Australian Equal Opportunity
Bailey v Australian National University
(1995) EOC 92-744
LEGISLATION CITED:
Discrimination Act
ss.129, 130,
REPRESENTATION:
Mr P B de Plater instructed by Kerin & Co. for the
Complainant.
Mr J Dwyer (directly instructed) for the Respondent.
Complainant alleges that she was the recipient of actions on the part of the
Respondent’s employees which amounted to victimisation
in breach of
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
(“the Act”).
I set out my deliberations in respect of each specific allegation, I consider it
a background against which that
which follows may be understood.
Respondent is not a franchised entity. Rather, each complex operated by it is
owned by the same central ‘entity’
and is a branch of a single
organisation.
was, I consider, clearly established on the
person employed by the Respondent at a particular complex who wanted to obtain
work at another complex had to:
themselves a position at the prospective complex; and
(b) apply to
the prospective complex for the job and successfully go through an interview and
reference checking process, involving
checks with the current complex undertaken
by the management (howsoever described) of the prospective complex; and
(c) be offered
the job by the complex manager of the prospective
consider that the evidence also established that, if the person then accepted
the job offered by the prospective complex, the person
would remain “on
the books”. This meant that the person would retain their existing
employee number, continuity of service
with the Respondent and would not have to
repeat the general induction processes administered to ‘new’
employees. They
may, however, be required to undergo
‘in-complex’
training at their new complex.
I consider that there is no evidence to support a finding that there is an
‘entitlement’ to be ‘kept on
the books’ by management at
any complex operated by the Respondent and
whether or not a
particular employee is ‘kept on the books’ is a determination for
management at each complex.
THE WITNESSES
Complainant
evidence and also relied upon evidence given by Ms McI (who had worked with
her previously at the C
psychiatrist upon whom she attended for the purpose of obtaining a report for
use in proceedings before the Tribunal. Each witness
was cross-examined.
Respondent relied upon evidence given by the following witnesses, all of whom
were cross examined by the Complainant:
Building co-ordinator at the Mo complex from May 2005 until May 2007 and the
person to whom the Complainant reported from approximately
- Complex manager at the Mo complex at the relevant time but who has never met
Complainant
Human Resources
Co-ordinator
(primarily responsible for recruitment of management staff and advising store
managers regarding issues affecting or involving team
members, such as
discipline performance, dismissal, harassment or discrimination);for the area
within which the Mf complex is located;
Human Resources Co-ordinator for the area within which the Mo complex is located
(with the same primary responsibility as Ms JV);
- Warehouse Operations manager at the Mf complex at the relevant time;
Administration Co-ordinator at the Mf Complex.
of the Act is in the following terms:
Victimisation
A person must not victimise another person.
Maximum penalty—
(a) in the case of an individual--45 penalty units or imprisonment for 3
(b) in the case of a corporation--170 penalty units.”
of the Act defines when vicitmisation occurs:
130 Meaning of
victimisation
(1) Victimisation happens if a person (the respondent) does an act, or
threatens to do an act, to the detriment of another person
(the complainant)--
(a) because the complainant, or a person associated with, or related to, the
complainant--
(i) refused to do an act that would amount to a contravention of the Act; or
(ii) in good faith, alleged, or intends to allege that a person committed an
act that would amount to a contravention of the Act;
(iii) is, has been, or intends to be, involved in a proceeding under the Act
against any person; or
(b) because the respondent believes that the complainant, or a person
associated with, or related to, the complainant is doing, has
done, or intends
to do one of the things mentioned in paragraph (a)(i), (ii) or (iii).
(2) In this section, a reference to involvement in a proceeding under the Act
(a) making a complaint under the Act and continuing with the complaint,
whether by investigation, conciliation, hearing or otherwise;
(b) involvement in a prosecution for an offence against the Act; and
(c) supplying information and producing documents to a person who is
performing a function under the Act; and
(d) appearing as a witness in a proceeding under the Act.
are three separate elements which must be established before an allegation of
victimisation is made out:
person does or threatens to do an act;
detriment of another person;
(c) that there is a causal nexus between any detriment suffered and the matters
outlined in 130(1)(a) or 130(1)(b) of the Act.
the first element is made out in each particular case is a factual issue and
will depend upon the evidence in that case.
term ’detriment’ is not defined in the Act.
Wadsworth v Akers and Woolworths Ltd t/a Big W Discount
Wilson set out a number of authorities from other
which the meaning to be given to the term has been discussed.
have relied upon those authorities in reaching my decision that, in order to
establish detriment, the Complainant must show, on
an objectively assessed
basis, that she has suffered loss, damage or injury in a matter of substance (as
distinct from a trivial
consider that, in order to establish the necessary causal nexus between the
detriment suffered and the relevant
s.130(1)(a)
or (b) matter, it is not
necessary for the Complainant to establish that the matter was the sole reason
for the detrimental conduct.
Rather, the Complainant must establish that such
matter/s were a ‘substantial reason’ for the detrimental
Complainant bears the onus of proving, on the balance of probabilities, that the
Respondent contravened the
apply the above to my consideration of the allegations of victimisation made by
the Complainant in this matter.
BRIEF BACKGROUND SUMMARY
Complainant commenced her employment, as a team member, with the Respondent at
its C complex in B on about 24 September 2001.
has asserted, in another Complaint to which the Respondent is a party (filed on
24 May 2005) heard by me at the same time as this
matter, that, in the
period from June 2004 until November 2004, during the course of her employment
at the C complex, she was subjected
to behaviours by other employees which
amounted to sexual harassment and for which the Respondent is vicariously
liable. She has
also asserted, in those proceedings, that she was the subject
of victimisation by the Respondent to this Complaint.
following matters, which I make as findings of fact, were clearly established by
the evidence and were not, I consider, controversial
as between the
(a) in 2004,
the Complainant’s husband took up employment interstate in M;
(b) initially,
the Complainant and the parties’ children remained living in B and the
Complainant remained working at the C
complex as a team member in the outdoor
timber section;
(c) during the
period the Complainant’s husband was interstate in 2004, the Complainant
alleged that she was the victim of acts
of sexual harassment perpetrated against
her by others of the Respondent’s employees also working at the C
Complainant last physically attended for work with the Respondent at the C store
on 5 November 2004 (although her last rostered
day was 29 November,
2004) and subsequently relocated interstate to M at the end of 2004;
Complainant looked for work at a complex operated by the Respondent in M, and
was subsequently offered, and accepted, a casual
position at its Mo complex,
commencing in about January 2005 – she later obtained a permanent
part-time position at the same
(f) on or about
24 May 2005, the Complainant lodged a Complaint with the
Anti-Discrimination Commission in Queensland alleging that
she had been the
victim of victimisation, sex discrimination and sexual harassment by employees
of the Respondent whilst employed
at the C complex;
had been involved in the investigation and management of the allegations which
were the basis of this Complaint;
(h) in about
August 2006, the Complainant advised management of the Mo complex that her
husband was returning to B and she would accompany
Complainant last attended physically at the Mo complex for work on 5 August
Complainant subsequently relocated to B; and
(k) upon her
arrival in B, the Complainant attempted to obtain employment with the Respondent
at the Mf complex.
parties differ, in whole or part, in respect of other matters relevant the
determination of the Complaint.
summary, the Complainant alleges, in this proceeding against the Respondent,
that the Respondent acted to her detriment by terminating
her employment and
failing to offer or withdrawing an offer of part-time employment at its Mf
complex and that these decisions were
as a consequence of the existence of the
other proceedings under the Act to which it is a party.
‘TERMINATION’
find that termination of employment is an act capable of amounting to an
‘act to the detriment of’ the Complainant within
the meaning of
of the Act.
Complainant asserts that:
(a) she was
informed, by correspondence dated 26 September, 2006 from her
superannuation
fund had been advised that she no longer worked for the Respondent;
(b) prior to
her receipt of the correspondence referred to above, she was not aware that her
employment had been terminated by the
Respondent;
(c) she was
subsequently unemployed until December, 2006.
Tribunal received into evidence a Separation
‘Termination’
which recorded the Complainant’s termination date as 25 August 2006)
and a Notice of Separation dated 10 September
is no evidence as to the date on which the Complainant’s superannuation
fund was made aware that she was no longer employed
by the Respondent.
August 2006, the Complainant informed Mo employees (including a Mr PB) that
she was returning to Q on 25 August 2006 (she denied
that this was, in
resignation
consider, however, that such communication amounted to a clear and unequivocal
communication by the Complainant to the Mo complex
management that, not only
would she not be available for any further shifts at that complex from that date
on, she would not be living
in the same State from that date on.
find that, at no time prior to her departure for Q, did the Complainant
specifically ask the Mo management to be ‘kept on
I consider that the Complainant appears to have acted under an assumption that,
merely by telling the Mo complex management
that she was returning to B, she
would be kept ‘on the books’ there until she had obtained a job with
another complex
in B; or, alternatively, she regarded her response to
Ms AD’s request (outlined later in paragraph 49), to amount to a
to be kept ‘on the books’ until that position came
assumption the Complainant acted under, I find that there is no evidence to
suggest that the Complainant was told by anyone
at the Mo complex that she would
be kept ‘on the books’ for any period of time.
last day upon which the Complainant physically attended at the Mo complex for
work was 5 August, 2006.
10 August 2006, an
, sent on the
Complainant’s behalf by her
containing the following relevant information, was received by Mo complex
management:
Complainant would be on stress leave on 10/11, 17/18, 24/25 August
It is with much regret that I have to leave on this note, but feel
it is prudent for myself and fellow work colleges that I seek council
employment”.
Complainant was ‘punched" (which I take to mean ‘entered into the
system’) as ‘sick’ by Mr JH despite
the absence of a
Certificate.
Complainant's last rostered shift at the Mo complex was 25 August
29 August 2006, Mr JH requested payroll to ‘suspend’ the
Complainant’s employment immediately as she had, about
a month prior,
provided advice that she would be moving to another State, had a last rostered
shift on 25 August and had not responded
to attempts to contact her by
was cc'd in on this email sent by Mr JH. She was not, at that stage, made
aware of the email referred to in paragraph 35
said that, at the time she became involved in the matter, she had no idea that
the Complainant was involved in litigation
with the Respondent and regarded the
whole thing as an abandonment
her evidence in this regard.
understood the request to suspend made by Mr JH (referred to in
paragraph 38 above) to be a request to suspend the Complainant’s
employment on the system. She said, and I accept, that an employee could be
suspended within the system even if no job offer had
been made to them by
another complex and that such person could commence work at another complex with
continuity of service and the
same employee
said that, by asking for the Complainant’s employment to be
‘suspended effective from 28 August 2006’, Mr
asking that the Complainant be suspended from accumulating (benefits) and, as he
was aware she was moving to Q, was not terminating
her as such but was
suspending things until he was able to work out what was going
Therefore, as
at 29 August 2006, they were ‘suspending’ the Complainant until
they were able to ascertain what exactly
was happening with the Q position
referred to by the
Complainant.
said that suspending an employee was not something that was done regularly but,
rather, was a process used where an employee
was going through a long-term
illness or going overseas and in circumstances where the complex was uncertain
on in terms of the employee’s plans. She said that it
would not be done for a period as long as three or six
said, in essence, that, because there was a cost to the Respondent in having
people ‘suspended’ on the system,
the process was only done on the
basis of information as to the end date being provided by the person seeking the
suspension.
evidence to the contrary was before me and I accept her evidence in this
said that she was not aware of any request made by the Complainant to the Mo
complex to retain her employment on the Respondent’s
in the absence of such request, she would regard it as an abandonment of
employment.
a consequence of being brought into the matter by Mr JH’s email
(referred to at paragraph 38 above), Ms GH requested further
information from him.
31 August 2006, Mr JH provided Ms GH with additional information
2006, her last day to work at the Mo complex was 25 August 2006 as per her
email notification and that multiple attempts
to contact her by telephone had
been unsuccessful. He also provided her contact
said that, as no medical certificates had been provided by the Complainant to
the Mo complex at the time in relation to her
asserted stress leave, from the
perspective of management of the Mo complex, the Complainant had not been at
work all month (August
2006), had said that she was going to Q and had
disappeared’.
then sought assistance from Ms JV, who is more experienced than she
, to draft a
letter for a potential abandonment of employment (from the Mo complex) to send
to the Complainant. She said, and I
accept, that such assistance was sought by
her because she was, at that time, engaged in negotiating the Respondent’s
EBA (covering
some 17,000 employees) which meant that Ms JV was assisting
her with her usual duties. She said, and I accept, that as she and Ms
worked closely together, she consulted her (albeit that she was located in
another State) about human resource issues rather than
her going to her superior
(located in the same premises) about every team member issue (there being some
23,000 team members within
the First Respondent’s
said that she contacted Ms JV for assistance with an abandonment letter and
not because she was aware that the Complainant was
heading for Q and looking for
work at a complex there (within Ms JV’s area of responsibility). I
accept this evidence. I am
not persuaded that Ms GH, in the middle of
negotiations about an EBA covering 17,000 employees, engaged in some sort of
joint enterprise
with Ms JV to act against the Complainant.
12.11pm on 6 September 2006, Ms AD sent the Complainant an
(drafted by
Ms GH or Ms JV or both in
consultation
seeking to clarify whether she wished to return to work or resign (given her
comment as set out in paragraph 34 above). The email
asked the Complainant
to advise of her intention that day and advised that if there was no response by
that day, the company may
form the opinion that she did not want to continue
employment and will commence termination proceedings.
accepted that the correspondence sent by email on 6 September 2006
(referred to above) was factually wrong in so far as it asserted
Complainant had ‘failed to attend for work’ that day in
circumstances where she (the Complainant) had no obligation
to attend for work
on 6 September
Ms JV accepted, during cross examination, that despite there being a
suggested change to the email sent to the Complainant’s
6 September 2006 requesting the provision of information, such that the
time for reply was intended to be by 13 September
2006, the original draft
(in which a response was requested by 6 September -the same day it was
sent) was, in fact, sent to the Complainant’s
consider, in the circumstances of this case, that nothing turns upon this
12.30pm on 6 September 2006, the Complainant caused an
in reply to Ms AD’s email, advising that she:
(a) has moved
as planned to B;
(b) had been
offered work at the Mf complex and would be ‘transferring’ there in
the next week or so.
Complainant made no specific request, in this email to be ‘kept on the
informed Ms GH of this response by telephone. Ms AD says that, as a
consequence of the response, the Complainant's employment
‘terminated’. The meaning of this statement may be evinced from the
events which subsequently transpired.
then contacted Ms JV and asked if she would contact the Mf complex to
determine if the Complainant had obtained employment at
that location so that
she could let the Mo complex know what was happening because they thought the
Complainant had abandoned employment
essence, she said that she didn’t make contact herself with the Mf complex
because it was within Ms JV’s area of
responsibility.
accept her evidence in this regard.
says that she told Ms GH that if the Complainant had been seeking
employment in B, reference checks would have been made of
the managers in Mo and
that perhaps Ms GH could check this.
herself, contacted the Mo complex to determine if any member of management had
provided a reference for the Complainant to
the Mf complex as this was standard
procedure. She denied the suggestion that she, in fact, took steps to ensure
that no-one from
the Mo complex provided a reference for the
Complainant.
said that she could not tell anyone at the complex not to provide a reference.
I accept her evidence in this regard.
subsequently advised Ms JV by
reference had been provided for the Complainant by any of the managers at the Mo
complex. Whilst this is, on the evidence,
accurate in so far as it refers to
written references, it seems, from the evidence of Mr JG that he had, in
fact, been provided with
two conflicting references from the Mo complex.
considered an absence of references was indicative of abandonment because, if
the Complainant had been applying for work at
another complex, that complex
would have been in contact with the Mo complex seeking a reference. As noted
above, in fact, Mr JG
from the Mf complex
been in contact with
the Mo complex for references and had obtained one positive reference and one
negative reference. However, Ms
GH had no contact with him at all and was
unaware of this.
am not persuaded that Ms GH passed on to him any information about the Mo
store being happy to see the Complainant
Ms JV had contacted Mr JG and asked him whether he
had recently
employed the Complainant or if she was in the process of applying for employment
at the complex. Mr JG confirmed with
Ms JV that he had been in
lost contact with her
for the time being. Ms JV reminded Mr JG of the
procedure of doing reference checks before employing people, which she said was
a fairly standard thing for her to do. She accepted that, whilst Mr JG
should have known this procedure, it didn’t hurt to
remind him of
persuaded that there was anything sinister in this remark.
was then contacted by Ms JV who advised her that the Complainant was not
employed at the Mf complex. This was an accurate statement.
then assisted further by drafting a response to the information provided by the
Complainant’s husband by email on 6 September
forwarded by email to GH on 7 September 2006, in summary,
‘confirmed’ (based on information provided) that the Complainant
then located in B and asserted that, as that was the case, it was taken that she
would no longer be working for the Mo complex
which ‘as such will be
finalising her employment with the
said that it was not her role to send a termination letter to the Complainant
and that that function ‘would have’
been undertaken by the Mo
complex had they decided to terminate her employment. She said that her role
was to advise the complex
as to what they might say in such correspondence but
not to make the decision whether or not to terminate
employment.
reaffirmed that the final decision about the Complainant’s employment
rested with the Mo complex and not with her (saying
she did not make decisions
regarding employment of staff) or
accept her evidence in this regard.
is no evidence to suggest that a termination letter (whether in terms of the
draft referred to in paragraph 64 above or in other
terms) was, in fact,
sent by the Mo complex management to the Complainant. Whatever ‘should
have’ been done clearly
wasn’t and the Complainant received no
correspondence from the Mo complex after the email from Ms AD on
6 September 2006 (referred
to in paragraph 49 above).
am satisfied and find, on the evidence outlined above, that the Mo complex
‘finalised’ the Complainant’s employment
because it had
received information that she was travelling interstate to live and work, would
not be available to work at that complex
and had obtained employment with
another complex operated by the Respondent. I am not persuaded that this
decision had anything
to do with the proceedings under the Act by the
Complainant against the Respondent.
am not persuaded that the Complainant’s involvement in a proceeding under
the Act was any reason for her termination, let
alone any substantial
Consequently,
I am not persuaded that the Respondent’s employees victimised the
Complainant in contravention of
of the Act.
I am not persuaded on the evidence that the letter received by the Complainant
from her superannuation fund had anything
to do with the events at the Mf
complex discussed below. Rather, I am satisfied and find that it is more likely
than not, given
that the Notice of
dated 10 September 2006 and the correspondence from the superannuation
26 September 2006, that the correspondence arose out of information
provided by the Mo complex to that fund.
turn now to consider the other particular of
victimisation.
FAILING TO CONFIRM OFFER OF EMPLOYMENT AT THE MF
is asserted, in the Points of Claim
Complainant’s behalf that:
(a) following
her return to B, in September 2006, she was offered, and accepted, a permanent
part-time position of 25 hours per week
with the Respondent at its Mf
(b) at the time
of this offer and acceptance, she informed the Respondent’s representative
(a Ms RW) that her file was held
by the M Human Resources Management
‘team’ and that she was engaged in litigation with the
Respondent;
(c) she was
informed by Ms RW that she would be contacted with a date upon which she
was to begin working in her permanent part-time
position of 25 hours/week,
but this did not occur;
(d) a friend of
hers (Ms McI) contacted Ms RW to follow up about the start date but
was told that it was none of her concern.
Complainant gave oral
interaction with Ms RW. Ms RW knew the Complainant as she had worked
with her at the Respondent's C Complex.
find, as matters of fact based on the evidence, that the following
or about September 2006, Ms RW was informed by Ms McI that the
Complainant was returning to B and may be available to work.
Complainant initially telephoned Ms RW (who remembers speaking with her)
and then went out to the Mf complex to speak with her
in the manager’s
office. Ms RW agrees that they met at the Mf complex.
Complainant said that Ms RW told her that it was great to have her back and
that, because she was a hard worker, Ms RW would ‘convince’
complex manager to put her on.
Complainant says that Ms RW ‘offered’ her a position for
25 hrs/week. Ms RW says that she told the Complainant that
position available at the Mf complex that would provide the Complainant
with 25 hours of work per week. Ms RW said that
she was not able to
"offer" the position to the Complainant immediately but was inviting her to tell
her if she was interested in
applying for it. She says that, if the Complainant
had said that she was interested, she would have asked her to complete the usual
application form and she would have undertaken the usual recruitment process
(that is, application, reference checks, offer of employment).
consider that, at this stage of the discussions between the parties, Ms RW
did not make a formal ‘offer’ of employment
to the Complainant but
rather indicated to her that there was a job available if she wanted to apply
for it in the manner usual to
the operation of the Respondent’s
says that the Complainant also told her during the conversation that she was
involved in litigation with the Respondent. This
seems to be consistent, in
part at least, with what the Complainant says happened. Ms RW said that she
responded by saying that this
matter was of no concern to her. Given that
Ms RW later contacted the Complainant to see whether the Complainant would
the Complainant and Ms RW agree that the Complainant told Ms RW that
she would like to think about the opportunity overnight,
Complainant subsequently told Ms McI that she would not be taking the
25 hour/week position. Ms McI confirmed
Complainant contacted Ms RW the next day and told her, in the presence of
be taking the job on, saying that she was going to do
further study.
said that as a consequence of receiving this information she did not proceed
further with any aspect of the recruitment process.
I accept this
W said that a number of days later a forklift operator working at the Mf complex
was dismissed for misconduct. That meant that
the Mf complex was short staffed
at a time when the quarterly stock-take was about to begin. She said that she
needed to appoint
a person for a short term position urgently and immediately
thought of the Complainant. I accept her evidence in this regard and,
above, find such an action to be inconsistent with any negative view of the
Complainant because of the existence of proceedings
under the Act between the
Complainant and the Respondent.
said she spoke to Mr JG about speaking with the Complainant about
employment as a casual for the stock-take work and he agreed
she should contact
in fact, knew the Complainant because he remembered working with her at C and
recalled her as a good employee. Whilst he could
not specifically remember
offering the Complainant a job at the EP complex post August 2003, he was clear
in stating that, based
on his experience of working with her at the C complex,
he would not have had any reason not to offer her employment had she been
interested.
then asked Ms McI if the Complainant would be interested in the stock-take
work. Ms McI rang the Complainant to ask her if
she was interested and she
said that she was.
then contacted the Complainant to discuss the casual stock-take position at the
Mf complex. She remembers that the Complainant
was interested. She told the
Complainant that she would be working under Mr JG.
Complainant said that, when she contacted Ms RW to tell her that she would
assist with the stock-take work, she (the Complainant)
told Ms RW that
‘if it’s not going to put you out, I will do that 25 hours a
week if that’s
of this detail formed part of her affidavit material but was provided by her
orally during her evidence.
Complainant further asserted that, when she raised the option of her doing the
25 hours/week job with Ms RW, Ms RW was positive
‘great, excellent’ and told her she would be working under
Mr JG.- the Complainant said that she told
Ms RW that that was fine as
she had worked with Mr JG
Complainant said, during cross-examination, that Ms RW told her that she
would possibly be able to start at the Mf complex on
11 September 2006 (a couple of days after this conversation) and her
understanding of what she would be doing was that
she would be helping
Mr JG do stock which would take about one
Complainant said that she then went home and waited for Ms RW to call (as
she said that Ms RW had said she would do when the relevant
arrived from interstate). The Complainant said that she waited as the week
rolled on and, when she didn’t hear anything
back from Ms RW, thought
that she ‘couldn’t believe they’ve done this to me. I cannot
believe that they are going
to go to these lengths to get rid of
Complainant said that she made no further inquiries of Ms RW to see what
was happening with her start date as she didn’t
want to put herself
through any further stress. She asserted that she kept asking Ms McI what
was happening and when Ms McI offered
to ask about what was happening, she
told her not to worry about it because she concluded (in summary) that she was
not wanted at
the Mf complex and she decided that she would not follow up any
other opportunities with the Respondent ever
seems that Ms McI ignored the Complainant’s direction not to check up
on what was happening because both Ms RW and Ms McI
Ms McI approached her consistently asking her things like why hadn't she
offered the Complainant a job. Ms RW says that
she told Ms McI at
least on one occasion that Mr JG was the person responsible for the matter.
She recalled Ms McI saying that they
were not hiring the Complainant
because of what happened in Mo and she says that she had no idea what that was a
reference to. She
said that she knew what happened at the C complex but had no
idea what Ms McI was talking about when she mentioned the Mo
her evidence in this regard.
accepts that after a period of time she told Ms McI "
quite firmly"
that the matters were none of her business or words to that
denies that, during the discussion about the stock-take job, the Complainant
25 hour/week job that they had previously discussed
but says that she had told the Complainant that another 25 hour/week job
be available.
In this sense, therefore, the topic of a 25 hour/week job was revisited but
25 hour/week job first discussed with the Complainant.
Ms RW told the Complainant that, if there was another position in the store
at any point in time, it would be working for
Complainant asserts that the comments made by her as outlined in
paragraph 90 above amount to an acceptance of a job
persuaded that this is the case. I am not persuaded that the
Complainant’s comments amounted to anything more than
an attempt to let
Ms RW know that, contrary to what she had previously told her, the
Complainant was interested in, and available
for, a 25 hour/week job at the
Mf complex.
said that, during the conversation about the stock-take job, she asked the
Complainant about her current status with the First
Respondent in Mo and she
says the Complainant told her that she was still employed with them but that
they knew she was leaving.
This is consistent with other evidence in the matter
already referred to.
said that this response did not make much sense to her so she enquired further
and was told by the Complainant that, from the
Complainant's perspective, her
status with the Mo complex was that she was on holidays.
any event, Ms RW then rang the Mo store to do the normal reference checks
and spoke with the building co-ordinator. She asked
him for a reference in
respect of the Complainant and he told her that he would not provide one and he
would not discuss the Complainant
at all – he directed Ms RW to the
Human Resource Department in V.
said that she was concerned at this response because it led her to think there
might be some problem with the employment at
the Mo complex.
says she then spoke to Mr JG who told her he had received a telephone call
from Ms JV. Ms JV had asked him whether the Complainant
was employed
at the Mf complex or if she was interviewing for a job and when he told her that
she was, Ms JV had stressed the importance
of doing full reference
stated that it was standard practice within the business that any position of
employment with the Respondent (whether it be
as a trolley collector or
co-ordinator or for casual employment of any nature – such as stock-take)
required a minimum of two
insisted on this in accordance with his usual practice. He spoke to two
individuals in M in order to satisfy this requirement.
said that he did this, despite having previously worked with the Complainant,
because that was only on a casual basis and had been
more than two years since
it had occurred.
said that the references obtained were conflicting: one was positive and one was
them being provided by people who were both managers from the Mo complex.
said he was concerned by this as the negative reference did not sound like the
– he had good
recollections of her as an
concerned not to hire someone whose unsatisfactory performance would reflect
badly on him.
said that, as the position was only a short term stock-take role and, as he had
a number of doubts about the references provided,
he determined not to advance
the Complainant's recruitment process. Mr JG said that the process never
advanced beyond basic reference
checks in that the Complainant was never
interviewed or offered employment. I accept his evidence in this
says that, at all times during the process he was aware that the Complainant was
involved in litigation against the Respondent.
He asserts that this did not
feature in his decision not to progress a recruitment process. He denied that
his knowledge of the
litigation occurred only as a result of his making
inquiries and said that he was aware that the litigation involved sexual
harassment.
accept his evidence in this regard, especially given that the Complainant was
known to him as a past work colleague.
said, to the contrary, that he wanted to hire the Complainant but was concerned
advancement if he hired
someone who was not satisfactory. I accept his evidence in this regard.
said that the fact that the role was short term (approximately ten hours of
work) and the negative reference were the only factors
that affected his
decision not to proceed to interview and/or hire the Complainant.
said that he was, and is, fully aware that it is unlawful to refuse to hire a
person because of litigation they're involved
in against their employers. I
accept his evidence that he was aware that the fact that the Complainant had
litigation against the
Respondent or one of its employees could not impact on
his decision to employ or not employ the
Complainant.
accept that it did not.
says that he spoke to Ms JV on many occasions in relation to numerous
aspects of his role as Operations Manager but cannot recall
any specific
conversation. He says that he thinks he might have spoken to her at one time
recall the specifics of the
conversation. He does remember, however, that Ms JV never contacted him in
any unsolicited fashion to
discuss the Complainant or her case. I accept his
evidence in this regard.
accept that it was his decision whether to offer the Complainant stock-taking
work or not and that he was not influenced in making
it by any interaction with
find that his Mr JG’s own personal experience of the Complainant as
an employee was a positive one and that he acted in not
progressing her attempt
to obtain stock-taking work simply because he had conflicting reports and was
concerned about the potential
impact on his own future of ignoring a negative
persuaded that Mr JG acted in any way because of the litigation in which
the Complainant was involved with the Respondent.
accept Mr JG’s rejection of the proposition that he and Ms JV
jointly decided that it was ‘too dangerous’ or unsafe
or unwise to
offer the Complainant any work because of the ongoing proceedings on foot
between the Complainant and the
Respondent.
is no evidence of any Application made by the Complainant to the Mf complex for
any job of any description whatsoever.
am not persuaded that the Complainant was offered and accepted a
25 hour/week job which was subsequently ‘withdrawn’
because she
was involved in proceedings under the Act against the Respondent.
am not persuaded that Mr JG failed to offer the Complainant stock-take work
because of the litigation in which she was involved
with the Respondent. I find
that his decision not to progress her interest in such a position (for
10 hours work) was solely out
of concern for his own reputation within the
organisation and a desire not to make a mistake (which, I infer, he at least
would stay on his ‘record’ with the Respondent). I am not
persuaded on the evidence that the fact that the Complainant
was involved in
litigation under the Act with the Respondent played any part in his decision not
to offer the Complainant stock-take
am not persuaded that the actions of the Respondent’s staff (as outlined
above in the course of this Judgment) amounted to
acts of victimisation on their
part against the Complainant.
Accordingly,
I dismiss the Complaint.
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal Queensland
Evidence of
Ms GH : transcript
Transcript p.124
evidence of AD @ Transcript
Affidavit of Complainant filed 30 May
Exhibit 11:
Affidavit of McI filed 8 June
Exhibit 37:
Report dated 17 July
Exhibit 29:
Affidavit of JH filed 14 September
21: Affidavit of AD filed 11 September
Transcript 305
Exhibit 40: Affidavit of JV filed 11 September
been in the Respondent’s employ since
23 : Affidavit of GH filed 11 September
13 : Affidavit of JG filed 14 September
36: Affidavit of RW filed 14 September
Bogie v The University of Western Sydney
(1990) EOC 92-313
per the NSW
Equal Opportunity Tribunal;
Shaikh v Commissioner, New South Wales Fire
(1996) EOC 92-808
per the NSW Equal Opportunity Tribunal;
Sivananthan v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Service
[2001] NSW ADT
per the New South Wales Administrative Decisions Tribunal Equal Opportunities
Hautlieu Pty Ltd trading as Russell Pathology v McIntosh
WASCA per the Western Australian Court of Appeal;
Damiano & Anor v
Wilkinson & Anor
[2004] FAMCA 891
per Baumann
Cockin v P&N Beverages Pty Ltd
[2006] QADT 42
per Member Rangiah;
Morrison-Liddy v The Director Department of Technical and Further Education
(1989) EOC 92-246
per the South Australian Equal Opportunity Tribunal; Bogie
(supra) @ 78,146;
Bailey v Australian National University
@ 78,552; Damiano (supra) @ para
I have referred to as such because of the Respondent’s contention that the
Complainant abandoned her
Transcript 123, line
contained within Exhibit
Mr PB who I understand to have been the administrative
co-ordinator
Exhibit 22: email dated 29 August 2006; Annexure GH1 to Affidavit of
evidence of Mr JH and
Exhibit 22: email dated 29 August 2006; Annexure GH1 to Affidavit of GH, filed
11 September
Transcript 319
Transcript 322
Transcript 317
Transcript 311
Transcript 311
Transcript 311
Transcript 337
Transcript 312
Transcript 313
Exhibit 22: email dated 31 August 2006; Annexure GH1 to Affidavit of GH, filed
11 September
Transcript 323
Transcript 321
Exhibit 22: email dated 6 September
Transcript 307
Transcript 325
Exhibit 22: email dated 6 September
Transcript 327
Transcript 328
Transcript 327
Exhibit 22:
email dated 6 September 2006; GH4 to the Affidavit of GH
40, Annexure JV3
See Annexure
GH5, Affidavit of GH, filed 11 September
Transcript 335
being the matter to which I have already
Transcript p.54, line 18-p.55 line
Transcript 194
Transcript p.79, line
Transcript p.82, line
Transcript p.82, line
Transcript p.83, line
Transcript p.83, line
Transcript 478
Transcript 479
Transcript 473
Transcript 474
Transcript p.81, line
Transcript 201
Transcript 202;
Transcript 205
Transcript 205 -
Transcript 209
Transcript 211
Transcript 210
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (556 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter