URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIRC/2025/306.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:40:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pyke v State of Queensland (Queensland Health) [2025] QIRC 306 (10 November 2025)
QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Pyke v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2025] QIRC 306
Pyke, Craig
State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
PSA/2025/130
PROCEEDING:
Public Sector Appeal – Appeal against a fair treatment
DELIVERED ON:
10 November 2025
On the papers
The Orders contained in paragraph [120] of these reasons for
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – PUBLIC SECTOR – EMPLOYEES AND SERVANTS OF THE
CROWN GENERALLY – appeal against a fair treatment
decision – where
appellant requested flexible work arrangement – where flexible work
arrangement was partially approved
– where appellant requested an internal
review – where internal review decision not provided within 14 days
in a deemed confirmation of the local action decision – whether
the deemed review decision was fair and reasonable –
deemed review
decision confirmed.
LEGISLATION:
Industrial Relations Act
Public Sector Act 2022
Individual Employee Grievances Directive
cls 5, 8 and 9
Queensland Public Health Sector Certified Agreement (No. 11)
Queensland Health C5 Flexible working arrangements policy
(QH-POL-242)
Benn v State of Queensland (Department of Education) WZAR
Brandy v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Colebourne v State of Queensland (Queensland Police Service) (No 2)
[2022] QIRC 16
Dudley v State of Queensland (Office of Industrial Relations)
Goodall v State of Queensland
(Unreported decision of the Supreme
Court of Queensland, Dalton J, 10 October 2018)
Hardy v Queensland (Dept of Environment and Science)
[2022] QIRC
Hunt v State of Queensland (Department of Agriculture and Fisheries)
[2022] QIRC 162
Malcolm v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2024] QIRC
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v WZARH
Page v John Thompson and Lesley Dwyer, As Chief Executive Officer, West
Moreton Hospital and Health Service
[2014] QSC 252
Pope v Lawler
[1996] FCA 1446
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; ex
(2003) 214 CLR 1
Schubert v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2024] QIRC
State of Queensland (Queensland Health) v Hume (No. 3)
Sutaria v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC
Wirth v Mackay HHS & Anor
[2016] QSC 39
Reasons for Decision
Introduction and background
[1] Craig Pyke
('the Appellant') is employed full-time as a Procurement Officer, Systems
Procurement with Queensland Health ('the
Respondent').
Appellant has been working under a Flexible Work Arrangement ('FWA') since
October 2022 pursuant to which he works Monday
to Thursday for 10 hours a day
with a 30 minute lunch break. This enabled the Appellant to take Friday off each
week as a flex day.
[3] The FWA was
reviewed on a number of occasions, but kept in place. On 28 January 2025, the
Appellant was requested to resubmit
his FWA application. The fresh application
was supported by a medical certificate from Dr Claire Stewart, Lighthouse
General Practice
dated 20 January 2023, which had been submitted with an earlier
application.
Appellant was asked to provide an updated medical certificate and he
subsequently provided a new medical certificate from
Dr Stewart dated 21
February 2025, which strongly recommended the continuation of the existing
arrangement.
[5] On 13 March
2025 the Appellant's line manager, Ms Lynne Best approved the Appellant's FWA
request, specifying:
fixed hours of
6:00 AM to 4:00 PM, Monday to Thursday;
work from home
day to be Thursday;
with one Accrued
Day Off (ADO) per week; and
for this work
pattern to be formalised in myHR.
[6] On 14 March
2025, Ms Best issued a formal letter confirming approval of the Appellant's FWA
on the same conditions set out in
the preceding
[7] On 26 March
2025, the Appellant lodged a Stage 1 grievance under the
Individual Employee
Grievances Directive 11/20
Grievance Directive
'), relating to
the operational implementation of the approved
The grievance characterised
the decision as an unfair and unreasonable refusal of his FWA, and cited changes
to previously understood
arrangements.
Appellant objected to the FWA becoming a structured compressed hours arrangement
as opposed to the pre-existing arrangement
whereby the Appellant utilised flex
time to take Friday off.
1- Local Action decision
was released to the Appellant on 3 June ('the LAD')
in response to the Appellant's
The decision-maker, Mr
Glen Mann, Chief Procurement Officer confirmed the decision of Ms Best and he
specifically observed:
He had decided
that the Appellant's approved FWA and compressed working hours, must be formally
recorded in myHR.
confirmed that:
not support the FWA continuing as it had been (using flex to accrue a day off),
and instead the approved compressed working
hours must be formally recorded in
supportive of the FWA being made on an ongoing basis, subject to
and Mr Hanscomb hold the appropriate delegation to approve flexible work
arrangements for employees occupying positions at
other classification levels.
Mr Mann further confirmed that he supported Ms Best and Mr Hanscomb to make the
decision on the Appellant's
Appellant was dissatisfied with this decision and lodged a
Stage 2- Internal
of the LAD on 9 June
[11] Through an
administration error, the delegated decision-maker for the internal review, Mr
Damian Green (Deputy Director-General,
Corporate Services Division) failed to
provide the internal review decision within 14 days of receipt of the internal
review request.
Pursuant to
clause 9.2(g) of the
Grievance Directive
failure to provide an internal review decision is treated as a deemed
confirmation of the LAD.
Appellant filed an Appeal Notice in the Industrial Registry on 7 July 2025
seeking to challenge the deemed confirmation of
Respondent belatedly provided an internal review decision on 9 July
As this document post-dated
the filing of the Appeal Notice, I have not given this decision any
consideration in determining the
satisfied that the deemed confirmation of the LAD local action decision was fair
and reasonable.
[15] My reasons
Is the Appellant entitled to appeal?
Public Sector Act 2022
(Qld) ('the
') provides
that an appeal may be made against a fair treatment decision.
Section 133(d)
provides that for fair treatment decisions, it is the public sector
employee who is aggrieved by the decision who may appeal.
satisfied that the Appellant was aggrieved by the decision.
Section 129
relevantly provides:
Definitions for part
In this part—
fair treatment decision
means a decision a public sector
employee believes is unfair and unreasonable.
satisfied that the decision is one that is able to be appealed pursuant to
, and further, that the Appellant is entitled to appeal.
Industrial Relations Act 2016
('IR Act') requires an appeal
to be lodged within 21 days after the day the decision appealed against is
internal review decision should have been provided on or before 23 June 2025.
The Appellant therefore had 21 days from 23
June 2025 to lodge his Appeal
[22] The Appeal
Notice was filed in the Industrial Registry on 7 July 2025 well within the 21
day period. I am satisfied that the
appeal has been brought within the required
What decisions can the Commission make?
prescribes that the Commission may determine to
the decision appealed against;
set the decision
aside and return the matter to the decision maker with a copy of the decision on
appeal and any directions considered
appropriate; or
set the decision
aside and substitute another decision.
Appeal Principles
and (3) of the
provides that the appeal is decided by reviewing
the decision appealed against
"to decide whether the decision appealed
against was fair and reasonable".
[25] The appeal
is not conducted by way of
re-hearing,
but rather involves a
review of the decision arrived at by the decision-maker and the associated
decision-making process.
the word 'review' has no settled meaning, it must take its meaning from the
context in which it
[26] Findings
made by the decision-maker, which are reasonably open to them, should not be
disturbed on appeal. Even so, in reviewing
the decision appealed against, the
Commission member may allow other evidence to be taken into
[27] The issue
for my determination is whether the deemed decision which is the subject of the
appeal was fair and
reasonable.
Relevant Legislation
relevantly provides:
27 Request for flexible working arrangements
An employee
the employee's employer for a
change in the way the employee works, including –
the employee's ordinary hours of work; and
the place where the employee works
(c) a change to the way the employee works, for example, the use of different
equipment as a result of a disability illness or injury.
(2) The request must –
(a) be in writing; and
(b) state the change in the way the employee works in sufficient detail to allow
the employer to make a decision about the request;
(c) state the reasons for the change.
(Emphasis added)
contemplates the employer's decision about an employee's request
It provides:
28 Decision about request for flexible working arrangements
(1) The employer may decide to –
(a) grant the request; or
grant the request in part or subject to conditions
(c) refuse the request.
(2) The employer may grant the request in part
or subject to
refuse the request, only on reasonable
(3) The employer must give the employee written notice about its decision
within 21 days after receiving the request.
(4) If the employer decides to grant the request in part or subject to
conditions or to refuse the request, the written notice about
the decision must
(a) the written reasons for the decision, outlining the reasonable grounds for
granting the request in part or subject to conditions
or for the refusal; and
(b) that the commission has jurisdiction to hear and decide a dispute over the
request under chapter 6.
(Emphasis added)
Relevant Directive and Policies
Directive 11/20: Individual employee grievances policy
11/20: Individual employee grievances policy
('Directive 11/20') relevantly
that can be subject of an individual employee grievance
individual employee grievance under this directive is a grievance submitted by a
current public service employee who has an
honest belief, based on reasonable
grounds, that:
(b) the conduct or behaviour of an employee, agent or contractor is unfair and
unreasonable
(c) the conduct or behaviour of an employee, agent or contractor constitutes
bullying in the workplace, sexual harassment, racial
vilification, religious
vilification or vilification on the grounds of gender identity or sexuality
(d) the conduct or behaviour of an employee is a breach of the Code of Conduct
employee grievance resolution principles
8.2 Individual employee grievances are to be managed and resolved using a
three-step process:
(a) local action (the first stage of the individual employee grievance
(b) internal review of a decision made following local action (the second stage
of the individual employee grievance process), and
(c) where applicable, external review of a decision made at internal review
(the third stage of the individual employee grievance
8.3 Agencies, including managers and supervisors, must manage individual
employee grievances:
(a) in accordance with principles of natural justice, including timely
and the provision of adequate reasons
(c) in accordance with the procedures in clause 9.
(Emphasis added)
for managing and resolving individual employee grievances
Stage 1–local action
(b) An individual employee grievance submitted by an employee must be resolved
in accordance with the agency’s individual
employee grievance policy and
procedures. This action may include, but is not limited to, one or more of the
conducting preliminary enquiries to determine appropriate options for
resolution of the individual employee grievance
(ii) ADR strategies, including, facilitated discussion, mediation, conciliation
or negotiation
gathering information, including from witnesses
(iv) other reasonable action in the circumstances.
(f) After a decision has been made about an individual employee
grievance– including a decision to take no action under clause
9.1(c)–the agency must provide a written decision to the employee who
submitted the grievance. The decision must:
(i) outline the action taken to manage the individual employee grievance and
the outcome of this action
(ii) provide the reasons for the decision, or the decision to take no action
(iii) outline any action that the agency proposes to take, or will take, as a
result of the decision; and
(iv) inform the employee of their internal review rights outlined in Stage
2– internal review, including any relevant timeframes.
9.2 Stage 2–internal review
(a) If an employee is dissatisfied with a decision made through local action,
the employee may make a written request to the agency
chief executive for an
internal review.
An internal review is to be completed by the chief executive or their
delegate. The chief executive or delegate is to determine whether
the decision
made through local action was fair and reasonable in the circumstances.
(h) At the completion of internal review, including a decision to take no
further action under clause 9.2(e), the chief executive
or delegate must provide
a written decision The Reto the employee. This decision must:
(i) outline the action taken to review the decision made through local action
(ii) outline the reasons for the decision, or the decision to take no further
(iii) outline any action that the chief executive or delegate proposes to take,
or will take, as a result of the internal review,
(iv) outline any avenues of external review that may be available to the
employee, including any relevant timeframes.
(Emphasis added)
Queensland Health C5 Flexible working arrangements policy
[31] Clause 3 of
the Queensland Health C5 Flexible working arrangements policy ('the FWA policy')
relevantly provides:
3 Submitting a request to access flexible working arrangements
Any decision to grant a request in part or subject to conditions, or to
refuse a request, is to be made only on reasonable grounds
and communicated to
the employee in writing, and must:
contain details
of the part approval and/or conditions (e.g. timeframe for the arrangement to be
provide clear
reasons as to why a part approval or condition has been applied, or the reason
for refusal
employees’ entitlement to lodge an industrial dispute with the Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission.
Industrial Relations Act
notes that if the employer does
not give the written notice within 21 days after receiving this request, the
employer is taken to
have decided to refuse the request. The Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission has jurisdiction to hear and decide a dispute
over the request.
Grounds of Appeal
[32] In his
Appeal Notice, the Appellant outlines a number of appeal grounds in an attached
schedule. I summarise these grounds as
Since October
2022 the Appellant through an approved FWA has worked compressed hours Monday to
Thursday 6:00 am to 4:00 pm with Friday
as a flexible accrued day.
The Respondent
has decided that the FWA is conditional and the Respondent's myHR system should
record the Appellant's hours of work
to reflect the FWA with the same hours on
Monday to Thursday with Friday recorded as a "rostered day off". This does not
criteria of compressed hours or an agreed FWA.
Changing the
Appellant's entitlements in the myHR System disadvantages the accrual
entitlements to annual leave and sick leave. It
also removes eligibility to
flexible time accruals and also removes eligibility to public holidays that may
fall on a Friday.
resubmitting his FWA in January 2025 management have continually tried to block
or to find reasons to deny the Appellant's FWA
request. This is despite the
Respondent's
Guidelines: Flexible working arrangements
stating under
clause 5.3, the process for the decision maker (delegate):
It is the position of Queensland Health that employees have access to
flexible working arrangements where this is operationally feasible.
As a result,
where possible, decision makers (delegates) should be looking for reasons to say
‘yes’, rather than ‘no’
without grounds.
The excuses
provided by the Respondent for not approving the FWA together with the request
to permanently change the Appellant's roster
is unjust and goes against all HR
The Appellant's
expected outcome from submitting his grievance was for his managers to realise
what they were doing was unreasonable
and to accept that they may have made a
mistake and to agree to continue his FWA for a further 3-6 months and then
review it again.
reasonable outcome for everyone is to have the Appellant's FWA continue for the
reasons stated above, with a review every
3-6 months.
Proceedings in the Commission
Directions Order was issued to the parties on 11 July 2025, inviting the
provision of written submissions as follows:
Appellant's
outline of submissions filed on 23 July 2025.
Respondent's
outline of submissions filed on 8 August 2025.
Appellant's
reply submissions filed on 14 August 2025.
[34] I have
considered all of the submissions and attached evidence provided by the parties
although they may not be specifically
referred to in these reasons.
Appellant's Submissions
Appellant commenced working on the FWA Monday to Thursday (as detailed above) in
October 2022. In January 2023 the Appellant
was requested to resubmit the FWA
application with supporting medical evidence, which was provided by his treating
General Practitioner,
Dr Claire Stewart. Dr Stewart confirmed the FWA
arrangement was beneficial for the Appellant's mental and physical
[36] The FWA was
reviewed, and approved, by Category Director, James Doyle in February 2023. The
FWA was subsequently reviewed and
continued in May 2023. During this period the
Appellant worked compressed hours on Monday to Thursday and took a flex day on
Where public holidays fell in the week or sick leave was taken, the
Appellant would negotiate with his line manager to work a Friday
and therefore
incur no deficit to his ordinary weekly hours (38 hours per week).
[37] Annual
leave entitlements were also recorded and taken as Monday to Friday, 7.36 hours
per day. Since 2016 the Appellant has
also purchased leave in blocks of 5 days
Monday to Friday as per
HR Policy C21 – Purchased leave.
January 2025 the Appellant was asked by his new line manager to resubmit his
FWA. He was subsequently requested to provide
updated medical evidence to
support the application.
[39] On 13 March
2025, the FWA was informally agreed with the conditions that:
Hours to be
fixed 6 am – 4 pm = 10 hours with half an hour for lunch = 9.5 hours
Monday to Friday each week being the accrued
day off myHR System back end to be
fixed up, so entitlements are accrued at the appropriate rate and taken at the
appropriate rate.
Work from home day to be Thursday, subject to change in line
with business needs.
Employees who
participate in accrued days off in accordance with cl 15(1)(e) of HHSGEA can
work a maximum of 10 hours but do not participate
in flex/accrued
Notwithstanding
the working arrangements recorded in clauses 15. 1 (a) (b) and (h), an employer
and an employee or group of employees
may agree that the ordinary hours of work
are to exceed 8 hours on any day, thus enabling more than one accrued day off
particular work cycle. However, the ordinary hours of work shall not
exceed 10 hours on any one day.
[40] On 13 March
2025 the Appellant emailed Ms Best stating that he was not comfortable with
agreeing to a permanent change in his
employment contract and the myHR
[41] On 24 March
2025 a meeting was held involving the Appellant, managers and payroll. When the
matter could not be resolved locally,
the Appellant lodged a formal grievance on
26 March 2025 in accordance with the Respondent's policy
Appellant submits that his former FWA was premised on him accruing flex-time
outside of the ordinary 7.36 hours ordinary
days to enable him to take a flex
day on Friday. In being a flexible work arrangement, there may be weeks where a
public holiday
(7.36 hours) falls, or sick leave is accessed (7.36 hours per
day). An arrangement was in place with previous managers for these
hours to be
normally made up on a Friday.
[43] There is no
evidence since his FWA has been in place from October 2022, that there has been
any impact on the Appellant's recorded
timesheets or that the FWA has resulted
in any significant leave deficits.
[44] Since Ms
Best has been appointed, she has not agreed to the Appellant working a Friday or
agreed to other suggestions of working
his ordinary hours plus additional hours
as required in circumstances of public holidays or sick leave days that have
left the Appellant's
debit balance as a minus value.
[45] Ms Best
maintains that the Appellant is not entitled to work on a Friday as it is a
rostered day off. Ms Best also interprets
the correspondence from Dr Stewart
dated 21 February 2025 to reflect the Respondent's belief that the Appellant
must not work on
Friday. The Appellant contends that he has demonstrated that he
is flexible and able to work on a Friday when required.
Appellant states that he is not expecting this FWA to be permanent and he is
prepared to have it reviewed every 3- 6 months
as long as it is considered
fairly and in line with other team members and any related policies to FWAs.
Appellant contends that the detriments of the proposed changes by the
Respondent's FWA conditions to him are:
The ability to
be flexible with his work pattern.
The myHR System
records his work pattern and employment conditions as Monday to Thursday with no
entitlement to ordinary hours across
the spread of Monday to Friday.
He loses any
entitlement to any public holidays that may fall on a Friday, and possibly the
yearly concessional day.
No entitlement
to Fridays for ordinary hours of sick or annual leave
entitlements.
Precluded from
purchase leave (must be taken in blocks of 5 days Monday - Friday only).
The proposed
work pattern will be permanently recorded in myHR System, and he loses all
capability of working flexible and the ability
to request changes to his work
The possibility
of implications to his entitlements like superannuation and any leave
entitlements, the Respondent's payroll could
not confirm or deny if there would
be any future implications.
The Respondent's
interpretation of Dr Stewart's correspondence dated 21 February 2025 reflecting
the belief he is not able to work
any Fridays.
Respondent's Submissions
Respondent notes that following the Appellant lodging the grievance, on 14 April
2025 a meeting occurred with the Appellant,
his support person, Mr Mann (the
Delegate), and a representative from HR Advisory Services. The Appellant raised
concerns around
the handling of his FWA, the rationale and communication of
conditions applied, and his interactions with his line manager and Category
[49] Between
April and June 2025, Mr Mann undertook a review of all relevant documentation
and engaged with both the Appellant and
the line manager to clarify issues and
obtain a balanced understanding of the events and processes.
[50] On 14 May
2025, a further meeting was convened with the same attendees as the meeting on
14 April 2025. At the meeting, Mr Mann
provided a summary of key themes arising
from the grievance, and the Appellant was provided the opportunity to provide
further comment
and clarification.
Respondent submits that the LAD to approve the Appellant's FWA subject to the
formalisation of the arrangement in the myHR
system was fair and reasonable.
Both when initially made by the line manager and when also confirmed by Mr
permits an employee to request an FWA.
Section 28(1)
provides that an employer may decide to grant the request,
grant the request
in part (or subject to conditions)
, or refuse the request.
Section 28(2)
provides that a decision to refuse the request or part of the request
may only be on reasonable grounds.
[53] Schedule 3,
clause 3.1 of the
Queensland Public Health Sector Certified Agreement
('EB 11') relevantly provides, among other
things, that:
employees will at all times obey directions given by their Supervisor regarding
hours of work during the spread of hours; and
staff will give first priority to the maintenance of acceptable workflows;
there will be cooperation in planning employees' working
Respondent submits that the Commission has previously found that FWAs remain a
matter for mutual agreement between an employer
and employee and that, provided
the grounds of refusal are not unreasonable, the discretion to grant an FWA
remains with the
[55] The request
to provide updated medical evidence as part of reassessing the existing FWA, was
reasonable in circumstances where
the Appellant was seeking to rely on medical
evidence from 2023 to support the further request.
approved conditions, being a 9.5 hour workday Monday to Thursday with Friday as
the accrued day off, formalised the Appellant's
compressed working week,
enabling accurate payroll processing and system alignment. The Respondent
submits that this arrangement
preserved the Appellant's working preferences
while ensuring entitlements such as public holidays and leave accruals would be
recorded and managed once formalised.
Respondent has identified that discrepancies can arise with the Appellant's
timekeeping records, and in fact did arise on
occasions, where the informal
arrangements lacked system configuration.
Appellant's line manager and Mr Mann appropriately addressed those issues by
requiring the FWA to be formalised in myHR.
Respondent refutes the Appellant's suggestion that the proposed FWA will affect
his leave entitlements, access to public
holidays and ability to purchase leave.
The Respondent notes that the Appellant will continue to accrue leave on a
full-time basis
and there is no impediment to his ability to purchase leave.
[60] As regards
leave and public holidays, Mr Mann specifically considered that under the
current arrangements, when the appellant
either took leave or where there was a
public holiday, the Appellant was only paid 7.36 hours which then lead to an
insufficient
flex accrual during the week to then not work on a
[61] In light of
the medical evidence from Dr Stewart regarding the need for the Appellant to not
work on a Friday, the Respondent
notes that it has a primary duty of care to
ensure, so far as reasonably practicable, the health and safety of its workers.
The Respondent
did not consider it appropriate for the Appellant to undertake
work on Fridays in the absence of further medical evidence.
approach taken by Mr Mann of approving the FWA subject to the conditions
requiring formalisation of the FWA in myHR was consistent
with the medical
evidence provided by the Appellant and was also consistent with the FWA Policy
and EB11, which provide that flexible
working arrangements must be operationally
feasible and subject to formal approval.
Respondent concludes that it has carefully considered the Appellant's individual
circumstances and has provided the Appellant
with multiple opportunities to
raise concerns, attend grievance meetings, and submit supporting materials for
requirement to formalise the FWA represented a balanced and sustainable
resolution that respected the Appellant's preferences
while addressing the
Respondent's operational requirements and obligations to ensure proper system
integration.
Respondent submits that it has acted in accordance with the FWA Policy and that
Mr Mann's decision was fair and reasonable
in the circumstances.
Appellant's submissions in reply
Appellant notes that at no time has Dr Stewart declared him medically unfit to
work on Fridays.
instances where a public holiday (equivalent to 7 hours and 36 minutes), or sick
leave occurred during a work week, the Appellant
would revert to a standard
Monday to Friday working 7 hours and 36 minutes each day. The Appellant submits
that this approach ensured
his compliance with the 38-hour weekly requirement.
He notes that this method has been in place since October 2022.
Appellant has provided a timesheet for Easter 2025 showing how public holidays
have been regularly completed on his fortnightly
timesheets.
Appellant then largely repeats his earlier submissions regarding the
Respondent's proposal not being flexible and causing
him the detriments
highlighted in paragraph [48] above.
[70] In relation
to the Respondent's citation of
Dudley v State of Queensland (Office of
Industrial Relations)
Appellant seeks to distinguish the decision on the basis that he is not
requesting his full-time hours be reduced and nor is
he requesting that the days
that he works in the office be reduced.
Appellant references an email from the Respondent's internal employee relations
dated 16 April 2025,
which recommended against the maintenance of the FWA based on the use of
flex-time. The Appellant alleges that this email was not
a true and accurate
reflection of his current FWA request or background.
Appellant also notes that under the
Queensland Health Guideline: Flexible
working arrangements
in clause 5.
4 Flexible Working Arrangements and
Agreement Form
, it is stated:
Employees who access variable working hours/flex-time as part of their normal
working arrangements, available in an industrial instrument,
are not required to
complete the Flexible Working Arrangements Application and Agreement form.
The Appellant questions whether this means that he will not be on an FWA and
the benefits that come with an FWA will not apply to
Consideration
required to decide this appeal by assessing whether or not the deemed decision
appealed against is fair and reasonable.
This would usually involve a review of
the decision-making process that has been utilised, and the decision arrived
[74] Clause
9.2(g) of the
Grievance Directive
in effect creates a legal fiction that
the failure to address the internal review request constitutes a confirmation of
LAD. It is therefore necessary to consider the LAD and whether that
decision was fair and reasonable.
[75] Deputy
President Merrell in
Colebourne v State of Queensland (Queensland Police
Service) (No 2)
') considered the meaning of 'fair and reasonable' and
concluded that it should be construed within the ordinary meaning of the phrase
as used in the context of
his Honour further noted that assessing whether a decision was
'fair and reasonable' is not an assessment of whether the decision
unreasonable only by reference to the legal
His Honour concluded
that assessing whether a decision was 'fair and reasonable' permitted
review of both the factual merits and legal reasonableness of both the decision
the process of making that
[77] In the
recent decision of
Benn v State of Queensland (Department of
Commissioner Pratt provided the following observations as to the process in
determining whether a decision is fair and
reasonable:
For a decision
to be fair and reasonable, the conclusion underpinning it must be reasonably
open to be reached. If the conclusions
were reasonably open to the
decision-maker to reach, it is not the Commission's role to disturb that
decision, even if the Commission
would have reached a different
conclusion.
If the decision
is flawed by conclusions that were not fairly and reasonably open to the
decision-maker to reach, then that decision
is prone to being overturned on
disappointment with the outcome of a decision is not enough to establish that it
was not fair and
reasonable.
The decision
must create some practical injustice before an appeal of this nature can
[78] In the
Appeal Notice, the Appellant has failed to set out clear grounds of appeal which
set out his contentions as to why the
decision of Mr Mann was not fair and
reasonable.
[79] Instead of
this, the Appellant has set out a timeline of his various applications for FWAs
and the basis upon which they were
granted. He then has set out the various
difficulties he has experienced in having his new application for an FWA in
January 2025
approved to his satisfaction.
[80] In adopting
this approach, the Appellant has focussed on issues that he has experienced with
his line manager, Ms Best, and his
dissatisfaction with various statements he
alleges that Queensland Health have made. The Appellant then mentions
disadvantages he
contends that he will experience as a consequence of the
compressed hours arrangement being formalised in myHR.
approach is largely repeated in the Appellant's submissions in support of the
summary, the Appellant's position appears to be that the previous arrangement
that had been in place since October 2022 of
the Appellant working longer hours
on Monday to Thursday to accrue sufficient flex-time to take Friday off as a
flex day was working
to his satisfaction, and as far as he was aware, the
Respondent's satisfaction.
[83] The issues
of him going into debit in his flex hours due to sick leave or public holidays
was not a significant issue and was
addressed by the Appellant working on a
Friday when required.
Appellant's submissions then focus on the various disadvantages that he will
experience in the future if the Respondent's
proposed FWA is operationalised and
recorded formally in myHR. It is those disadvantages that the Appellant appears
to rely upon
to establish that Mr Mann's decision (and the decision of Ms Best
prior to that) are not fair and reasonable.
[85] In the FWA
application dated 28 January
the Appellant requests the
continuation of his current arrangement of working compressed hours Monday to
Thursday and taking Friday
off from work. The Appellant also requests to work
from home every Thursday.
addressing potential issues, the Appellant states:
There should be no issues to this arrangement
as this is for my mental
and is supported by my doctor.
As stated above I have been doing compressed hours since the beginning of
October 2022 and at no time as (sic) any of my line managers
in this time
advised me that this is impacting my work performance or my team in any
(Emphasis added)
Appellant attached the medical certificate from Dr Stewart dated 20 January 2023
which was provided to support an earlier
FWA application.
[88] In light of
the Appellant's reference to the arrangement being for his mental health, and in
light of him attaching the 2023
medical certificate, I am satisfied that it was
fair and reasonable for the Respondent to seek updated medical information from
Appellant when considering his FWA application.
[89] In the
updated medical certificate dated 21 February
Dr Claire Stewart confirms
that the Appellant continues to suffer from difficulties with his mental health
related to situational
stressors within his family and workplace challenges. Dr
Stewart strongly recommends that the Appellant continue working compressed
and has Friday off for the benefit of his mental health and physical wellbeing.
[90] On 6 March
2025, Ms Best approves the FWA and includes the following conditions on the FWA
application form:
2 accrued days
off per pay cycle ,in line with corporate timesheet rules (attached)
Hours to be
fixed 6am until 4pm = 10 hours with half hour for lunch 09.5 hours Monday to
Thursday with Friday each week being the
accrued day off MYHR back end to be
fixed up so entitlements are accrued at the appropriate rate and taken at the
appropriate rate.
Work from home
day to be a Thursday: subject to change in line with business
Employees who participate in accrued days off in accordance with cl15.1 (e)
of HHSGEA can work a maximum of 10 hours but do not participate
In flex/accrued
(e) Notwithstanding the working hours arrangements recorded in clauses 15.1
(a), (b) and (h), an employer and an employee or group
of employees may agree
that the ordinary hours of work are to exceed 8 hours on any day, thus enabling
more than one accrued day
off to be taken off during a particular work cycle.
However, the ordinary hours of work shall not exceed 10 hours on any one
[91] In the
formal correspondence sent by Ms Best dated 14 March
it was confirmed that the
pre-existing arrangement had led to various issues with the Appellant's
timesheets as follows:
This has led to various issues with your timesheet. For example, when you
take leave Monday - Thursday, you input 7:36 hours of leave
in your timesheet
and no 'flex time' is accrued on this day, as you were away, therefore, leaving
hours owing (deficit). You then
worked hours to make up this time a (above 10
hours a day- without approval). As detailed in the business rules for Timesheets
(previously
sent to you). Employees must seek agreement from their line manager
when the daily hours on any given day will not be performed.
Employees may go into debit hours from time to time, but must not carry over
greater than 4 hours in debit at the end of the pay period.
Upon reviewing
previous timesheets, this debit balance for you often surpassed this rule, and
you currently have a deficit of over
10 hours which is not acceptable to the
organisation.
[92] Ms Best
further noted that as the errors in the Appellant's timesheet had now been
identified as incorrect and investigated,
this highlighted that his FWA was not
correctly reflecting the EA and business rules conditions, and required updating
that the compressed hours the Appellant had requested and was
undertaking, were correctly processed in line with EA and business
necessary in my view to note that in the FWA application lodged by the Appellant
in January 2025 he sought the ability
to work compressed hours on Monday to
Thursday from 6:00 am to 4:00 pm with half an hour for lunch as he had been
doing since October
2022. This was approved.
Appellant sought to work from home every Thursday. This was approved.
Appellant sought to have every Friday off from work. This was approved. The
difference being the Appellant sought to utilise
flex time to achieve this,
whereas the decision taken by the Respondent was that the Appellant would have a
rostered day off in accordance
with a more formal structure.
[96] Shortly
after this on 26 March 2025 the Appellant lodged his grievance because of the
issue identified in the preceding paragraph.
[97] The LAD was
provided to the Appellant by Mr Mann on 3 June 2025.
[98] In terms of
the process leading up to that decision, as noted earlier in these reasons for
decision, Mr Mann held meetings with
the Appellant and his support person on 14
April 2025 and 14 May 2025. In those meetings the Appellant was afforded the
opportunity
to provide additional information, and ask questions. Further, Mr
Mann was able to clarify the information that the Appellant had
provided in
support of the grievance.
addition, Mr Mann made enquiries with relevant business units to seek
information relevant to the issues raised by the Appellant
in the grievance. I
am satisfied that the process undertaken by Mr Mann leading to the LAD being
provided to the Appellant was fair
and reasonable.
Sutaria v State of Queensland (Queensland
Commissioner Pidgeon relevantly observed:
[58] While the FWA policy is framed in positive terms and places an onus on
decision-makers to attempt where possible to accommodate
reasonable requests,
the priority of the organisation must be to balance FWA requests
need to meet clinical responsibilities and
ensure that any FWA does not
result in a negative impact on the workplace or service
(Emphasis added)
[101] In the
LAD, Mr Mann confirms that the compressed working hours that had been approved,
and that a compressed hours arrangement
was a flexible work option that fell
within the scope of the
Flexible working arrangements HR Policy C5
Guideline for Flexible Working Arrangements
Guideline').
[102] I note
that in clause 2.1 of the Guideline, examples of flexible work options are
provided. These include the following:
Description
When we work
Compressed working hours
A formal arrangement where normal, full-time hours are worked (e.g. 36
hours 15 minutes or 38 hours per week) over fewer than normal
This arrangement is often used to work a nine-day fortnight.
should be considered when implementing this arrangement.
Given that example, the conclusion of Mr Mann to the same effect, was fair
and reasonable.
[103] In the
LAD, Mr Mann addressed the fundamental grievance of the Appellant, that being
not being able to utilise flex time on
Friday and instead having this recorded
as a rostered day off. Mr Mann noted as follows:
As discussed with you in the meeting on 14 May 2025, I have received advice
from HR Advisory Services and from Workplace Relations
and Policy team that
confirms the most appropriate course of action for compressed working hours is
to ensure the system aligns with
the work hours and days recorded on your FWA
for the following reasons:
To ensure you
are paid correctly in line with the days and hours you are actually working.
you are paid
7:36 hours Monday to Thursday, when you actually work 9:30 hours on each of
those days.
you are paid
7:36 hours on a Friday, however you do not work Fridays.
To ensure you
are paid correctly when you take leave and on public holidays.
Currently, when
you take leave or there is a public holiday, you are only paid 7:36 hours, which
then leads to insufficient flex accrual
during the week to take the Friday
resulted in you accumulating a flex deficit on your timesheet of greater than
the allowed four hours.
It is then very
difficult for you to resolve the deficit because the hours you work during the
week only accrue enough to take the
[104] I further
note, as recorded in the correspondence from Ms Best sent by email on 14 March
2025, that at that time the Appellant
had a debit balance (deficit) of ten hours
in his flex time.
[105] Mr Mann
also confirmed that changing the Appellant's hours in the system to accurately
reflect the days and hours worked was
not a permanent change to the Appellant's
employment contract. Mr Mann noted that the Appellant's employment contract with
Health and his employment conditions remained the same. The
information provided by Mr Mann was in my view completely correct and
and reasonable.
[106] The LAD
further noted that the change to the Appellant's work pattern within myHR was to
support his approved FWA and that he
could request changes to the FWA and the
work pattern in the future if required, in consultation with the Appellant's
line manager.
[107] Mr Mann
ultimately reached the following conclusion in the LAD:
After considering all of the information before me, I have decided that your
approved FWA and compressed working hours, consisting
of Monday to Thursday 6am
to 4pm with Fridays off, must be formally recorded in myHR. I will arrange for
Ms Best to process the appropriate
form in myHR.
In relation to the outcomes you were seeking, I confirm that:
I do not support
the FWA to continue as it has been (using flex to accrue a day off) and as per
my decision above, the compressed
working hours must be formally recorded in
I am supportive
of the FWA being made on an ongoing basis, subject to review.
Ms Best and Mr
Hanscomb hold the appropriate delegation to approve flexible work arrangements
for employees occupying positions at
other classification levels as per
delegation 17.2 of the Department of Health HR Delegations Manual. Based on this
and given my
decision above, I support Ms Best and Mr Hanscomb to make the
decision on your FWA.
Dudley v State of Queensland (Office of Industrial
Commissioner Dwyer noted in relation to
[45] There is a right of employees contained in
for an FWA. There is no right (in the
or elsewhere) to
an FWA. That legal reality must be borne in mind as the
starting point for any submission made by an employee dissatisfied with an
employer's decision to refuse their specific FWA
[109] Industrial
Commissioner Dwyer went on to confirm that whilst FWAs are an increasingly
popular and accessible feature in employment
relationships, they remain a matter
for mutual agreement between an employer and employee and the discretion to
grant or deny an
FWA remains with the
[110] I do not
accept the Appellant's attempt to distinguish
on its facts. The
observations of Industrial Commissioner Dwyer highlighted immediately above, are
of general application and very
much arise from the clear wording of
Hardy v Queensland (Dept of Environment and
Commissioner Dwyer once again in determining a public sector appeal arising from
the refusal of an FWA application by
Ms Hardy confirmed that the right of an
employee to ask for an FWA is enshrined in the
. Dwyer IC went on to note
that beyond the obligation to consider the request and not unreasonably refuse
it, there was no obligation
for a request to be
[112] There was
evidence available to both the original decision-maker, Ms Best, and also to Mr
Mann that confirmed that there had
been issues with the Appellant's timesheets
because of the current arrangements and the use of flex. There was evidence
to both decision-makers that this had caused the Appellant to have an
excessive debit flex balance.
medical certificate from Dr Stewart did in my view indicate that it may be
problematic in terms of the Appellant's mental
health functioning if he was
required to work on Fridays. Because of this, there was a genuine work, health
and safety issue involved
with the Appellant working on Fridays that had to be
addressed by the Respondent in approving the FWA in the form sought by the
[114] Ms Best in
the correspondence dated 14 March 2025 also identifies that the Appellant had on
occasions been working in excess
of ten hours a day in order to decrease his
debit flex balance. This in my view also represented a health and safety risk
Respondent that was required to be addressed.
decision to formalise the FWA arrangement in myHR as a compressed working hours
arrangement was in my view a fair and reasonable
decision. Further, given the
difficulties that had been experienced with the flex arrangement, I am satisfied
that it was fair and
reasonable for the FWA to be approved with the conditions
identified in paragraphs [90] and [107] above. I am satisfied that the
Respondent has appropriately balanced the Appellant's FWA requests with the
Respondent's interests and obligations as an employer.
satisfied that the Respondent, and Mr Mann in particular, have given proper,
careful and in-depth consideration to the
FWA proposed by the Appellant.
[117] Mr Mann's
decision appropriately informed the Appellant of his appeal rights and also
appropriately addressed the Appellant's
human rights. Finally, the LAD also
informed the Appellant about how to access employee assistance.
[118] It is
clear that the Appellant is disappointed with the outcome of his FWA request and
that he perceives that he will be disadvantaged
by some aspects of the decision
to formalise his compressed working hours arrangement. This is not enough to
establish that the LAD
was unfair and unreasonable.
[119] In all of
the circumstances, and for the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that the
deemed decision was fair and reasonable.
[120] I make the
following orders:
Pursuant to
s 562C(1)(a)
Industrial Relations Act
deemed review decision is confirmed.
appeal is dismissed.
Respondent's submissions filed 8 August 2025,
Attachment 6.
Ibid, Attachment
Ibid, Attachment
Ibid, Attachment
Respondent's submissions (n
1), Attachment 17.
9.2(f) of the
Respondent's
submissions (n 1), Attachment
Goodall v State of
(Supreme Court of Queensland, Dalton J, 10 October 2018), 5;
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Brandy v Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Industrial Relations
Page v John Thompson and Lesley Dwyer, As Chief Executive Officer, West
Moreton Hospital and Health Service
[2014] QSC 252
, [60]-[61] (Byrne
State of Queensland (Office of Industrial Relations)
[2023] QIRC 212
[2023] QIRC
Appellant's reply
submissions filed 14 August 2025: Attachment 4; Respondent's submissions,
Attachment 13.
[2022] QIRC 16.
Ibid, at [25], citing
Pope v Lawler
[1996] FCA 1446.
[21]-[22] and [25].
Ibid, at [23] citing
Goodall v State of Queensland
(Unreported decision of the Supreme Court
of Queensland, Dalton J, 10 October 2018), 5 as to the former, equivalent
provisions in
Public Service Act
[2025] QIRC
Ibid, [9] and
Queensland (Queensland Health) v Hume (No. 3)
[2024] ICQ 3
, [78]-[79]
Schubert v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2024] QIRC 128
Malcolm v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2024] QIRC 97
[195]-[200].
v State of Queensland (Department of Agriculture and Fisheries)
[2022] QIRC
, [79]-[83], [85], which cited
Wirth v Mackay HHS & Anor
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v WZARH
(2015) 256 CLR 326, [35]-[36], [57], [61];
Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; ex parte Lam
(2003) 214 CLR
Respondent's
submissions (n 1): Attachment
Respondent's submissions
(n 1): Attachment 4.
Attachment 6.
Respondent's
submissions (n 1): Attachment
[2023] QIRC
Ibid, [58] per
Industrial Commissioner
Respondent's
submissions: Attachment 16 Local Action Decision dated 3 June
[2023] QIRC
Ibid, [45] per
Industrial Commissioner Dwyer.
Ibid, [46] per Industrial
Commissioner Dwyer.
Queensland (Dept of Environment and Science)
[2022] QIRC 480
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (368 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter