URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QADT/2009/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Whitlock v Bunnings, DP and DF [2009] QADT 14 (22 May 2009)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL QUEENSLAND
Whitlock v Bunnings, DP and DF
[2009] QADT 14
KERRI WHITLOCK
Complainant
BUNNINGS PTY LTD
First Respondent
Second Respondent
Third Respondent
HEA05/188 and HEA07/47
PROCEEDING:
Application for costs.
DELIVERED ON:
22 May 2009
DELIVERED AT:
President DA Savage S.C.
HEARING DATE:
14 May 2009
1. That the First and Third Respondents pay the
Complainant’s costs on an indemnity basis in the sum of $132,818.65 within
days of the date of this order.
2. That the disclosure of the identity of the Second and Third Respondents
is prohibited.
CATCHWORDS:
Costs – indemnity costs – where respondent knew or ought
reasonably to have known the complainant was likely to succeed.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Anti-Discrimination Act
REPRESENTATION:
Ken Watson instructed by Susan Moriarty Solicitors for the complainant.
John Dwyer for the first and second respondents.
THE COMPLAINT AND THE FINDINGS
Ms Whitlock
complained to the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner that she had been sexually
harassed by two employees of the First Respondent,
Bunnings Group Limited
(“Bunnings”).
matter proceeded to conciliation in the Commission. By the time of the
conciliation two further complaints of sexual harassment
had been made against
one of the two Bunnings employees the subject of the complaint. The
conciliation failed.
Ms Whitlock’s election her unconciliated complaint was referred to
the Tribunal for hearing and determination.
further conciliation conference was convened by order of this Tribunal; that too
was unsuccessful.
hearing was conducted before a member of the Tribunal over eight days. The
member decided that Ms Whitlock had been subjected to
various acts of which
she complained. The member held that as against one of the Bunnings Group
employees that amounted to sexual
harassment and as against the other it did
not. That later decision was based upon a finding the second employee had
shown to Ms Whitlock a website which contained pornographic
images but that that employee should not reasonably have anticipated
particular website would hold such images.
and that employee should regard themselves as extremely fortunate to have
obtained such a finding of fact since the case
put to Ms Whitlock was that
she was not telling the truth when she claimed that the website had displayed
pornographic images. It
was never suggested to Ms Whitlock by any of the
Respondents that the pornographic images she had seen were the unintentional
consequence
of the employee opening that website for her. That finding was
contrary to both Ms Whitlock’s case and the case advanced by
the Respondents.
Ms Whitlock
also made two claims of victimisation against Bunnings. To some extent (but
only for reasons of the health of one of
the Respondents during the course of
the hearing for which Ms Whitlock cannot be held responsible) those matters
were dealt with
separately. Both claims of victimisation failed.
SOME DISCRETIONARY FACTORS
was a significant debate before me at a hearing convened to consider the costs
question as to whether or not a reasonable person
in the position of the
Complainant should have prosecuted or continued to prosecute the victimisation
complaints. The costs of the
victimisation complaints were sought against
Ms Whitlock.
hearing of this complaint went too long. The victimisation issue may have made
a long hearing longer but that was only because
the principal complaint could
not be heard due to the ill health of a party. This is not a case in which I
would consider making
separate costs orders in respect to the separate parts of
the complainant’s case that succeeded and failed. In my view the
Complainant substantially succeeded in the factual propositions that she put up
as to her original complaint of sexual harassment
and was reasonably entitled to
think that she had been the subject of victimisation having made that complaint.
think apart from the above observations there is substance in the
Complainant’s assertion that Bunnings did not disclose all
relevant to the case of victimisation, and in any event, dealt with that issue
poorly prior to the hearing. Had all the
documents eventually disclosed been
disclosed initially and the matter the subject of sensible negotiation, it may
not have been
reasonably pursued. That was not however the case.
submit that the Complainant should not recover her costs of the complaint but
should instead be ordered to pay its costs
for all or a significant part of the
proceedings. Apart from pointing to the circumstances which I have already
mentioned and rejected
Respondents’ submissions are based largely on what are said to be offers
to settle significantly more attractive than the result Ms Whitlock has now
RUNNING UP LEGAL COSTS
the hearing in this matter had been finalised, the Tribunal made various changes
to its practices designed to narrow issues
of fact in dispute and more directly
address questions of costs that might be incurred in the hearing of those
factual disputes.
This case is an illustration that further limitation is
needed to be placed on the parties and their legal representatives in cases
which on any view, as here, an award of $25,000 or thereabouts was likely to be
I was told by Counsel, did not at any stage mount a positive case that sexual
harassment had not occurred. Bunnings put
no offer to Ms Whitlock who was
at all times represented by solicitors in an amount which expressly included an
amount of assessed
legal costs. As far as I can see Bunnings did not make an
offer to Ms Whitlock in an all up sum which was in fact more than her
actual legal costs at any particular date.
understand from submissions made by counsel for Bunnings who was directly
briefed by the human resources department of that company,
that Bunnings’
costs itself might be as high as $80,000. The Complainant’s costs have
now exceeded $130,000. The costs
of the parties would have been higher still
had Bunnings been required to employ a firm of solicitors in addition to
directly briefing
counsel as Ms Whitlock did.
sum approaching $250,000 has been applied by the parties in the pursuit of an
award which was and was always likely to be $25,000.
This wasteful application
of resources is scandalous.
THE TRIBUNAL’S ROLE
Tribunal was created to provide a venue for the inexpensive and expeditious
resolution of disputes of this type. The rights given
under the Act to people
in Ms Whitlock’s position as an ordinary member of our community
become theoretical, if they cannot
obtain a vindication of those rights other
than by risking what on any view must be a goodly portion of an ordinary
available assets.
THE PARTIES AND THEIR
I were to order as Bunnings submit, the consequence for Ms Whitlock in
succeeding in her case and vindicating her serious complaints
harassment against that company would be that she pay her own legal
practitioners and Bunnings a sum of money somewhere
between $150,000 and
$200,000 having reasonably prosecuted the claim and substantially succeeded in
proving it. I do not propose
to do so. That would work a manifest injustice on
Ms Whitlock.
case was carried on by Bunnings at great expense. It is a large and well
resourced corporation. The application of its resources
is, and always was, far
less significant to Bunnings than it was to Ms Whitlock. It smacks of
oppression to Ms Whitlock that the
matters continued in such circumstances
given the probable result and award. It was at least implied by Bunnings that
was more then was expected. To my mind it appears modest.
have not overlooked the fact that Ms Whitlock’s lawyer obtained fees
of $130,000 or more (including outlays) to obtain an
award for their client of
$24,000. Reasonable minds might wonder about the comparative benefits to
Ms Whitlock and to her lawyers
in continuing these proceedings through an
eight day hearing given the very real prospect that Ms Whitlock might not
recover all
her costs and thus might lose a significant part of her compensation
in legal fees. That does not however reflect poorly on Ms Whitlock.
have not concluded in the instant matter that either side has acted in an
improper way or as importantly that either side’s
lawyers have acted in an
improper way. Neither side would give in nor could either side despite the
seniority and experience of
their representation manage to find a suitable
compromise. That should not have been the case and the Tribunal in this case
have seen to it that it was not the case. But someone must now meet
these costs. I have no power to award the costs against the
lawyers or to
prevent the lawyer’s recovery of costs from their clients (as might a
Judge). If I had such a power this case
would have been a good case to consider
its exercise.
the hearing of the original complaints, even more costs have been incurred in
completing voluminous submissions about the quantum
of and liability for costs.
The reason for and purpose of the original proceedings have long since given way
to what the lawyers
in the case obviously see as the real issue: who should pay
RELEVANT DISCRETIONARY FACTORS
do not regard the offers made by Bunnings to settle the proceedings as being
more favourable to Ms Whitlock than the result that
she has obtained. Even
if I was capable of ascertaining that those offers were more favourable, it
would not have any substantial
effect on the exercise of my discretion in this
case since the offers were not obviously so. It also does not affect my
whether the offers are properly to be regarded (as Bunnings submitted)
offers made under the
Anti-Discrimination Act
Act”) or as offers of compromise made outside the provisions of that Act.
The fact is, those offers were not
offers obviously more favourable to
Ms Whitlock than the result and it was more than reasonable for her not to
have acted upon any
Ms Whitlock
should have her costs of the proceedings as against Bunnings and the Third
Respondent, and of all the issues in the case
including those that involved the
Second Respondent.
do not propose to make a costs order in favour of the Second Respondent.
have been provided with two assessments: both on District Court scale as prima
facie required under the provisions of the Act; one
on an indemnity basis and
one on a standard basis. I was told by counsel for Bunnings that there is no
issue as to the assessment
in general but subsequent submissions sent to me
after the hearing about costs sought to exclude certain costs from the
assessments.
I mentioned above, I do not propose to exclude any of those items on any of the
bases contended for by Bunnings in their extensive
written submissions.
difference between standard and indemnity costs is some $30,000. This might be
regarded as indicating the comparatively small
component of what used to be
termed solicitor/client costs in the overall costs of running the
proceedings.
I am assured that there is no basis to challenge the assessment, there is no
reason for me to investigate individual items in
the assessment. In any event,
it is a case where I would make a global assessment of the costs relying upon
the calculation in the
assessment.
have concluded that Bunnings and the Third Respondent should pay
Ms Whitlock’s costs on an indemnity basis. The Third
Respondent’s
case was exposed at the hearing as being untrue. I can only
think that it was deliberately untrue. Both the Second and Third Respondent
gave sworn evidence which was found to be false. Bunnings made no positive case
and made no offer at all to apologise or take any
other steps to alleviate
Ms Whitlock’s hurt. It made insignificant offers of compensation and
costs in a case which it knew
or ought reasonably to have known would be most
likely to succeed. It had the financial capacity to run the case to its end and
must be taken to have known of the probable financial consequences to
Ms Whitlock of running the case for eight days. It put Ms
Whitlock to
the trouble and expense and distress of an eight day hearing. There are many
factors relevant to the exercise of a discretion
as to costs. Properly viewed,
I think, that the critical factor in resolving the cost consequences here is
what I regard objectively
as the entirely unreasonable nature of Bunnings
approach to the complaint in consequence of which an enormous sum of money has
been squandered. It would have remunerated Ms Whitlock nearly ten
times over without the further stress, humiliation and hurt associated
these proceedings.
order that Bunnings Group Limited and the Third Respondent pay to the
Complainant Ms Whitlock the sum of $132,818.65 within twenty-eight
the date of this order.
Douglas Savage
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal Queensland
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (412 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter