URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIC/2009/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:38:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dean Coggins v CEC Constructions [2009] QIC 29; 192 QGIG 71 (24 September 2009)
[Extract from Queensland Government Industrial
dated 2 October, 2009, Vol. 192, No. 5, pages
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Workplace Health and
Safety Act 1995
- s. 164(3) - appeal against decision of industrial
Dean Allan Coggins AND CEC Constructions Pty Ltd
(C/2009/21)
PRESIDENT HALL
24 September 2009
On 7 November 2008, Dean Allan Coggins, a Public Officer within the meaning
of s. 142A of the
Justices Act 1886
and an inspector duly appointed under
the provisions of the
Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995
complaint before a Justice of the Peace. The offence alleged was:
"... that on the 23rd day of November 2007 at False Cape, Yarrabah, in the
Magistrates Courts District of Cairns, CEC CONSTRUCTIONS
PTY LTD being a person
on whom a workplace health and safety obligation is imposed did fail to
discharge the obligation contrary
to section 24 of the said Act in that CEC
CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LTD being a relevant person who conducts a business or
undertaking did
fail to ensure each of the person's workers were not affected by
the conduct of its business or undertaking.".
Particulars were given:
Particulars
Worker: Dudley Anderson
Workplace: Reef Cove Construction Site, Yarrabah, Qld 4871
or undertaking: Construction
Risk: The risk is the risk of injury, including the risk of death or
grievous bodily harm injuries to DUDLEY ANDERSON EHAU
Hazard(s): The source of the risk emanates from:
(a) The system of work
to excavate rock and/or
(b) The use of plant, namely, a CAT 330 excavator to excavate rock.
Contrary to such Act and Regulation in such case made and provided ...".
A circumstance of aggravation was alleged,
, that the breach
caused the death of Dudley Anderson Ehau.
Prior to the start of the trial, the defendant made an application to the
learned Industrial Magistrate hearing the complaint for
a direction under s. 83A
Justices Act 1886
requiring the complainant to provide particulars
or, alternatively, disclosure of any Regulation(s), Ministerial Notice(s) or
of Practice that it intends to contend will have application to the
proceedings.
On 27 April 2009, the Industrial Magistrate delivered His
Honour's Decision and issued the following directions:
"I direct that the prosecution disclose to the defendant within 14 days of
this date any regulation, ministerial notice or code of
practice that it alleges
is made relevant by section 26
Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995
which it intends to rely upon to prove its case against the defendant.
I also direct that the prosecution disclose to the defendant within 14 days
of this date any regulation, ministerial notice or code
of practice that it
alleges is made relevant to the circumstances of this case for any reason and
which it intends to produce to
the Court at the hearing.".
The Complainant now appeals against those directions.
has consistently held that s. 164(3) of the
Workplace Health and Safety Act
is sufficiently broad to encompass "a final decision whether or not of
an interlocutory kind", see
Jawatts Bakery v Lang
[1999] QIC 66
(1999) 162 QGIG 408
NQEA Australia Pty Ltd v Dare
[2003] QIC 174
(2003) 175 QGIG 17
[2005] QIC 29
(2005) 179 QGIG 142.
The orders which are the subject of this
Appeal are not of that character. The orders are entirely procedural in nature,
the conduct of the proceedings before the Industrial Magistrate and may be
revisited by the Industrial Magistrate. I accept that
it follows from the
definition of "person dissatisfied with a decision in proceedings" at Schedule 5
Industrial Relations Act 1999
, that s. 341(2) of that Act
authorises appeals against interlocutory decisions of Industrial Magistrates
which lack the element of
finality. However, with respect to Counsel for the
complainant, s. 164 of the
Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995
Industrial Relations Act 1999
to appeals "brought under" s. 164(3) of
Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995
and does not seek to expand the
appeals which may be brought under s. 164(3).
In any event, the
application to the Industrial Magistrate was made pursuant to s. 83A of the
Justices Act 1886
and the directions were issued pursuant to s. 83A(5).
Section 83A(5) expressly bars an interlocutory appeal against such directions.
Sammon v Rutherford
does not contain any suggestion to
the contrary.
Sammon v Rutherford, op. cit.
was a case in which an
Industrial Magistrate (correctly) refused to issue directions.
for the complainant submits that this is an appropriate case in which to grant
prerogative relief pursuant to s. 248(1)(e)
Industrial Relations
. The grant of relief pursuant to s. 248(1)(e) involves the
exercise of discretion. In ordinary circumstances, the Court should
relief pursuant to s. 248(1)(e) to reverse a decision by the Legislature to bar
an appeal. Section 83A(7) of the
Justices Act 1886
does not, it must be
remembered, bar an appeal in perpetuity. The grant of a direction may be raised
in an appeal against conviction
or sentence. Only an interlocutory appeal is
barred. The difficulty is that the Industrial Magistrates Court is a court of
creation. It has only such powers as are conferred on it by express
words or necessary implication. Further, by s. 289 of the
Relations Act 1999
, the Industrial Magistrates Court is a court of record
not a superior court of record. It follows that the Industrial Magistrates
Court may not determine its own jurisdiction. Here, the directions orders are
said to have been made in excess of jurisdiction.
Section 83A of the
Justices Act 1886
provides as follows:
83A Direction
(1) This section applies to a proceeding for an offence.
(2) A magistrate, on his or her own initiative, may direct the parties to the
proceeding to attend at a direction hearing.
(3) A party to the proceeding may apply to a court, in the approved form, for
a direction hearing.
(4) The party must serve a copy of the filed application on each other party
at least 2 clear days before the day nominated for the
direction hearing, unless
the court directs otherwise.
(5) At a direction hearing, a magistrate may give a direction he or she is
entitled to make at law about any aspect of the conduct
of the proceeding,
including, for example, about any of the following -
(aa) disclosing a thing under the Criminal Code, chapter 62, chapter division
(a) a party providing a copy of -
(i) a medical, psychiatric or other expert report; or
(ii) a statement, report or other stated information relevant to the
proceeding;
(b) psychiatric or other medical examination of the defendant;
(c) joining complaints;
(d) receiving evidence or submissions by telephone, video link or other form
of communication;
(e) issuing a summons or warrant;
(f) changing the usual practice of the court in a way that helps an alleged
victim of the offence to give evidence in the proceeding;
(g) if the proceeding is a committal proceeding -
(i) the arrangements necessary for the giving of evidence by an affected
child witness under the
Evidence Act 1977
, part 2, division 4A; or
(ii) cross-examining a protected witness under the
Evidence Act 1977
part 2, division 6.
(5A) In a summary proceeding, a magistrate may give a direction under
subsection (5)(a) about prosecution disclosure, despite subsection
(5)(aa) and
section 41.
(6) A direction is binding unless a magistrate, for special reason, gives
leave to reopen the direction.
(7) A direction must not be subject to interlocutory appeal but may raised as
a ground of appeal against conviction or sentence.
(8) To remove any doubt, it is declared that costs are not payable on a
direction hearing in relation to an offence dealt with by
way of committal
proceeding.
(9) In this section -
direction hearing
means a hearing before the court for a
direction about the conduct of the proceeding.".
The Court was called upon to construe s. 83A in
Sammon v Rutherford
. At page 143 the Court said:
"I quite accept the submission of Mr Perry SC that s. 83A(5) may be read as
if 'including' was preceded by a semi-colon rather than
a comma. But the words
'at a direction hearing, a magistrate may give a direction he or she is entitled
to make at law about any
aspect of the conduct of the proceeding' are not apt to
confer power to issue directions. The role of the words is to make plain
the power vested includes power to make any direction the magistrate is
otherwise entitled to make as well as the directions
in the inclusive list. And
at no time has any power other than that at s. 83A5(aa) been identified.".
Senior Counsel for the Defendant submits that the Court should abandon
that construction and adopt the view that the introductory
words do indeed vest
power to give a direction, and that the words "entitled to make at law" are
intended to limit the power to give
a direction in those cases in which the
giving of directions is otherwise legislatively precluded. Reliance is placed
upon the decision
of the Court of Appeal in
Higgins v Comans Acting
Magistrate and DPP (Qld)
[2005] QCA 234.
In my view the reliance is
Higgins v Comans Acting Magistrate and DPP (Qld)
, concerned a stated case which raised the question whether the
Magistrates Court had the power to grant a stay of proceedings in
relation to
the examination of witnesses on a committal hearing. The Court of Appeal found
Justices Act 1886
contained no such express power and in
reliance on
Grassby v R
[1989] HCA 45
(1989) 168 CLR 1
, held that such a power might
not be implied. Counsel for Higgins sought to meet those findings by relying on
the introductory words
of s. 83A. As to that submission, Keane JA at paragraph
[21] observed:
"Further, the appellant's reliance on the general terms of s 83A(5) to bring
a permanent stay of committal proceedings within the
category of directions
which the magistrate is 'entitled to make at law about any aspect of the conduct
of the proceeding' is essentially
circular. The submission begs the question of
what directions the magistrate is entitled to give at law in relation to
proceedings. Reference to s 108 of the
Justices Act 1886
effectively circumscribes the magistrate's function 'at law' in this regard
as I will explain below.".
The comment that the argument was "entirely
circular" seems to me to convey that the "general terms" required the Court to
again on the task which the Court had already undertaken,
the search for an express or necessarily
implied power.
the submission of Senior Counsel for the Defendant that the construction which I
have placed upon s. 83A of the
Justices Act 1886
does not sit well with
the Explanatory Notes to the Bill which introduced s. 83A,
Law Amendment Bill 2002. Explanatory Notes may sometimes be overly
enthusiastic. It is not legitimate to fondle the words
of a statute to achieve
the ambition disclosed by the Explanatory Note.
I should say that I
regret the conclusion to which I have come. The directions issued by the
Industrial Magistrate seem to me to
be eminently sensible and moderate.
Regulations, Ministerial Notices and Codes of Practice do vary over time. It is
entirely useful
if parties to proceedings under the
Workplace Health and
Safety Act 1995
can agree upon the versions relevant to the proceedings.
However, that regret is no justification for withholding relief where there
been an excess of jurisdiction.
I quash the directions issued by the
Industrial Magistrate on 17 April 2009 in the matter of
Dean Allan Coggins
AND CEC Constructions Pty Ltd
, LFR: CAIR-MAG-11754/08, FILE NO:
MAG-212593/08(7).
Dated 24 September 2009.
D.R. HALL, President
Released: 24 September
Appearances:
Mr G. Lee of Legal and Prosecution Services,
Workplace Health and Safety Queensland, for the Appellant.
Mr R. Douglas SC
instructed by DLA Phillips Fox as Town Agents for Miller Harris Lawyers, for the
Respondent.
Government Printer, Queensland
The State of
Queensland 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (54.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter