URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2003/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Friday's Riverside, Ashgrove [2003] QLAT 9 (4 December 2002)
FIRST APPELLANT
SECOND APPELLANT:
Michael Dempsey
Glen William Kolpak
FIRST RESPONDENT:
Chief Executive, Department of Tourism Racing and Fair Trading, including
Liquor Licensing
SECOND RESPONDENT
(APPLICANT)
Weller Hotels & Taverns Pty Ltd
APPEAL NUMBERS
9 & 10 of 2002/2003
PROPOSED PREMISES
Detached bottle shop at Shop 4, 480 Waterworks Rd, Ashgrove
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST
Grant of application for a detached bottle shop
HEARING DATE:
11 November 2002
Mrs G Spender (Presiding Member)
Mrs J Harrington
Dr M O’Donnell
DECISION DATE
4 December 2002
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1 On 28 February 2002, Weller Hotels and Taverns Pty Ltd (“the
applicant”) lodged an application for a detached bottle
operated under the general licence in respect of Friday’s, 123 Eagle
Street, Brisbane, and to be situated at Shop
4, 480 Waterworks Road, Ashgrove.
The proposed trading hours were seven (7) days per week from 10.00am to
12.00midnight.
2 The application was advertised pursuant to
s.118(1)(b)
Liquor Act 1992
(“the Act”) and 25 amenity objections, 21 of which included public
interest issues, and one submission on public interest
alone, were received.
3 The Brisbane City Council (“the Council”) and the Assistant
Commissioner of Police, Metropolitan North Region, were
asked to comment on the
application pursuant to
of the Act. The police did not object but the
Council did object on the basis of the concerns of the local member, Councillor
that a further bottle shop would saturate the area and that there was
limited availability of parking outside the proposed shop.
An objectors’
conference was convened but no resolution of the objectors’ concerns was
On 25 July 2002, the chief
executive determined to grant the application and the grounds for the decision
as advised to the Tribunal
were as follows:
“ The application met all Division requirements in terms of the premises
and information required to be supplied.
• The Assistant Commissioner of Police, Metropolitan North Region had no
objection to the application.
• The Chief Executive was satisfied that the amenity (in terms of
of the Act) would not be unduly affected.
• The Chief Executive was satisfied that it was in the public interest
pursuant to
Section 116
Liquor Act 1992
, for the application to be
5 By notices of appeal, both lodged on 30 August 2002, the appellants instituted
the present appeals.
PRELIMINARY ISSUE
6 At the commencement of the hearing before the Tribunal, counsel for the
applicant formally objected to the appearance of the first
appellant on the
ground that he was not a “member of the public” as defined in
and that his objection, not being a valid objection, was not capable of
founding an appeal. Counsel argued that the address shown
on the letter of
objection lodged by the first appellant was 1 Musgrave Road, Red Hill, which is
the address of the Normanby Hotel.
The “Liquor Stop” detached
bottle shop situated at Unit 5, 486 Waterworks Road, approximately 50 metres
away from the
proposed premises, is operated under the general licence of the
Normanby Hotel. The licensee of that hotel is Warner Street Properties
a subsidiary company of The Grape Management Pty Ltd. Counsel argued that the
first appellant did not demonstrate in his
letter of objection that he had a
proper interest in the locality concerned or was likely to be affected by the
grant of the application.
7 Leave was granted to the first appellant to lead evidence that he was in fact
an employee of the “Liquor Stop” shop
and that he would be
inconvenienced as a person who works in the locality by the increased parking
and traffic problems which would
arise out of the establishment of the proposed
8 The Tribunal ruled that it was satisfied on the basis of the fresh evidence
adduced by the first appellant that he did have a proper
interest in the
locality in terms of
s.119(5)(a)
and (b), was therefore a “member of the
public” entitled to object pursuant to
, and was therefore
entitled to appeal pursuant to
s.30(1)(a)(i).
It is the Tribunal’s
experience that objectors whose residential address given in their letter of
objection is clearly not
within the relevant locality often fail to appreciate
that they must in those circumstances state, if their objection is to be valid,
that they work or do business or travel through the locality and are likely to
be affected in some particular way.
9 We consider that fairness requires that such an objector who seeks to be heard
before the Tribunal, whether as an appellant/objector
or not, should be granted
leave to adduce evidence to establish the necessary proper interest in the
locality and the likelihood
of being affected, rather than being refused
outright the right to be heard. However if no evidence is adduced to establish
a particular objector has a proper interest in the locality, and if the
Tribunal is unable to infer from the stated address that
an objector would be
likely to travel or do business in the locality, then the Tribunal is clearly
entitled to regard an objection
which does not on its face establish a proper
interest in the locality as an invalid objection and to disregard the objection
in the case of that objector’s appeal, to dismiss the
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
10 An application for approval of a detached bottle shop pursuant to
of the Act is one to which public interest is relevant pursuant to
s.116(1)(b).
Pursuant to
the application must satisfy the Tribunal that is in the
pubic interest for the application to be granted. If so satisfied, the
must then have regard to the matters specified in
s.121(5)(b)
, (c), (d), and (f)
respectively, which are objections made to the grant of the application;
comments from the local government for
the area to which the application
relates; comments from the assistant commissioner of police for the relevant
locality; and the
impact on the amenity of the community concerned.
PROPOSED PREMISES
11 The proposed bottle shop will be situated in Shop 4, 480 Waterworks Road,
Ashgrove in a large strip shopping complex known as
the Ashgrove West Shopping
Centre, which comprises a variety of tenancies including Australia Post,
plumbers and electricians, bakery,
Ashgrove Well Being Centre, real estate
agents, picture framing business, photographic business, Ashgrove 7 Day
Convenience Store,
Red Rooster, one café and two pizza outlets,
newsagency, butcher, cycle shop, chemist and the “Liquor Stop”
shop on one side of Waterworks Road, and florist, hairdresser,
laundromat, drapery, doctor, dentist and physiotherapy practices on
side of the road. There are ten tenancies between the “Liquor Stop”
bottle shop and the proposed premises.
12 Waterworks Road, which is a one-way street out-bound at the subject site, is
a major arterial road carrying traffic to and from
Brisbane City. The applicant
states in its initial public interest submission to the Liquor Licensing
Division (“the Division”)
that the traffic operations section of the
Council has advised that the latest available 24 hour traffic count for the
intersection
of Waterworks Road and Jubilee Terrace, approximately 1 kilometre
from the subject premises, was 46,000 vehicles taken on 20 April
applicant submits that those figures demonstrate a significant volume of traffic
utilising Waterworks Road. It is further
submitted that given the comprehensive
mix of tenants within this shopping centre and the large amount of available
off-street carparking,
both in front of the shopping centre and in the two
separate carparks on the basement level, the Ashgrove West Shopping Centre is
extremely popular centre for both daily and weekly shopping needs as well as
professional services.
13 The applicant submits that the proposed bottle shop will attract local
residents as well as residents from suburbs further outbound
such as The Gap,
Ferny Grove and Samford, who commute to Brisbane for work, and travel past the
site on their way home from work.
It is also conveniently located for people
passing through Ashgrove and wishing to purchase food and liquor for leisure
at Mount Nebo and Mount Glorious.
14 In a further submission to the Division with respect to public interest
issues, Mr Nigel Kilvington, the general manager of Friday’s,
states that
at 150 square metres the proposed store will be substantially larger than all
detached bottle shops in the area with
the exception of the bottle shop at The
Gap Tavern. It will have extensive cold room facilities (approximately 20
doors) in order
to offer all champagnes, sparkling wines, white wines, beers,
RTD’s and soft beverages cold. It will offer superior service
checkouts and Eftpos facilities, and three staff at peak periods.
15 Mr Kilvington says that the applicant is part of the Queensland-owned
Champion Liquor Group which has over 50 outlets in South
East Queensland. He
says that the Division would no doubt be aware that Coles Myer and Woolworths
have entered the Queensland market
and that The Grape is now majority-owned and
controlled by the southern Theo’s Group.
16 Mr Kilvington explains his proposal and its place in the current packaged
liquor market in the following terms:
...This [Theo’s] group has opened a Theo’s Liquor on the Gold
Coast and more are planned. In effect The Grape has now
split its group and
developed 3 brands, Theo’s, The Grape and Bubbles. Theo’s is a bulk
discounter, Bubbles is a late
night convenience operation and The Grape stores
will continue to enhance their range of “House Brand” wines at the
of National and International brands.
Queensland’s largest Hotel Group ALH has in the past year re-badged its
outlets as The Fridge, a move which squarely places
these stores in the
convenience category. As ultimately these stores are owned by Fosters which
owns CUB & Berringer Blass,
the product ranging of these outlets is far from
inclusive. The Champion Group has seen great opportunity in these recent
developments
in Queensland, as well as the obvious challenges from such a flurry
of activity.
Should this application be successful, this store wil be branded as The Wine
Place. Simultaneously, several other of the Group’s
stores will be
re-branded and re-signaged.
Clearly this brand suggests a strong emphasis on wine and wine knowledge. We
have enclosed a draft product listing (wines) for your
consideration. Obviously
this list does not include many commonly available commercial wines which would
also be carried. We see
a great opportunity to range a very extensive selection
of overseas wines and believe we can take the mystery out of the various
European appellations.
The Wine Place will also place a great deal of emphasis on ranging of quality
glass and gift wear, with in house gift-wrapping service.
Beers and Spirits
will be treated with the same inclusive approach to ranging.
There is ample analytical and anecdotal evidence pointing to convenience as a
major factor in selecting a shopping destination, especially
when there is
little or no differentiation.
To attract custom from a larger area a superior product must be offered and we
believe The Wine Place, by virtue of its superior
facilities ranging and
informed staff, will entice patronage from Petrie Terrace to The Gap. The
Friday’s Riverside Wine Store
is well known in the trade as the highest
volume outlet of premium wines and Riedel glass wear, and it is with this
expertise we
believe we can launch a new and exciting retail brand into the
PUBLIC INTEREST
17 There is no dispute on the material before us that the primary locality is
the suburb of Ashgrove but, as the proposed premises
is situated on a major
arterial road, the relevant locality also comprises a secondary locality of St
John’s Wood, the Gap,
Bardon and Enoggera. In addition, the relevant
locality in our view also includes a district catchment area beyond The Gap,
the areas of Ferny Hills, Samford, Mount Nebo and Mount
18 The population of the suburb of Ashgrove in 2001 was 11,336 persons according
to the most recent figures available from the Australian
Bureau of Statistics.
The total residential population for the suburbs of Ashgrove, Bardon, Enoggera
and The Gap according to Australian
Bureau of Statistics figures was 40,173
persons in 1996.
19 Within the suburb of Ashgrove there are three existing detached bottle shops.
The “Liquor Stop” store referred to
earlier, and situated
approximately 50 metres from the proposed site in the Ashgrove West Shopping
Centre, has trading hours 10.00am
to 9.00pm Monday to Sunday. The applicant
contends that this bottle shop has an old appearance by comparison to more
recently opened
bottle shops and has a congested layout. Wine bottles are
displayed in open cardboard boxes and stacked on top of unopened boxes
Shelving is limited. Cartons of beer are stacked against the wall in the rear
left hand corner of the premises. Associated
products, such as chips and soft
drinks are also available. While the range of products is reasonably extensive,
the focus appears
to be on the low to medium variety of wines, averaging in
price from $6.00-$15.00 per bottle, and generic brands of beer and spirits.
S Tofilau, Liquor Licensing officer, who inspected the premises, confirms that
these premises have an older appearance but have
a reasonably extensive range of
liquor available. Mr P Reinhold, also a Liquor Licensing officer, inspected
this store and he describes
its condition as “good” with a fit out
in accord with the standard suburban detached bottle shop and a range of product
typical for its specification with a reasonable range of wine.
20 Located one kilometre from the proposed premises is a “The
Fridge” detached bottle shop located in a small convenience
centre on the
same side of Waterworks Road as the proposed premises but towards the city.
This detached bottle shop is well laid
out and reasonably up-market in
appearance offering a wide selection of wines, beer and spirits. This premises
is convenient to
patrons travelling on Waterworks Road. The trading hours are
10.00am to 12.00 midnight Monday to Sunday.
21 The third existing detached bottle shop in the suburb of Ashgrove is a
McGuire’s brand store which is part of the Ashgrove
Shopping Village on
the corner of Harry Street and Stewart’s Road. It is also well laid out
with a large selection of medium
and premium wines and champagnes available
under refrigeration. The premises includes an alcove where medium and premium
are displayed. This premises is located in an extended shopping
centre incorporating a Coles store. Trading hours are 10.00am
to 12.00midnight
Monday to Sunday.
22 The other licensed premises in Ashgrove are three on-premises (meals)
licences and two clubs, Ashgrove Bowls Club and Ashgrove
Services and Community
Club. There is no hotel in this suburb.
23 With respect to the demographics of Ashgrove we accept the findings of Mr
Reinhold that the suburb can be described as middle
class to upper middle class.
The median individual income levels in 1996 were above the state average but not
dramatically so. The
median individual income level had improved slightly by
the 2001 census. There has been only a very small increase in population
suburb over the five year period between 1996 and 2001.
24 With respect to the likely health and social impact that granting the
application would have on the population of the locality,
we accept Mr
Reinhold’s assessment that there are no sensitive sites or sub communities
in close proximity to the proposed
premises. We also accept his assessment
“With improving income levels and with other demographics on a par with a
state average, it may be concluded that the demographics
of the area do not
reveal any particular vulnerability that would suffer with the addition of
another premises, particularly a relatively
low level risk proposal such as a
detached bottle shop in a commercial and retail
25 However, Mr Reinhold expressed a view in his report of 21 June 2002 that it
was not in the public interest for detached bottle
shops to exist in a highly
competitive environment such as would exist if the present application were
approved. He claims that
as a new premises takes market share from existing
premises, the existing premises reduce their range of services rather than
the services offered, and if the situation becomes untenable, one will
be forced to close with the resultant trauma of failed business
and loss of
employment.
26 Mr Leask said at the hearing that, although Mr Reinhold was entitled to
express his personal view, those views did not accord
with those of other
officers in the Division, and the final recommendation of Ms P Tennison, the
Liquor Licensing officer responsible
for processing of this application, was
that the location some 50 metres from an existing bottle shop was not sufficient
for refusal
of the application. That view was endorsed by Mr M Farrah, the
Acting Manager of the Licensing Administration Unit. The decision
the application was made by the Director-General of the department and was
confirmed by the Liquor Licensing Advisory
Panel. The panel in recommending the
approval of the application said that the issue of public interest was
“borderline”,
but on balance the application should be granted.
27 Mr Leask did not disagree with the submission made by counsel for the
applicant that the social disruption feared by Mr Reinhold
does not in fact
occur when a detached bottle shop is forced by tough competition to close.
Because all detached bottle shops are
owned by hotel groups or other large
market players, losses on one failed detached bottle shop are easily absorbed
within the relevant
group’s overall highly profitable packaged liquor
operation and displaced staff are simply given employment in another of
group’s detached bottle shops or hotels. Counsel for the applicant argues
that there is no reason to fear that the operators
of either the proposed
detached bottle shop, who are a highly respected family with a history of four
generations within the liquor
industry in Queensland, or the Theo’s
– Grape group, another respected group, would resort to unlawful conduct
serving of minors, merely to shore up an unprofitable detached bottle
shop. We accept this argument, and we find that there is unlikely
adverse health or social impact arising out of approval of this
application.
28 As part of a submission to the Division addressing the issue as to whether
the proposed detached bottle shop would merely replicate
existing detached
bottle shops, Mr Kilvington provided the Division with three recent articles
published in The Australian newspaper
by the paper’s financial reporters,
which analyse and comment upon trends in the Australian packaged liquor
industry. Mr Kilvington
argues that these articles by respected financial
writers support his contention that the major group players, Coles Myer,
Woolworths,
Theo’s and The Fridge are restricting the product range in the
stores which they acquire.
29 In summarising the applicant’s case on public interest, counsel for the
applicant argued that there is a clear public interest
in the availability of
choice of products and services within detached bottle shops in any one area.
He submitted that the adjacent
“Liquor Stop” shop has a lesser range
of products than would be offered by the proposed premises. He argues that it
is highly significant that the “Liquor Stop” shop, although owned by
the recently enlarged Grape group, does not trade
under the Grape banner. He
submits that the “Liquor Stop” is not branded as “The
Grape” because it is a
down-scaled version of a “The Grape”
store. When the Grape chain was locally owned, all liquor outlets owned by the
group catered for the upper market but that is no longer the case. He argues
that it is in the public interest that the applicant
be able to expand its fine
wine stores within a market where stores which carry a limited product are
proliferating.
30 The Tribunal is specifically required by virtue of
s.116(4)(g)
to take into
account in assessing “public interest” the objects of the Act as
mentioned in
One of those objects is the regulation of the liquor industry
in a way which is compatible with minimizing harm arising from misuse
31 Councillor Knapp told officer Reinhold in a conversation of the 20 June 2002
that many local residents did not want two detached
bottle shops in their local
shopping centre because of the poor environment that detached bottle shops
created. Dr R Morgan and
his wife in their letter of objection raise concerns
that detached bottle shops attract adolescent binge drinkers. However Mr Leask,
who represented the Chief Executive at the hearing and supported the decision of
the Chief Executive, told the Tribunal that it continued
Division’s experience that detached bottle shops did not cause problems in
the community. On the basis of the Division’s
extensive experience with
the operation of detached bottle shops throughout the state, we accept Mr
Leask’s view that the presence
of two detached bottle shops in close
proximity is highly unlikely to give rise to incidents of loutish behaviour or
to result in
intoxicated persons loitering in the immediate vicinity, when there
is no evidence that this has occurred when only one bottle shop
was operating.
32 Another of the objects of the Act is to provide for the regulation of the
liquor industry with minimal formality, technicality
or intervention consistent
with the proper and efficient administration of the act. We have not been
provided with any evidence
that the placing of a new detached bottle shop within
50 metres of an existing shop in itself creates any adverse social or health
impacts or gives rise to any harms. In these circumstances, it seems to us that
we should be reluctant to intervene in the packaged
liquor market to prevent a
new detached bottle shop from being established. The economic impact upon an
existing detached bottle
shop is not a matter to which we are entitled to have
regard. In this respect, the Tribunal must be guided by the principles
by His Honour Justice Fryberg in the Supreme Court decision, David
Williams v Coogee Squash Courts Pty Ltd (unreported decision no.
1639 of 1996,
13 March 1996). His Honour said in that case at pages 5 and
“In my view, the function of the Tribunal and of the Chief Executive is
not to attend to the private economic welfare of particular
facilities.
........ The most that could have been said on the available evidence seems to
be that the new facility might impact
on the profitability or turnover of the
existing facilities which would be within 800 metres of the new facility. That
seem to me to be a relevant consideration for the chief executive or
the tribunal to take into account”.
33 We do not accept Mr Reinhold’s view that what arises from the
objections which address public interest is that it offends
public sensibilities
to have two detached bottle shops within sight of one another. What the
objections indicate to us is that a
more diverse mix of retail tenancies is
perceived as being more commercially advantageous by other tenants in the
Ashgrove West Shopping
Centre, and as being of greater benefit to patrons of the
Centre, than the duplication of an existing type of retail outlet. The
advantages of a particular mix of retail tenancies is not, however, a matter to
which the Tribunal may have regard under the Act.
34 In the end we accept the applicant’s and Ms Tennison’s view
that the mere location of this proposed new premises 50
metres away from an
existing premises does not justify refusal of the application on public interest
grounds. It is the factors
specified in
& (4) upon which the
Tribunal must focus in determining whether granting an application is in the
public interest. In the end
the Tribunal has reached the conclusion that the
proposed premises can be differentiated in its product offering and in the
it offers from the adjacent detached bottle shop. We consider that it
will enhance the level of choice with respect to the availability
of fine wines
for the residents of Ashgrove and adjacent suburbs who patronise this large
suburban strip shopping centre.
We do not think that it is
unreasonable for there to be four detached bottle shops in a large suburb of a
capital city in which there
are no premises with a general licence and which
attracts a large amount of through-traffic travelling to other suburbs. We
considerable weight, in determining whether existing facilities are
sufficient to meet the reasonable demands and expectations of
the public in the
locality, upon the fact that the proposed shop is located on the major arterial
road in the locality. We find
that the proposed premises can also be
differentiated in its product offerings and services from ”The
Fridge” shop on
Waterworks Road, and will enhance the level of choice with
respect to premium wines for persons travelling along Waterworks Road,
particular, for commuters travelling home from the city to suburbs beyond
Ashgrove West.
36 Having taken into account all matters to which we must have regard as
specified in sub
, we are satisfied in terms of
(2) that it is in the public interest for the application to be
AMENITY ISSUES
37 The main concerns raised by the appellants and by the other objectors relate
to perceived traffic and parking problems at the
proposed site. Noise concerns
were also raised by nearby residents, but it appears that those concerns have
been resolved as a result
of the applicant’s agreeing to amend its
application so as to seek trading hours of 10:00am to 9:00pm Sunday to Thursday
10:00am to 10:00pm Friday and Saturday.
38 The appellants state that the intersection of Waterworks Road and Cavell
Terrace adjacent to the proposed premises is a dangerous
one and, with any
increased traffic as a result of the establishment of a new detached bottle
shop, accidents are likely to occur.
The underground carpark which services the
proposed shop is accessed off Ennis Lane which runs into Cavell Terrace. That
then runs into Waterworks Road. The applicant on the other hand submits
that the turn into Cavell Terrace is neither difficult nor
dangerous. The
applicant points out that the police have raised no concerns about the safety of
that intersection and Councillor
Knapp makes no mention of traffic problems at
the intersection.
39 The appellants are also concerned that if patrons of the proposed shop miss
the turn into Cavell Terrace and Ennis Lane they will
proceed along Waterworks
Road past the shopping centre and will then take the first turn left in order to
the carpark. In doing so they will have to proceed
down Kincaid Avenue and that street, the appellants contend, will become a
and will be unsafe for children who reside in that street.
The Tribunal notes however that objections from the only two households
Kincaid Avenue which lodged objections did not share the appellants’
concerns in this regard. These objectors stated that,
provided the closing time
was reduced from midnight and their concerns about noise were addressed, they
would have no objection to
the application. (The applicant has agreed to erect
a barrier along the back fence line of these two neighbouring
residences.)
40 There is evidence before us that a small supermarket operated successfully at
the proposed site for many years prior to April
2000 and there is no evidence
before us that use of the site in that way, which would have generated more
patronage than a detached
bottle shop which will be half the supermarket’s
size, ever caused traffic problems. If this site is not used as a detached
bottle shop it will doubtless become some other kind of retail outlet which may
well generate more traffic than a detached bottle
41 On the basis of all the evidence before us we are not satisfied that there
will be any traffic problems caused by the establishment
of the proposed
premises which would justify refusal of the application.
42 We are also not satisfied that there are likely to be significant parking
problems. We find that there are 14 parking spaces
under the proposed premises
with stairs leading up to the side of the shop. There are at least 50
additional spaces servicing the
strip shopping centre from a combination of
spaces at street level and in a second underground carpark. These include 4
spaces on the street immediately outside the proposed shop.
43 The appellants argue that a new liquor outlet will cause extra congestion in
the street-level shopping centre carpark. They say
that at peak time cars queue
from that carpark out onto Waterworks Road waiting for a parking
44 Officers of the Division who have inspected the site do not believe that
there will be any problems with traffic or carparking.
The report from local
police states that “there appears to be ample parking”. It seems to
us in any case that the peak
times for a detached bottle shop which are in the
early evening hours after 5:00pm will not coincide with the peak times for the
street level shopping centre carpark which is used by a number of commercial
businesses which are likely to close at 5:00pm. Even
if, as Councillor Knapp
says, some patrons are reluctant to use the less accessible underground carpark,
there are likely to be,
in our view, some parking spaces available at street
level during the peak times of the two detached bottle shops. There may indeed
be some increase in competition for carparking spaces at these peak times but we
do not think that any inconvenience to local residents
would be of such
magnitude as to warrant refusal of the application. We consider that if the
applicant promotes with patrons, as
it says it will, use of the underground
carpark then the parking problems envisaged by the appellants and other
objectors will not
45 In summary, we are satisfied that any traffic or parking problems which may
arise are unlikely to cause undue inconvenience to
residents of the locality or
to result in any lessening of the amenity of the locality.
46 Having considered all matters to which we must have regard pursuant to
(5) of the Act, the Tribunal is satisfied that it should exercise its discretion
to approve the application. We are satisfied on
the basis of all the evidence
before us that the establishment of the proposed detached bottle shop is in the
public interest and
will not in our view have any adverse impact upon the
amenity of the community concerned.
DECISION OF THE
47 The Tribunal orders that the decision of the Chief Executive of the 25
July 2002 to grant approval for a detached bottle shop to
be operated under the
general licence of Friday’s, 123 Eagle Street, Brisbane, and to be
situated at Shop 4, 480 Waterworks
Road, Ashgrove, with trading hours of 10:00am
to 9:00pm Sunday to Thursday and 10:00am to 10:00pm Friday and Saturday, be
subject to the same pre-conditions for commencement of trading as
imposed by the Chief Executive.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (113 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter