URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Habibi Arehjan v Workers' Compensation Regulator [2025] ICQ 23 (28 October 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Habibi Arehjan v Workers’ Compensation Regulator
NADIA HABIBI AREHJAN
(appellant)
COMPENSATION REGULATOR
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
28 October 2025
HEARING DATE:
30 April 2024
Davis J, President
appeal is dismissed.
respondent file and serve any written submissions and affidavits in support on
the question of costs by 4.00 pm on 11 November
appellant file and serve submissions and any affidavits in support on the
question of costs by 4.00 pm on 25 November 2025.
party may by 4.00 pm on 2 December 2025 give notice to the other and to the
Registrar of an intention to make oral submissions
on costs and the Registrar
shall then allocate a date for hearing the submissions.
the absence of notice being given pursuant to order 4, the question of costs
will be determined on the basis of any written submissions
received and without
further oral submissions.
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION – ASSESSMENT AND AMOUNT OF COMPENSATION
– DISCONTINUATION OF PAYMENTS – GENERALLY –
appellant was injured in a motor vehicle accident – where the accident
occurred in the course of the appellant’s
employment – where the
appellant claimed weekly payments of compensation – where the appellant
claimed medical expenses
– where the insurer allowed the claims –
where weekly payments were made – where medical expenses were paid –
where the insurer ceased the payments – where the appellant appealed to
the respondent – where the respondent upheld
the decision of the insurer
– where the appellant appealed to the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission – where
the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission
dismissed the appeal – where the appellant appealed to the Industrial
of Queensland – whether incapacity because of the work related
injury stopped – whether medical treatment is no longer
required for the
management of the injury
Industrial Relation Act 2016
(Qld), s 557, s 565
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Arnotts Snack Products Pty Ltd v Yacob
(1985) 155 CLR 171
Asioty v Canberra Abattoir Pty Ltd
(1989) 167 CLR 533
[1989] HCA 40
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
170 CLR 321;
[1990] HCA 33
Beale v Government Insurance Office of
New South Wales
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
Drew v Makita (Australia)
[2009] 2 Qd R 219
[2009] QCA 66
Flannery & Anor v Halifax Estate Agencies Ltd
[1999] EWCA Civ 811
[2000] 1 All ER 373
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
Habibi Arehjan v Workers’ Compensation
Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 230
Housing Commission of New
South Wales v Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty Ltd
[1983] 3 NSWLR 378
(2019) 266 CLR 129
[2019] HCA 28
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
Scott v Sun Alliance Ltd
(1993) 178 CLR 1
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR
Steggles Pty Ltd v Vandenberg
(1987) 163 CLR 321
Thompson v Armstrong and Royse Pty Ltd
(1950) 81 CLR
[1950] HCA 46
Turay v Workers’ Compensation
[2023] ICQ 13
Workers’ Compensation
Regulator v Glass
(2020) 4 QR 693
APPEARANCES:
The appellant appeared on her own behalf
B I McMillan of counsel for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
The appellant appeared on her own behalf
Workers’ Compensation
Regulator directly briefing Mr McMillan
[1] This is an
appeal from a judgment of Vice President O’Connor dismissing three appeals
from decisions of the Workers’
Compensation
appellant, Ms Nadia Habibi Arehjan, is an electrical engineer. In 2017, she was
employed as such by Incitec Pivot Limited.
February 2017, Ms Habibi Arehjan was involved in a motor vehicle accident which
occurred in the course of her employment.
There is no doubt that Ms Habibi
Arehjan suffered quite severe injuries. There is no doubt that she suffered
those injuries in the
course of her employment. There is no doubt that
compensation was payable to Ms Habibi Arehjan in relation to those
[4] Ms Habibi
Arehjan made application for compensation pursuant to the provisions of the
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
WorkCover, the statutory insurer, accepted liability to pay compensation with
respect to eight injuries:
(a) fracture left femur and subsequent knee problems;
(b) adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed moods – moderate
(c) left shoulder strain with referred neck pain;
(d) fractured nose;
(e) capsuloligamentous injury and soft tissue injury left wrist;
(f) musculoligamentous injury to the cervical spine;
(g) fracture of the distal sacrum/coccydynia; and
(h) lumbosacral junction pain.
[5] WorkCover
terminated weekly entitlements of Ms Habibi Arehjan from 2 May 2019 as
those payments related to musculoligamentous
injury to Ms Habibi Arehjan’s
cervical spine (the first termination decision).
[6] WorkCover
terminated weekly entitlements of Ms Habibi Arehjan for the period between13
June 2018 to 23 July 2018 with respect
to all injuries except her left wrist EDC
tendonitis (the second termination decision).
[7] WorkCover
terminated weekly payments as of and from 16 August 2019 in relation to Ms
Habibi Arehjan’s left wrist EDC tendonitis
(the third termination
[8] Ms Habibi
Arehjan sought review by the Workers’ Compensation Regulator of each of
the termination decisions. The Regulator
confirmed each of the three termination
[9] From the
Regulator’s decisions, Ms Habibi Arehjan appealed to the Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission. The Commission,
constituted by Vice President
O’Connor, heard the three appeals together:
(a) Appeal WC/2019/157 was Ms Habibi Arehjan’s appeal from the
Regulator’s confirmation of the first termination decision;
(b) Appeal WC/2020/36 was Ms Habibi Arehjan’s appeal from the
Regulator’s confirmation of the second termination decision;
(c) Appeal WC/2023/37 was Mr Habibi Arehjan’s appeal from the
Regulator’s confirmation of the third termination decision.
[10] In support
of her case before the Commission, Ms Habibi Arehjan gave evidence on her own
behalf and called three medical witnesses.
One of those witnesses, Dr James
Price, is an orthopaedic surgeon and the other two, Corena Caltabiano and
Deborah Dale are physiotherapists.
The Regulator called six medical witnesses,
five of whom are orthopaedic surgeons; Dr Andrew Ryan, Dr Phil Allen, Dr Dale
Rimmington,
Dr Greg Sterling and Dr Simon Journeaux. The Regulator also
called Dr Michael Bryant, a neurosurgeon.
[11] After a
hearing which was conducted over four days from 8 to 11 November 2021, the Vice
President dismissed the three
It is from that decision
which Ms Habibi Arehjan now appeals.
[12] Chapter 3,
Part 9 of the WCR Act provides for weekly payment of compensation.
Chapter 4 Part 2 provides for payment of medical
[13] Here, as
already observed, Ms Habibi Arehjan was clearly entitled to compensation and
payment of medical expenses. The contentious
question was as to when those
payments should cease.
[14] Section
144A of the WCR Act prescribes the circumstances in which weekly payments of
compensation stop:
“(1) The entitlement of a worker to
weekly payments of
compensation under part 9 stops when the first of the
following happens—
(a) the incapacity because of the work related injury stops;
(b) the worker has received weekly payments for the
incapacity for 5 years;
(c) compensation under this part reaches the maximum
amount under part 6.
(2) If subsection (1)(b) or (c) applies, the worker’s entitlement to
further compensation for the injury stops.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply to the worker’s entitlement to
compensation under chapter 4A.
(4) This section does not limit another provision of this Act that stops
weekly payments.”
[15] Section
144B prescribes the circumstances in which payments of medical expenses stop:
“(1) The entitlement of a worker to the payment of
treatment, hospitalisation and expenses under chapter 4 for an injury stops
(a) the entitlement of the worker to weekly payments of
compensation under part 9 stops; and
(b) medical treatment by a registered person is no longer
required for the management of the injury because the
injury is not likely to improve with further medical
treatment or hospitalisation.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to section 220 or
decisions now under appeal were initially made by the statutory insurer,
WorkCover. They are reviewable decisions for the
purposes of Chapter 13 of the
Decisions of the
Regulator to review the decision of WorkCover and confirm WorkCover’s
decisions may themselves be appealed
to the Commission by Part 3, Division 1 of
Chapter 13. That is what occurred here, and those are the appeals dealt with and
by the Vice President. The Commission’s decisions are appealable
to this Court by Part 3, Division 1A of Chapter 13. That is
the path by
which the current appeals arrived here.
[17] Appeals to
this Court are by way of rehearing and are not limited to questions of law,
error or want of jurisdiction.
Those limitations only apply to appeals mounted under the
Relations Act 2016
decisions made under that or some other legislation.
[18] As to an
appellate court’s function on an appeal by way of rehearing, the High
Fox v Percy
“[25] Within the constraints marked out by the
nature of the appellate process, the appellate court is obliged to conduct a
real review of the trial and, in cases where the trial was conducted before a
judge sitting alone, of that judge's reasons. Appellate
courts are not excused
from the task of “weighing conflicting evidence and drawing [their] own
inferences and conclusions,
though [they] should always bear in mind that [they
have] neither seen nor heard the witnesses, and should make due allowance in
this respect”. In
Warren v Coombes
, the majority of this Court
reiterated the rule that:
“[I]n general an appellate court is in as good a position as the trial
judge to decide on the proper inference to be drawn from
facts which are
undisputed or which, having been disputed, are established by the findings of
the trial judge. In deciding what is
the proper inference to be drawn, the
appellate court will give respect and weight to the conclusion of the trial
judge but, once
having reached its own conclusion, will not shrink from giving
effect to it.”
As this Court there said, that approach was “not only sound in law, but
beneficial in ...
operation””
Bell J, Gageler J (as his
Honour then was), Nettle and Edelman JJ described the principles in this
“A court of appeal is bound to conduct a “real
review” of the evidence given at first instance and of the judge's
for judgment to determine whether the trial judge has erred in fact or law.
Appellate restraint with respect to interference
with a trial judge's findings
unless they are “glaringly improbable” or “contrary to
compelling inferences”
is as to factual findings which are likely to
have been affected by impressions about the credibility and reliability of
formed by the trial judge as a result of seeing and hearing them give
their evidence. It includes findings of secondary facts which
are based on a
combination of these impressions and other inferences from primary facts.
Thereafter, “in general an appellate
court is in as good a position
as the trial judge to decide on the proper inference to be drawn from facts
which are undisputed or
which, having been disputed, are established by the
findings of the trial judge”. Here, the trial judge's findings of primary
fact were not disturbed. However, in material respects, the Court of Appeal
found that the inferences that his Honour drew from those
findings were wrong.
Notably, the trial judge's finding that the driver was not wearing the seatbelt
not only was contrary to each
party's case but, if correct, on the Court of
Appeal's analysis, would lead to the conclusion that there was no real prospect
the appellant was the driver
And the trial judge's acceptance of the RACQ's case, that the appellant had been
pulled from the driver's seat to the passenger
seat immediately behind in
something less than 90 seconds, was, in the Court of Appeal's analysis,
[20] The appeal
to this Court is a civil appeal which is determined upon consideration of the
complaints raised as grounds of appeal.
There is no cause, as in criminal
appeals, to review the entire case.
Ms Habibi Arehjan’s case on appeal is limited to the grounds that she has
identified.
The appeals
[21] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s application to appeal sought the following orders:
“Appeals WC/2019/157; WC/2020/36; and WC/2020/37 are
dismissed.”
[22] As already
observed, appeals WC/2019/157, WC/2020/36 and WC/2020/37 were all appeals
brought by Ms Habibi Arehjan to the Commission
against the decisions of the
Regulator. Those appeals were in fact all dismissed by the Vice President. The
application to appeal
is insensible in that it seeks orders that have already
been made by the Commission.
[23] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s application to appeal was sensibly taken by the Regulator to be
a challenge to the decisions of the
Vice President and both the Regulator and
WorkCover. If Ms Habibi Arehjan was successful in her appeal to this Court, the
appropriate
orders would be to set aside the orders made in the Commission and
allow the appeals.
[24] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s grounds of appeal were described as:
error of law (this means that the Member may have misapplied the law or a legal
principal to the facts);
an excess, or want, of jurisdiction (this means that the member may have made
a decision that is not within their power to
[25] The grounds
of appeal give no particulars as to Ms Habibi Arehjan’s real complaints.
No point is taken by the Regulator
as to the way the grounds of appeal are
expressed. Ms Habibi Arehjan has filed written submissions from which the
various bases
upon which the Commissioner’s judgment is challenged can be
discerned. In his written submissions, Mr McMillan, counsel for
the Regulator,
categorised Ms Habibi Arehjan’s complaints into 14 grounds. Ms
Habibi Arehjan adopted the categorisation when
preparing her written submissions
in reply to Mr McMillan’s submissions.
[26] The 14
grounds are:
(a) the Commission erred by referring at paragraph [41] of the reasons to
“an MRI performed in Tehran on 5 December 2018”
(Ground 1);
(b) the Commission erred in dealing with Dr Bryant’s evidence because the
Commission “went beyond” his oral evidence
and “ignored”
a letter (which was exhibit 97) written by Dr Bryant (Ground 2);
(c) the Commission erred by referring to reports of Dr Panjak Relan and Dr Peter
McCombe, which were not in evidence (Ground 3);
(d) the Commission erred by “ignoring [Ms Habibi Arehjan’s] reasons
to resign” from Sun Metals in November 2018
(Ground 4);
(e) the Commission erred by relying on “the independent assessment
doctor”, Dr Allen, “who wasn’t aware of
injury” (Ground 5);
(f) the Commission erred by referring to Ms Habibi Arehjan’s
“redundancy” “without providing evidence to
comply with
Fair Work Act 2009
” (Ground 6);
(g) the Commission erred in its finding at paragraph [84] of the reasons (Ground
(h) the Commission erred by referring (at [92]) to Dr Sterling’s
certification of Ms Habibi Arehjan on 8 June 2019 at “fit
(Ground 8);
(i) the Commission “used an old case in which the decision was made based
on another state Act” (Ground 9);
(j) the Commission “went beyond the expert evidence ... and relied on a
surgical treatment plan that wasn’t part of the
appeal” (Ground
(k) the Commission “didn’t consider the exhibits and hearing
materials” and didn’t comply with the Commission’s
Conduct for Members (Ground 11);
(l) the Commission “ignored” the requirements of s 144 of the WCR
Act (Ground 12);
(m) the Commission “went beyond” the evidence of Dr Ryan (Ground
(n) the Commission “didn’t consider the exhibits and hearing
materials, used them selectively” (Ground 14).
[27] Ground 14
makes essentially the same complaint as is made in ground 11, but in relation to
a different part of the judgment under
appeal. There is no need to consider
ground 14 separately. The appeal proceeded on the basis that grounds 1-13 were
Ms Habibi Arehjan’s
[28] When the
appeals came on for hearing, Ms Habibi Arehjan made no complaint about the
categorisation of her grounds and she was
content to rely upon her written
submissions. Her only additional oral submission
“APPELLANT: [the matter is about my neck] injury that it
wasn’t accepted by WorkCover in the time of the accident, and
later on, we
became [indistinct] that, just injury, that we went the process, but
unfortunately WorkCover didn’t cover and
support the medical treatment
that I needed to receive, and I pay for my all treatment, and I proceed through
the process, and I
went – I did the appeal the case to ensure that I can
receive the support that I didn’t. It is the reason – one
reason that I’m here, for the medical treatment that I received last
two/three years, up to – I couldn’t
turn my neck. It was – I
couldn’t because of the whiplash injury.
It is the first case that I’m here, and also about my wrist, that
unfortunately I couldn’t work because of my wrist injury.
I had my leg
injury that I couldn’t walk, and I still – I cannot do the field
work because of the impairment that I have
for my leg and other injuries. I am
change my career to the office work, office space job that I can earn the money
and I can live
by, but then I had the wrist injury. I couldn’t work in
office, too. So for at least six to nine months, I couldn’t work,
is the reason that I’m here, just have an honest conversation, and to get
the agreement with the WorkCover compensation
– or regulator,
[29] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s oral submissions do little more than assert that her injuries
persisted, and she did not recover her
proper entitlements. As earlier
observed, it is not my function to engage in a complete review of Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s entitlements
and injuries. She must be held to her grounds of
appeal, which are what will be considered.
[30] Mr McMillan
was content to rely upon his written submissions filed in the appeal but sought
to also rely upon his written submissions
filed in the Commission to the extent
they provided greater detail of the medical evidence which was before the Vice
President. Ms
Habibi Arehjan was content for those submissions to be tendered
and marked Exhibit 1 on the appeal.
[31] Ms Habibi
Arehjan, in her written submissions, filed on the appeal to this Court, referred
to her submissions filed in the Commission.
Like Mr McMillan’s submissions
before the Commission, I have had regard to
Consideration
Ground 1 - The Commissioner erred by referring at paragraph [41] of the
reasons to “an MRI performed in Tehran on 5 December
[32] This ground
concerns the appeals to the Commission in file numbers WC/2019/157 and
WC/2020/36.
[33] Paragraph
41 of the Commission’s judgment is as follows:
MRI performed in Tehran on 5 December 2018 reported fracture of the inferior
segment of the sacrum with mild anterior
displacement.”
paragraph [41], Ms Habibi Arehjan submitted in her written
submissions:
“The commissioner in paragraph 41 stated that An
MRI performed in Tehran on 5 December 2018, the appellant in her submission
paragraph 96, clearly stated that the MRI was taken by red radiology in
Brisbane, Australia. The appellant submitted the evidence
in hearing Exhibit
#49. the commissioner, even didn’t read the exhibit and relied on the
respondent submission, which was incorrect”
[35] Ms Habibi
Arehjan is correct in her submissions that the Commission mistakenly stated that
the scan was performed in Tehran on
5 December 2018 when it was not. This was
conceded by Mr McMillan in his written submissions:
paragraph [41] of the Commission’s reasons, in a section of the reasons
headed “Background to Appeals”
the Commissioner referred to
“an MRI performed in Tehran on 5 December 2018”. No such document
was tendered in evidence
before the Commission, although it was referred to in
the Regulator’s statement of facts and contentions filed before the
The relevant document, Exhibit 49 before the Commission, was a report
by Dr Amarasena, a radiologist, of a CT scan taken of Ms Habibi
coccyx on 5 December 2018 at RED Radiology. That report described the injury in
identical terms to those used by
the Commission at paragraph [41] of the
reasons. Plainly, the Commission erred by referring to a document not in
evidence. However,
the substance of paragraph [41] was correct that medical
imaging taken on 5 December 2018 “reported fracture of the inferior
segment of the sacrum with mild anterior displacement”.
any event, paragraph [41] and the error therein was not material to the issues
for determination by the Commission, namely:
a) For WC/2020/36 – whether Ms Habibi Arehjan was entitled to weekly
compensation for her coccyx injury from 13 June 2018
to 23 July 2018; and
b) For WC/2020/37 – whether Ms Habibi Arehjan was incapacitated for work
because of the coccyx injury or required further treatment
for the coccyx injury
from 16 August 2019.”
[36] Ms Habibi
Arehjan replied to that submission in her second written submission filed on the
“[9] In paragraph [20], the respondent admits that the
erred happened, which shows the commissioner didn’t reviewed the
No CT has been taken from Coccyx of appellant in Tehran, the referred CT is an
MRI which was taken from lower lumbar of
appellant, which was not accepted in
hearing as an evidence.”
[37] This ground
concerns exhibit 49, which was Dr Sahan Amarasena’s report in relation to
a scan performed in Brisbane on Ms
Habibi Arehjan on 5 December 2018. In that
report, Dr Amarasena opined:
Noncontrast CT imaging of the sacrum
There is a fracture of the Inferior segment of the sacrum (S5) with mild
anterior displacement of the distal fracture fragment by
approximately 1mm. The
fracture line is difficult to clearly visualise with sclerotic change identified
in the region consistent
with fracture healing. The coccygeal segments appear
normally aligned with no fracture. No other fractures are evident. Mild
degenerative
change bilateral sacroiliac joints evident. No presacral or
precoccygeal soft tissue swelling.
Conclusion:
Healed distal sacral fracture.
[38] Therefore,
the Commission has correctly found:
(a) there was a scan conducted;
(b) it was conducted on 5 December 2018; and
(c) the scan identified a “fracture of the inferior segment of the sacrum
with mild anterior
displacement”.
[39] Whether the
scan was performed in Tehran or Brisbane does not affect the probative value of
the evidence provided through Exhibit
49. However, Ms Habibi Arehjan submits
that the error shows that the Vice President has not fulfilled his function on
properly reviewing the evidence.
observation made at paragraph [41] was part of his Honour’s recitation of
the chronology of Ms Habibi Arehjan’s
plight from the time she suffered
the injuries in the car accident. That chronology was long and
complicated.
[41] Exhibit 49
was tendered by Ms Habibi Arehjan after Dr Price had given evidence and been
excused. The tender was made without
opposition from counsel appearing for the
Neither the tender
nor the contents of Exhibit 49 were contentious.
[42] The error
may have come from the Regulator’s statement of facts and contentions
which was filed in the Commission on 30
March 2021. In that document the
Regulator recorded a chronology including; “An MRI performed in Tehran on
5 December 2018
reported fracture of the inferior segment of the sacrum with
mild anterior displacement”.
[43] The fact
that the Vice President may have taken parts of a chronology from
non-contentious statements made in a document filed
by the Regulator and made an
inconsequential error in respect of a non-contentious document does not lead to
a conclusion that the
Vice President has failed to properly review the case on
[44] There is no
substance in ground 1.
Ground 2 - The Commission erred in dealing
with Dr Bryant’s evidence because the Commission “went beyond”
evidence and “ignored” a letter (which was Exhibit 97)
written by Dr Bryant
[45] This ground
concerns the appeals to the Commission in file numbers WC/2019/157 and
WC/2020/36.
[46] Dr Bryant
is a spinal surgeon. The Commission considered Dr Bryant’s evidence at
paragraphs [45]-[48] of the judgment
under appeal and later at paragraphs
“[45] On 18 February 2019 the Appellant was
examined by Dr Bryant, Neurosurgeon who noted that the Appellant had had a good
result from the injection in the sacrococcygeal junction and the pain was
reasonably well controlled.
[46] On 25 February 2019 the Appellant had an MRI of the cervical spine which
showed no significant disc protrusion and no cervical
cord pathology. A
whole-body bone scan with SPECT CT of cervical spine was performed on the
Appellant and showed no abnormality.
Dr Bryant reviewed the MRI and SPECT CT
scans on 25 March 2019 and found them to be entirely unremarkable. He concluded
most likely diagnosis was a muscular ligamentous whiplash type
[47] On 2 April 2019 Dr Bryant advised that the Appellant had no particular
ongoing incapacity from her neck and specifically, nothing
that related to her
work injury and did not require any further treatment for her neck
[48] On 15 April 2019 Dr Bryant stated there was no incapacity for work at
that point in time, with no restrictions placed on the
Appellant's work.
WorkCover ceased medical treatment and incapacity benefits on 3 May 2019 in
relation to the "musculoligamentous
injury to the cervical spine"
condition.”
“[79] Dr Michael Bryant, orthopaedic surgeon in a report dated 2 April
2019 sets outs out the following responses to a series
of questions:
there has been a change to the diagnosis of her neck
The diagnosis in Nadia for her cervical complaint is
that of "muscular ligamentous whiplash type injury". There is no specific disc
injury nor any compression of the nerve and certainly nothing that surgery is
going to help.
Nadia incapacitated as a result of her neck condition?
no particular ongoing incapacity from her neck and specifically, nothing that
relates to her work injury.
Nadia require further treatment for her neck condition?
4. Has the neck injury ceased?
[80] In the report of 15 April 2019, Dr Bryant stated that the Appellant
required no specific treatment nor any ongoing need for rehabilitation.
there was, at that time, no incapacity for work nor was it necessary to place
restrictions on the Appellant's ability to
[81] Dr Bryant further noted in his report of 17 July 2019 that:
I do not feel there is any surgically amenable cervical injury in Nadia's
circumstance with a Musculo-ligamentous strain the most
likely explanation for
her reported ongoing symptoms. This should be considered partial incapacity. The
degree of incapacity should
be formally assessed by an independent assessor
specifically trained in the degree of impairment assessments.
[82] Dr Bryant went on to observe that he did not feel that there is any
surgically correctable neck injury related to the reported
work accident that
should be impacting significantly on the Appellant's hours or days of work.
Further, he believed no other hospitalisation
or medical treatment was necessary
at that time.
[83] In a file note dated 4 November 2021 Dr Bryant clarified his reference
to 'partial incapacity' in his report of 17 July 2019
by stating that he did not
consider the Appellant to have any incapacity to work because of her
musculoligamentous injury to her
cervical spine, as stated in his reports of 2
April 2019, 15 April 2019 and 12 July 2019. His statement about 'partial
incapacity'
in his report was based on the Appellant's self-reports of pain
rather than on any objective signs of injury.
[84] No evidence has been adduced by the Appellant to suggest that at the
time of the cessation of the compensation payments that
she had any entitlement
associated with a musculoligamentous injury to the cervical spine.
[85] I accept the medical evidence, and, in particular the evidence of Dr
Bryant, which does not support a conclusion that the Appellant
had a total or
partial incapacity for work because of the accepted work-related neck injury
beyond 2 May 2019. Further, the evidence
does not support a conclusion that
there is a requirement for the Appellant to undergo further medical treatment,
hospitalisation
or other expenses for the management of the accepted
work-related neck injury beyond 2 May 2019.”
Habibi Arehjan’s written submissions in relation to ground 2, she
“[21] The Commissioner went beyond of Dr.
Bryant’s oral testimony, Doctor Bryant Stated that:
a standard surgical consultation, and rehabilitation physicians and
– and occupational physicians are far better qualified than
perform those sorts of assessments and – and – and – and enrol
in – in – in that sort of
treatment strategy. As a surgeon, –
I – I need to exclude surgically correctible pathologies, and often with
injuries, almost invariably with whiplash injuries, there is no
surgically treatable pathology, and so, depending on the patient’s
reported on going symptoms, alternative arrangements need to be made for ongoing
treatment, if – if it's indicated.
I have reviewed the treatment plan discussed by the Dr Zofia
Piotrowska-Hess and Nadia Habibi and I agree it is the best treatment
Nadia. This isn’t any surgical intervention that will benefit Nadia at
this moment.
Thank you, Doctor. Doctor, just one thing. How do you
describe your relationship, medical relationship, with Ms Habibi? ---The
relationship
broke down when Ms Habibi was – felt- or thought by my
assistant – my executive assistant at the time that Ms Habibi
threatening. So I wrote a letter to 10 your – to the GP suggesting that
it would best for us to discontinue our
therapeutic relationship. Is this the
reason you send letter 26th of July 2019 to my GP Dr Sophia PiotrowsaHess?
correct. 15 May I ask you that what was your opinion about the
relationship with Ms Habibi before this brokage? --- The relationship
entirely therapeutic. I was – I accepted the role as the treating
specialist for this condition. I found no role for
any surgical intervention
and could not find any – any reason to continue discussions regarding 20
surgery. Yes? --- There
was much toing and froing with WorkCover at that stage
offer any sensible treatment plan. It was my opinion that
strictly speaking from a surgical 25 point of view there was no disablement
result of the injury per se.
[22] The commissioner ignored the Dr. Bryant letter prior to damage to the
relationship between Nadia Habibi and Dr. Bryant on 26
I have reviewed the treatment plan discussed by the Dr Zofia
Piotrowska-Hess and Nadia Habibi and I agree it is the best treatment
Nadia. This isn’t any surgical intervention that will benefit Nadia at
this moment.
McMillan, in his written submissions, stated:
“22) The error
alleged in that the Commission “went beyond Dr Bryant’s oral
testimony” and “ignored”
a letter from Dr Bryant.
Commissioner dealt specifically with Dr Bryant’s evidence at paragraphs
[45]-[48] and [79]-[85]. The Commissioner did not
specifically refer to exhibit
97, but there was no error in that omission because the content of the letter,
which is undated, was
consistent with Dr Bryant’s evidence and the
Commission’s treatment of it, namely that Dr Bryant’s expert opinion
as a spinal surgeon was that Ms Habibi Arehjan’s neck injury did not cause
incapacity for work and did not require further
Bryant was asked about exhibit 97 in oral evidence but Ms Habibi Arehjan did not
suggest to him any alleged inconsistency with
his other evidence regarding her
neck injury. Dr Bryant confirmed his view, apparently by reference to the
context of exhibit 97,
that he agreed with Dr Hess’s plan to refer Ms
Habibi Arehjan to a pain specialist.”
[49] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s written submissions in reply on this ground
“[10] Dr. Hess recommended the treatment plan that
agreed by Dr. Bryant, As Dr. Bryant testimony, he agreed that his view was
surgical treatment and he agreed that rehabilitation physios are the best people
to determine the treatment plan for whiplash injury
[11] Not considering the oral testimony changed the hearing outcome.
[12] Chapter 3, Part 8A, ss 144A and 144B of the WCR Act covers any type of
treatments, including the pain management, chiropractor,
and physiotherapy,
which were part of the treatment plan for whiplash injury, refer to EPC. The
commissioner focused on surgical
treatment requirements.”
[50] Exhibit 97
is Dr Bryant’s letter:
“I have review the treatment plan
discussed by Dr Zofia Piotrowska-Hess and Nadia Habibi and I agree that it is
the best treatment
option for Nadia. There isnt any surgical intervention that
will benefit Nadia at this moment.
Please not hesitate to call me if you need any further questions.”
[51] I cannot
see anything in paragraphs [45] to [48] or [79] to [85] of the judgment under
appeal which is inconsistent with anything
that Dr Bryant had said in his
evidence, or anything he wrote in Exhibit 97.
Habibi Arehjan’s cross examination of Dr Bryant at the Commission, she
appears to be at cross purposes with him.
Dr Bryant is a surgeon. In Exhibit
97 he opined that there was no surgical intervention that was called for. That
is not inconsistent
with Dr Poitrowska-Hess’ approach of instigating a
treatment program for what appeared to be a whiplash injury. This is made
in Dr Bryant’s evidence given in cross-examination by Ms Habibi
“Yes?---There was much toing and froing with
WorkCover at that stage about what the best treatment plan was moving forward
certainly I couldn’t offer any sensible treatment plan. It was my
opinion that strictly speaking from a surgical point of view
there was no
disablement as a result of the injury per se.
Yeah?---Ms Habibi reported ongoing pain and Dr – Dr Hess suggested that
she would refer you to a pain special – or refer
Ms Habibi to a pain
specialist which I felt at that stage was an entirely appropriate next step.
I appreciate that, Doctor. Just have you ever just treated the patient with
the whiplash injury? Sorry I’m asking, I’m
not questioning your
knowledge, just confirmation that have you ever just treated a patient for the
whiplash injury?---As a surgeon
I treat surgical conditions and whiplash would
not be considered a – a truly surgical condition and so patients who have
pain despite no evidence of any anatomical disruption on good quality
MRI scans and bone scans, I offer simple strategies including
pain management
and avoidance strategies but if it’s anything more complex than that there
is always – or – not
always but there can be referral to a pain
specialist depending on the patient’s reported symptom. So, yes, in answer
question, yes, we see patients with whiplash injuries on a fairly
regular basis.”
“HIS HONOUR: Yes?--- - - - that – that does not form of a –
a standard surgical consultation, and rehabilitation
physicians and – and
occupational physicians are far better qualified than myself to perform those
sorts of assessments and
– and – and – and enrol in – in
– in that sort of treatment strategy. As a surgeon, I – I need
exclude surgically correctible pathologies, and often with whiplash injuries,
almost invariably with whiplash injuries, there
is no surgically treatable
pathology, and so, depending on the patient’s reported on going symptoms,
alternative arrangements
need to be made for ongoing treatment, if – if
it’s indicated.”
Bryant’s opinion is that there was no incapacity. That is not
inconsistent with his view that treatment for pain management
appropriate.
[54] There is no
substance in ground 2.
Ground 3 - The Commission erred by
referring to reports of Dr Panjal Relan and Dr Peter McCombe which were not in
[55] This ground
concerns the appeals to the Commission in file numbers WC/2019/157 and
WC/2020/36.
[56] The reports
of Dr Relan and Dr McCombe are referred to in paragraphs [53] and [54] of the
judgment under appeal:
“[53] On 29 June 2019 Dr Pankaj Relan
reported the Appellant was suffering from an adjustment disorder with mixed
anxiety and
depressed moods. Her employment was the major significant
contributing factor. She had a reasonable capacity to engage in full‑time
work and he did not consider that further treatment would be of any additional
[54] On 1 July 2019 Dr Peter McCombe, Orthopaedic Surgeon reported that the
Appellant was complaining of pain in the sacrum, coccyx
and occasionally the
lumbosacral junction. This pain was markedly worse when sitting, particularly in
a hard chair. She could sit
for only a few minutes in an unsuitable chair though
she could manage one to two hours on a suitable soft chair. She had no problems
with standing or walking which was unlimited. Lifting weights of more than about
5 kg however caused her lower back and sacral pain.
Dr McCombe diagnosed
coccydenia and possibly a soft tissue injury. The coccydenia did not affect her
ability to continue working
in her current job.”
[57] In support
of this ground, Ms Habibi Arehjan made two submissions in her first written
submission:
“[23] In Paragraph 53 and 54, the commissioner
refers to Dr Pankaj Relan and Dr Peter McCombe reports that were not disclose
the hearing.”
“[37] The commissioner used the expert evidence which is not disclosed
in hearing to the appellant and is not exhibit a document”
McMillan, in his written submission, responded as
“25) The Commission referred to reports of Dr Panjak
Relan and Dr Peter McCombe at paragraphs [53]-[54] of the reasons under
heading “Backgrounds to Appeals”.
is correct (as the Appellant submits) that those reports, while referred to in
the Regulator’s statement of facts and contentions,
were never received in
evidence by the Commission. Since the reports referred to were never received by
the Commission, it must be
inferred that the references to them in the
Commission’s reasons relied on the content of the Regulator’s
statement of
facts and contentions. However, the Commission could not have
considered the reports or taken them into account in determining any
issues before it in the appeals because it didn’t receive them. In that
regard, it is notable that there is no reference
to either of these reports in
the paragraphs of the reasons under the heading
“Consideration”.
the reports were plainly not relevant to any of the issues for determination by
the Commission. It is apparent from the text
of paragraphs [53]-[54] that Dr
Relan’s report related to Ms Habibi Arehjan’s adjustment disorder
and Dr McCombe’s
report related to her coccyx injury. Material relevant to
those injuries could only be relevant to WC/2020/36 because WC/2019/157
only to the neck injury and WC/2020/37 related only to the left wrist EDC
tendonitis. Both reports, by the text of paragraphs
[53]-[54], post-dated the
period relevant to WC/2020/36, being 13 June 2018 to 23 July 2018. Therefore,
that material must be irrelevant
to the issues for determination in that appeal.
As such, any error by the Commission in referring to material that was described
in the Regulator’s statement of facts and contentions but not ultimately
put into evidence, was not material to any of the
Commission’s
Commission’s consideration of WC/2020/36 is set out at paragraphs [86] to
[104] of the reasons. The evidence referred to
and considered in those
paragraphs supports the finding at [100] that “no economic incapacity has
been demonstrated”
and at [104] that Ms Habibi Arehjan “was not
otherwise entitled to incapacity benefits”
for the relevant
[59] In her
reply submissions, Ms Habibi Arehjan said:
commissioner didn’t consider the fact , by considering the irrelevant
phrases , without having the evidence,
changed the hearing outcome.
[14] The respondent confirmed that Dr Panjak Relan and Dr Peter
McCombe’s report wasn’t submitted as evidence.
[15] The respondent tried to demonstrate that the neck pain is psychological
pain and Dr Relan report was about the appellant psychological
[60] Dr Relan
and his report are only mentioned once in the judgment and that is at paragraph
[53]. Dr McCombe is mentioned twice
in the judgment, on both occasions in
paragraph [54].
[61] Paragraphs
[53] and [54] of the judgment appear under the heading “Background to
Appeals”. As was observed in relation
to ground 1, that part of the
judgment records a chronology. It is apparent both in relation to this ground 3
and ground 1 that
the Vice President relied upon the chronology set out in the
Regulator’s statement of contentions.
reference to the reports of Dr Relan and Dr McCombe was made in error. However,
there is nothing to support
Arehjan’s submission made in her second written submission that the
reference to those reports “changed the
hearing outcome”.
Overwhelmingly, the inference is quite the contrary.
observed, the Vice President referred to the reports at paragraphs [53] and
[54]. He did not mention them again. After setting
out the chronology in the
“Background to Appeals” part of the judgment, the Vice President
then turned to an examination
of “Relevant employment
President then turned to “Consideration” where he analysed the
material relevant to each of the three
Neither Dr Relan nor
Dr McCombe, nor their reports are mentioned anywhere in the pages of the
judgment where the Vice President
considers the merits of the appeals. There is
nothing to suggest that anything said by Dr Relan or Dr McCombe in any
report played
any part in the Vice President’s decision to dismiss the
[64] Ground 3
has no substance.
Ground 4 - The Commission erred in
“ignoring [Ms Habibi Arehjan’s] reason to resign” from Sun
Metals in November
[65] This ground
relates to appeals to the Commission in files WC/2019/157 and WC/2020/36.
[66] Ms Habibi
Arehjan, in her first written outline, said:
paragraph 69 the commissioner ignores the reason to resign; in Exhibit 84, the
appellant clearly states that she couldn’t
carry out the job for which she
was working.”
McMillan, on behalf of the Regulator, submitted:
Commission noted, at paragraph [69] of the reasons, that Ms Habibi Arehjan
resigned her employment from Sun Metals
(where she had been employed, after
Incitec, since 1 August 2018) on or about 24 November 2018. Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s reasons
for resigning were not relevant to any of the issues for
determination by the Commission. Therefore, there was no error in the Commission
not dealing with them in its reasons..
none of the medical evidence supported a finding that Ms Habibi Arehjan resigned
her employment with Sun Metals due to incapacity
arising from her injuries and
the termination form, exhibit 84, records her reason as being that the job was
“completely different
from applied for”.”
[68] Ms Habibi
Arehjan, in her reply submissions, submitted:
appellant denied the reason for the resignation; the appellant couldn’t
perform the job because of incapacity;
she requested a change to the position
description that wasn’t agreed upon by SunMetals, while they were happy
with the appellant’s
performance.”
[69] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s complaint is as to the finding in paragraph [69] of the
Vice’s President’s
It is necessary to put
that paragraph in some context.
[70] As already
observed, the Vice President, under the heading “Background to
Appeals”, set out a chronology of events
from the time of the
When reciting the
chronology, the Vice President referred to various instances where Ms Habibi
Arehjan had obtained medical treatment
and then mentioned Sun Metals for the
first time at paragraph [34]:
“[34] The Appellant obtained
full time employment as an electrical engineer for Sun Metals on 6 August
[71] The Vice
President then continued his chronology referring to a number of medical
procedures and opinions. He then observed:
“[38] On 16
November 2018 Associate Professor Satish Karunakaran, consultant
neuropsychiatrist, provided a report stating that
the Appellant was suffering
from an adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed moods, of moderate
severity. He considered
that the work-related physical injuries were "a major
factor for her psychological injury". Any incapacity for work due to
psychological
symptoms appeared to have ceased, but she remained symptomatic
with considerable amounts of distress. She should go on antidepressant
medication and have 12 sessions of psychological treatment.
[39] On or about 24 November 2018 the Appellant resigned from Sun
explaining the chronology of medical treatment provided to Ms Habibi Arehjan,
the Vice President turned to “Relevant
While recording
Ms Habibi Arehjan’s employment history the Vice President referred to the
accident on 10 February 2017,
and recorded that the employment with Incitec was terminated by way of
redundancy on 13 June 2018.
After noting some evidence about the redundancy, the Vice President then
“[63] On the same day that the Appellant was made
redundant, she applied for a new position with Sun Metals Corporation Pty
[73] His Honour
then observed:
“[65] During the
period 24 July 2018 and 5 August 2018, the Appellant was certified as 'Not able
to work at all' by Dr Stevens.
During this period, the Appellant received
workers' compensation benefits.
[66] By letter dated 1 August 2018, Sun Metals Corporation Pty Ltd made an
offer of fixed term employment to the Appellant. The Appellant
accepted the
offer and commenced employment as an Electrical Instrumentation Engineer on 6
August 2018 on an annual salary of $125,000.
[67] The Appellant's employment with Sun Metals was subject to the
completion of all pre‑employment medical tests. In her oral
evidence she
told the Commission that she completed her pre-employment medical assessment but
that: " ... it was horrible, very heavy.
After the medical assessment I laid
down on my back of my car for two hours on my - it's too much because of the
pain that I had
in my back, and my leg was shaking ... ."
[68] On 21 September 2018, the Appellant received a positive probation
review noting that her performance and conduct met the employer's
expectations
during the review process.
[69] The Appellant resigned from Sun Metals on or about 24 November
[74] It can be
seen that the statement at paragraph [69] of the judgment under appeal is not
made in isolation. It is made after
recitation of other facts relevant to Ms
Habibi Arehjan’s departure from Sun Metals.
[75] Once the
Vice President had recorded Ms Habibi Arehjan’s employment history since
the accident, he then turned to consideration
of the appeals. He obviously
appreciated that Ms Habibi Arehjan’s case was that she was incapacitated
by the injuries and he
determined that issue upon consideration of the medical
[76] Ms Habibi
Arehjan says that in exhibit 84 she “clearly states that she
couldn’t carry out the job for which she was
[77] Exhibit 84
is the termination form whereby Ms Habibi Arehjan left the employment of Sun
Metals. Exhibit 38 is a probation review
dated 21 September 2018, and exhibit
39 is a letter (with attachments) dated 14 November 2018 from Sun Metals to
“Nadia Habibi”,
obviously a reference to Ms Habibi Arehjan.
probation review contains comments:
“Nadia has experienced
with electrical /HV and Instrumentation.
She is doing lots of engineering work in terms of High level engineering,
including Electrical/Instrumentation.
She is doing lots of engineering work in terms of High level engineering,
including Electrical/Instrumentation installation specification
and sizing of
transformers, MCC SLD.
She is very good performance to meet our preliminary and detailed engineering
I’m so happy for her performance
October 2018, Ms Habibi Arehjan reported by email to relevant employees of Sun
Metals that she had injured herself by putting
dishes into the dishwasher
machine. This had occurred while she was at work for Sun
That email provoked the
letter from Sun Metals to Ms Habibi Arehjan of 14 November 2018 which became
exhibit 39. Sun Metals had
made an appointment for Ms Habibi Arehjan to be
assessed by an occupational physician and they sought an authorisation to be
by Ms Habibi Arehjan releasing medical information from the occupational
physician to Sun Metals.
[80] Exhibit 84,
which is the termination form, is dated 21 November 2018. It has attached to it
an email from Ms Habibi Arehjan
dated 26 October 2018 addressed to Peter
Mulligan “of Hays” which might be a recruitment agency. In that
email, Ms Habibi
Arehjan said:
Definitely, Sun Metals is not going to have any changes in my position
description; I am actively looking for a job in Brisbane.
termination form itself bears this:
“My reason for
leaving is:
The proposed JD is completely different from applied JD.”
[82] I infer
that “JD” refers to “job description.”
[83] Ms Habibi
Arehjan gave evidence before the Vice President about her experience with Sun
Metals. She said that she was looking
for an office job as she could cope with
work of that nature despite her injuries. She explained that the job description
position she obtained with Sun Metals did not match what was required in
the actual position which was maintenance
Ms Habibi Arehjan was
cross-examined before the Vice
and questioned about
her employment at Sun Metals. The cross-examination established that Ms Habibi
Arehjan was employed at a higher
salary than she was for Incitec and she left
because the job did not suit
[84] The Vice
President made no findings adverse to Ms Habibi Arehjan in relation to Sun
Metals. As already observed, he resolved
the contest as to whether she was
incapacitated, not by looking at her work at Sun Metals or her resignation, but
by considering
the medical evidence.
[85] There is no
substance in ground 4.
Ground 5 - The Commission erred by relying
on “the independent assessment doctor”, Dr Allen, “who
wasn’t aware
of the [neck] injury”
[86] The ground
relates to appeals to the Commission files WC/2019/157 and WC/2020/36
[87] Ms Habibi
Arehjan says in her first written outline:
“[27] The whiplash
injury was diagnosed by the appellant’s physiotherapist in May 2018. The
commissioner relied on the
independent assessment doctor, who wasn’t aware
of the injury. An independent medical assessor can only assess the area that
been asked. Dr. Allen assessed the shoulder injury in April 2018, which is
irrelevant to the neck injury.”
McMillan, on behalf of the Regulator, submitted:
error alleged here is that the Commission accepted Dr Allen’s expert
evidence regarding Ms Habibi Arehjan’s
neck injury when he was initially
engaged only in relation to her left shoulder injury. However, it is apparent
from Dr Allen’s
report and his oral evidence that he was aware of Ms
Habibi Arehjan’s neck injury, he was appropriately qualified to give an
opinion regarding that injury and it was appropriate for him to do
[89] Ms Habibi
Arehjan, in her reply submissions, submitted:
“[17] Referring
to paragraph [3], IME can only examine the area that was agreed upon with the
insurer; the neck injury wasn’t
diagnosed at the time of the assessment,
so it was impossible for R. Allen to examine the injury of which he wasn’t
Dr. Allen examined the shoulder in April 2018. The whiplash injury was
diagnosed by Ms. Corena Caltabiano on 25th May 2018, Dr. Allen
aware of the injury at the time of the assessment..”
[90] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s reference to paragraph [3] in paragraph [17] of her reply
submissions, is a reference to paragraph
[3] of those same reply submissions.
It appears as:
[3] Ethical Guidelines on Independent
Medical Assessments 2010. Revised 2015
3.1 Prior to conducting the independent medical assessment, the doctor should
ensure that the party requesting the report provides
a written explanation of
the medico-legal issues to be addressed. If in doubt about what to address, the
doctor should contact the
party. Generally, the issues will include a history
given by the examinee, results of examinations, investigations or testing,
on clinical material provided, diagnosis, prognosis and future
management of any condition.”
[91] As to Dr
Allen, the Vice President observed in his judgment:
Appellant was examined by Dr Phil Allen, Orthopaedic Surgeon on 27 April 2018.
Dr Allen reported the Appellant's cervical
spine revealed no spasm or tenderness
and she had symmetrical movement in all directions which was within normal
range. Dr Allen
could not find any objectively verifiable pathology in the left
“[78] In the report of Dr Phil Allen, Orthopaedic Surgeon dated 30
April 2018, he opined:
I could find no objectively verifiable pathology in the left shoulder. I
therefore conclude that regards to the left shoulder any
work related injuries
of the 10th February 2017 have now ceased.
There is no incapacity for work as an Electrical Engineer with respect to the
left shoulder.
In the absence of any objectively verifiable pathology in the left shoulder
there is no indication for any further medical treatment
hospitalisation.”
“[95] In respect of her shoulder, Dr Rimmerton said in his report of 9
November 2017 that the Appellant's shoulder was "back
to normal". In a facsimile
to WorkCover dated 26 February 2018 in answer to a question as to whether the
Appellant was able to return
to full duties in respect of her left wrist Dr Ryan
replied: "[y]es, this was likely, given her progress at her last consultation".
Further, Dr Allen expressed the view that: "There is no incapacity for work as
an Electrical Engineer with respect to the left shoulder".".
Allen’s report,
opines that Ms Habibi Arehjan’s left shoulder is normal and
“Examination of the cervical spine revealed no spasm or
tenderness and she had symmetrical movement in all directions which
the normal range. There were no radicular signs or symptoms in her
[93] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s complaint is that Dr Allen was only retained, she submits, to
examine her shoulder not her cervical
spine (neck). Ms Habibi Arehjan submits
that Dr Allen was not authorised to examine her neck and, therefore, his opinion
have been admitted into evidence.
evidence is obviously relevant and admissible. There is no suggestion that Dr
Allen was not qualified to give an opinion
as to Ms Habibi Arehjan’s neck
injury. In my view, there was no error in receiving and acting upon the
evidence. Even if
there was an error, it hasn’t affected the result as
there was other evidence. Dr Rimmington, an Orthopaedic Surgeon, thought
to Ms Habibi Arehjan’s cervical spine in 2017 “was
unremarkable” and Dr Bryant on the 2nd April 2019 thought
that the neck
[95] Ground 5
has no substance.
Ground 6 - The Commission erred by referring to
Ms Habibi Arehjan’s “redundancy” without providing evidence to
Fair Work Act 2009
[96] This ground
relates to appeals to the Commission files WC2019/157 and WC/2020/36.
[97] Ms Habibi
Arehjan says in her first written outline:
“[28] In multiple
paragraphs, the commissioner stated the redundancy agreement, without providing
the evidence to comply with
Fair Work Act 2009
- Legislation, division 11
requirements.”
McMillan, on behalf of the Regulator, submitted:
ground is premised on a misunderstanding of the law and the matters for
determination by the Commission in the appeals.
The provisions of the
Work Act 2009
as they relate to “redundancy” payments have no
application or relevance to the issues for determination in these appeals.
was no error in the Commission referring to Ms Habibi Arehjan’s
“redundancy”. The Settlement and Release
agreement between Ms Habibi
Arehjan and Incitec provided at clause 1.1 that Ms Habibi Arehjan’s
employment was terminated “for
reasons of redundancy” and Ms Habibi
Arehjan accepted in evidence that she had received a “redundancy”
[99] Ms Habibi
Arehjan refers to paragraph [7] of her reply outline, which is in the
“[7] The appellant denied the redundancy by Incitec
Pivot, The respondent failed to provide the termination notice, which issued
incitect Pivot, the appellant role (Responsible Electrical Engineer Role) was a
mandatory role, which couldn’t become redundant..
Job: Lead Electrical, Instrumentation and Controls Engineer at INCITEC
PIVOT LIMITED Australia (joblum.com)
The applanate and IPL agreed to be separated, without having any effect on
worker compensation benefits.”
[100] Chapter 2,
Fair Work Act 2009
contains the National Employment
Standards. Division 11 of that Part concerns “Notice of termination and
redundancy pay”.
There is nothing in that division relevant to the
entitlement of Ms Habibi Arehjan to Workers’ Compensation Payments under
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
reference to the redundancy payment is made by the Vice Present while recording
Ms Habibi Arehjan’s “Relevant
employment history”. The Vice
President said:
“[57] At the time of the motor vehicle
accident on 10 February 2017, the Appellant was employed as an Electrical
Engineer with
Incitec. She commenced her employment with Incitec on 1 February
[58] The Appellant's employment with Incitec was terminated by way of a
redundancy on 13 June 2018. Clause 1.1 of the redundancy agreement
Ms Habibi Arehjan's employment will be terminated for reasons of redundancy,
effective 13 June 2018.
[59] At clause 2.2 of the agreement, it says:
On the 1st business day after the 1st of July, the company will pay Ms Habibi
a) an amount equivalent to Ms Habibi Arehjan's leave entitlements (if any)
accrued to the End Date; and
b) the amount equivalent to five (5) weeks' notice; and
c) a redundancy payment of $30,000
in each case less amounts required to be deducted by the Company for
[60] Consistent with the redundancy agreement, the Appellant accepted that
she received her statutory leave entitlements, five weeks'
pay in lieu of
notice, and a redundancy payment of $30,000.”
evidence supports those findings, which appear to be non-contentious. Ground 6
has no substance.
Ground 7 - The Commission erred in its finding
at paragraph [84] of the reasons
ground concerns appeals in the Commission files WC/2019/157 and WC/2020/36.
[104] Paragraph
[84], which is referred to in the ground, is as
evidence has been adduced by the Appellant to suggest that at the time of the
cessation of the compensation payments that
she had any entitlement associated
with a musculoligamentous injury to the cervical spine.”
[105] In support
of this ground, Ms Habibi Arehjan submitted:
Paragraph 84 commissioner stated that :
No evidence has been adduced by the Appellant to suggest that at the time
of the cessation of the compensation payments that she had
any entitlement
associated with a musculoligamentous injury to the cervical spine.
The appellant has demonstrated her incapacity in multiple statements through
a medical expert and herself.
Due to her physical limitations, the plaintiff was not able to perform
physical activities, and to make a living, she had to turn
to intellectual
activities, which was difficult due to severe headaches as a result of the
whiplash injury. In 2018, she worked
November, she resigned as the job description didn’t
change. In 2019, she changed her job every 45 days until she was treated
March 2020, and after the treatment, she was continuously working and earning
McMillan, for the Regulator, submitted:
“34) This ground
alleges an error in the finding at paragraph [84] of the reasons, presumably on
the basis of the early grounds.
However, Ms Habibi Arehjan has not identified
any evidence adduced by her before the Commission to establish that she was
incapacitated
by her neck injury or that it required further treatment, for the
purposes of ss 144A and 144B of the Act, after 2 May 2019. There
is no error in
the Commission’s treatment of the evidence relevant to WC/2019/157 at
paragraphs [75] to [83] of the reasons
or in the conclusion at paragraph [84].
Habibi Arehjan asserts that she was “not able to perform physical
activities, and to make a living... as a result of the
whiplash injury”.
However, the weight of the evidence before the Commission supported a finding
that Ms Habibi Arehjan was
not incapacitated for work due to her neck injury and
it did not require further treatment from 2 May 2019.”
[107] Ms Habibi
Arehjan replied:
“[19] The appellant stand by her First
submission P[29].
[20] June 2018, Dr Simon Journeaux accepted that the appellant has
[21] Incapacity and treatment requirement have been recorded in multiple
letters from treatment physios, and improvement has been
[22] Impairment assessment shows 5% impairment after receiving 5 years
physio, and two procedure to burn the nerve neck”
[108] Paragraph
[84] in the Vice President’s judgment was followed
“[85] I accept the medical evidence, and, in particular
the evidence of Dr Bryant, which does not support a conclusion that
Appellant had a total or partial incapacity for work because of the accepted
work-related neck injury beyond 2 May 2019. Further,
the evidence does not
support a conclusion that there is a requirement for the Appellant to undergo
further medical treatment, hospitalisation
or other expenses for the management
of the accepted work-related neck injury beyond 2 May 2019.”
[109] Paragraphs
[84] and [85] are the concluding paragraphs in a passage in the judgment which
starts at paragraph [77], where the
Vice President summarises the medical
evidence relevant to appeal WC/2019/157 being the injury to the cervical spine.
When the judgment
is looked at as a whole it can been seen that, in paragraphs
[84] and [85], the Vice President is saying that he has accepted the
evidence and formed his decision upon that.
[110] Ms Habibi
Arehjan says there is other medical evidence. She referred to the report of Dr
Simon Journeaux. That was considered
at paragraph [31] of the Vice
President’s judgment:
“[31] On 28 June 2018 the
Appellant was examined by Dr Simon Journeaux, Orthopaedic Surgeon, who
(a) the Appellant reported a burning pain in the mid to low cervical spine
intermittently three to four times per week;
(b) the Appellant denied having any symptoms referable to the left or right
(c) the Appellant had likely suffered a musculoligamentous injury to the
cervical spine;
(d) that no further treatment would be of benefit in relation to the neck injury
(e) the Appellant had the capacity to work in her substantive role but had
partial incapacity related to ladder work and working
on certain sites as a
consequence of her left knee/femoral fracture.”
[111] The date
on which weekly payments were stopped was 2 May 2019. By that point there was a
body of evidence that there was no
incapacity for work in relation to Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s neck injury. In particular:
(a) Dr Allen’s opinion given on 27 April
(b) Dr Sterling’s certification of
(c) Dr Journeaux in his report of 28 June
(d) Dr Bryant in his report of 2 April 2019;
(e) Dr Bryant in his report of 15 April
[112] As to Dr
Journeaux’s evidence there are exhibits 101 and 102 being file notes of
conferences with the Regulator’s
counsel. Those notes were signed by the
[113] Exhibit
101 was made on 16 April 2020, it included:
“3. Dr Journeaux
noted the treatment plan proposed by Dr Berge, as outlined in his letter of 3
February 2020. Dr Journeaux considered
that the treatment proposed was unlikely
to be of benefit to Ms Habibi Arehjan because of psychosocial factors
influencing her presentation.”
[114] Exhibit
102 is dated 4 November 2021, it included:
“1. Further to
his report dated 28 June 2018, Dr Journeaux clarified that he believed Ms
Arehjan did not have any physical
incapacity for work because of her
musculoligamentous injury to the cervical spine.
The partial incapacity to which he referred was based on Ms Arehjan’s
self report of pain for which he was unable to find any
physical/structural
[115] Ms Habibi
Arehjan relies on evidence of her treating physiotherapist Carina Caltabiano.
Ms Caltabiano was called as a witness
before the Commission by Ms Habibi Arehjan
and several exhibits were
Those various
documents demonstrate that Ms Caltabiano, an experienced Physiotherapist treated
Ms Habibi Arehjan for neck and shoulder
difficulties beyond the date of
termination of payments.
Caltabiano was cross examined before the Commission. Counsel for the Regulator
attempted to illicit an acceptance from Ms
Caltabiano that she would defer to
the opinion of Orthopaedic Specialists. She refused to make that concession
saying, understandably,
that she formed her own views independently, but would
work collaboratively for a patient’s benefit with the
[117] The Vice
President does not refer to Ms Caltabiano’s evidence in the judgment.
However, when properly viewed, Ms Caltabino’s
evidence doesn’t go
far. She was treating Ms Habibi Arehjan for pain reported by Ms Habibi Arehjan
in her neck and shoulder.
That does not prove incapacity. The Vice President
relied upon a solid body of evidence from orthopaedic specialists to conclude
that the Regulator’s decision was fair and reasonable. In my view the
Vice President’s decision to do so was justified.
[118] Paragraph
[84] of the Commission’s reasons does not show error and ground 7 is not
Ground 8 - The Commission erred by referring [at] [92]
to Dr Sterling’s certification of Ms Habibi Arehjan on 8 June 2018 as
“fit for duty”
ground concerns appeals in the Commission files WC/2019/157 and WC/2020/36.
complaint is about the finding at paragraph [92] of the judgment under appeal.
Paragraphs [91] and [92] of the judgment
“[91] In the
medical report of Dr Greg Sterling, Orthopaedic Surgeon dated 6 June 2018 he
notes that the Appellant was performing
most of her work duties with the only
exception being going up and down ladders when on site.
[92] Dr Sterling certified the Appellant as fit for suitable duties with no
restrictions in hours or days which was signed by the
Appellant on 8 June
[121] In her
first written submission, Ms Habibi Arehjan said:
Paragraph 92 the commissioner refers to the suitable duty which signed by Dr.
Sterling and Dr. Remington, which doesn't
comply with Dr. Sterling's oral
testimony; this is reflected in the appellant's submission in paragraph 96. This
suitable duty doesn’t
cover S5 fracture and whiplash injury.”
McMillan’s response was:
“36) Ms Habibi Arehjan appears
to contend that the Commission erred by referring (at 92]) to Dr
Sterling’s certification
of Ms Habibi Arehjan on 8 June 2018 as “fit
for duty”. She refers to paragraph [96] of her final submissions to the
Commission,
in which she submitted:
“The mentioned suitable duty was approved by Dr. Sterling and Dr.
Rimmington without considering the Fracture of the distal
sacrum/coccydynia,
Soft tissue to lumbar spine, and other injuries which were accepted by work
cover in later date.”
Commission’s reference to Dr Sterling’s certification on 8 June 2018
was clearly relevant to the issue for determination
in WC/2020/36, being Ms
Habibi Arehjan’s entitlement to compensation from 18 June 2018 to 23 July
20218. Further, the other
evidence referred to by the Commission at paragraphs
[86] to [98] supported the conclusion at [100] that Ms Habibi Arehjan was not
incapacitated by any injury other than her left wrist ECD tendonitis during that
“impairment assessment” referred to at paragraph [32] of Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s submissions was not in evidence
before the Commission and does
not, in any event, prove incapacity for the purposes of s 144A of the Act.
the conclusion that Ms Habibi Arehjan was otherwise not entitled to compensation
during that period by operation of s 147
of the Act because of the payments she
received in accordance with the Settlement and Release agreement was plainly
correct at law.”
[123] In her
reply submissions, Ms Habibi Arehjan said:
“[23] The appellant
stands by her submission; each doctor can recommend a suitable duty based on the
injury that they are treating,
not for all injuries. The suitable duty dated
June 2018 doesn’t cover neck, Lumbar, injury and Coccyx fracture, which
accepted after June 2018.This resulted in an incident at SunMetals.
[24] The impairment assessment is fresh evidence, which proves that the
commissioner didn’t consider the appellant’s submission
evidences.”
Sterling is mentioned on numerous occasions in the Vice President’s
His opinions in
relation to Ms Habibi Arehjan are recorded in the passage in the part of the
judgment entitled “Background
There is no
complaint about the accuracy of what is recorded.
considering appeal WC/2020/36,
the Vice President referred to a good deal of evidence including the medical
report of Dr Sterling. This, the Vice President does
at paragraphs [91] and
[92] which appear earlier in these
[126] There
seems to be no complaint as to the accuracy of what was actually recorded by the
Commission in paragraphs [91] and [92]
but Ms Habibi Arehjan submits that Dr
Sterling was not assessing all of her injuries.
observed, the reference to Dr Sterling’s report was accurate. It formed a
legitimate part of a body of evidence from
which the Vice President drew the
conclusion that there was not an incapacity for
[128] No error
is shown and ground 8 has no substance.
Ground 9 - The Commission
“used an old case in which the decision was made based on another State
ground concerns all three appeals.
[130] Ms Habibi
Arehjan, in her first written submission on the appeals,
“[33]. The commissioner used an old case in which the
decision was made based on another state ACT, which is not applicable
Queensland, and the ACT based on which the decision was made is not valid
[34]. Problems seen in cases mentioned by commissioner have been addressed
in new ACT revision, the maximum payment limited to 5
years (Commonwealth v
Muratore Jacobs J ) and the leave entitlement can be cashed out (McTiernan J in
Thompson v Armstrong). There
is no retroactive law to accept the old version of
[35]. Retrospectivity information is amended in Worker Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act , which doesn’t include NSW worker
compensation Act
[36]. In the NSW Worker Compensation Act 1926-1947, the meaning of
incapacity includes affecting the earning capacity of a worker
opportunities for employment, which the appellant needed to resign as SunMetals
didn’t accept to change the job description,
which wasn't for the
appellant.”
And, earlier in the submissions, quoted these cases:
“[14] McTiernan J in Thompson v Armstrong & Royse Proprietary:
This case raises questions under the Workers' Compensation Act 1926-1947
New South Wales
. They concern the liability of the respondent in
respect of an injury received by the appellant whereby he was incapacitated for
work during a period which comprised leave and holidays.
The case shows that on 18th December 1947 the appellant was disabled for
work while in the respondent's service by an injury which
arose out of and in
the course of the employment and that the disablement did not cease until 30th
December 1947.
It appears that the respondent paid compensation under the Act to the
appellant for incapacity for work on the first and second
days of the
disablement only. The respondent denies that the injury resulted in incapacity
for work within the meaning of the Act
during any longer period than these two
The period beginning on 20th December and ending on 30th December
coincided with annual leave and Christmas holidays taken by the
respondent's
employees in accordance with the Federal industrial award regulating the
employment.
The employees of the respondent had a legal right by virtue of the award
to leave and holidays with pay. It provided for the "annual
close-down" of the
plant to permit the employees to take such leave. The plant was closed down for
this purpose from 20th December
1947 to 2nd January 1948.
Cardiff Corporation v. Hall 1 shows that the principle upon which
compensation is given under a Workers' Compensation Act is based
diminution of earning power by reason of the injury. In that case Buckley LJ.
said that the Act makes the employer an insurer
of capacity for work . This
capacity is the worker’s power to earn wages. The principle was again
stated in Harwood v. Wyken
Colliery Co.
By McTiernan, Fullagar and Kitto JJ. (Latham C.J. and Webb J.
dissenting, and Williams J. expressing no opinion}, that the wages
received by
the worker during the period of his annual holidays, not having been received in
respect of the injury and the consequent
incapacity to earn, were not a payment,
allowance or benefit which the worker received from the employer during the
period of his
incapacity to which the Commission was authorized by S. 13 of the
Act to have regard.
The argument assumes that the appellant was bound to the respondent by
his contract of service not to accept employment with any
other employer while
his contract of service subsisted but the statute clearly contemplates
concurrent contracts of service, e.g.
SS. 14 (a), 14 (b). The appellant was
entitled if physically capable to accept employment elsewhere during the period
of close-down.
Even though he could not work for the respondent he could have
worked for other employers if he had not been incapacitated.
For the respondent it was argued that where a contract of employment
remained on foot SO that the relation of employer and employee
still subsisted
(as in the present case) during a period of physical incapacity and the employer
in fact paid full wages (or presumably
any amount greater than the amount
claimable as compensation) the employee had no right to compensation. The right
to compensation
depended upon "total or partial incapacity for work' resulting
from an injury to which the Act applied (s. 9) and it was contended
incapacity for which the Act provided was an economic incapacity-an incapacity
for earning wages.
A worker is entitled to receive compensation in accordance with the
scale prescribed by the Act where total or partial incapacity
for work results
from the injury", S. 9. The Act makes the earnings of the worker the basis of
the compensation. In the case of total
or partial incapacity for work the
employer is liable to pay the compensation in the form of a weekly payment
during the incapacity.
The Act says that in the case of partial incapacity the
weekly payment shall not exceed the difference between the amount of the
weekly earnings of the worker before the injury and the average weekly amount he
is earning or is able to earn in some suitable
employment after the injury. The
nature of the case of total incapacity precludes such a limitation on the weekly
payment of compensation.
The personal injury sustained by the workman may incapacitate him from
earning wages either by rendering him physically unfit to
work or by preventing
him from getting work by reason of some handicap which his injury has imposed
upon him in the labour market
notwithstanding that he is as physically fit for
his work as he was before his accident." This passage clearly brings out the
significance
of the word "for" in the phrase incapacity for work". The loss for
which the Act gives the worker compensation is "incapacity for
[15] Thompson v Armstrong & Royse Pty Ltd has been proceed under NSW
worker compensation that is not apply in
Queensland.
[16] In Thompson v Armstrong & Royse Pty Ltd , employee paid 2 days for
incapacity.
[17] The appellant in the case of Thompson v Armstrong & Royse Pty Ltd
received the wage for the period that he was claiming,
when he was
incapacitated. His claimed was to received the wage on top of the wage he
received for holidays and Christmas.
In Thompson v Armstrong & Royse Pty Ltd ,
McTiernan, Fullagar and Kitto JJ. (Latham C.J. and Webb J. dissenting, and
Williams J. expressing no opinion), that the wages received
by the worker during
the period of his annual holidays, not having been received in respect of the
injury and the consequent incapacity
to earn, were not a payment, allowance or
benefit which the worker received from the employer during the period of his
to which the Commission was authorized by S. 13 of the Act to have
[18] In Commonwealth v Muratore Jacobs J (with whom
Gibbs, Stephen and Aickin JJ agreed)
In 1966 the Delegate of the Commissioner for Employees' Compensation
under the last-mentioned Act determined that the condition suffered
respondent and causing incapacity for work since 1st June 1965 was not the
result of injury by accident arising out of or
in the course of his employment
by the Commonwealth and was not the result of a disease due to the nature of the
employment.
The respondent, Vittorio Muratore, was an employee of the
Postmaster-General's Department when he was injured in the course of his
employment at various times between 1956 and 1963. He received compensation
Commonwealth Employees' Compensation Act 1930
when he was not
4. The respondent lodged an appeal to the District Court but on 28th
November 1972 the appeal was withdrawn and dismissed. In the
meantime on 30th
August 1972 a further determination was made by the Delegate of the Commissioner
(now under the Compensation (Commonwealth
Government Employees) Act 1971). This
the Commissioner was entitled to do by virtue ofs. 20 (4) (a) of the 1971 Act,
the earlier
determination of April 1971 made under the old Act being deemed to
be a determination under the 1971 Act (s. 107 (2)). The determination
"(1) The evidence before me, including specialist medical opinion,
indicates that since 24 June 1971 the said Vittorio Muratore has
been able to
earn, in some suitable employment or business, a weekly amount which is not less
than his weekly pay at the date of
injury as since varied. (2) NOW THEREFORE, in
pursuance of the provisions of the Compensation (Commonwealth Employees) Acts
including sections 4 (2), 104 (15) and 107 (2) of that Act, and further to
the determinations previously made, I hereby determine:
since 24 June 1971 the said Vittorio Muratore has been able to earn in
some suitable employment or business a weekly amount not less
than his average
weekly earnings before the injury and he is therefore not entitled to
compensation under section 46 (2) of the said
Act from and including 24 June
1971." (at p299)
[19] Queensland WorkCover accepted liability to pay compensation to the
appellant ( Nadia Habibi Arehjan), under
Workers' Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
, This Act establishes a
workers' compensation scheme for Queensland.”
McMillan, for the Regulator, submitted:
“40) This ground is
misconceived. The Commission properly referred at paragraphs [8] and [9] to
relevant authority as applied
in Queensland by this Court.”
[132] In reply,
Ms Habibi Arehjan said:
“[25] There is no retroactive law to
accept the old version of ACT, the referred cases were irrelevant to this case,
the referred
parts have been recorded in the appellant first submission.
[26] The respondent didn’t provide evidence for relativity between the
applied case and the presence case.
[27] The applied law shall be relevant to the case.”
[133] Beginning
at paragraph [4] of the judgment, the Vice President directed himself as to the
applicable law he should apply to
the case. After referring to various
provisions of the WCR Act, he turned to the notion of incapacity and
Colbran v Workers' Compensation Board of
the Industrial Court endorsed the following passage from the
decision of McTiernan J in
Thompson v Armstrong & Royse Pty Ltd
The phrase [incapacity for work] does not merely mean inability to work for
the employer in whose service the worker was injured.
An injury results in
incapacity for work according to the intention of the Act, when it takes away or
diminishes the power of the
worker to earn wages in some suitable
employment.
Arnotts Snack Products Pty Ltd v Yacob
, with reference to
Thompson v Armstrong & Royse Pty Ltd
, the test was expressed in this
Fullagar J said (81 CLR at 613): "A man is totally incapacitated for work
when he is, by reason of his injury, physically unable to
work. The words in
their natural and primary sense mean that. When their meaning has been expounded
by reference to inability to
earn wages, the purpose has been to make the
meaning more specific, and the result has been to extend rather than restrict
the meaning".
The same point was made, though less directly, by Kitto J who remarked (81
CLR at 621): "Loss of wages is in most cases a result of,
but it does not itself
constitute, the relevant economic fact. That fact is the inability, or the
reduced ability, by reason of a
physical deficiency, to sell work for wages".
See also McTiernan J (81 CLR at 602-3).
The judgments in Thompson were discussed by Jacobs J (with whom Gibbs,
Stephen and Aickin JJ agreed) in
Commonwealth v Muratore
[1978] HCA 47
(1978) 22 ALR
[1978] HCA 47
141 CLR 296
at 300-1, which related to the
Compensation
(Commonwealth Government Employees) Act 1971
(Cth). His Honour said (at
(ALR) 179; (CLR) 300): 'It has always been recognized that 'incapacity for
work', those words being taken
to refer to physical incapacity, is only relevant
where it produces an economic incapacity.' He was speaking, as the passage at
foot of p 301 makes plain, of compensable incapacity for work, so that the
employee's incapacity is:'... measured by the extent that
the amount per week
that he is able to earn in some suitable employment or business is less than his
average weekly earnings before
his injury.”
[134] The notion
of incapacity is one that has been common to workers’ compensation
legislation in Queensland and in other jurisdictions
for decades. The concept
is not defined in the WCR Act. While ultimately it is the provisions of the WCR
Act which must be construed
and applied, resort to cases which have considered
such a fundamental concept as incapacity in other statutes is conventional.
[135] The Vice
President’s reliance upon
Arnotts Snack Products Pty Ltd v
Armstrong and Royse Pty Ltd
both decisions of the High Court of Australia, was sound.
followed by the High Court in
Steggles Pty Ltd v
Canberra Abattoir Pty Ltd
were followed in
Scott v Sun
Alliance Ltd
[136] Ms Habibi
Arehjan does not suggest an alternative construction of the relevant sections of
the WCR Act.
[137] Ground 9
is dismissed.
Ground 10 – The
Commission “went beyond the expert evidence ... and relied on a surgical
treatment plan that wasn’t
part of the appeal”
ground relates to appeals to the Commission files WC2019/157 and
WC/2020/36.
her first written submission, Ms Habibi Arehjan
“[38]. The commissioner went beyond the expert
evidence and their testimony and relied on a surgical treatment requirement
wasn’t part of the appeal. The appellant clarified that the required
treatment is pain management, physiotherapy, and
chiropractic. The appellant
provided the evidence and exhibited the document in the hearing, showing her
incapability to move her
neck had improved.
Ms. Habibi Arehjan experienced the dizziness, made her breath to be shortened
and repeatedly she had the cough which caused the hearing
to be adjourned twice,
which shows she is still suffering from
impairments.”
McMillan for the Regulator submitted:
“40) Ms Habibi Arehjan
contends that the Commission “went beyond the expert evidence ... and
relied on a surgical treatment
plan that wasn’t part of the appeal”.
This appears to relate to her contention in WC/2019/157 and WC/2020/36 that she
was entitled to ongoing compensation because her injuries required further
treatment by way of pain management. There was no “surgical
plan” referred to in the evidence before the Commission. Rather, it
appears that this submission is directed to impugning
the opinions of the expert
witnesses who were surgeons, Drs Sterling, Allen, Journeaux, Rimmington, Ryan
and Bryant. However, Ms
Habibi Arehjan did not adduce any expert evidence to
support her contention regarding pain management or establish any basis upon
which the Commission ought to have rejected the evidence of the experts called
by the Regulator.
there was no error by the Commission’s treatment of the expert evidence or
in the conclusions reached in reliance
on that evidence at paragraphs [77] to
[104] of the reasons.”
[141] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s reply submissions said:
“[28] Dr. Bryant, in
oral testimony, admitted that the treatment strategy for whiplash injury people
is rehabilitation physicians
and occupational physicians jobs..
[29] The progress reports have been submitted as evidence that shows the
improvement.
Has been having treatment with a Chiro and a Physio In WA where now working,
neck with reduced movement
to that side. Lower back mostly ok only feels coccyx pain if sitting on hard or
uncomfortable chair. (L)
knee still unable to kneel on it or run. Awaiting trial
next week with Workcover. No pool near new work in WA to continue hydro exs.
[30] In oral testimony Dr. Bryant Stated that:
a standard surgical consultation, and rehabilitation physicians and
– and occupational physicians are far better qualified than
perform those sorts of assessments and – and – and – and
enroll in – in – in that sort of
treatment strategy. As a surgeon, I
– I need to exclude surgically correctable pathologies, and often with
whiplash injuries,
almost invariably with whiplash injuries, there is no
surgically treatable pathology, and so, depending on the patient's reported
going symptoms, alternative arrangements need to be made for ongoing treatment,
if – if it’s indicated
[31] While Dr. Bryant, admitted that the rehabilitation physicians are far
better than him for whiplash, and He accepted that Dr.
Hess is a reasonable
treatment. The commissioner went beyond the expert evidence, and in his
decision, he stated that:
The Appellant bore the onus of proof to show that the Regulator had erred.
In short, the only question for determination by the Commission
is whether the
Appellant has shown that she was entitled to weekly payments and the payment of
medical treatment, hospitalisation
and other expenses.
[32] Chapter 3, Part 8A, ss 144A and 144B of the WCR Act covers any type of
treatment, including pain management, chiropractors, and
physiotherapy, which
were part of the treatment plan for whiplash injuries, refer to EPC in P
[33] Two experts gave evidence in the hearing, Debbie Dale and Ms. Corena
Caltabiano, who both treated the appellant’s neck
injury between May 2018
and October 2021 under the Dr. Hess EPC Program. This continued in Karratha
under other physiotherapists.”
[142] Ms Habibi
Arehjan does not identify with precision the “surgical treatment
requirement” to which she refers in her
first submissions filed in the
appeal. Her point appears to be that:
(a) she has been receiving treatment;
(b) her ability to move her neck has improved; therefore
(c) the treatment was successful and should be the subject of payment by
WorkCover; and
(d) because she was dizzy and short of breath on the hearing before the
Commission it follows she is still suffering and, therefore,
ought to receive
ongoing payments.
[143] In her
submission, Ms Habibi Arehjan relies on a clinical note prepared by
Ms Deb Dale who is one of her treating
physiotherapist.
Has been having treatment with a Chiro and a Physio in WA where now working,
neck with reduced movement
to that side. Lower back mostly ok only feels coccyx pain if sitting on hard or
uncomfortable chair. (L)
knee still unable to kneel on it or run. Awaiting trial
next week with Workcover. No pool near new work in WA to continue hydro
[144] It can be
seen that the comments in Ms Dale’s note are under a heading
“subjective”. Those comments appear
to be a recitation of what Ms
Habibi Arehjan has said. There is another part of the note which is headed
“Objective”
which are, presumably, Ms Dale’s observations
recorded upon examination of
Ms Habibi Arehjan.
However, even those notes make reference to “still pain”, which must
be an observation made on the
basis of reporting by Ms Habibi Arehjan.
Habibi Arehjan’s difficulty is that there is a large body of evidence to
the effect that there are no ongoing effects
This evidence came
from Dr Rimmington, Dr Allen, Dr Sterling, Dr Piotrowska-Hess, Dr Journeaux and
Dr Bryant. That evidence was
all analysed by the Vice President and was
[146] There is
no substance to ground 10.
Ground 11 – The Commission
didn’t “consider the exhibits and hearing materials” and
didn’t comply with
the Commission’s code of conduct for
[147] Ms Habibi
Arehjan, in her first written submission, submitted:
The commissioner didn’t consider exhibits and hearing materials, CT scan
of the S5 fracture has been done in Brisbane
not in Tehran. The commissioner
didn't comply with section 2 of the Industrial Court OF Queensland, Queensland
Industrial Relations
Commission Code of Conduct for members of the
commission.”
“[51]. The commissioner didn’t consider exhibits and hearing
materials, used them selectively.”
McMillan, for the Regulator, submitted:
“43) There is no basis
to the allegation that the Commission “didn’t consider the exhibits
and hearing materials”
or “used them selectively”. The
Commission was not required, in its reasons, to refer to every exhibit or every
who gave oral evidence. However, “the essential ground or grounds
upon which the decision rests should be articulated”.
The reasons clearly
articulate the essential grounds for the Commission’s decision in each
appeal and the critical evidence
relied on in reaching those decisions.
is also alleged that the Commission didn’t comply with section 2 of the
Commission’s Code of Conduct for Members, which
sets out the duties of
members during hearings, relevantly to “listen to evidence” and
“deal with each matter on
its merits, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the applicable legislation.” There is no proper basis to
the Vice President failed in his duty to do those things during the
hearing before the Commission on 8 to 11 November 2021. No error
demonstrated.”
[149] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s reply submissions said:
“[35] The evidence and
oral testimonies are available, refer to previous Paragraphs.
[36] An industrial tribunal hearing is a formal process where a tribunal
panel reviews the facts of a case and makes a binding decision
on a matter. It
is a type of law court that makes judgments on disagreements between companies
and their workers. The hearing is
more formal than conciliation conferences and
involves the tribunal receiving arguments and evidence from both parties before
a decision. The commissioner ignored the required treatment, which was
confirmed by two experts and Dr.
[150] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s first submission on this ground refers to the statement in the
judgement to a CT scan being taken
in Tehran when it was in fact done in
Brisbane through Dr Bryant. This issue has already been dealt
[151] Contrary
to Ms Habibi Arehjan’s submissions, the Vice President obviously has
considered the exhibits and the evidence
before him. This is evidenced by the
detailed judgment produced.
[152] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s real complaint is that the Vice President has not referred to
every piece of evidence which was before
him. Ground 11 is really a complaint
[153] It is well
established that reasons must be given and the failure to give sufficient
reasons constitutes an error of
Drew v Makita
(Australia) Pty Ltd
JA, following
Housing Commission of New South Wales v Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty
considered that the
detail to which a judge must descend in exposing their reasoning depends on the
nature of the issues for determination
and the function to be served by the
giving of reasons.
been various judicial statements as to when reasons will or will not be
inadequate.
Beale v Government Insurance Office of New South
Meagher JA identified
“fundamental elements” of a statement of reasons which it is useful
to consider. They are:
(a) the need to refer to relevant evidence;
(b) to set out material findings of fact and any conclusions or ultimate
findings reached; and
(c) the process of reasoning by which the law is applied to the facts found
should be articulated.
[155] As Muir JA
observed in
Drew v Makita,
the fundamental elements identified in
are not rigid rules or principles but are considerations which may
assist in the assessment of the adequacy of
, Meagher JA, when considering the first of the three fundamental
elements observed;
“there is no need to refer to the relevant
evidence in detail, especially in circumstances where it is clear that the
has been considered. However, where certain evidence is important or
critical to the proper determination of the matter and is not
referred to by the
trial judge, an appellate Court may infer that the trail judge overlooked the
evidence or failed to give consideration
As to the second fundamental element, his Honour observed:
“...where findings of fact are not referred to, an appellate Court may
infer that the trial judge considered that finding to
be immaterial”.
In relation to the second and third fundamental elements, his Honour
“it may not be necessary to make findings on every argument or destroy
every submission, particularly where the arguments advanced
are numerous and are
of varying significance.”
[157] Here, Ms
Habibi Arehjan was involved in a serious accident and suffered significant
injuries which, on any assessment, required
treatment over a significant period.
The central question for determination by the Commission was as to when the
payments of compensation
ought to stop. That was always an issue which would
primarily, if not completely, be determined upon consideration of the medical
[158] His Honour
has summarised the chronology of events including treatment received by Ms
Habibi Arehjan after the accident. That
is done under the heading Background to
President then considered Ms Habibi Arehjan’s employment
before turning to the
consideration of each of the appeals by reference to the evidence which the Vice
President judged to be significant
determinative.
There is no
inadequacy in the expression of the reasons.
[159] The other
complaint in ground 11 is as to compliance by the Vice President with s 2 of the
Code of Conduct for Members
. It is unnecessary to delve into
what could be difficult questions as to the interrelationship between the
Code of Conduct
and the legal discharge of the obligation to decide the
[160] Ms Habibi
Arehjan does not descend to particulars as to how s 2 of the
been breached. In my view, there is no substance to the complaint because it is
evident from the reasons, as I have already
explained, that the issues before
the Commission have been sufficiently explored and the reasons for the dismissal
of the appeals
have been sufficiently explained.
[161] There is
no substance to ground 11.
Ground 12 – The Commission
“ignored” the requirements of s 144 of the WCR Act
ground concerns appeals to the Commission files WC/2019/157 and WC/2020/36.
[163] In her
first written submission Ms Habibi Arehjan said:
commissioner ignored the
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act
section 144
requirement, that states
For the day the worker stops work because of the injury, the worker is
entitled to compensation under this part for the injury.
[This includes
partial and total incapacity]”
McMillan’s submissions were:
“45) Section 144 of the
Act relevantly provides that “for the day the worker stops work because of
the injury, the worker
is entitled to compensation under this part for the
injury.” There is no dispute that Ms Habibi Arehjan was entitled to
compensation
on the day of her injuries. The section has no relevant application
to these appeals.”
[165] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s submissions in reply were:
“[37] The appellant
was eligible for compensation for WC157 up to 4th October 2019. For a specific
injury, the compensation
cannot stop and continue. The respondent didn’t
provide the relevant law to state that ss144 can stop and continue after a
while. An injury cannot heal and can get injured again. If the treatment
isn’t provided, the condition can get worse, but the
healed injury cannot
[166] It is
difficult to discern the real complaint which is sought to be articulated by
this ground. Section 144 is in Part 8 of
Chapter 3 of the WCR Act. Part 7
concerns “Payment of compensation”. Part 8 concerns
“Compensation for day of
injury” and Part 8A, which contains ss 144A
and 144B concerns “When entitlement to compensation stops”.
[167] Sections
142, 143 and 144, which are the only three sections in Part 8 of Chapter 3
Application of pt 8
This part applies only if a worker stops work because of an injury and under
the industrial instrument or contract of employment applying
(a) the worker is not entitled to be paid for the whole of the day on which the
worker stops work; or
(b) no amount is specified as being payable to the worker for the whole of the
day on which the worker stops work; or
(c) the amount specified as being payable to the worker for the whole of the day
on which the worker stops work is less than the
amount payable as compensation
under this part.
143 Definition for pt 8
In this part—
compensation under this part
means an amount equal to the
amount the worker would have received from the worker’s employment for the
day on which the worker
stops work because of an injury if the worker were at
work and the injury had not been sustained.
144 When employer must pay worker for day of injury
(1) For the day the worker stops work because of the injury, the worker is
entitled to compensation under this part for the injury.
(1A) Subsection (1) applies despite anything in an industrial instrument or
contract of employment applying to the worker.
(2) Despite section 109, the employer must pay the compensation.
(3) The amount of compensation under this part that is payable is in
addition to any other compensation payable to the worker under
(4) The day for which compensation under this part is payable is not to be
included in the excess period under section 66.”
[168] Part 8 is
designed to ensure that, where, by a worker’s terms of employment, the
worker would not be entitled to be paid
for the whole of the day on which they
were injured and stopped work, compensation will be payable in a way enabling
the worker to
recover the full day’s pay notwithstanding the terms of
employment.
[169] As already
observed, there is no doubt here that Ms Habibi Arehjan was injured in the
course of her employment, and was entitled
to compensation. The question before
the Commission was as to when the payment of compensation ceased. Part 8 of
Chapter 3 is not
relevant to that issue, and there is no substance in ground
Ground 13 – The Commission “went beyond”
the evidence of Dr Ryan
ground concerns the appeal in Commission file WC/2020/37.
[171] Ms Habibi
Arehjan, in her first written submissions in this appeal,
“[45]. The Commissioner went beyond of Dr Ryan
confirmation that the statement in report dated 30th of August 2019, doesn't
mean that without symptoms and previous employment in full capacity. Also Dr.
Ryan confirmed that the report dated 30th of August
2019, doesn't include the
finding in April 2020 [intersection Syndrome]
[46]. In all time, the appellant was under light duty, as tolerated by
patient, Just for wrist injury, it wasn't included whiplash
injury. The incident
in Arcadis was raise because of severe headache and dizziness in the result of
whiplash injury.
[47]. BRS change the starting date from December 2019 to 6th January 2020, in
request of Ms. Habibi Arehjan, because of her hand situation.
[48]. From April 2020 to September 2020, because of COVID 19, the appellant
didn't work normally in the work environment.
[49]. 4th June 2020, Dr. Ryan Confirmed that incapacity due to work related
injury didn't stopped and Ms. Habibi Arehjan was under
suitable duty since
August 2019.”
McMillan submitted for the Regulator:
“46) Similar to Ground 2
and Ground 10, this ground alleges that the Commission “went beyond”
the evidence of Dr
Ryan. The Commission dealt with Dr Ryan’s evidence at
paragraphs [19], [23], [55]-[56], [95] and [108]-[113]. The Commission’s
conclusion at paragraph [114] is entirely consistent with and supported by the
evidence referred to earlier in the reasons. Ms Habibi
Arehjan refers to exhibit
61, a work capacity certificate issued by Dr Ryan on 20 June 2020, to contend
that Dr Ryan confirmed in
his evidence that incapacity had not stopped at that
date. However, after some confusion in oral evidence, Dr Ryan clarified that
opinion that Ms Habibi Arehjan had been fit for suitable duties since August
2019 had not changed.”
[173] In her
written submissions in reply, Ms Habibi Arehjan
“[39] The appellant stands by her submissions in March
2020 and October 2023.”
[174] Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s reply submissions refer to her submissions of March 2020 and
October 2023. I suspect that the reference
to the submissions of March 2020
should be a reference to submissions filed in the Commission on 17 March 2022.
The submissions
of October 2023 are Ms Habibi Arehjan’s primary written
submissions filed in the appeal. The relevant parts have been identified
appear above.
[175] No attempt
has been made by Ms Habibi Arehjan to identify those parts of the submissions of
March 2022 which she says I should
consider in the course of dealing with ground
[176] Ms Habibi
Arehjan has carriage of the appeal. I have attempted to consider every
submission that she has made. However, the
written submission of 17 March 2022
is 60 pages in length containing 163 paragraphs. I do not intend to sift
through the document
in the hope that I can identify something which Ms Habibi
Arehjan might rely upon in relation to ground 13 of the appeal.
[177] I shall
have regard to her first submissions filed in the appeal and, of course, the
documents and evidence to which she refers
in that submission.
[178] As can be
seen from paragraph [49] of Ms Habibi Arehjan’s first written submission,
reliance is had by her upon a document
dated 4 June 2020 which became Exhibit
61. This document was produced by WorkCover with the intention that Dr Ryan
would complete
some of the proforma parts and return it to WorkCover. That is
what occurred.
document posed two questions for Dr Ryan. The first was: “1. Has the
incapacity due to the work related injuries
stopped? (please note that capacity
means that the injured worker can return to work, not necessarily their
pre-injury work.).”
Dr Ryan ticked the box “No”. Then
appeared another question, namely: “If it has not stopped, when do you
that the incapacity because of the work related injury will stop?”
To that Dr Ryan wrote “7/20”, meaning July 2020.
[180] Another
question on the form was as to whether the work related injury would improve
from further medical or surgical treatment.
Dr Ryan answered that question
[181] From that
document, Ms Habibi Arehjan maintains that in the opinion of Dr Ryan she was
incapacitated to 4 June 2020 and would
continue to be incapacitated until July
[182] Dr Ryan
gave evidence to the Commission on the third day of the hearing. He was called
by the Regulator and cross-examined
by Ms Habibi Arehjan.
respect to Ms Habibi Arehjan, she may not have appreciated the distinction
between the injury persisting, and the injury
being incapacitating in the legal
sense. In re-examination this exchange occurred:
BLATTMAN: Yes, just a few things, Doctor. I won’t keep you long. You were
just taken to exhibit 61 on page 214, and
that was the position as at the 4th of
APPELLANT: Would you please repeat the page.
HIS HONOUR: It’s - - -
MS BLATTMAN: Page 214.
HIS HONOUR: ---214.
APPELLANT: Yep.
MS BLATTMAN: So you indicated that the incapacity hadn’t stopped, but
it’s the case, isn’t it, that at that time,
you considered Ms Habibi
fit for suitable duties?---Correct.
And that had been the case since in or about August 2019?---Yes.”
[184] Although
Exhibit 61 could have been clearer, the only sensible interpretation of Dr
Ryan’s evidence is that while the
injury continued to have effect as late
as June and July 2020, Ms Habibi Arehjan was not incapacitated for employment as
from, 16 August 2019.
[185] The Vice
President made this finding:
“[114] In respect of WC/2020/37
based on the expert medical evidence of Dr Ryan, which I accept, together with
the Appellant's
employment history as set out above, I find that the Appellant
was not relevantly incapacitated for employment on and from 16 August
finding was clearly correct and there is no substance in ground
Conclusions and orders
grounds of appeal have failed so the appeal must be dismissed.
submissions have been made in relation to costs. It is appropriate that
directions are made for the exchange of written
submissions on costs.
[189] The orders
appeal is dismissed.
respondent file and serve any written submissions and affidavits in support on
the question of costs by 4.00 pm on 11 November
appellant file and serve submissions and any affidavits in support on the
question of costs by 4.00 pm on 25 November 2025.
party may by 4.00 pm on 2 December 2025 give notice to the other and to the
Registrar of an intention to make oral submissions
on costs and the Registrar
shall then allocate a date for hearing the submissions.
the absence of notice being given pursuant to order 4, the question of costs
will be determined on the basis of any written submissions
received and without
further oral submissions.
Habibi Arehjan v
Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 230.
Section 540(1)(a)(ix).
Turay v Workers’
Compensation Regulator
[2023] ICQ 13
generally Workers’
Compensation Regulator v Glass
[2020] QCA 133
(2020) 4 QR 693.
Industrial Relations Act
(2003) 214 CLR
At [25]; and followed in
[2019] HCA 28
(2019) 266 CLR 129.
[2019] HCA 28
(2019) 266 CLR 129.
[2019] HCA 28
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
181 CLR 487
at 492; and see
R v Thrupp & Ors
[2024] QCA 134
authorities analysed therein at [123].
Excerpts of Ms Habibi
Arehjan’s written submissions have been faithfully reproduced throughout
this judgment, notwithstanding
the appearance of obvious errors.
Habibi Arehjan v
Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 230.
Exhibit 49; and
Arehjan v Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 230
Habibi Arehjan v
Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 230
and [79]-[85].
Paragraphs [57]-[74].
WC/2019/157 at paragraphs
[75]-[85]; WC/2020/36 at paragraphs [86]-[104]; WC/2020/37 at paragraphs
[105]-[114].
Paragraph [69] of
Arehjan v Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 230
appears at paragraph [73] of these reasons.
Habibi Arehjan v
Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 230
, commencing at
paragraph [10].
Beginning at [57].
Paragraph [64] can be
Exhibit 38.
Part of exhibit 49.
Exhibit 84.
T 1–83-T1-98 and;
T1-115 to T1-145.
See exhibits 38 and 39.
Exhibit 80.
Habibi Arehjan v
Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 230
Habibi Arehjan v
Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 230.
Habibi Arehjan v Workers’ Compensation
Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 230
Paragraph [28].
Paragraph [31].
Paragraph [47].
Paragraph [48].
Exhibits 101 and 102.
Exhibits 22 to 33.
See for example exhibit
The report is Exhibit
Paragraphs [15], [21],
[25], [28], [29], [32], [37], [44], [52], [91] and [92].
Paragraphs [15], [21],
[25], [28], [29], [32], [37], [44], [52].
Commencing at paragraph
At paragraph [120] of these
[1985] HCA 2
(1985) 155 CLR 171.
[1950] HCA 46
(1950) 81 CLR 585.
[1987] HCA 35
(1987) 163 CLR 321.
(1989) 167 CLR 533.
[1993] HCA 46
(1993) 178 CLR 1.
Paragraph [38] of those
submissions finishes with a quote of a passage from
Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal v Bond
(1990) 170 CLR 321 which doesn’t seem relevant to what
has been identified as ground 10.
Relevantly, the neck.
Habibi Arehjan v
Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 230
Paragraph [34] of the reply
submissions is not reproduced as it is just an observation as to the form of the
Regulator’s submission.
See paragraphs [32]-[44] of
these reasons.
Drew v Makita
(Australia) Pty Ltd
[2009] QCA 66
[2009] 2 Qd R 219
[2009] QCA 66
[2009] 2 Qd R 219.
[1983] 3 NSWLR 378
Drew v Makita
(Australia) Pty Ltd
Soulemezis v Dudley
(Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
Beale v Government Insurance
Office of New South Wales
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
Flannery v Halifax
Estate Agencies Ltd
[1999] EWCA Civ 811
[2000] 1 WLR 377.
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430.
Drew v Makita
(Australia) Pty Ltd
[2009] QCA 66
[2009] 2 Qd R 219
[77] at 443.
Habibi Arehjan v
Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 230
At [57] – [74].
WC/2019/157 at [75]-[85];
WC/2020/36 at [86]-[104]; and WC/2020/37 at [105]-[114].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (533 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter