URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBCCMCmr/2025/401.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parkside Apartments Toombul [2025] QBCCMCmr 401 (11 November 2025)
ADJUDICATOR’S ORDER
Office of the
Commissioner
for Body Corporate and Community
Parkside Apartments Toombul
[2025] QBCCMCmr 401
Richard Boothby (
The Body Corporate for Parkside Apartments Toombul
Peter Morris (
affected person
Parkside Apartments Toombul CTS 39237
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 227(1)(b)
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation Module)
Regulation 2020
Accommodation Module
APPLICATION NO:
DECISION DATE:
11 November 2025
DECISION OF:
L Jones, Adjudicator
CATCHWORDS:
INTERIM ORDER – whether interim relief that would stop the body
corporate from acting on motions to reimburse lot owners is
Act, s 279.
INTERIM ORDERS
application for interim orders is dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. Overview
application for interim orders is brought against the body corporate by the
owner of Lot 804 in the scheme.
[2] This dispute
has some connection to previous applications for interim and final orders,
Parkside Apartments Toombul
[2025] QBCCMCmr 68
Parkside Apartments
[2025] QBCCMCmr 230.
Those applications were also lodged by this
applicant against the body corporate.
[3] The body
corporate is undertaking maintenance works that allegedly displaces occupiers of
some lots. The body corporate’s
committee passed motions that had the
effect of reimbursing lot owners for relocation costs or lost rent for the
period of the works.
applicant takes issue with those committee decisions because, at an
extraordinary general meeting in November 2024, the applicant
submitted a motion
that proposed the body corporate engage a law firm, Mahoneys (who represents the
applicant in this matter, as
well as previous applications), to provide legal
advice about ‘consequential damage liability’ related to the body
corporate’s
maintenance works. The motion passed. However, Mahoneys has
not been engaged by the body corporate.
applicant’s position is that it is unreasonable for the committee to
decide to reimburse lot owners without obtaining
legal advice from Mahoneys,
pursuant to the previous general meeting resolution.
applicant seeks a final order that would require the body corporate to obtain
the legal advice from Mahoneys before making
payment to any lot owners for
damage or relocation costs.
meantime, the applicant seeks interim orders that would stop the committee from
acting on its resolutions to pay lot owners
either until the dispute is finally
resolved, or the body corporate passed a resolution at a general meeting
permitting such payments.
dismissed the application for interim orders as, on my preliminary
(a) I am not currently satisfied there is a prima facie case for the final
orders that would sufficiently justify interim relief
(i) The wording of the motion does not clearly support the interpretation that
the body corporate could not resolve to reimburse
lot owners without obtaining
legal advice prior.
(ii) The body corporate has previously passed an ordinary resolution that
permitted the committee to make such reimbursement decisions.
This motion was
unsuccessfully challenged by the applicant via a previous application to an
adjudicator, where the adjudicator made
comment that the liability for such
costs has arisen from the body corporate’s works.
(iii) There is a question as to whether it would be reasonable for the committee
to act on the motion to engage Mahoneys, in circumstances
where there is now
risk of a perceived conflict of interest, and the body corporate would not have
had regard to this issue at the
time it passed the motion to obtain advice from
(b) I am also not satisfied the nature, circumstances or balance of convenience
justifies the interim relief, or that the orders
would be just and equitable,
(i) The final orders do not expressly challenge the validity of the committee
decisions for reimbursement.
(ii) The interim orders only expressly apply to two decisions of the committee,
where at least one other similar decision has been
(iii) The interim orders appear to be of little utility, where the orders would
stop payment to impacted lot owners unless same was
approved by resolution at a
general meeting. There is a strong argument these decisions have already been
approved via a motion at
a subsequent general meeting.
(iv) The works appear to relate to the structural integrity of the building. The
interim orders may bring further dispute and delay
to the works.
(v) The body corporate has acted on the committee decisions to reimburse lot
owners (with payments taking place on a regular basis).
Those owners have acted
in reliance of these agreements and would be negatively impacted by the interim
2. Background
survey plans for the scheme show it is a building format plan subdivision of 83
lots and common property, in a 12 level concrete
block building.
community management statement shows that the Accommodation Module applies.
[11] It is not
disputed that there are maintenance works taking place at the scheme that the
body corporate has an obligation to undertake.
applicant acknowledges that some lot owners have been unable to reside in their
lots as a result of the works,
does not dispute that those lot owners may have a right to seek compensation
from the body corporate in relation to property
damage as a result of a failure
to maintain by the body
2.1. Motion for engagement
applicant says the idea of the body corporate reimbursing impacted lot owners
for losses is controversial, and as a result,
an extraordinary general meeting
was requisitioned and held on 19 November 2024 (
) where the
following motion was resolved to pass, which I will refer to as
Lawyer Engagement
Motion 7 – Independent review of claims for consequential damage –
Level 1 building defect
That the Body Corporate appoint Mahoneys to act, and provide legal advice, on
the Body Corporate’s consequential damage liability
and other issues at
the Scheme relating to the level 1 building deficiency up to the value of $5000.
A copy of any resulting legal
advice is to be fully communicated to all lot
[14] The body
corporate has not acted on the passed Motion for Lawyer Engagement.
2.2. Subsequent general meeting
the passing of the Motion for Lawyer Engagement, the body corporate held its
annual general meeting on 30 January 2025
), where the following
motion was passed, which I will refer to as the
Associated Costs
Level 1 Associated Costs
That, subject to Motion 18 and either 15a or 15b being carried, the Body
Corporate authorise the Committee to approve up to $183,680.20
for the Level 1
Associated costs as outlined the attached Project Estimate, subject to
sufficient documentation to support the claim
being received, with the
anticipated costs as follows:
Rental Leases 6 Lots x $7,865.00 $47,190.00
Bonds 6 Lots x $2,860.00 $17,160.00
Bond Cleaning 6 Lots x $750 $4,500.00
Relocation - Departing 6 Lots x $800.00 $4,800.00
Relocation - Returning 6 Lots x $800.00 $4,800.00
Offsite Storage Provisional Sum $5,712.00
Recovery of Losses Provisional Sum $14,070.00
Carparks Provisional Sum $48,750.00
Gardens Provisional Sum
$20,000.00_
ESTIMATED TOTAL
$166,982.00
**Note: the above estimates may vary by up to 10%
Further, that the Body Corporate raise a special levy totalling $183,680.20,
being $221.30 per contribution entitlement ($2,213.00
per Unit)...
[16] Despite the
Associated Costs Motion being directly relevant to this dispute, this meeting
and its motions was not disclosed in
the application.
2.3. Previous dispute
applicant, represented by Mahoneys, sought orders of an adjudicator disputing
the Associated Costs Motion and other motions,
for several reasons including
that the body corporate acted unreasonably in passing the motion. The
application was ultimately dismissed
Parkside Apartments Toombul
[2025] QBCCMCmr 230.
[18] Despite
comments and findings of the adjudicator in that decision being relevant to this
current dispute, the previous disputes
were not disclosed to me in the
application.
2.4. Disputed committee decisions
22 September 2025, the committee passed the following motions via a vote outside
of committee meeting:
Motion 1 – Associated Costs – Additional Rent Lot 104
That the Body Corporate resolve to approve the associated costs claim for Lot
104 to for rent for an additional 26 week period commencing
18.09.2025 and
expiring 18.03.2026, at a cost of $800 per week plus an additional bond of
$200.00 plus a rent adjustment of $214.30.
Motion 2 Associated Costs Lot 107 Loss of Rent
That the Body Corporate resolve to approve the associated costs claim for Lot
107 for loss of rent for a 28 week period commencing
22.09.2025 and expiring
07.04.2026 at a cost of $650.00 per week.
applicant refers to the above decisions as the
Resolutions
around 7 October 2025, the committee also passed a resolution via a vote outside
of committee meeting to reimburse the
owner of Lot 108 for loss of rent for a 26
week period. While this motion is disclosed in the application materials, it is
not expressly
referenced in the interim order sought and does not form part of
the applicant’s express definition of the disputed Committee
Resolutions.
It may be captured in the second part of the interim order sought, but it is not
entirely clear what the applicant’s
intentions are.
2.5. Final order sought
final order the applicant seeks, which is not being determined at this time,
reads as follows:
(a) a declaration that the Body Corporate must comply with the [Motion for
Lawyer Engagement] prior to considering and voting on
motions to make payment to
lot owners for consequential damage or associated loss as those terms are used
by the Body Corporate
2.6. Interim orders sought
interim orders the applicant seeks, which are being determined in this decision,
read as follows:
(a) that until:
(i) further order;
(ii) the resolution or discontinuance of this proceeding;
the Body Corporate for Parkside Apartments Toombul Community Titles Scheme
39237, whether by its committee, servants or agents, must
(iii) make the payments contemplated by, or otherwise act upon, the resolutions
of the committee purportedly passed outside committee
meeting on 22 September
2025 and recorded as motions 1 and 2 in the minutes of cote outside of committee
meeting dated 22 September
(iv) otherwise cause payments to be made to lot owners in respect of any claims
for consequential loss or damage without first:
A. obtaining approval for the said payment by ordinary resolution passed in a
general meeting; or
B. complying with the resolution made in respect of [the Motion for Lawyer
Engagement] at the extraordinary general meeting of the
body corporate held on
19 November 2024.
2.7. Submissions
may make interim orders without seeking submissions from the respondent or ant
affected parties.
However, where
appropriate, I may seek comment from parties the order may negatively impact. In
the circumstances, I found it appropriate
to give opportunity of response from
the body corporate and the owners of Lots 104, 107 and 108. Those lot owners are
as affected parties by the applicant, but I consider they may be
negatively impacted by the application.
3. Analysis
[25] Interim
orders are temporary in their effect. Typically, their purpose is to maintain
the status quo, preserving a party’s
rights or interests until the matter
can be finally determined, usually by stopping a party from taking certain
[26] The ability
for an adjudicator to make interim orders is provided for in the legislation.
All orders of an adjudicator must be
For interim orders, an
adjudicator may make the order where satisfied, on reasonable grounds, that the
order is necessary due to
the nature or urgency of the
circumstances.
Adjudicators often
follow the test applied by courts in interlocutory applications, being whether
the applicant has shown that it
has a prima facie case, and whether the
applicant has shown that the balance of convenience favours the granting of the
relief claimed.
[27] Therefore,
to be successful in their application for interim orders, the applicant must
satisfy me that:
(a) There is a prima facie case to justify relief.
(b) The balance of convenience justifies the interim relief.
[28] Ultimately,
the order must also be just and equitable.
3.1. Prima facie case
I am not determining the final orders sought, determining whether there is a
genuine legal issue at the interim stage requires
some level of assessment of
the prospects of success in the application’s final orders.
[30] The onus is
on the applicant to satisfy the adjudicator that there is a prima facie case to
justify the relief they are seeking.
The applicant does not necessarily need to
show that it is more probable than not that they would succeed. Rather, the
need to show a sufficient likelihood of success to justify interim
How strong the possibility
of success needed to secure the interim relief depends upon the nature of the
rights the applicant asserts,
and the consequences of the order
3.1.1. Declaratory order
applicant has framed the final order as a declaration. On my preliminary view, I
am not satisfied this is appropriate, nor
reflective of the applicant’s
declaratory order serves to state or clarify legal rights without directing any
specific action. It is non-coercive in nature.
On the other hand, a mandatory
or prohibitory order compels a party to do, or refrain from doing, an act.
[33] The rest of
the application’s contents, including the nature of the interim relief
sought, indicates the applicant wishes
to compel the body corporate to engage
Mahoneys before making further decisions. My preliminary view is that the
applicant’s
intention does not align with the nature of a declaratory
[34] My role is
to determine whether the orders sought are justified. The wording of the relief
sought is pivotal, as it dictates
what questions of fact and law I need to
determine. If this dispute is to continue, I would encourage the applicant to
the framing of the final orders.
[35] I will
extend some grace to the applicant and proceed on the basis that the applicant
seeks mandatory relief.
3.1.2. Compliance with Motion for Lawyer
applicant wishes to see the body corporate obtain legal advice before any
decisions are made regarding reimbursement. The
applicant argues:
(a) The committee has an obligation to carry out valid resolutions of the body
corporate made at a general meeting.
(b) It is unreasonable for the committee to not put into effect the Motion for
Lawyer Engagement, as it is not entitled to disregard
the wishes of owners.
[37] The body
corporate argues that whether the body corporate has an obligation to implement
the Motion for Lawyer engagement has
no bearing on whether the Committee
Decisions, made in accordance with the Associated Costs Motion, should be
implemented.
[38] I am not
currently satisfied there is a sufficient prima facie case for the final order
sought that would justify interim relief,
based on this argument.
[39] The final
order is not simply that the committee should engage Mahoneys for legal advice.
It goes further than that. The final
order sought would restrain the committee
from paying lot owners for any loss associated with the works, until the legal
been obtained.
preliminary view, the Motion for Lawyer Engagement does not clearly state such
an intention, and that view is given further
weight in the context of the
general meeting resolutions. The Motion for Lawyer Engagement certainly does
state that Mahoneys be
engaged for legal advice, but it is not clearly framed as
a prerequisite for any other decision. The passing of the Associated Costs
Motion at a later general meeting where legal advice had not been obtained,
muddies the water further. Arguably, the Associted Costs
Motion arguably revokes
the Motion for Lawyer Engagement, by necessary implication, because it
authorises the body corproate to spend
money without the advice from
[41] Insofar as
there is any argument that the committee should act on the Motion for Lawyer
Engagement, without the question of whether
it may act on the Committee
Resolutions, I still hold concerns.
legislation does state the committee must put into effect the lawful decisions
of the body corporate.
legislation also states the committee must act
reasonably.
There is a question
around whether it would be reasonable for the committee to act on the engagement
in the current circumstances.
[43] Since the
passing of the Motion for Lawyer Engagement, Mahoneys have acted against the
body corporate in several applications
related to the issue it was going to give
advice on, including this application.
preliminary review, which is only based on a brief overview of the materials
currently in front of me, there is the possibility
that Mahoneys have now acted
on related matters where the body corporate’s and the applicant’s
interests may oppose.
Therefore, it is not inconceivable that there is the
potential for conflict of interest with the engagement. While this potential
not have existed at the time of the Motion for Lawyer Engagement passing, it may
now be a significant factor. The body corporate
has not given informed consent
to Mahoneys to act and give it advice in these new circumstances. I think it is
certainly questionable
as to whether it would be reasonable for the committee to
now act on the Motion for Lawyer Engagement, despite the decision being
a general meeting.
3.1.3. Reasonableness of Committee Resolutions
applicant also argues that it would be unreasonable for the committee to pass
resolutions that would reimburse lot owners
for losses associated with the works
(a) The Motion for Lawyer Engagement shows lot owners were not in favour of the
committee making payments without first obtaining
legal advice.
(b) Legal advice would give guidance the appropriateness of reimbursement.
(c) The payments relate to future payments that the owners could not yet seek to
[46] The body
corporate argues that:
(a) The Motion for Lawyer Engagement was not intended to be a pre-condition to
payment decisions.
(b) Subsequent general meeting resolutions on the subject have been passed
without legal advice, including the Associated Costs Motion.
(c) The committee is authorised via a general meeting resolution to make such
decisions, via the Associated Costs Motion.
(d) Reimbursement for loss of rent is specifically contemplated in the
Associated Costs Motion.
[47] At this
preliminary stage, I am not currently satisfied there is a sufficient prima
facie case for the final order sought that
would justify interim relief, based
on reasonableness arguments.
legislation requires the body corporate and its committee to act reasonably in
decision making.
This involves
considering the facts and circumstances that tend to have a rational bearing on
the issue and disregarding irrelevant
Where it is argued that
the body corporate has failed to act reasonably in a decision, an
adjudicator’s role is to firstly
assess the decision-making process and
whether the body corporate has failed to consider any relevant factors or relied
on irrelevant
factors. If there is no defect in that decision making process,
the decision of the body corporate will stand unless an adjudicator
is satisfied
that the outcome of the decision is legally unreasonable. A decision is legally
unreasonable if it is conflicted, arbitrary,
absurd or plainly
[49] I have
already commented that I am currently sceptical of the argument that the Motion
for Lawyer Engagement had the intention
of stopping the committee from making
any decisions about reimbursement to lot owners without first obtaining advice.
I have already
commented that the passing of the Associated Costs Motion, which
was not disclosed by the applicant, does not align with the applicant’s
[50] It is also
difficult to argue that it would be an unreasonable act for the committee to
resolve to reimburse lot owners without
legal advice when Adjudicator Hendry
made the following comments where the Associated Costs Motion was challenged,
which was not
disclosed to me in the application:
[65] I remain of the view I expressed in the interim order that the liability
for the relocation expenses has arisen as the rectification
works have been
authorised by the body corporate and this necessitates that the relocation
expenses be incurred.
applicant has also not provided any evidence that the committee has otherwise
relied on irrelevant documentation to support
the claims when making the
Committee Resolutions. It does not appear the applicant made any attempt to
obtain those documents before
submitting the
application.
3.2. Nature, urgency and balance of convenience
am not currently satisfied there is a satisfactory prima facie case to justify
interim relief. However, for completeness and
if I am wrong, I will continue to
consider whether the circumstances would otherwise justify the interim orders
3.2.1. Framing of orders
first preliminary concern is that the final order is not framed in a way that
adequately correlates with the interim relief
sought. The final order does not
expressly seek to void the Committee Resolutions. Therefore, the application is
not drafted in a
way that is conducive to my direct assessment as to whether the
Committee Resolutions suffer deficiency. I will continue to afford
leniency to
the applicant on this issue.
[54] My next
concern is regarding the framing of the interim order itself. The application
contains evidence of 3 resolutions of the
committee regarding reimbursement to
lot owners, but only expressly argues against 2 of those 3 within the interim
order. The third
would possibly be captured by the latter part of the interim
order sought, but it is unclear. Ultimately, based on the materials
currently in
front of me, justice and equity cannot favour interim orders that would impact
some lot owners receiving reimbursement
and not others.
[55] The interim
relief also appears to be of little utility. The sought interim orders would
stop the body corporate from making
payment, unless the payment has already been
approved by ordinary resolution. There is a strong argument that payments have
been approved by ordinary resolution, pursuant to the Associated Costs
Motion, so long as the committee has ‘sufficient documentation
the claim being received’.
3.2.2. Impacts
[56] Before
granting an interim order, I must balance the inconvenience to the respondent
lot owners if I were to grant the interim
relief now, in the knowledge that
final orders might ultimately be refused, against the inconvenience to the
applicant body corporate
if I were to not grant relief now, in the knowledge
that final orders might ultimately be
applicant argues the balance of convenience favours interim relief as:
(a) If the body corporate makes payments when it does not have a liability to do
so, it may not be recoverable.
(b) Once the payments are made there is no reason for the body corporate to
comply with the Motion for Lawyer Engagement.
(c) The only negative consequence to the interim orders being made is that
payments to lot owners that may be justified will be delayed.
[58] I am not
satisfied the balance of convenience justifies interim relief. I disagree that
there is limited negative consequences
to the interim orders as:
(a) The works, that require the lots be unoccupied, relate to structural
integrity of the building. Discontinuance of the relocation
or lost rent payment
agreements with those lot owners might arise in further dispute and could impact
the works proceeding.
(b) The owners of lots receiving payments would clearly be impacted. The
agreements are currently on foot and the lot owners subject
to the Committee
Resolutions are receiving ongoing payments that they are relying on. It does not
appear that the applicant sought
to clarify this before lodging the application.
The owner of Lot 107 has provided comprehensive submissions that confirm they
relied on the agreements for reimbursement and evicted their tenants.
4. Conclusion
applicant has not satisfied me that there is a sufficient prima facie case to
justify interim relief. Even where this was
so, I am also not satisfied that the
nature, circumstances or balance of convenience justifies the interim orders
sought. The application
for interim orders must fail.
Paragraph 40(c) of the interim
application.
Paragraph 40(d) of
the interim application.
SDW2 Pty. Ltd. V JLF
Corporation Pty Ltd
[2017] QSC 1
Beecham Group Ltd v Bristol
Laboratories Pty Ltd
(1968) 118 CLR 618
Broadcasting Corp v O’Neill
[2006] HCA 46
(2006) 227 CLR 57
Act, ss 94(2),
Body Corporate
For Beaches Surfers Paradise v Backshall
[2016] QCATA 177
Body Corporate For
Beaches Surfers Paradise v Backshall
[2016] QCATA 177
Parkside Apartments
[2025] QBCCMCmr 230
The applicant may
request copies of, or to inspect, body corporate records pursuant to Act,
Broadcasting Corporation v O'Neill
[2006] HCA 46
(2006) 227 CLR 57
Beecham Group Ltd v Bristol Laboratories Pty Ltd
(1968) 118 CLR
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (186 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter