URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCAT/2025/442.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bace Investments Pty Ltd v Queensland Building and Construction Commission [2025] QCAT 442 (6 November 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Bace Investments Pty Ltd v Queensland Building and Construction
[2025] QCAT 442
BACE INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
(applicant)
QUEENSLAND BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION COMMISSION
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO:
MATTER TYPE:
Building matters
DELIVERED ON:
6 November 2025
HEARING DATE:
On the papers
DECISION OF:
Member Scott-Mackenzie
application by Queensland Building and Construction Commission filed 22 November
2024 to dismiss the proceeding is granted.
proceeding is dismissed.
application for costs in the proceeding be filed in the Tribunal and given to
the other party by email, by:
4:00pm on 1
December 2025.
reply to any application for costs in the proceeding be filed in the Tribunal
and given to the other party by email,
4:00pm on 12 January 2026.
CATCHWORDS:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS – QUEENSLAND
CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL – where applicant applied
to dismiss the
proceeding – whether the internal review decision is reviewable –
whether the application lacks utility
– whether the application for
external review should be dismissed
Queensland Building and Construction Commission Act 1991
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
ACN 148 877 525 Pty Ltd v Queensland Building and Construction
[2022] QCAT 72
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
Body Corporate for Parkside Bulimba CTS46539 v Queensland Building and
Construction Commission & Anor
[2024] QCATA 109
Body Corporate for Jade Apartments CTS40720 v Lee Crocker v Queensland
Building and Construction Commission
[2020] QSC 24
Fraser Property Developments Pty Ltd v Sommerfeld (No. 1)
Jorg & Anor v Queensland Building and Construction Commission &
[2021] QCATA 134
JM Kelly (Project Builders) Pty Ltd v Queensland Building Services
[2013] QCAT 502
Queensland Building and Construction Commission v B & L
Constructions Qld Pty Ltd
[2023] QCATA 71
Stephenson v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
Tanna v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
[2023] QCATA
TCQ Pty Ltd ATF Midgley Family Trust v Queensland Building and
Construction Commission
[2023] QCAT 485
The Body Corporate for Jade Apartments CTS 40720 v Queensland
Building and Construction Commission
[2016] QCAT 445
Vytla v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
[2024] QCAT
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
This matter was heard and determined on the papers pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
REASONS FOR DECISION
Application
22 November 2024 the respondent (‘Commission’) made application to
the Tribunal to dismiss the proceeding under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld) (‘QCAT Act’)
(‘interlocutory application’). It filed written submissions in
support of the application.
applicant (‘Bace Investments’) filed written submissions in reply to
the application.
central issue to be decided by the Tribunal is whether it has jurisdiction to
hear and decide the proceeding. Alternatively,
it is submitted, the original
application lacks utility and should be dismissed.
Investments does not dispute the background to the application set out in the
Commission’s submissions.
[5] On 10 August
2015, about 10 years ago, Bace Investments as building contractor and Mr Kieran
Bryce as building owner entered a
Queensland New Homes Construction Contract
(‘contract’) for the construction of a home at 23 Bergamot Circuit,
[6] On 10 August
2015 Bace Investments insured the building work under the statutory insurance
scheme with the policy providing cover
until 10 February 2022.
[7] On 10 March
2016 the building work reached practical completion.
December 2016 Mr Bryce became aware of the building defect.
September 2023 Mr Bryce asked the Commission to give a direction to Bace
Investments to rectify building work he considered
defective or incomplete. The
complaint item is in the following terms:
Description
Date first noticed
Attachments
Water leaking in en suite shower. Leak has been identified since approx
22/12/2016. Water leak comes out of shower, through internal
walls onto carpet.
Leak has attempted to be bandaid patched over the years by builder. Leak still
present with mould
October 2023 the Commission decided not to give a direction to Bace Investments
to rectify or remedy the building work
on the ground the application was outside
the time in
section 72A(4)
Queensland Building and Construction
Commission Act 1991
(Qld) (‘QBCC Act’) (‘original
decision’).
[11] The work
was inspected by the Commission on 14 February 2024. It gave to Mr Bryce and
Bace Investments a copy of the report.
The decision of the Commission on the
complaint item is in the following terms:
The installation of the waterproof membrane to the ensuite wall has not been
installed in accordance with the NCC 2015 BCA Volume
2 in that water is able to
escape behind linings, or into concealed spaces, resulting in damage to building
Pertains item 1 of the QBCC Complaint Form
Commission then gave to Bace Investments a letter dated 15 February 2024
(‘15 February 2024 letter’). The letter
confirms the Commission will
not be directing Bace Investments to rectify or remedy the work on the ground
mentioned in the original
decision. It then continues:
Kieran Bryce may still be entitled to a claim under the Queensland Home Warranty
Scheme. This this is your opportunity to have the
necessary work rectified by a
licensed contractor, before assessment of Kieran Bryce's entitlement to a
If the work detailed in the attached Defective Work List is not addressed, the
QBCC will consider if Kieran Bryce is entitled to
a claim under the Queensland
The QBCC may recover payment made on an insurance claim as a debt from the
building contractor or a director (including a director
at the time the building
work was carried out and a director at the time a payment is made by the QBCC),
as allowed under the
Queensland Building and Construction Commission Act
In addition, if a claim is approved, it will appear on the register of licensees
which is available to the public on the QBCC’s
[13] On 13 March
2024 the Commission determined the work had not been rectified or remedied. A
notice to that effect was given by
the Commission to Bace Investments.
Investments, on 14 March 2024, applied for internal review. The decision
identified in the application was the 15 February
2024 letter.
[15] On 11 April
2024 the internal reviewer completed the internal review. She confirms the
original decision not to give a notice
to rectify or remedy on the ground the
application is outside the time in section 72A(4) of the QBCC Act
(‘internal review
decision’).
decision reviewed identified in the decision notice is the 15 February 2024
[17] On 30 April
2024 Bace Investments made application to the Tribunal to review the internal
review decision.
(a) on 25 October 2023 the Commission decided not to give a notice to Bace
Investments to rectify or remedy the defective work on
the ground the
application was outside the time in section 72A(4) of the QBCC Act;
(b) the Commission gave to Bace Investments the 15 February 2024 letter
confirming it will not be directing Bace Investments to rectify
or remedy the
defective work on the ground mentioned in the original decision and stating the
owner may be entitled to claim under
the statutory insurance scheme;
(c) on 14 March 2024 Bace Investments applied for internal review of the 15
February 2024 letter, not the original decision;
(d) on 11 April 2024 the internal reviewer confirmed the original decision not
to give to Bace Investments a direction to rectify
or remedy the work on the
ground mentioned in the original decision. The decision reviewed is the 15
February 2024 letter. It records
submissions about the statutory insurance
scheme which cannot be considered because the original decision being reviewed
is the decision
not to direct Bace Investments to rectify or remedy the work;
(e) on 30 April 2024 Bace Investments made application to the Tribunal to review
the internal review decision.
Internal review decision
internal review decision is a review of the 15 February 2024 letter. The
decision reads:
I have decided NOT to give a Direction to Rectify as the Statutory Timeframe has
setting out the background and Bace Investments’ submissions, the internal
review decision continues:
The letter and attachment of 7 February 2024 is a Notice Defective works list
(NODW). The QBCC Act allows for the reviewable decision
under S86(e) to be a
decision to not give a direction to rectify or remedy.
The NODW is issued to allow the Director of the cancelled and or liquidated
company to take relevant and or appropriate action to
rectify the alleged
defects identified by the affected party if the Director see fit.
Further, it reserves the QBCC ability to recover any debt that maybe incurred at
a later point in time if a claim is paid under the
Statutory Insurance Scheme.
decision highlights the confusion in the following paragraph. It
During the course of the Internal review, the applicant has made reference to
the Insurance Claim against the Statutory Scheme, and
the fundamental elements
that should be considered before accepting a claim. These comments and
allegations cannot be considered
under this internal review because the decision
before me under Section 86(e) is relative to whether a decision to issue a
to rectify or remedy or decision to not give a direction.
[22] It then
refers to legislation and policy considerations, and under the subheading
Statutory Timeframe
’ continues:
Pursuant to sections 72(2A) and 72A(4) of the QBCC Act, a DTR cannot be given
more than six years and six months after the “building
complete or left in an incomplete state.
Section 72A(4) of the QBCC Act provides a direction to rectify cannot be given
more than 6 years and 6 months after the building
work was completed or left in
an incomplete state (the statutory period). However, an extension of time for
giving a direction to
rectify may be granted by the Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (QCAT) if it is satisfied, upon application by the QBCC,
that there are sufficient reasons for extending the time to give the
The complaint item relates to building work that was completed on or about 10
March 2016 when the applicant provided a form 21, final
inspection certificate.
Accordingly, the final date for the QBCC to be able to give a direction to
rectify was on 10 September 2022.
However, I have noted that complaint form was lodged on 9 September 2023 out of
statutory time frame. As such, I am satisfied that
the time to issue a DTR has
expired and a DTR cannot be issued.
Legislation
[23] Usefully,
the Commission sets out the legislation relevant to the issues raised. It
commences with section 72 of the QBCC Act,
the power to require rectification of
building work and remediation of consequential damage. Relevantly, the section
(1) This section applies if the commission is of the opinion that:
(a) building work is defective or incomplete; or
(b) consequential damage has been caused by, or as a consequence of, carrying
out building work.
(2) The commission may direct the person who carried out the building work to do
the following within the period stated in the direction:
(a) for building work that is defective or incomplete - rectify the building
(b) for consequential damage—remedy the damage.
(2AA) and (2A) ...
(3) In deciding whether to give the direction, the commission may take into
consideration all the circumstances it considers are
reasonably relevant and, in
particular, is not limited to a consideration of the terms of the contract for
carrying out the building
work (including the terms of any warranties included
in the contract).
(5) The commission is not required to give the direction if the commission is
satisfied that, in the circumstances, it would be unfair
to the person to give
the direction.
Example for subsection (5):
The commission might decide not to give a direction for the rectification of
building work because an owner refuses to allow a building
contractor to return
to the owner’s home or because an owner’s failure to properly
maintain a home has exacerbated the
extent of defective building work carried
out on the home.
(6)–(8) ...
[24] Subsection
(4) of section 72A provides:
A direction to rectify or remedy cannot be given more than 6 years and 6 months
after the building work to which the direction relates
was completed or left in
an incomplete state unless the tribunal is satisfied, on application by the
commission, that there is in
the circumstances of a particular case sufficient
reason for extending the time for giving the direction and extends the time
accordingly.
[25] Reviewable
decisions are provided for in section 86. Relevantly, a decision to give a
direction to rectify or remedy, or not
to give the direction, is a reviewable
[26] A person
who is given, or is entitled to be given, a notice of a reviewable decision may
apply to the internal reviewer to have
the decision
requirements for an internal review application are set out in section 86B.
[28] Section 86C
provides that if an internal review application is made under section 86B, the
internal reviewer must, as soon as
practicable but within the required period,
make the internal review decision
as if the reviewable decision the subject
of the application had not been made
[29] Reviewable
is defined in section 86E of the QBCC Act. It means:
(a) a reviewable decision within the meaning of subdivision 1, other than a
decision that was the subject of an internal review under
subdivision 1; or
(b) an internal review decision within the meaning of subdivision 1.
Tribunal’s review jurisdiction is provided for in division 3 of part 1 of
chapter 2 of the QCAT Act. Section 17, under
the heading
’, provides:
(1) The tribunal’s review jurisdiction is the jurisdiction conferred on
the tribunal by an enabling Act to review a decision
made or taken to have been
made by another entity under that Act.
(2) For this Act, a decision mentioned in subsection (1) is a
reviewable decision
and the entity that made or is taken to have made the decision is the
decision-maker
reviewable decision.
[31] When the
review jurisdiction is exercised is provided for in section 18 of the QCAT Act.
It is in the following terms:
(1) The tribunal may exercise its review jurisdiction if a person has, under
this Act, applied to the tribunal to exercise its review
reviewable decision.
(2) A person may apply to the tribunal to exercise its review jurisdiction for a
reviewable decision, and the tribunal may deal with
the application, even if the
decision is also the subject of a complaint, preliminary inquiry or
investigation under the
Ombudsman Act 2001
[32] A review
involves a fresh hearing.
contains provisions requiring a decision-maker to help the Tribunal.
functions for the review jurisdiction are provided for in
section 24.
Subsections (1) and (2) provide:
(1) In a proceeding for a review of a reviewable decision, the tribunal may:
(a) confirm or amend the decision; or
(b) set aside the decision and substitute its own decision; or
(c) set aside the decision and return the matter for reconsideration to the
decision-maker for the decision, with the directions
the tribunal considers
appropriate.
(2) The tribunal’s decision under subsection (1)(a) or (b) for a
reviewable decision:
(a) is taken to be a decision of the decision-maker for the reviewable decision
except for the tribunal’s review jurisdiction
or an appeal under
(b) subject to any contrary order of the tribunal, has effect from when the
reviewable decision takes or took effect.
Tribunal is given power to dismiss, strike out and decide if a proceeding, or
part, is unjustified.
Sections 47(1)
and (2) relevantly provide:
(1) This section applies if the tribunal considers a proceeding or a part of a
proceeding is:
(a) frivolous, vexatious or misconceived; or
(b) lacking in substance; or
(c) otherwise an abuse of process.
(2) The tribunal may:
(a) if the party who brought the proceeding or part before the tribunal is the
applicant for the proceeding, order the proceeding
or part be dismissed or
struck out; or
(b) for a part of a proceeding brought before the tribunal by a party other than
the applicant for the proceeding—
(i) make its final decision in the proceeding in the applicant’s favour;
(ii) order that the party who brought the part before the tribunal be removed
from the proceeding; or
(c) make a costs order against the party who brought the proceeding or part
before the tribunal to compensate another party for any
reasonable costs,
expenses, loss, inconvenience and embarrassment resulting from the proceeding or
Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to hear and decide the
proceeding?
Commission’s submissions
Commission’s submissions identify the issue to be decided by the Tribunal
and background to the original application.
It then refers to the relevant
legislation and several decided cases, including
Fraser Property Developments
Pty Ltd v Sommerfeld (No. 1)
JM Kelly (Project Builders) Pty Ltd v Queensland Building Services
TCQ Pty Ltd ATF
Midgley Family Trust v Queensland Building and Construction
Body Corporate for Jade Apartments
CTS40720 v Queensland Building and Construction
Queensland Building and Construction Commission v B
& L Constructions Qld Pty
Constructions
Vytla v Queensland Building and
Construction Commission
[36] I will
submissions then address the application for early dismissal. Several cases are
referred to by the Commission, including
. There, the Tribunal
[35] In considering whether to strike out a proceeding pursuant to s 47 of the
QCAT Act, I am satisfied I have the requisite material
and have received the
necessary assistance from the parties to make a definite and certain
conclusion.
[36] The principles in considering whether to exercise the discretion to strike
out a proceeding were considered by Chief Justice
Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways
. His Honour said:
Although I can agree with Latham C.J. in the same case when he said that the
defendant should be saved from the vexation of the continuance
of useless and
futile proceedings ... in my opinion great care must be exercised to ensure that
under the guise of achieving expeditious
finality a plaintiff is not improperly
deprived of his opportunity for the trial of his case by the appointed tribunal.
On the other
hand, I do not think that the exercise of the jurisdiction should
be reserved for those cases where argument is unnecessary to evoke
the futility
of the plaintiff's claim. Argument, perhaps even of an extensive kind, may be
necessary to demonstrate that the case
of the plaintiff is so clearly untenable
that it cannot possibly succeed.
[37] The Tribunal is limited in a review of this decision to asking whether that
decision was the correct and preferable one. It
is not an opportunity for the
Tribunal to make a completely different type of decision unrelated to the one
under review, for example,
that a decision to issue a direction to rectify be
made instead. (Citations omitted)
Commission then submits the 15 February 2024 letter is not a direction to
rectify building work under section 72(2) of the
QBCC Act but was taken to be a
decision not to give a direction to rectify. The internal review decision is not
a reviewable decision,
B & L Constructions
. It submits an
internal review decision will only be properly made if it relates to a properly
made application for internal review
which in turn means the applicant must
apply for review of a reviewable decision.
Bace Investments’ submissions
Investments submits the application is to review the internal review decision.
The decision is a reviewable decision within
the meaning of section 86(1)(e) of
the QBCC Act.
disagrees with the Commission’s interpretation of
Constructions
and submits the internal review decision is a
reviewable decision irrespective of whether the internal reviewer correctly or
incorrectly
characterised the 15 February 2024 letter.
Investments refers to the decision of the Tribunal in
Stephenson v Queensland
Building and Construction
. There, at [22],
the Tribunal said:
The QBCC, after failing to correctly identify the ‘decision’ to be
reviewed then refused the internal review by considering
the delay of 381 days.
It says because the IRU application was not correctly made within the
requirement of section 86B (i.e. within
28 days) no decision could be made under
section 86C. This is clearly wrong. If a review is requested it can be refused
on the basis
that there is no reviewable decision. This decision, if
appropriate, can be reviewed. This is in fact what was done and notice of
rights were provided in that letter. At that point the IRU letter was a
reviewable decision. (Citation omitted)
[42] The 15
February 2024 letter, Bace Investments submits, is not sanctioned by
legislation. It is a ‘
new decision
’ and clearly directs
rectification of the work.
[43] In the
alternative, Bace Investments submits, the 15 February 2024 letter is a
reviewable decision by reason of section 86B of
the QBCC Act it having made the
application within 28 days after it became aware of the decision.
Decided cases
Commission refers to several decided cases of the Tribunal and Appeal Tribunal.
Jade Apartments
the applicant, on 20 June 2014, complained
work on the ground the company was not the building contractor and the
company responsible had been wound up and was no longer entitled
to a licence
under the QBCC Act.
[45] Subsequently,
on 4 May 2016, the applicant again asked the Commission to give a direction to
rectify the building work, explaining
in an accompanying letter the complaint
item restates the first complaint item.
Commission internally reviewed the original decision on the first complaint. It
was confirmed.
[47] The owner
then applied to the Commission for internal review of the second complaint. It
did not decide the application but informed
the owner it had upheld the decision
on the first complaint.
[48] The owner
applied to the Tribunal for review of the two decisions.
Tribunal decided there is no decision in the list of reviewable decisions in
section 86 of the QBCC Act which would extend
to a decision to refuse to
investigate a complaint or refuse to consider an internal review application. It
then continued:
A decision to give a direction to rectify or remedy or not to give the direction
is a reviewable decision under s86(1)(e). The decision
on the first complaint
not to give a direction to rectify may be a decision of this character. A
decision to refuse to investigate
a second complaint about the same subject
matter which, if investigated, may have lead to such a decision, is
decision may be distinguished from the internal review decision now before the
Tribunal. The application for external review
of the first decision was out of
time, the second decision was not a reviewable decision.
& L Constructions
, a building contractor constructed a home. It was sold
and the new owner complained about defective work. The complaint was disallowed
but then allowed on internal review. The building contractor applied to the
Tribunal for review of the internal review decision.
Tribunal decided it has jurisdiction to hear and decide the proceeding. At [11],
it observed:
The original decision of the appellant to reject the claim was a reviewable
decision within the meaning of subdivision 1, being within
s 86(1)(h), a
decision to disallow a claim under the statutory insurance scheme, but it was
the subject of an internal review, so
it does not satisfy paragraph (a). But as
a result of the internal review, there was an “internal review decision
meaning of subdivision 1” ...
[53] It later
In the present case, the internal reviewer made a decision, so there was an
internal review decision for the purposes of s 86(1)
and hence within the
meaning of subdivision 1. If one reads the words of s 86E(b) literally, there
was also an internal review decision
for the purposes of paragraph (b) of the
definition of “reviewable decision” in s 86E. That decision affected
the builder,
because of the statutory indemnity in the Act s 71, so it was
entitled to apply to the Tribunal for review of that decision under
was the effect of the decision of the Member. Unless the terms of s 86E(b) are
read down in some way, it was correct,
and the appeal must be
Tribunal concluded the provisions establish that, once there has been an
internal review, the constraints on what are reviewable
decisions imposed by
section 86 have been satisfied, so that any internal review decision becomes a
reviewable decision.
[55] Here, the
internal reviewer did not review the original decision, she reviewed the 15
February 2024 letter. The consequence is
that unless the internal reviewed
decision can be said to be a ‘
new decision
’ that is a
reviewable decision, it cannot be said Bace Investments was a person who is
given, or is entitled to be given, notice
of a reviewable decision.
[56] A notice to
a director of a building contractor was considered by the Appeal Tribunal in
. The Commission gave a director a notice informing him it would not
be giving a direction to rectify building work on the ground
that it was not
registered but the building owner may be entitled to assistance under the
statutory insurance scheme.
director applied to the Commission for internal review of the decision. The
decision described the original decision as a
decision not to give a direction
to rectify under section 72 of the QBCC Act. The internal reviewer found the
application by the
building owner was not made within 12 months of the owner
becoming aware of the defective building work, it would be unfair to direct
rectification of the work and decided not to give the direction to rectify.
[58] The owner
applied to the Tribunal for review of the internal review decision.
Tribunal decided the notice to the director is not a reviewable decision within
the meaning of section 86 of the QBCC Act.
In so doing, it referred to the
decision of Mason CJ in
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v
, and Jackson J in
Crocker v Queensland Building and Construction
’). In the latter case, his Honour considered a
notice about the liability of a director for payment by the Commission for
under the statutory insurance scheme under section 111C of the QBCC
Act. He said:
Otherwise, on the material before me, the essential plank in the
applicant’s case to set aside the other decisions was that
he ought to
have been given notice of the challenged decisions, which I have identified, in
either paragraphs (c) or (d). It is not
contended that, under the statute, there
was any express requirement for him to be notified. The apparent difficulty that
the implication
of such a requirement would create is that failure to give
notice to a director of a building contractor who may be affected under
111C would have the consequence of invalidating every decision which is made by
the respondent. That would be a startling
conclusion. Nevertheless, if that is
what is required on the proper construction of the statute, there is no reason
to shrink from
However, in my view, apart from the fact of the incidence of the liability that
is created under section 111C for a director who
meets the requirements for that
Section to apply, there is no reason to think that the statute should require
that, for a valid decision
of the kinds identified under paragraphs (c) or (d)
to be made, notice must be given to the director of any company building
as well as to the company itself.
In my view, the fact of the operation of section 111C is not of itself a
sufficient reason to imply that requirement into the statute.
It follows that,
in the result, none of the decisions that are challenged on the basis of the
ground of absence of procedural fairness
are reviewable under section 20 for the
reason that the respondent was required to give the applicant notice of those
[60] The view
was repeated by the Tribunal in ACN 148 877 525 Pty Ltd v Queensland Building
and Construction Commission
(‘ACN 148 877 525’):
This provision allows the QBCC to recover the insurance debt from the directors
personally, thereby displacing the common law separate
entity principle. This
applies notwithstanding the company may have been deregistered. The decision as
to whether or not to recover
the insurance debt is made after the scope of works
decision and depends upon whether the person from whom recovery is sought was
director when the relevant building work was carried out and when the payment
under the scheme was made.
(Citation omitted)
Tribunal, in
, considered an original decision building work
undertaken on direction by the Commission was of a satisfactory standard. The
review decision was a ‘
deemed decision
’, a decision
the same as the original decision because it had not been decided within 28
days. The Commission applied to the
Tribunal to strike out the external review
proceeding on the ground the internal review decision is not a reviewable
[62] At [28],
the Tribunal said:
I do not accept the submissions of the QBCC to the effect that the Tribunal on
review needs to be satisfied that the original decision
was a ‘reviewable
decision’. I agree that this would be relevant if the Tribunal was
reviewing the original decision,
but it is not. The Tribunal is reviewing the
internal review decision. The internal review decision is itself a
“reviewable
decision” within the meaning of s 86E(b).
Tribunal’s conclusion is found in [31]:
It follows, in my view, that whether the
decision was or was not
properly categorised as a reviewable decision is not relevant. The decision was
categorised as a reviewable
decision and was the subject of an internal review.
The internal review decision is a reviewable decision and the Tribunal has
to review it. It follows that the application to strike out should
not be allowed on the basis the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction. That,
however, is
not the end of the matter.
Commission disagrees with the decision in Vytla. It submits, ‘... where an
application for internal review is properly
made to the Commission (i.e.
pursuant to section 86A and 86B, being an application for internal review of a
“reviewable decision”
section 86 of the QBCC Act),
it is irrelevant that the decision ultimately made within the “internal
review decision”
is one that is
in section 86, because a
properly made “internally review decision” is of itself externally
reviewable in the Tribunal
pursuant to section 86E(b).’ The submission
gives rise to a need to review the process for an internal review
Internal review application
person involved in a building dispute, under section 77(1) of the QBCC Act, may
apply, as provided under the QCAT Act, to the
Tribunal to have the Tribunal
decide the dispute. However, the person may not apply to the Tribunal unless the
person has complied
with a process established by the Commission to attempt to
resolve the dispute.
[66] The powers
of the Tribunal are spelt out in section 77(3). They include ordering
rectification or completion of defective or
incomplete tribunal
[67] Building
is defined in schedule 2. It includes a domestic building
dispute which in turn includes a claim or dispute arising between a building
owner and building contractor relating to the performance of the reviewable
domestic work or a contract for the performance of reviewable
[68] Reviewable
domestic work
is defined as domestic building work under schedule 1B,
section 4, except as provided in the definition. Here, the contract was a
domestic building contract.
[69] Tribunal
is defined in section 75(1). It includes the erection or
construction of a building. Reviewable domestic work is declared to be tribunal
[70] The power
given to the Tribunal is to order rectification or completion of defective or
incomplete tribunal work. Tribunal work
includes the erection or construction of
a building. It extends to tribunal work.
[71] Reviewable
is defined in section 86. It includes a decision to give a
direction to rectify or remedy or not to give a
section 86A(1), a person who is given, or is entitled to be given, notice of a
reviewable decision may apply to the internal
reviewer to have the decision
reviewed. However, the subsection does not apply if the person has applied to
the Tribunal for a review
of the reviewable decision under subdivision 2.
requirements for an internal review application are set out in section 86B. They
include a requirement the application be
made within a specified period after
the applicant is given notice of the reviewable decision to which the
application relates or
otherwise becomes aware of the decision. In other words,
whilst the internal reviewer may make a new decision under section 86C,
respect of the reviewable decision to which the application relates.
internal review application is made under section 86B, the internal reviewer, by
virtue of section 86C(1), must, as soon
as practicable but within the required
period, make a new decision as if the reviewable decision the subject of the
application had
not been made. However, if the internal reviewer does not decide
the application within the required period, the internal reviewer
is taken to
have made an internal review decision at the end of the required period that is
the same as the reviewable
[75] Several
matters flow out of sections 86A–86D. First, a person who is given, or is
entitled to be given, notice of a reviewable
decision may apply to the internal
reviewer to have the decision reviewed. The right is confined to a reviewable
[76] Secondly,
the internal review application must comply with section 86B. Support for the
view the application must relate to the
reviewable decision is found in
paragraph (b)(i). Otherwise, the Commission may decline to make a new
[77] Thirdly,
the internal review decision is a new decision unconstrained by the reviewable
decision the subject of the application
but, in my opinion, in the context of
the original decision and the reviewable decision to which the internal review
application
[78] Here, the
internal review application was to review the 15 February 2024 letter. The
letter is not a reviewable decision; it
is an advisory letter. The legislation
makes clear the entitlement to apply to the internal reviewer to have a decision
is a person who is given, or is entitled to be given, notice of a
reviewable decision. The letter did not fall within the category
specified and,
hence, the interlocutory application must be granted.
[79] In case I
am wrong, I have also considered whether the review application is lacking in
Does the original application lack utility?
Commission’s submissions
Commission, under the subheading
Review Application lacking in substance
submits a decision notice cannot be given because ‘
... there is no
question arising for the Tribunal to answer.
’ Then, under the
subheading ‘
Expiry of timeframe for issuing direction to
’, the Commission refers to several decided cases.
& Anor v Queensland Building and Construction Commission &
’), the Appeal Tribunal, at [43], observes:
Section 24(1) of the QCAT Act begins with the words ‘In a proceeding for a
review of a reviewable decision...’. The section
assumes that the tribunal
has jurisdiction in a particular review proceeding. The jurisdiction of a court,
or in this case a tribunal,
is not to be confused with its powers. Where, as
here, an application to review a decision not to issue a direction to rectify is
not filed within 6 years and 6 months of the completion of the building work and
where, as here, there is no application by the commission
to extend the time
limit, the tribunal has no jurisdiction to review the decision. Section 24(2)(b)
cannot be relied upon to create
a jurisdiction that does not
(Citation omitted)
Corporate for Parkside Bulimba CTS46539 v Queensland Building and Construction
Commission & Anor
Parkside Bulimba
’), the Appeal Tribunal allowed an appeal
from the Tribunal on the ground the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to review a
of the Commission was not limited by section 72A(4) of the QBCC Act.
The section, the decision continues:
... simply prevents the QBCC from sending a direction to rectify after expiry of
the period in s 72A(4) unless an extension of time
is sought by the QBCC and
granted by the Tribunal. Once the decision to issue a direction to rectify is
viewed as separate to the
direction itself, s 24(2)(b) of the QCAT Act can
properly come into play to deem any substituted decision to have been made on
date of decision under review which is in this case within the 6-year
6-month time frame.
Tanna v Queensland Building and Construction
Parkside Bulimba
, the Tribunal decided a question to be answered may
arise in circumstances where the time in section 72A(4) had passed. The
circumstances,
the Commission submits, are limited to a decision under review
where the direction to rectify or remedy is given within six years
months after the building work to which the direction relates was completed or
left in an incomplete state. That is not what
happened here.
Investments submits the 15 February 2024 letter is a direction to rectify. The
Commission disagrees, citing
, at [37]. There, the Tribunal
The Tribunal is limited in a review of this decision to asking whether that
decision was the correct and preferable one. It is not
an opportunity for the
Tribunal to make a completely different type of decision unrelated to the one
under review, for example, that
a decision to issue a direction to rectify be
made instead.
[85] It follows,
it is submitted by the Commission, the original application cannot succeed
because it did not give a direction to
rectify. Further, the time for giving a
direction under section 72A(4) of the QBCC Act has passed.
Bace Investments’ submissions
Investments’ submissions focus on the 15 February 2024 letter. It should
be declared a ‘
[87] Of critical
importance, Bace Investments submits, is whether the 15 February 2024 letter is
a direction to rectify and merits
the internal review decision. It has an
arguable case and it would be in the interests of justice to hear and decide the
application on its merits.
Investments refers to the decision of the Tribunal in
, in particular
[34]. There, the Tribunal set aside an internal review decision on the ground
the decision was not a reviewable decision
and went on to consider whether a
complaint item was in time.
Investments’ submissions conclude:
The Applicant submits that it would be in line with the objects of the QCAT Act
for the tribunal to proceed to hear and determine
the Review Application on its
merits given the questionable approaches taken by the decision-maker in relation
to the decision under
review to ensure fairness and consistency in decisions by
the Commission.
Consideration
Bryce gave the complaint item to the Commission on 9 September 2023, about six
years and nine months after the building work
to which the direction relates was
completed or left in an incomplete state. The Commission declined to give a
direction to rectify
on the ground the time for a direction had passed.
[91] The 15
February 2024 letter was then given by the Commission to Mr Bryce and Bace
Investments. On 14 March 2024 Bace Investments
applied to the internal reviewer
to review the letter. The decision reviewed is in the following terms:
Decision made by Peter Doolan, Building Inspector on 15 February 2024 to NOT
issue a Direction to Rectify (DTR) under Section 72
Building and Construction Commission Act 1991 (the Act)
background describes the 15 February 2024 letter as a decision, ‘
not to issue a Direction to Rectify (DTR) instead issued a Notices of Defective
a Work List (NODW).
’ The decision misdescribes the letter. What it
does is confirm the complaint item was given outside the time in section 72A(4)
of the QBCC Act and the decision is a reviewable decision.
[93] The 15
February 2024 letter then goes on to state that, unless the work in the
defective work list is carried out, the building
owner may be entitled to
assistance under the statutory insurance scheme.
internal review decision refers to Bace Investments’ submissions. They
include submissions that:
(a) the 15 February 2024 letter was given outside of, and contrary to,
legislation;
(b) the letter is invalid because it retrospectively imposes a responsibility on
Bace Investments for rectification of work; and
(c) the Commission decided by default Bace Investments is not liable for
rectification of work.
submissions are mistaken. The 15 February 2024 letter is an advisory letter, not
a decision to rectify. It does not impose
responsibility on Bace Investments for
rectification work. It states that if the work in the defective work list is not
carried out,
Mr Bryce may be entitled to assistance under the scheme. The
Commission did not decide, by default or otherwise, Bace Investments
liable for rectification work. It decided the complaint was given outside the
time specified in section 72A(4).
internal review decision refers to legislation. It concludes by deciding a
direction to rectify or remedy cannot be given
because of the time in section
internal review decision reviews the 15 February 2024 letter. The letter is not
a reviewable decision. Notwithstanding, the
decision confirms the original
[98] Leaving to
one side the internal review decision is not a review of a reviewable decision,
the issue now to be decided is whether
the complaint item is outside the time in
section 72A(4) of the QBCC Act. The Commission, in its submissions, refers to
the decision
of the Tribunal in
Parkside Bulimba
. The exception
identified is accepted but is not advanced by the parties in material filed in
the Tribunal. They agreed the complaint
was outside the time in section
Tribunal may order in terms of section 24(1) of the QCAT Act. Here, the internal
review decision confirmed the original decision.
The decision of the Tribunal,
in my opinion, cannot be otherwise.
mindful of the provisions of section 47 of the QCAT Act and am satisfied the
Tribunal has before it all of the material
relevant to the issue to be decided.
Also, I am mindful of what was said by Barwick CJ in
General Steel Industries
Inc v Commissioner for
. There, his Honour
the Chief Justice, citing Dixon J (as his Honour then was) in
Dey v Victorian
Railways Commissioners
As I have said, some of these expressions occur in cases in which the inherent
on statutory rules of court
but although the material available to the court in either type of case may be
different the need for
exceptional caution in exercising the power whether it be
inherent or under statutory rules is the same. Dixon J. (as he then was)
a number of authorities in
Dey v. Victorian Railways Commissioners
he says: “A case must be very clear indeed to justify the summary
intervention of the court to prevent a plaintiff submitting
his case for
determination in the appointed manner by the court with or without a jury. The
fact that a transaction is intricate
may not disentitle the court to examine a
cause of action alleged to grow out of it for the purpose of seeing whether the
amounts to an abuse of process or is vexatious. But once it appears
that there is a real question to be determined whether of fact
or law and that
the rights of the parties depend upon it, then it is not competent for the court
to dismiss the action as frivolous
and vexatious and an abuse of process.”
Although I can agree with Latham C.J. in the same case when he said that the
should be saved from the vexation of the continuance of useless and
futile proceedings (1949) 78 CLR, at p 84, in my opinion great
care must be
exercised to ensure that under the guise of achieving expeditious finality a
plaintiff is not improperly deprived of
his opportunity for the trial of his
case by the appointed tribunal. On the other hand, I do not think that the
exercise of the jurisdiction
should be reserved for those cases where argument
is unnecessary to evoke the futility of the plaintiff's claim. Argument, perhaps
even of an extensive kind, may be necessary to demonstrate that the case of the
plaintiff is so clearly untenable that it cannot
possibly succeed.
purpose of the review of a reviewable decision is to produce the correct and
preferable decision.
internal review is not a review of a reviewable decision and therefore the
internal review decision must be set aside. Further,
the internal review
decision lacks utility. The interlocutory application must be granted and the
proceeding dismissed.
decision of the Tribunal is that the interlocutory application be granted. The
proceeding is dismissed.
[103] I will
hear the parties on
QBCC Act s 86(1)(e).
QBCC Act s 86A.
QCAT Act s 20.
[2005] QCA 134.
[2013] QCAT 502.
[2023] QCAT 485.
[2016] QCAT 445.
[2023] QCATA 71.
[2024] QCAT 346.
[2017] QCAT 212.
Jade Apartments
Constructions
[1990] HCA 33
[2020] QSC 24.
[2022] QCAT 72.
ACN 148 877 525
QBCC Act s 77(2).
QBCC Act s 77(3)(g).
QBCC Act s 75(2).
QBCC Act s 86(1)(e).
QBCC Act s 86C(3).
[2021] QCATA 134.
[2024] QCATA 109.
Parkside Bulimba
[2023] QCATA 81
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
(1949) 78 CLR 62
QCAT Act s 20(1).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (446 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter