URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2025/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sullivan & Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor [2025] QPEC 20 (19 September 2025)
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT COURT
Sullivan & Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2025] QPEC 20
PATRICK SULLIVAN
LINDA OWENS, DENIS OWENS, MICHELLE TEYS,
MICHAEL DAVIDSON & TRACEY DAVIDSON
(Appellants)
COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GOLD COAST
(Respondent)
BELLA FELICITA NO 2 PTY LTD ACN 655 775 367
(Co-Respondent)
571 of 2025
Planning and Environment
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning and Environment Court, Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
19 September 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
15 – 18 September 2025
Everson DCJ
Appeal to be allowed in part
CATCHWORDS:
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT – APPEAL – appeal against approval of
a change to a material change of use to establish a multiple
dwelling in the
Medium density residential zone.
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT – ASSESSMENT – compliance with the
planning scheme – relevant matters.
Abeleda & Anor v Brisbane City Council & Anor
[2020] QCA 257
(2020) 6 QR
Archer & Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Ors
[2022] QPEC 59
Brisbane City Council v YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
[2021] QPELR 987
Catterall v Moreton Bay Regional Council
[2020] QPEC 52
McEnearney v Council of the City of Gold Coast
(2024) 261 LEGERA
Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council
[2021] QCA 95
LEGISLATION:
Planning Act 2016
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
Planning Regulation 2017
E J Morzone KC and D C Whitehouse for the Appellants
J J Ware for the Respondent
M J Batty KC and N A Batty for the Co-Respondent
SOLICITORS:
TelcoTech Legal for the Appellants
HopgoodGanim Lawyers for the Respondent
MacDonnells Law for the Co-Respondent
Introduction
is a submitter appeal against the decision of the respondent to approve a
development application for a development permit
for an other change to a
development permit for a material change of use to establish a multiple dwelling
(“the proposed development”)
on land situated at 133 Golden Four
Drive, Bilinga (“the site”).
The proposed development
site has the benefit of a current development approval for a 7-storey
residential apartment building that accommodates 11
dwelling units. It is 23
metres in height and incorporates a basement car park (“the approved
development”). The proposed
development seeks to increase the height of
the approved development to add 2 additional storeys resulting in a 9-storey
32.85 metres in height and an increase in the number of units from 11
to 13. The basement car park is to be removed and ground level
car parking is
to be provided for 26 resident vehicles utilising various mechanical car lifts.
Communal open space is increased
from 114.75m² to 124.6m² and is moved
from ground level at the rear of the building to a terrace at the western corner
of level one overlooking Golden Four Drive. These design changes result in
reduced setbacks at ground level and at level one of
the building. The
architectural treatment of the building has been altered to incorporate
significant landscaping elements, particularly
at the front, at ground level and
at the roof terrace of the building. The proposed development also creates a
greater degree of
openness as a consequence of design changes to the south-east
corner of the building.
original development had two darker top stories. The proposed development has
three which are shown to be chocolate coloured
in the photomontages (“a
choc top”).
The site and the surrounding area
site is located on the western side of Golden Four Drive, within a narrow linear
band of residential development, on the southern
Gold Coast. To the east is
Pacific Parade which runs parallel to the edge of the beach. To the west is
Golden Four Drive which
runs parallel to the Gold Coast Highway. These roads
are joined by a series of short streets resulting in a finger of land two lots
wide. Understandably, the focus of the urban development is the nearby
Pursuant to the Gold Coast
City Plan 2016 (“the planning
, the site is within
the Urban area on Strategic framework map 1 and in the Consolidation area on
Strategic framework map 9.
site is within the Medium density residential
Pursuant to the Building
height overlay map, it is part of an area subject to a building height of 23
metres which extends from
Mills Street to the south to Musgrave Street in the
All of the relevant experts
who gave evidence at the hearing of the appeal identified this as the
appropriate local area for the
context of assessing the proposed development,
with the exception of Mr Middleton and Mr Butcher, the architect and the visual
expert who gave evidence on behalf of the appellants. In circumstances
where the area is well defined by the beach on one side and
the highway on the
other, topography is uniform and the planning controls identical, the local area
identified above appears appropriate
for this purpose.
[4] The more
restricted local areas identified by Mr Middleton and Mr Butcher, which they
contend are appropriate, given the relative
absence of high-rise buildings to
date, fail to acknowledge that the character of the local area calls for
consideration both the
planned and existing local
I will therefore base my
assessment on the local area described above in para [3] (“the local
area”) which contains
numerous existing and approved buildings above
6-storeys scattered within it, including buildings with partial
built-to-boundary
built form.
is uncontentious that the local area is an area in transition with smaller
residential buildings increasingly being replaced
with larger residential
multiple dwellings.
[5] The site
itself has an area of 759m² and a frontage of 15 metres. Adjoining the
site to the north is a 4-storey multiple
dwelling called Nusa, which is where
all of the appellants live. All but one of the submissions in respect of the
proposed development
came from occupants of this building and generally raised
concerns relating to various perceived amenity impacts occasioned by
To the south the site is
adjoined by an older 3-storey multiple dwelling known as Lanai, and to the east
is a larger 4-storey multiple
dwelling development opposite the beach called San
The statutory assessment framework
[6] Pursuant
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
(“PECA”), the appeal is by hearing
and the co-respondent must
establish that the appeal ought be
PECA addresses the nature of an appeal and relevantly provides:
Planning Act
applies for the P&E Court’s decision
on the appeal as if—
(a) the P&E Court were the assessment manager for the development
application; and
(b) the reference in subsection (8) of that section to when the assessment
manager decides the application were a reference to when
the P&E Court makes
the decision.
proposed development was impact assessable,
Planning Act 2016
(Qld) (“PA”) provides that the assessment must be carried out
against the relevant assessment benchmarks in a categorising
instrument for the
development which, in the circumstances before me, are the relevant provisions
of the planning scheme.
also be carried out having regard to matters prescribed by regulation. In this
Planning Regulation 2017
(Qld) states that I must
have regard to “any development approval for, and any lawful use of, the
premises or adjacent
common material”,
includes the properly made submissions referred to above. Further, the
assessment may be carried out having regard to any
other relevant matter other
than a person’s personal circumstances, financial or
application for the proposed development is a change application, the assessment
is more constrained than it otherwise
would be. In
McEnearney v Council of
the City of Gold
Flanagan JA
with approval the
observations of Williamson KC DCJ in
Catterall v Moreton Bay Regional
These were that the
inclusion of the phrase “in the context of the development approval”
in s 82(4) of the PA made it
clear that the assessment and decision-making
process occurs in the context that the application is one to change an existing
development
approval, as distinct from a fresh development
application.
[9] Otherwise,
in determining an appeal about a development application, the court is conferred
a wide discretion pursuant to
of the PA to approve all or part of the
application, impose development conditions on the approval, or refuse the
application. As
the Court of Appeal observed, the ultimate decision of the
Court “is a broad evaluative
judgement.”
The weight to
be given to each of the factors in undertaking this assessment is a matter for
the decision-maker.
Relevant provisions of the planning scheme
the site is within the Medium density residential zone, the Medium density
residential zone code (“MDRZC”) applies.
Relevantly, code
assessable development that complies with the purpose and overall outcomes of
the code complies with the code,
and if such development complies with the
performance or acceptable outcomes, it complies with the purpose and overall
outcomes of
6.2.2.2(2) provides that the purpose of the MDRZC will be achieved through
overall outcomes which include “whether
adjoining residential amenity is
unreasonably impacted”.
Further, PO1 then goes on to say that:
(a) assist in the protection of residential amenity;
(b) allow for access around the building;
(c) contribute to the streetscape; and
(d) allow for on-site car parking.
Relevantly, AO1 states that side and rear setbacks for a building height of
up to 4.5 metres can be 1.5
[11] Although
the site is designated in the Building height overlay map as subject to a
building height of 23 metres, Specific outcome
3.3.2.1 of the Strategic
framework of the planning scheme provides as follows:
(9) Increases in building height up to a maximum of 50% above the
height overlay map
may occur in limited circumstances in urban
neighbourhoods where all the following outcomes are satisfied:
(b) a reinforced local identity and sense of place;
(c) a well-managed interface with, relationship to and impact on nearby
development, including the reasonable amenity expectations
of nearby residents;
(e) an excellent standard of appearance of the built form and street edge;
[12] Pursuant to
of the planning scheme, the Strategic framework prevails over all other
components to the extent of any
inconsistency.
The issues in dispute
issues in dispute in the appeal narrowed by negotiation between the parties and
various conditions offered by the
co-respondent.
Their latest
iteration is set out in Exhibit 1A. They are:
within in the context of the existing development approval, the proposed
development achieves compliance with s 3.3.2.1(9)
(b), (c) and (e) of the
Planning Scheme. In particular:
(a) Does the proposed development achieve a well-managed interface with, and
relationship to, nearby development and ensure that
the impact on nearby
development and its residents is reasonable (sub-paragraph c of Specific outcome
3.3.2.1(9)) having regard to:
(i) The reasonable expectations provided by the MDRZ Code for setbacks, in
particular PO1 and the incursion into setbacks caused
by the ground level, level
1 and Level 4 to 9 [sic] of the proposed development shown on the elevations on
pages 30, 31 and 33 of
Exhibit 7) [sic];
(ii) The proposed development presenting as physically overbearing to existing
surrounding development being 135 Golden Four Drive
(Nusa), 146 Pacific Parade
(San Chelsea) and 131 Golden Four Drive (Lanai) in consequence of the combined
height of the building,
proposed setbacks and the architectural treatments of
the building;
(iii) Inadequate provision of landscaping which fails to effectively mitigate or
soften the impacts of the built form.
(b) Does the proposed development reinforce the local identity and sense of
place (sub-paragraph b of Specific outcome 3.3.2.1(9))
having regard to:
(i) the part of the local area in which the proposed development is located
having less variation in the building height and building
heights [sic] and
being predominantly low;
(ii) the height, bulk and scale of the proposed building being at variance with
its contextual setting.
(c) Does the proposed development achieve an excellent standard of appearance of
the built form
and street edge
(sub-paragraph e of Specific
outcome 3.3.2.1(9)) having regard to:
(i) the built form, substantial increase in hardstand, reduced setbacks and
inadequate landscaping at the ground level and level
1 of the building’
(ii) the black box form on top of the building exacerbating and not mitigating
the impact of the additional height;
(iii) the north and south elevations presenting in a flat dominant form;
there are any relevant matters that favour the exercise of discretion in favour
of approval.
As noted above, the “black box”
referred to in paragraph 1(c)(i) is not black or indeed a box. It is a
reference to the
number of experts gave evidence at the hearing of the appeal. Each of the
parties engaged an architect. Mr Curtis gave evidence
on behalf of the
co-respondent, Mr Richards gave evidence on behalf of the respondent, and Mr
Middleton gave evidence on behalf of
the appellants. Experts in the field of
visual amenity also gave evidence. Mr Curtis also gave evidence in this
capacity on behalf
of the co-respondent, Dr McGowan gave evidence in this
capacity on behalf of the respondent and Mr Butcher gave evidence in this
capacity on behalf of the appellants. Both Dr McGowan and Mr Butcher are
landscape architects and gave evidence in this regard.
The co-respondent called
an additional landscape architect, Mr Brooksby, whose evidence was restricted to
matters relating to landscaping
itself. In addition, I received reports from
the following town planners: Mr Buckley, who was engaged by the co-respondent;
who was engaged by the respondent; and Mr Adamson, who was engaged by
the appellants.
[15] In respect
of architectural matters, I prefer the evidence of Mr Curtis and Mr Richards to
that of Mr Middleton. Mr Middleton
based his opinions about the size and bulk
of the building on the character he divined from the limited precinct which he
as contributing to the character of the local
His consideration of
character failed to have regard to the wider local area identified by me
He also failed to
appreciate the considerable flexibility offered by the planning scheme in
complying with the setback requirements
[16] In my view,
Mr Richards accurately articulated the merits of the proposed development in the
following terms:
Specifically, the primary impacts to NUSA are on
the lowest for [sic] levels of the 2024 approval. The additional floor levels
not have a significant additional impact.
In relation to the lower four levels, there are some additional impacts with
the treatment of the ground level as car parking is located
at this level and
not in a basement [sic]. The interface to NUSA is to a driveway and the form of
the parking does not have an impact
on the level one[.] [sic] Ground level
impacts are moderated by planter boxes on the level one [sic] with setbacks
enabling ground
level deep planting and planters to fall over the edge within
the property.
The building form, bulk, scale and architectural expression is well
considered and exhibits design excellence. It is inventively
expressed in four
elements, a base at ground level, a mid-rise element with a white frame and
introduced curves, an upper level element
where the floor plans change expressed
as a darker form and a visually lighter roof terrace and pergola.
The aggregation of these four elements breaks up the scale and provides a
strong visual transition to the lower scale developments
The apartment planning of the building is an improvement on the 2022
approval, with the primary outlook for living rooms on the street
apartment now
facing and overlooking to the street and not primarily to a side
[17] Turning to
the disputed issues themselves, the first is whether the proposed development
achieves a well-managed interface with
and relationship to nearby development,
having regard to the reasonable amenity expectations of residents. In this
regard, the appellants
take issue with the setbacks provided and allege that the
proposed development presents as physically overbearing to its neighbours
consequence of the combination of its height, setbacks and architectural
treatments. Further, it is alleged that inadequate
landscaping is provided and
that this fails to mitigate or soften the impacts of the built form.
original development was located centrally on the site. It was set back between
approximately 2.5 and 3 metres from the
northern boundary and generally a
similar distance from the southern boundary. It was set back approximately 3.4
metres from the
Principally by
utilising car lifts at the ground level, the built form is now much closer to
each of these boundaries.
ground level and to a height of 4.3 metres, car lifts are now present across
almost all of the eastern boundary. Although they
are landscaped extensively,
they were originally only set back .75 of a metre. I consider this inadequate
in the circumstances.
The co-respondent has now agreed to a condition that they
are set back 1.5 metres from the eastern boundary where the interface
rear of the adjoining multiple dwelling complex. This complies with AO1 in the
MDRZC. I am of the view that this setback
is adequate in the circumstances
where it permits 1.5 metres of deep planting between the built form and the
[19] There will
be a small build-to-boundary intrusion of a car lift into the setback to Lanai
to the south for a distance of 13.5
metres in circumstances where the built form
is to be landscaped extensively at the top with trailing vegetation cascading
This overlooks a services area at the rear of Lanai. There is a
similar degree of built form very close to the northern boundary
at the rear of
the Nusa building, which is less than a metre from this boundary. Further,
along this boundary there is another built-to-boundary
car lift which is again
4.3 metres high and approximately 13.5 metres long. It is located about halfway
along from the street frontage.
Between it and the street is an elevated
walkway and outdoor entertainment area which is buffered by
landscaping.
The landscaping on
top of the car lifts is much more extensive than that proposed to be located
adjacent to the walkway and the
outdoor entertaining area. This boundary
adjoins the driveway of the Nusa development; but at its height of 4.3 metres,
of the built form is a little higher than the balconies at level one of
this neighbouring
development.
[20] I accept
the evidence Brooksby that the proposed development incorporates 248m² of
landscaping as compared to the approved
development which only provided
131m² of landscaping.
Further, at level one a total area of 109m² of landscaping is to be
provided compared to 7.8m² for the approved development.
I accept the
evidence of Mr Brooksby that the provision of irrigation and maintenance
infrastructure and the appropriate conditioning
of the proposed development will
ensure that the landscaping is appropriately
maintained.
When considering
the extent of the landscaping, together with the condition offered by the
co-respondent to install opaque glass
adjacent to the walkway and outdoor
entertainment area along the northern boundary, it is unsurprising that under
cross-examination
Mr Butcher conceded that he did not contend that there were
problems with impacts of the proposed development along this boundary
level or at level one.
[21] For the
higher levels of the proposed development, the appellants contend that the built
form is not set back to the extent required
by the Acceptable Outcomes in the
MDRZC, and that it is overbearing. Such an approach requires caution. As Brown
J observed in
Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional
While acceptable outcomes in a planning scheme may be relevant
in ascertaining the legislative intention of a planning scheme in a
area, it depends on the terms of the provision itself.
[22] It appears
the planning scheme provides a number of pathways to demonstrating appropriate
setbacks through the purpose and overall
outcomes and also through PO1 of the
MDRC. These are qualitative measures and do not prescribe any particular
dimension at any point
in the height of a structure. Moreover, as s 1.4 of the
planning scheme provides that the Strategic framework prevails over all
components to the extent of any inconsistency for impact
assessment,
appropriate to read a metric into the assessment contemplated by s
3.3.2.1(9)(c). In my view the design elements evident
in the proposed
development, which see it progressively set back from the adjoining neighbours
to the north and south as it increases
in height, are such that, when coupled
with the substantial landscaping that is now provided which assists in
articulating the building,
the setbacks are appropriate. The landscaping
effectively mitigates impacts from the increased built form close to boundaries
the overall design approach of the proposed development is such that it is
not physically overbearing to neighbouring properties.
further addressed by a condition proposing opaque glass windows at upper levels.
Accordingly, I find that it
achieves a well-managed interface with and in
relationship to nearby development, including the reasonable amenity
expectations of
nearby residents, and therefore complies with s
3.3.1.(9)(c).
[23] I turn now
to consider whether the proposed development reinforces the local identity and
sense of place. The proposed development
is a good example of a beachside
high-rise multiple dwelling in an area where this development is contemplated by
the planning scheme.
It occurs where other similar development is occurring
In my view it complies
with s 3.3.2.1(9)(b) of the planning scheme.
[24] The final
matter for consideration is whether the proposed development achieves an
excellent standard of appearance of built
form. The Macquarie Concise
Dictionary defines “excellent” as “possessing excellence or
superior merit; remarkably
For the reasons
set out in the opinion of Mr Richards above, I have no difficulty in concluding
that the proposed development is
of superior merit. It is definitely an
improvement on the approved development in terms of its articulation, its roof
and by the provision of enhanced landscaping. Although aesthetic
tastes may differ as to the merits of the palette chosen, particularly
upper three levels resulting in the choc top, this is something on which minds
may legitimately differ, without detracting
from its architectural merit. I
have no difficulty in concluding that the proposed development provides an
excellent standard of
appearance of built form in accordance with
s 3.3.2.1(9)(e) of the planning scheme.
find that the contentious provisions of the planning scheme have been satisfied,
justifying the increase in building height
sought by the proposed development
pursuant to s 3.3.2.1.
planning scheme contemplates development to well over 30 metres in height in the
local area and affords considerable design
flexibility. This extends to built
form and setbacks. Residents must therefore contemplate this scale and form of
development when
reflecting on the anticipated character of the local area.
[27] If I am
wrong in my assessment in this regard, in my view the following relevant matters
nevertheless warrant approval of the
proposed development:
provides a significantly improved architectural design and landscaping outcome
compared to the existing approval; and
circumstances where the appellants had all lost any views they had across the
site as a consequence of the approved
development,
the design changes
attributable to the proposed development do not appear to have any meaningful
consequence for them.
[28] Accordingly,
the appeal will be allowed in part to enable the provision of amended conditions
agreed between the parties and
offered by the co-respondent in the course of the
Ex. 2, pp 55,
, pp 5, 20 and
, pp 25 and 45.
Ex. 2, para
11, Ex. 12.
Ex. 5, para 47.
Ibid, para 54.
Archer & Anor v Council
of the City of Gold Coast & Ors
[2022] QPEC 59
Ex. 11, Fig.
[1847] EngR 546
Ex. 3, para
Ex. 20, para 14.
Planning and Environment
Court Act 2016
Planning Act 2016
s 45(5)(a)(i).
Section 31(1)(f).
Section 31(1)(g).
Planning Act 2016
s 45(5)(b).
(2024) 261 LEGERA 396.
At 409, [33].
[2020] QPEC 52.
(2024) 261 LEGERA 396 at
Brisbane City Council v
YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
[2021] QPELR 987
Abeleda & Anor v
Brisbane City Council & Anor
[2020] QCA 257
(2020) 6 QR 441
Section 5.3.3(4)(c), Ex.
12, pp 102–103.
Ibid, p 112.
Ibid, p 116.
Ibid, p 29.
Ex. 3, paras 170 and
T3-108, ll 15–45 to
T3-109, ll 1–10.
Ex. 3, para 172.
Ex. 3, paras
Ex. 7, p 6.
Ibid, p 21.
Ex. 7, p 38.
Ex. 2, para 358.
Ex. 10, pp 9–13;
T2-44, ll 15–26.
T3-34, ll 29–38.
[2021] QCA 95
[2022] QPELR 309
Section 1.4(1)(b)
Ex. 11, Fig. 1.
T3-31, ll 35–44.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (207 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter