URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jacks, M v Bourke, P [2003] QBT 26 (26 June 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 026
Application No:
JACKS, MICHELLE
C/- Lambert & Ho, Lawyers
George Street
BRISBANE Q 4003
Respondent:
BOURKE, PAUL
C/- Dibbs Barker Gosling Lawyers
BRISBANE Q 4001
Section 61 and 42
- Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
Upon consideration of written submissions from the parties, the
Queensland Building Tribunal makes the following orders:
The respondent will pay the
applicant’s costs of the proceedings on an indemnity basis, to be agreed,
or failing agreement to
be assessed.
The parties have liberty to apply for
orders in respect of interest if they cannot resolve the interest issue between
themselves.
....................................
MS McVEIGH - MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Date: 26 June
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 026
Jacks v Bourke
[2003] QBT J004-02 (No.
JACKS Michelle
BOURKE Paul
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
26 June 2003
DELIVERED AT:
DECISION ON THE PAPERS:
DECISION OF:
Ms J. McVeigh
CATCHWORDS:
COSTS – Consideration of
Building Tribunal Act 2000
, section 61
SOLICITORS:
Lambert & Ho
RESPONDENT:
Dibbs Barker Gosling
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Introduction
For reasons delivered on 22 May 2003 the
respondent was ordered to pay the applicant $7,787.86. The parties were given
leave to make
written submissions in respect of costs and interest.
Background facts
The facts relating to the dispute are set
out in my reasons of 22 May and need not be repeated. Facts relevant to the
application
under consideration, which for obvious reasons only came to my
attention after 22 May 2003, are set out below.
On 30 May 2002 the applicant, in
accordance with the contract, deposited $33,826.86 into the trust account of the
Queensland Master
Builders Association (“QMBA”) in order that she
might obtain possession of the units.
The application initiating the proceedings
was filed on 27 September 2002. Before proceedings were instituted the parties
made numerous
attempts to resolve their differences. Their solicitors exchanged
a number of offers made without prejudice save as to costs which
were attached
to the submissions on costs filed on behalf of the applicant. These offers are
summarised below.
By letter dated 3 July 2002, the
solicitors for the applicant canvassed the builder’s variation claims and
their client’s
complaints at some length and suggested negotiations take
place. By letter dated 25 July 2002, the solicitors for the applicant
global commercial offer of settlement. The applicant offered that the funds
held in the QMBA trust account be dispersed as
to $13,761.27 to the respondent
on the basis that this would settle all of the respondent’s claims against
her and all of her
claims against the respondent, save for the rectification of
the painting and the landscaping/drainage issue. The offer was open
acceptance for 7 days.
By letter dated 30 August 2002, the
solicitors for the applicant renewed the offer of 25 July 2002 until 2 September
2002, the next
working day.
By letter dated 13 September 2002, the
solicitors for the respondent conveyed their client’s willingness to
settle for a payment
of $38,763.99 and indicated their client’s
willingness to rectify all defects identified by the Queensland Building
Authority (“BSA”). The offer was open for acceptance for
Obviously none of the offers were
Submissions – applicant
It was submitted that a costs order should
be made on an indemnity basis in favour of the applicant, or failing that, that
should be made in favour of the applicant for costs assessed by
reference to the District Court Scale. Detailed written submissions
applicant were filed on 11, 18 and 23 June 2002. I will not repeat them in any
It was submitted that in the end result,
in terms of relative success, the applicant was successful in achieving relief
for payment
for a total of $77,342.83, whereas the respondent was only
successful in his claim in the amount of $30,961.47.
In submissions in reply a history of the
claims made by either party was advanced showing the shifting sands of the
claims over time,
including during the hearing. It was submitted that the
respondent had been wholly unsuccessful, he having claimed $93,048.91 and
having been ordered to pay the applicant $7,787.86. By way of contrast it was
submitted that out of a claim for $85,628.46 the
applicant had obtained credits,
relief for payment and damages totalling $77,342.83, thus being substantially
successful.
It was submitted a costs order should be
made on an indemnity basis taking into account the series of correspondence,
described as
offers, which occurred across the period 25 July
to 13 September 2002, prior to the filing of proceedings in this tribunal. It
submitted that the tribunal should adopt the approach discussed by the
Supreme Court in
Interchase Corporation Ltd v ACN 010 087 5473 Pty Ltd
(unreported 23 June 2000, No. 520 of 1994).
It was submitted that the respondent
should be ordered to pay interest on the monies held in the QMBA trust account
from 30 May 2002
to the date of release of the monies. It was further submitted
that the respondent should be ordered to pay interest on the monies
ordered to pay the applicant from the date of practical completion (29 May 2002)
until payment of the ordered sum by the
respondent.
Submissions - respondent
For the respondent it was submitted that
each party should bear its own costs of the proceedings. Detailed written
submissions were
filed on 11 and 19 June 2002. I will not repeat them in
It was submitted that each party was only
partially successful in respect of its claims. Attention was drawn to
concessions made
by each party before and during the course of the hearing. In
submissions in reply, the solicitors for the respondent disagreed
applicant’s solicitors’ calculations in respect of the outcome. It
was further submitted that in any event
the relative success of the parties in
terms of the amount awarded in comparison to the total claimed was but one
factor to be taken
into account.
In reply it was submitted that the offers
to settle did not support a claim for indemnity costs on the
that the correspondence was not
directly comparable to the decision as the applicant’s case changed
markedly between the date
of the offer and the date of the hearing;
the offers were not made in accordance
with Part 6 of Division 8 of the
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
(“the Act”).
It was submitted that no interest should
be awarded on the monies to be paid by the respondent to the applicant on the
these monies related to the estimated costs of rectification of the
paint defects, which costs had not been incurred by the applicant.
submitted that it would not be just to award interest on loss not yet suffered
in circumstances where the quotation for rectification
Section 61 of the Act sets out matters to
which the tribunal might have regard when deciding whether to award costs and
of the costs. These factors
“(a) the outcome of the
proceeding;
(b) the conduct of the parties to the proceeding
before and during the proceeding;
(c) the nature and complexity
of the proceeding;
(d) the relative strengths of the claims made
by each of the parties to the proceeding;
(e) any contravention
of the Queensland Building Services Authority Act 1991, the Domestic Building
Contracts Act 2000 or any other
Act by a party to the
proceeding;
(f) for a proceeding to which the authority is a
party, whether the other party to the proceeding was afforded natural justice by
the authority;
(g) anything else the tribunal considers
If one were to approach the matter in a
simplistic way one would say that the outcome of the proceedings was that the
applicant has
been successful and the respondent has been unsuccessful because
the respondent has been ordered to pay money to the applicant.
However, such an
assessment might be an over simplification of the proceedings. Each
party’s legal representative recognised
the need to analyse the claims
advanced by each party and each party’s success against their claims but
did not descend to
any level of detail. The proceedings were made up of many
component parts, 42 of which were resolved by the hearing. The applicant
enjoyed some success in her claim and in defence of the counter-claim and the
respondent enjoyed some success in his counter-claim
and in his defence of the
claim. Analysis of the outcome is further complicated by the changing quantum
of each party’s claim.
However, overall it is undeniable that the
applicant enjoyed more success in her claims and defences than did the
respondent.
Courts and this tribunal encourage
parties to make and consider offers of compromise. As Byrne J eloquently put it
Mutual Community Ltd v Lorden Holdings Pty Ltd
(unreported, Supreme
Court Victoria, 28 April 1993):
“The response of
a litigant in receipt of an offer of settlement will always be affected by the
prospect that the sum which
the court might order including party and party
costs may be less advantageous than the terms of the offer. Experience,
shows that this prospect alone is not always sufficient to compel a
litigant to face up to the offer. The further prospect of super-added
penalty if a reasonable offer is not accepted is a salutary inducement to an
offeree to undertake this often painful task.”
I am satisfied that the correspondence
between the parties’ solicitors expressed to be without prejudice save as
to costs, in
particular the letter of 25 July 2002, constituted
offers. The offers were plainly designed to avoid the costs
of litigation. The offers could not have been made pursuant to section
the Act as they were made before the proceedings were filed. Parties should be
encouraged to make offers to settle at the
earliest opportunity, including
before the institution of proceedings. It seems each party in these proceedings
adopted that course.
The District Court has indicated in
Vodopevic & Liddle v Knigge
(unreported District Court No. 3876/2002,
18/3/2003), obiter, that
offers should be taken into account
in the tribunal pursuant to section 61(4)(b) of the Act. As section 61 (4)(b)
refers to conduct
before the proceedings I find that the fact the
offer preceded the litigation is no reason to disregard it. One might think
that in making the offer the applicant, or those who
advised her, had heeded the
exhortation of Cole J in
NRMA Insurance Ltd v FR Coyle Pty Ltd
(unreported, NSW Supreme Court, 13 May 1994) to give careful consideration
to the matter of legal costs and prospects before commencing
the litigation.
When considering the conduct of the
parties it is useful to consider principles to be found in judgements of the
(above) White J explored the approach to be taken
offers. She identified a conflict of authority between the
approach taken by Rolfe J in
Multicon Engineering Pty Ltd v Federal Airports
Corporation
(1996) 138 ALR 425 and the Court of Appeal in South Australia
Pirrotta v Citibank Pty Ltd
(1998) 72 SASR 259.
Rolfe J held that
“the proper approach to an offer of compromise, whether made under the
rules or a Calderbank offer, was that there should be
a prima facie presumption
in the event of the offer not being accepted and in the event that the recipient
of the offer not receiving
a result more favourable that the offer, that the
party rejecting the offer should pay the costs of the other party on an
basis from the date of the making of the offer”
, following an
extensive review of the authorities, Debelle J in acknowledged obiter, concluded
offer should be a significant factor to be weighed when
considering whether to award indemnity costs, but that there should not be
prima facie presumption to be rebutted by the recipient of the
Rolfe J’s decision was followed
with approval by Gillard J in Victoria in
MT Associates Pty Ltd v Aqua-Max
(BC200002334). His Honour said:
object of making an offer is to bring the litigation to an end and to put on
notice the other side that if it refuses the
offer and subsequently the offeror
recovers more in the proceeding, then justice and fairness requires that a
special order for costs
These proceedings would have been
stillborn if the offer had been accepted.
White J favoured the South Australian
approach. She expressed the view that the
significant, but did not create a prima facie presumption that an indemnity
costs order would be made. She thought that
the extent to which the
offer departed from the regime envisaged by the rules might be
a determinative factor. In the complex and difficult litigation that
considering she thought it unreasonable to depart from the usual costs outcome
when the offer was effectively open for one
working day.
Although Rolfe J was considering a
complex construction matter and thus his approach is very attractive, and
despite the fact that
the decision of the Court of Appeal in South Australia was
only obiter, I feel constrained to follow White J, with the consequence
there can be no prima facie presumption that the applicant is entitled to
indemnity costs even though the result of the litigation
is much less favourable
to the respondent than the offer.
There is no doubt that had the respondent
accepted the offer conveyed in the letter dated 25 July 2002, renewed albeit for
working day on 30 August 2002, he would have been substantially better
off than he is now. He would have had $13,761.27 for almost
a year and would
have been able to have his subcontractor rectify the painting, presumably at no
cost, as was done to resolve the
landscaping/drainage issue, and he would not
have incurred the substantial legal costs which he undoubtedly must have
incurred since
25 July 2002. Instead he has to pay the applicant $7,786 and has
no prospect of avoiding a costs order, if not an indemnity costs
respondent’s failure to take up the reasonable offer has caused the
applicant to incur all of the costs associated
with the proceedings.
I reject the submission that the offer
was not directly comparable to the decision. I agree with the observation of
Gillard J in
MT Associates Pty Ltd
(above) at paragraph 120 that it is
standard practice in commercial litigation to compromise matters by an all
inclusive offer. I
also note that the global offer had been preceded by lengthy
correspondence and reports which set out the applicant’s lawyers’
and expert’s views on individual items claimed by the parties. I have no
doubt that those who advised the respondent would
have been well aware of the
likely costs of the litigation and the risk run by rejecting the global offer.
Mindful of the judgement in
(above) I note that the offer was open for 7 days and that had the offer
been made under Division 8 of Part 6 of the Act it must have
been open for 14
days. It is plain that the offer must be considered against what appears to be
considerable negotiation. There
can be no doubt that the parties were well
informed about the nature of each other’s cases. I agree with Gillard J
that experienced
lawyers would have no difficulty in making up their mind
whether or not to recommend accepting an offer within 7 days. I find that
respondent must have had sufficient time to consider it, his lawyers having been
able to make a detailed counter-offer on 13
There is sufficient difference in the
circumstances of this case to those being considered by White J in
for me to conclude that the fact the offer was open for less
time than an offer under the Act is not fatal to the applicant’s
indemnity costs.
Each party criticises the other for
changing the nature and value of the claims during the preparation for and the
course of the hearing.
Such changes are inherent in building disputes where
variations and defects claims are at the heart of the dispute. The case that
heard was not significantly different to the pleaded case, although the
particulars of the claims changed over time. I do not
think either party can be
criticised for making changes to their claims or defences on advice from their
lawyers and experts.
It was submitted that the respondent
unnecessarily extended the duration of the hearing by making an application to
amend on day one
and then by abandoning the amendment after it was allowed. I
accept the submission that the respondent was responsible for the waste
approximately a day of hearing time when he made an application for leave to
amend and then promptly abandoned the amendment allowed,
on the basis there
would be an adjournment of the hearing at his cost. However, I note that this
delay gave the experts an opportunity
to further refine the extent of the
dispute between the parties, thus saving considerable hearing
It was further submitted that the
respondent had acted unreasonably by failing to concede in respect of the
defective paintwork until
the last day of the hearing. The respondent has
already suffered the consequences of his late concession as he has lost the
opportunity
to rectify work he ultimately conceded was defective.
The proceedings related to a commercial
dispute. While individual claims were not complex, the number of claims made
the matter complex.
I have no doubt that this is the type of matter in which
each party was perfectly justified in retaining experienced solicitors
counsel and well qualified experts.
I have canvassed the relative strengths
of the claims ultimately advanced by the parties on a claim-by-claim basis in my
reasons for
decision. By the time the decision was delivered appropriate
concessions had been made by each party in respect of those claims
I note that neither the applicant nor the
respondent followed the requirements of the
Domestic Building Contracts Act
in so far as the variations were not recorded in writing.
It is also relevant to consider the
mandatory nature of the operation of section 161(2) of the Act which suggests
that in the tribunal
the Legislature intended, at least so far as offers made
under Part 8 of Division 6 of the Act were concerned, that the general policy
the courts of encouraging the making and consideration of offers to settle would
operate. Indeed it is to be noted that section
161(2) requires the policy to
operate without reservation of any discretion to the tribunal in respect of the
reasonableness of the
As this is a commercial building dispute
I have no doubt that it is appropriate to make an award of costs in the
proceedings. Taking
account of the policy of encouraging the making and
considering of reasonable settlement offers, the applicant’s
offer of 25 July 2002, the respondent’s failure to accept the offer
which would have resulted in an outcome to him significantly
more favourable
than the outcome of the proceedings and all of the other matters set out above,
I am of the view that the respondent
should pay the applicant’s costs of
the proceedings on an indemnity basis.
In the absence of any submissions as to
the legal basis upon which I might make an award of interest in respect of the
funds deposited
in the trust account of the QMBA in accordance with the
requirements of the contract, I am not prepared to make such an order.
I reject the submission for the
respondent that it would not be appropriate to make an award of interest on
money to be paid by the
respondent to the applicant on the basis that the amount
relates to painting rectification. The amount is simply the nett outcome
decisions in respect of each of the applicant’s and the respondent’s
claims. I see no reason why the applicant
is not entitled to interest on the
sum of $7,786.86 pursuant to section 93(2)(c) of the Act. Regulation 5 of the
Queensland Building Tribunal Regulation 2000
(as amended) prescribes that
interest is payable at the rate agreed between the parties, or if there is no
agreement as to the rate,
10%. The regulation prescribes that the interest is
payable from the day the amount claimed became due and payable to and including
the day of the decision by default. Considering the history of the legislation
one suspects that regulation 5(2) is only intended
to apply to decisions by
The contract interest rate on overdue
payments is 15% per annum calculated on a daily basis in respect of clause 11.
Unfortunately
I was not provided with a copy of the General Conditions so I do
not know whether clause 11 relates to payments overdue by the builder.
this to the parties to resolve. In my view the interest should be paid from 27
September 2002, the filing date of the proceedings,
to the date of payment of
The respondent will pay the
applicant’s costs of the proceedings on an indemnity basis, to be agreed
or failing agreement to
be assessed.
.....................................
J McVEIGH – MEMBER
Queensland Building
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (89.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter