URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/211.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Wright [2025] QCA 211 (31 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
[2025] QCA 211
WRIGHT, Jonathan
(appellant)
CA No 29 of 2025
SC No 37 of 2024
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Appeal against Conviction
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Toowoomba – Date of Conviction: 7 February 2025
(Bradley J)
DELIVERED ON:
31 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
14 October 2025
Mullins P and Hall AJA and Hindman J
The appeal be dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE
– PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES NOT AMOUNTING TO MISCARRIAGE
MISDIRECTION OR NON-DIRECTION – where the appellant was convicted of
murder – where the Crown case was that the
appellant deliberately ran down
the deceased with his vehicle and thereby caused his death – where the
Crown alleged that the
appellant’s intention was to kill the deceased or
cause him grievous bodily harm – where the defence case was that although
the appellant was angry with the deceased and had pursued him, the fatal
collision was an accident – where the appellant contends
that the trial
judge’s summing up in respect of the partial defence of provocation was
inadequate – where it is submitted
that the directions on provocation
should have incorporated reference to evidence of the appellant’s anger
– where there
was no dispute as to the appellant’s anger –
where the issue in dispute was what inference could be drawn from that anger
– where the extent to which a trial judge reminds the jury of the evidence
is a matter for individual judgment and will reflect
the complexity of the
issues, and the length and conduct of the case – whether the directions
regarding provocation were adequate
in the circumstances of this case –
whether it was necessary to remind the jury of evidence relating to the
appellant’s
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE
– PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES NOT AMOUNTING TO MISCARRIAGE
MISDIRECTION OR NON-DIRECTION – where the appellant was convicted of
murder – where the Crown case was that the
appellant deliberately ran down
the deceased with his vehicle and thereby caused his death – where the
appellant contends that
the failure of the trial judge to direct the jury as to
an alternative pathway to manslaughter, being manslaughter by criminal
negligence,
was an error – where the Crown did not rely on s 289 of
Criminal Code
to prove that the appellant had caused the death of the
deceased by criminal negligence – whether there was a basis upon which
further alternative pathway to manslaughter by criminal negligence could
properly have been left to the jury
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE
– PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES NOT AMOUNTING TO MISCARRIAGE
MISDIRECTION OR NON-DIRECTION – where the appellant was convicted of
murder – where the Crown case was that the
appellant deliberately ran down
the deceased with his vehicle and thereby caused his death – where the
appellant contends that
the failure of the trial judge to direct the jury as to
the use that could be made of evidence of discreditable conduct of the appellant
was an error – where the discreditable conduct referred to was that the
appellant had met with the deceased on the day in question
to purchase
methylamphetamine – where the evidence was introduced by the appellant
– where it is generally prudent for
a trial judge to give a warning
against any prejudice arising from evidence of this type – where there is
no rule of law that
a direction as to discreditable evidence must be given
– whether a direction ought to have been given on the facts of this
– whether there was a perceptible risk that the jury misused the evidence
– whether there is a realistic possibility
that the failure to give
a direction affected the reasoning of the jury
Criminal Code
(Qld), s 289, s 328A
Banks v The State of Western Australia
[2018] WASCA 130
Crofts v The Queen
(1996) 186 CLR 427
Domican v The Queen
(1992) 173 CLR 555
[1992] HCA 13
LNV v The State of Western Australia
[2019] WASCA 180
MDP v The Queen
(2025) 99 ALJR 969
[2025] HCA 24
v Aston-Brien
, considered
R v Coombes
, considered
R v Dunrobin
R v McMullen
R v Willersdorf
, considered
Roach v The Queen
(2011) 242 CLR 610
RPS v The Queen
(2000) 199 CLR 620
[2000] HCA 3
A M Hoare KC for the appellant
N W Crane for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Fisher Dore Lawyers for the appellant
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Queensland) for the respondent
I agree with Hall AJA.
appellant was convicted after a trial of the murder of Paul Sia. The Crown case
was that the appellant deliberately ran down
Mr Sia with his vehicle and thereby
caused his death. The Crown alleged that the appellant’s intention was to
kill Mr Sia
or cause him grievous bodily harm. The defence case was that,
although the appellant was angry with Mr Sia and had pursued him,
collision was an accident. The appellant appeals his conviction.
[4] There are
three grounds of appeal. By Ground 1, the appellant contends that the learned
trial judge’s summing up to the
jury in respect of the partial defence of
provocation was inadequate. It is submitted that the directions on provocation
have incorporated reference to evidence of the appellant’s anger.
By Ground 2, the appellant contends that the failure of
the trial judge to
direct the jury as to an alternative pathway to manslaughter, being manslaughter
by criminal negligence, was an
error. By Ground 3, the appellant contends that
the failure of the trial judge to direct the jury as to the use that could be
of evidence of discreditable conduct of the appellant was an error.
[5] As to Ground
1, the directions regarding provocation were adequate in the circumstances of
this case. The appellant accepts that
the trial judge directed the jury on the
relevant law and identified the issues that required determination. The trial
and much of the evidence was not contentious. That the appellant was
very angry was not in dispute. What was in issue was what
inference could be
drawn from that anger. There was no necessity to remind the jury of evidence
relating to the appellant’s
anger. There is no realistic possibility that
the jury would have overlooked that evidence.
[6] As to Ground
2, the Crown case was that the running down was a deliberate act. The Crown did
not rely on s 289 of the
Criminal Code
to prove that the appellant had
caused the death of the deceased by criminal negligence. Manslaughter was left
as an alternative
verdict in the event that the jury were not satisfied that the
appellant had the specific intent to kill or do grievous bodily harm,
they found such intent proven and were satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that provocation had been made out. There
was no basis upon which a further
alternative pathway to manslaughter by criminal negligence could properly have
been left to the
[7] As to Ground
3, the discreditable conduct referred to was that the appellant claimed in
evidence that he met with Mr Sia on the
day in question to purchase a quantity
of methylamphetamine for $40,000. The appellant said that he intended to use
some of the
drugs and sell the rest for profit. The appellant’s case was
that Mr Sia had assaulted him and stolen the $40,000. This evidence
introduced by the appellant to explain why he had pursued Mr Sia. The limited
relevance of the evidence was clear. There was
no suggestion that the appellant
was more likely to be guilty of murder because he had engaged in drug use or
dealing. Nor was it
suggested that this was relevant to his credibility as a
witness. No direction was sought regarding any possible prejudice arising
the evidence. In these circumstances, there is no perceptible risk that the
jury misused the evidence. Whilst it is generally
prudent for a trial
judge to give a warning against any prejudice arising from evidence of this
case did not result in a miscarriage of
[8] In my view,
none of the grounds of appeal succeed and the appeal should be
The prosecution case
[9] The Crown
opened its case on the following basis. At approximately 2.45 pm on
20 November 2022, Mr Sia arrived at the appellant’s
Rockville in a white Nissan Tiida.
Mr Sia was with another man, Nathan Vae Vae, who was in the passenger
The appellant came out of
his house and spoke with Mr Sia. A short time later Mr Sia and Mr Vae Vae drove
away in the Nissan.
appellant then entered the house shouting. He was very angry. He again left
the house and got into his white Holden Rodeo
utility and drove off at speed in
pursuit of the Nissan. He continued to pursue the Nissan for some 13
At times he drove above
the speed limit and manoeuvred around other vehicles on the road. This pursuit
was recorded on CCTV footage
taken at several points along the journey.
Further, the driver of a Volvo prime mover activated the dashcam in his vehicle
able to record the events at the point when the appellant’s Rodeo
forced the Nissan off the road.
appellant caused the Rodeo to ram the rear of the Nissan, resulting in extensive
He then rammed the Nissan
a second time to the left passenger side, forcing it off the road. The Nissan
crashed through a speed
sign and collided with a fence running parallel to the
road. Mr Sia got out of the Nissan and began picking up cash that had spilt
onto the grass by the side of the road. The appellant, who had driven past the
Nissan, turned around and drove the Rodeo back past
the Nissan and Mr
Mr Vae Vae got out of
the Nissan and climbed over the fence.
appellant then executed a U-turn against oncoming traffic, drove towards the
Nissan and then veered to the right, where Mr
Sia was standing, and ran him
over. Mr Sia was hit with full force by the Rodeo, which was fitted with a
One of the wheels of the
Rodeo also ran over Mr Sia’s head. Mr Sia suffered serious head and brain
appellant stopped the Rodeo a short distance from the point of impact, got out
and walked over to Mr Sia. He did not render
any assistance to Mr Sia, who was
still conscious.
Rather, he began
picking up cash that had fallen on the grass. He appeared to yell at the truck
driver who was filming the events
with his dashcam. The appellant then walked
over to the Nissan, opened the rear door and recovered his telephone and more
appellant then returned to the Rodeo and drove
He drove to a storage unit,
parked the Rodeo and arranged for another man to collect him. The Rodeo
subsequently went missing and
has not been located. The appellant claimed not
to know where it went.
[15] Mr Sia was
taken to hospital and treated for his
The injuries included
bleeding to the brain. The treatment was unsuccessful, and Mr Sia died on
3 December 2022. Mr Vae Vae was
also injured and had no recollection of
the events of that day.
prosecution case was that the appellant was in a state of rage and deliberately
ran down Mr Sia with the intention of causing
his death or at least grievous
bodily harm. The Crown also anticipated that provocation may be raised but said
that this was not
a case of provocation as the appellant had not lost his
self-control. Rather he had used his vehicle as a weapon to pursue and run
Mr Sia because he was angry with him. That anger did not result in a lack of
self-control because the appellant was able to
drive in a purposeful manner
during the 13 minute pursuit. Further, that period of time was said to be
sufficient to overcome the
effect of any rage caused by any incident at the
appellant’s house.
[17] On the
prosecution case, this was a killing by a deliberate act. Manslaughter was only
open if no specific intent to kill or
do grievous bodily harm was established,
or, if such intent was established, the appellant was acting under the influence
of provocation.
The prosecution did not allege that the appellant could be
guilty of manslaughter on the basis of criminal negligence. A further
alternative of dangerous operation of a vehicle causing death was, however, open
and left to the jury (s 328A of the Code).
The defence
appellant gave evidence at the trial. The defence case was that as at
20 November 2022, the appellant was struggling with
a drug addiction, as he
had throughout periods of his
He considered Mr Sia to
be a friend who he had known for the previous 12 months. The appellant had
arranged to purchase some methylamphetamine
The arrangement
was that Mr Sia would drive to the appellant’s house in Rockville and
would provide a quantity of methylamphetamine
in return for the sum of
[19] When Mr Sia
arrived in the white Nissan, there was another man in the car that the appellant
did not know. The appellant came
out of the house with the $40,000 cash in a
box, got into the back seat of the Nissan and began talking to Mr
Unexpectedly, Mr Sia
punched the appellant to the side of the head. The punch left the appellant
dazed and he found himself out
of the car and no longer in possession of the
box. The Nissan was reversing at the time the appellant exited the vehicle,
resulted in the appellant being hit by the open back
Whilst not badly injured,
he was somewhat confused. The Nissan took off at speed and the appellant
realised that Mr Sia and his
passenger had left with the box of money and the
appellant’s mobile
appellant believed he had been robbed and decided to pursue Mr Sia. He ran into
the house to get his car keys and then returned
to his Holden Rodeo utility that
was parked outside and set off in
He knew where Mr Sia
was likely to be driving because he knew they had travelled from Brisbane.
appellant’s case was that his intention was to force the Nissan from the
road and recover the money. His plan was
to undertake a “pit
manoeuvre” involving a collision with the back of the car being pursued in
order to spin it from
Whilst this was the first time he had ever tried such a manoeuvre, it was
something that he had learnt about whilst doing an advanced
driver training
appellant caught up to the Nissan, rammed it from behind, and forced it from the
road and into a nearby fence. He then turned
his vehicle around with the
intention of pushing the vehicle against the fence and leaving the bull bar
pressed against the side
of the Nissan so that the occupants could not get
As he turned the Rodeo
around, he saw that Mr Sia had got out of the Nissan. This occurred in a split
second, and he realised that
he was going to run into Mr Sia unless he took
evasive action. He swung the wheel of the vehicle hard to the right in an
to try to avoid
However, Mr Sia
bent over, and he lost sight of him. Initially, the appellant thought that he
had missed Mr Sia. He did feel a
bump, but thought he had run over a traffic
He turned the car around
again and it was at this point that he realised that he had run over Mr Sia.
His case was that it was
not his intention to hit Mr Sia. He stopped and
walked over to Mr Sia who was on the ground, but conscious and able to speak
to the effect of “you’re fucked,
appellant was concerned for his safety given the previous assault at his house
and given that Mr Sia was a young, strong
man. For those reasons, he walked
away and tried to recover the cash and his mobile telephone.
[24] In essence,
the defence case was that the running down was not deliberate, and the death of
Mr Sia was an accident.
[25] Ground 1 is
that the learned trial judge’s summing up to the jury in respect of the
partial defence of provocation was
inadequate and thereby occasioned a
miscarriage of justice.
[26] As noted,
the defence case was that the fatal collision was unintended. It was not
contended by the appellant that he had deliberately
run down Mr Sia with intent
to kill or do grievous bodily harm, but that his action was provoked.
Nonetheless, it was accepted at
the trial that the partial defence of
provocation was open on the evidence and should be left to the jury.
[27] The trial
judge’s directions in regard to provocation were as
now want to say something to you about provocation. You have heard that word
mentioned in the addresses this morning. If
you are satisfied that the accused
killed Paul Sia with an intention to kill him, or to do grievous bodily harm to
him, then there
is another subject that you will have to consider in this case,
which is provocation.
Our law recognises that a person may be killed in circumstances where the
accused was so provoked by something done by the other person
as to lose their
power of self-control such that this provides an explanation for their actions
which should be taken into account.
Under our law, if a person acts under
provocation, they are not guilty of murder, but they are guilty of manslaughter
only. Provocation
is, therefore, something which operates only as a partial
defence, not a complete defence, because it reduced what would otherwise
a verdict of murder to one of manslaughter.
In this context, provocation has a particular legal meaning. It consists of
conduct which causes a loss of the power of self-control
on the part of the
accused and which might have caused an ordinary person to lose the power of
self-control and to act in the way
in which the accused acted.
So there are three questions of fact involved here for you to consider.
First, was there any provocation by Mr Sia towards the accused?
Secondly, was
the accused actually provoked by Mr Sia’s actions? And, thirdly, was the
accused acting while provoked when
he did the things by which Mr Sia was
Unlike the elements that we have been considering for these offences,
provocation is different. It places an onus on the accused
to satisfy you that
it is more probable than not that there was provocation by Mr Sia towards
him; that he was provoked by Mr Sia;
and that he was acting while still provoked
when he did the act or acts by which Mr Sia was killed.
Can we unpack each of those questions, briefly. As to the first question,
you have to consider what the accused argues was the provocation
by Mr Sia. The
accused said Mr Sia punched him in the side of the head and robbed him by
driving away in the Nissan Tiida with about
$40,000 that the accused had taken
into the back seat of the car.
Unless you understand the accused’s personal circumstances, and any
history between the accused and Mr Sia, you may not understand
how serious was
the conduct of Mr Sia from the accused’s perspective. The accused says
that he and Mr Sia had been friends
for about a year. He said little about the
nature of the friendship. It seems he thought he could source drugs from Mr
Sia. Apparently
a significant quantity of drugs.
He said, on the day, he drove down to Plainlands to meet Mr Sia but
Mr Sia was running late. He said he told Mr Sia where to come
and meet him
near his house in Rockville. He said he willingly got into the back seat of the
Nissan Tiida with Mr Sia in the driver’s
seat and another person he did
not know also in the car. The accused said that the $40,000 was not his money.
He said he intended
to use the money to buy methylamphetamine from Mr Sia with
the idea of selling most of the drug at a profit. He said he intended
the profit to buy a Mazda Six car for his then partner. He said he was
angry or very, very angry.
He said he ran back into the house in Vanity Street, collected the keys to
his Holden Rodeo and drove off in pursuit of the Tiida.
You have to consider
whether that conduct occurred in the way the accused described it. You have
some assistance from the recordings
that you have been shown that have been
placed in evidence. You have to assess the conduct that you are satisfied
occurred of Mr
Sia from the viewpoint of the accused.
Now, with that understanding of the conduct of Mr Sia toward the accused,
whatever you may find it was, you have to ask whether it
could have caused an
ordinary person to lose self-control and act in the way that the accused did.
An ordinary person is simply
a person who has the minimum powers of self-control
that are expected of an ordinary citizen. An ordinary person has the ordinary
human weaknesses and emotions which are common in the community and you are
well-placed to make an assessment of that.
The accused bears the onus of proving that it is more likely than not that
what Mr Sia did – and he says it was punching him
in the side of the head
and driving off with the $40,000 in the car – whether that could have
caused an ordinary person to
lose self-control and act in the way the accused
did. The Crown says that the accused had about 13 minutes to consider his
to what Mr Sia did, whatever that was. The Crown says that the accused
had particular opportunities to consider his reaction after
he forced the Tiida
off the road and after he rammed it into the fence.
Now, you must form your own conclusion as to what happened that could have
provoked the accused and whether what you find happened
could have caused an
ordinary person to lose self-control and to act in the way that the accused did.
If you are satisfied that it
is more likely than not that what happened could
have caused the accused and could have caused an ordinary person to lose
self-control
and act in the way the accused did, then you may not find the
accused guilty of murder but you may find him guilty of manslaughter,
if you are otherwise satisfied of the first three elements.”
counsel sought a redirection in respect of provocation, to direct the jury that
Mr Sia’s actions in picking up cash
from the side of the road could
be viewed as a continuation of the stealing of that money. The trial judge
expressed a concern that
a direction in these terms would be directly contrary
to the appellant’s own evidence (and his defence case) that the death
Mr Sia was an accident. In particular, such a direction would invite the
jury to consider that the appellant saw Mr Sia picking
up money and was provoked
by that conduct. After a short adjournment to consider the position and take
instructions, trial counsel
said that, on reflection, he would not press the
point and that he shared the same concerns as the trial judge.
[29] The issue
now raised on appeal was not raised by trial counsel. There was no suggestion
that, in the circumstances of this case,
it was necessary for the jury to be
referred to any specific evidence in regard to provocation.
[30] The jury
did ask a question regarding the elements of provocation. The trial judge
repeated his directions in that regard.
appellant’s contention is that the directions on provocation were
deficient because they did not specifically refer
to evidence that was capable
of establishing that the appellant was angry at the time of the fatal collision.
It is submitted that
such evidence was relevant to the second and third
questions posed by the trial judge, that is, whether the appellant was actually
provoked by the deceased’s actions and whether he was acting whilst
provoked at the time of the fatal collision. It is also
said to be relevant in
negativing the submission of the prosecution that there was ample time for the
appellant’s anger to
evidence referred to by the appellant is as
witness Ms Gallagher described the appellant, whilst he drove past her vehicle
in the Rodeo shortly before the fatal collision,
as appearing angry and shouting
profanities.
witness Ms Howlett gave evidence that she saw the appellant aggressively
punching the driver’s side door of the Nissan.
witness Mr Johnson, after manoeuvring his vehicle in front of the
appellant’s utility, had an exchange with the appellant
in which Mr
Johnson asked the appellant what he was doing and the appellant replied that
“they robbed his house and took everything”.
appellant testified that he had been assaulted and robbed of $40,000 by a person
he considered to be a friend. The appellant
described himself as being
“pretty fucking – very unhappy” and that when he got out of
his vehicle he was “very
very angry”.
[33] In essence,
the appellant’s argument is that in determining whether the appellant had
met his onus to establish provocation
on the balance of probabilities, the jury
may have overlooked the significance of the above evidence. In oral
submissions, senior
counsel for the appellant suggested that the jury may have
confined themselves to the evidence of the appellant and overlooked other
objective evidence relevant to his anger and state of mind. The appellant
submits that the failure by the trial judge to refer to
this evidence could
realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury and thereby caused a
miscarriage of justice.
essential requirements of a summing up in a criminal trial were stated in
v The Queen
fundamental task of a trial judge is to ensure a fair trial of the accused.
That requires instructions about so much of the
law as the jury needs to know in
order to dispose of the issues in the case. This will include instructions
the offence, the burden and standard of proof, and the
respective functions of the judge and the jury. Subject to any applicable
statutory provisions, it will require the judge to identify the issues in the
case and to relate the law to those issues. It will
require the judge to put
fairly before the jury the case which the accused makes. In some cases, it will
require the judge to warn
the jury about how they should not reason or about
particular care needed before accepting certain types of evidence. None of this
should obscure the fact that it is for the jury, and the jury alone, to decide
[35] The extent
to which a trial judge reminds the jury of the evidence is a matter for
individual judgment and will reflect the complexity
of the issues, and the
length and conduct of the case. The omission of a summary of salient parts of
the evidence will not necessarily
cause a trial to
Domican v The Queen
majority (Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ)
“In a criminal trial the distinction between directions
on matters of law and directions on matters of fact or argument is fundamental.
A trial judge is bound to direct the jury as to any principle of law or rule of
practice applicable to the case, and a misdirection
or non-direction on such a
matter will usually mean that the trial has miscarried. But matters of fact and
the arguments in relation
to them are in a different category.
A trial judge
is not bound to discuss all the evidence or to analyze all the conflicts in the
evidence, and, by itself, the failure
of a trial judge to do so does not
mean that there has been any miscarriage of justice.
... Nevertheless, the
requirement of fairness means that ordinarily the respective cases for the
prosecution and the accused must
be accurately and fairly put to the jury. But
that requirement does not oblige the judge to put to the jury every argument put
by counsel for the accused. This Court has said that it ‘is
hardly necessary to say that as a reason for granting a new trial,
a conviction in a criminal case, it is not enough that the presiding judge
has not mentioned to the jury all the matters which
were set up on behalf of the
accused as affecting probabilities’.
Whether the trial judge is bound
to refer to an evidentiary matter or argument ultimately depends upon whether a
reference to that
matter or argument is necessary to ensure that the jurors have
sufficient knowledge and understanding of the evidence to discharge
to determine the case according to the evidence.
Consequently, the conduct
of the case necessarily bears on the extent to which the judge is bound to
comment on or discuss the evidence.
Discussion or comment which is justified or
required in one case may be neither required nor justified when a similar
case is conducted
in a different way.” (emphasis added; footnotes
[37] In the
present case the trial was of short duration. The trial commenced on
3 February 2025. The Crown prosecutor raised the
possibility of a defence
of provocation in his opening address and the jury were aware that it was a
potential issue in the trial
from the outset. The evidence was heard over three
days. The closing addresses and summing up of the trial judge commenced and
concluded on day four. The evidence was not lengthy or confusing. After a
brief period of deliberation, the jury returned their
verdict on the morning of
[38] It is also
relevant to note that there was no contest that the appellant was enraged. It
was, in fact, a component of the prosecution
case that the appellant had acted
in a state of rage and that this is what had motivated him to act as he
did. The evidence referred
to by the appellant was not contentious. The real
issue was not whether the appellant was angry, but whether that anger had
him to run down the appellant as an act of revenge, or in contrast,
whether he had been provoked and had lost his self-control.
It was not the
existence of evidence of anger that was in issue, but how that evidence was
evaluated. That evaluative exercise would
not have been assisted by reciting
the evidence.
[39] The trial
judge was not bound as a matter of law to give a direction on provocation that
incorporated reference to the evidence
of the appellant’s anger.
Reference to that evidence was only required if it was necessary to ensure that
the jurors had sufficient
knowledge and understanding of the evidence to
discharge their duty to determine the case according to the evidence. Having
to the length of the trial and the clarity of the evidence, there is no
perceptible risk that the jury overlooked the evidence or
had any difficulty in
understanding it. The fact that the evidence was not specifically referred to
by the trial judge in the provocation
direction did not result in a miscarriage
of justice. That conclusion is supported by the fact that no direction of the
said to be necessary was sought by defence counsel at the trial.
[40] Ground 1
[41] Ground 2 is
that the failure of the trial judge to direct the jury as to an alternative
pathway to manslaughter, being manslaughter
by criminal negligence, was an error
and thereby occasioned a miscarriage of justice.
appellant contends that it was open to the trial judge to leave for the
jury’s consideration the possibility that the
driving, albeit dangerous,
did not involve the intentional aiming of the vehicle at Mr Sia. This would
leave an alternative pathway
to manslaughter by criminal negligence based on
breach of the duty of a person in charge of a dangerous thing to use reasonable
and take reasonable precautions to avoid endangering the life, health or
safety of any person. Pursuant to s 289 of the Code, a
person who breaches such
a duty is held to have caused any consequences which result from the breach.
The appellant submitted that
he had been deprived of the opportunity for the
jury to return a verdict of manslaughter on this basis. It was submitted that a
direction on criminal negligence could realistically have affected the reasoning
of the jury and thus the failure to give such a
direction caused a miscarriage
of justice.
Willersdorf
Thomas JA (with
whom McPherson JA and Chesterman J agreed) said that the rules concerning
presentation to the jury of alternative
verdicts are not prescriptive. They are
governed by the duty of the trial judge to ensure a fair trial according to law.
should be permitted to return any verdict available on the evidence that
is consistent with justice to the accused. However, the
availability of
alternative verdicts should reflect the live issues in the case. Thomas JA
noted that a stricter approach applied
to murder cases, where the duty to
allow manslaughter to be left to the jury, if there is any basis for such a
verdict, is well recognised.
For historical reasons, a person on trial for
murder has sometimes been given the opportunity to receive a merciful verdict of
manslaughter
even when strict logic might suggest that such a verdict is not
really open.
prosecution did not open its case on the basis that the appellant could, as an
alternative, be guilty of manslaughter by
reason of criminal negligence. That
possibility was, however, raised in the absence of the jury prior to closing
addresses. In
that discussion the Crown Prosecutor initially suggested that
criminal negligence could arise for consideration if the jury were
not persuaded
that the appellant intended to harm Mr Sia. The trial judge noted that the s
289 duty was a means by which causation
could be proven and queried whether it
could serve any purpose in the circumstances of this case. The Crown Prosecutor
then confirmed
that the prosecution case was not based on recklessness, but had
“always been that this was a targeted act whether by manslaughter
murder”. Defence counsel made no contribution to this discussion and did
not seek, either at this time or subsequently,
that a direction on a criminal
negligence pathway be given.
[45] In closing
addresses and in the summing up the case was put on the basis that the jury
could only convict of murder or manslaughter
if they were satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the running down was a deliberate act. Defence counsel
stressed this point in
his closing address and made it clear that if the jury
were not satisfied that the appellant had caused the death of the deceased
deliberate act, he was entitled to an
just to remind you of some of the evidence relating to intention, whether the
Crown can satisfy you that there
was – beyond reasonable doubt, there was
an intention here. Of course, our case is that there was no – there was
an intention to do grievous bodily harm or death at that time, and, in fact,
what occurred was an accident. Intention, of course,
as I said, looms very
large. The Crown hasn’t said, for example, or hasn’t put their case
to you on the basis that,
look, it could have been reckless driving or reckless
– a reckless manner of driving or negligent driving. It says no,
intentional – intentional driving. There’s a difference.
But perhaps most important is, in your view here, is that you
must consider
whether you find Mr Wright guilty or not guilty on the particulars of the Crown
case, that it’s intentional –
not that it’s reckless and not
that it’s negligent. It’s intentional driving. That’s what
the Crown says
– it was intentional. Also, our case is that it
wasn’t – not only was it not intentional, it was an accident.
I’ll ask you to focus carefully on that.”
[46] This is not
a case in which manslaughter was not left to the jury as an available
alternative verdict to murder. To the contrary,
and consistent with the
prosecution case, the trial judge told the jury that there were two possible
pathways to guilt of manslaughter.
The first of these was if the jury was
satisfied that the running down was deliberate but were not satisfied to the
requisite standard
that the appellant had acted with the specific intent to kill
or do grievous bodily harm. The second pathway was if the jury were
that the running down was deliberate and the specific intent was proven, and the
appellant established on the balance of
probabilities that he acted under the
influence of provocation. The principles outlined in
Willersdorf
to alternative verdicts, they do not require that every alternative pathway to
an available verdict must be left regardless
of the circumstances of the
particular case.
[47] What was
not left was the possibility of a verdict of guilty of manslaughter by reason of
criminal negligence. There is an obvious
reason for this. The Crown did not
allege that the appellant had unlawfully killed the deceased by failing in a
duty to take all
reasonable precautions whilst in control of a dangerous thing,
namely the Rodeo. Furthermore, the appellant did not contend at the
such an alternative should have been left to the jury. To the contrary, defence
counsel took advantage of the lack of
an allegation of criminal negligence to
submit to the jury that the appellant could only be convicted if the running
down was a deliberate
act. Defence counsel relied on the Crown case as
particularised, as he was entitled to do.
[48] In the
circumstances of this case, the failure of the trial judge to direct on an
alternative pathway to guilt of manslaughter
by criminal negligence was not an
error and did not occasion a miscarriage of justice. Indeed, given the
particularisation of the
prosecution case, it would have been inappropriate for
such an alternative to have been left to the jury. If the jury were not
that the appellant had acted deliberately in running down the
deceased, then the appellant was entitled to be acquitted of murder
manslaughter. Leaving criminal negligence manslaughter to the jury would not
have been consistent with the prosecution case
or commensurate with a fair
[49] At the
appeal hearing, senior counsel for the appellant suggested that the appellant
was denied the chance of a merciful manslaughter
verdict. The implication was
that if the jury were minded to be merciful their options for returning a
manslaughter verdict were
limited. That argument is difficult to understand. A
manslaughter verdict was open to the jury. Furthermore, the jury also had
option of returning a verdict of not guilty of either murder or
manslaughter, but guilty of dangerous operation of a vehicle
causing death
contrary to s 328A of the Code.
[50] Ground 2
[51] Ground 3 is
that the failure of the trial judge to direct the jury as to the discreditable
conduct of the appellant was an error
of law and thereby occasioned a
miscarriage of justice.
appellant gave evidence at the trial to the effect that he had arranged with
Mr Sia for Mr Sia to attend at his house with
a quantity of
methylamphetamine which the appellant would purchase for $40,000. The appellant
explained that he had had a recurring
addiction to methylamphetamine and
that he intended to use some of the drug himself but sell the bulk of it. He
said that he intended
to use the profit that he made from the sales to
supplement money saved by his partner so that she could purchase a new car. He
also admitted that he had used methylamphetamine while working as a truck
appellant submits that this evidence was susceptible to being used by the jury
in a prejudicial manner. In those circumstances,
directions should have been
given limiting the way in which the jury could use the evidence. The appellant
relies on the cases of
Roach v The
to support the
proposition that where evidence of a propensity or other discreditable conduct
is admitted for a relevant purpose,
the jury should be given careful directions
as the use to made of it. The appellant submits that in such a case the trial
should give a clear and comprehensible warning about misuse of the
evidence and explain the purpose for which it is tendered.
appellant submits that the failure of the trial judge to give a satisfactory
direction on this issue amounts to an error
of law which will often, although
not invariably, result in allowing the appeal and setting aside the convictions
unless the court
considers that no substantial miscarriage of justice has
actually occurred. The appellant relies on
and the principle
that a wrong decision on a question of law which could realistically
have affected the reasoning of the jury should result in an appeal
being allowed
subject to the application of the proviso. The appellant submits that this is a
case where the likely deleterious
effect of the discreditable conduct on the
jury was not curtailed or modified by any direction. In those circumstances it
that the appeal should be allowed and the verdict set aside.
[55] Generally
speaking, where evidence is admissible for one purpose but inadmissible for
another, the trial judge should direct
the jury that they must not use the
evidence for the inadmissible purpose, at least where the use of the evidence
for the inadmissible
or irrelevant purpose would be adverse to the accused.
Where evidence is relevant and admissible for other reasons, but incidentally
discloses the accused’s propensity, a warning to the jury not to engage in
propensity reasoning is ordinarily required. That
will be the more so if the
prosecution invites propensity reasoning in circumstances where that use of the
evidence is not properly
Whether a direction is required, and if so, the kind of direction that
should be given, will depend upon an evaluation of the risk
of the evidence
being misused. A trial judge will usually have a better appreciation of the
significance of the evidence complained
of, seen in context, than can be
discerned from reading
transcript.
[56] A ground of
appeal that alleges that a miscarriage of justice has been caused by the failure
to give a direction regarding discreditable
evidence will depend on an
assessment of the circumstances of the case and whether there is a perceptible
risk that the jury could
have misused the evidence. This will include an
assessment of the significance of the evidence, how it was introduced, what
submissions
were made about it and how it was dealt with in the summing up. It
is not enough to show that the evidence, viewed in isolation,
reflected poorly on the appellant. When viewed in the context of the trial as a
whole the risk of prejudicial use may
not be a realistic possibility.
[57] The cases
relied on by the appellant relate to the need for directions to be given where
evidence which may show a propensity
is admitted for a different purpose. It is
necessary in such a case for the trial judge to give a clear and comprehensible
purpose for which the evidence was
This issue frequently
arises in cases involving sexual offending where evidence of other sexual
conduct is led as relationship or
context evidence and the risk of improper
propensity reasoning is very real.
[58] There are
other cases where the evidence of discreditable conduct was of a different
nature to the alleged offence, and the absence
of a direction has been held not
to have resulted in a miscarriage of justice. In
Aston-Brien
the appellant
was convicted of rape and there was evidence that immediately following the
offence the appellant had provided the
complainant with some methylamphetamine
for her own use. The evidence was relevant because the prosecution alleged that
the appellant had supplied the drugs was to buy the
complainant’s silence. This court held that, while it would not have been
inappropriate for the trial judge to remind the jury that they should not use
the fact that the appellant was engaging in the unlawful
supply of drugs for
concluding that he was guilty of rape, the failure to give such a direction
“did not result in an error
which vitiates the
the appellant was
convicted of four counts of rape and the evidence included reference to drug
dealing and other discreditable conduct.
The evidence was led to explain why
the complainant continued to see the appellant after the first offence. Trial
counsel made
no request for a direction and, accordingly, it was necessary for
the appellant to demonstrate that a miscarriage of justice resulted.
Wilson AJA, after reviewing the closing addresses and the summing-up, concluded
that a direction ought to have been given
to the jury, but that the failure to
do so did not result in a miscarriage of justice.
v The State of Western
the appellant was
convicted of two offences involving the use of violence. The appellant, who was
a sex worker, lured the victim
into a car where he was attacked from behind by a
male co-offender who was concealed in the back of the car. The appellant had
provided sexual services to the victim, and they had used illicit
drugs together on numerous occasions. The prosecution case was
appellant was angry with the victim because she believed that he was interfering
with her work as an escort and her social
life. On appeal the court accepted
that a jury might think that drug use and prostitution reflect adversely on a
character, but the risk that the jury would think that the
appellant was more likely to have committed the offences for these reasons
not substantial enough to require a warning on the basis of the evidence alone.
However, the trial judge also made remarks in
summing-up that, in effect,
invited propensity reasoning and gave the evidence a prominence that it did not
have in the State case.
The court concluded that the combination of the trial
judge’s inappropriate remarks and the absence of any corrective direction
resulted in a miscarriage of justice.
circumstances in which the evidence of the appellant’s drug use and his
attempt to purchase a quantity of drugs were
introduced were unusual. This
evidence was not introduced by the prosecution or relied upon by the prosecution
in any manner adverse
to the appellant. Rather, it was introduced by the
appellant to support his case that he was justifiably angry and to explain why
he had pursued Mr Sia, albeit that he had no intent to run him down or do him
any harm. Thus, the relevance of the evidence was
readily apparent from the way
in which it was led.
discreditable conduct was not of the same nature as the charge that was the
subject of the trial. There was no suggestion
that the appellant was under the
influence of drugs at the time of the incident. The only connection between
drugs and the incident
was the failed transaction with Mr Sia. The evidence did
not incidentally disclose any tendency or propensity on the part of the
appellant that was relevant to the allegation of murder. There was no risk that
the jury would engage in improper propensity reasoning.
appellant suggests that the prejudice to him was of a more general nature. The
implication is that the evidence reflected
on his character and, possibly, his
credibility. In effect, the appellant suggests that there was a risk that the
jury would be
prejudiced against the appellant due to his involvement in drugs
and this would affect their reasoning process. Any such risk has
to be viewed
in the light of the fact that the trial judge gave an orthodox direction to the
jury to put aside any prejudice. Although
there was no specific reference to
the drug evidence in this regard, it is unlikely that the jury would have failed
to appreciate
that that was a matter encompassed by the direction.
appellant suggests that the direction on prejudice did not alleviate the risk
because it invited the jury to take into account
the whole of the evidence,
which necessarily included the drug evidence. It is important in this regard to
recall the relevance
of that evidence. It was relevant in assessing the
appellant’s state of mind and whether he was acting in response to
provocation.
The trial judge’s directions on provocation, which have been
extracted earlier in these reasons, referred to the drug evidence
context. It would have been apparent to the jury from those directions that the
relevance and the proper use of the evidence
was confined to that issue.
counsel did not seek a direction to the jury not to use the discreditable
evidence in an improper way. Whilst the conduct
of counsel is not
determinative, the fact that counsel involved in the trial did not view such a
direction as necessary supports
a conclusion that there was no perceptible risk
of misuse. Trial counsel may also have reasonably taken the view that such a
would be counterproductive, in that it might have drawn attention to a
line of prejudicial reasoning that would otherwise not have
occurred to the
jury. Rather than causing the jury to confine their use of the evidence, a
direction may have unduly highlighted
the evidence and increased the risk that
it was intended to alleviate.
[65] There is no
rule of law that a direction as to discreditable evidence must be given.
Whether such a direction is necessary is
dependent on the facts of the case. It
may have been prudent for the trial judge to give a direction in this case, even
such direction was sought by defence counsel. However, the failure to
give a direction has not occasioned a miscarriage of justice.
There is no
perceptible risk that the jury would have misused the evidence. Nor is there a
realistic possibility that the failure
to give a direction affected the
reasoning of the jury. That conclusion is supported by the following
evidence was introduced by the defence and not the Crown.
evidence was directly relevant to the defence case in explaining the
appellant’s conduct.
use to which the evidence could be put was made clear by trial counsel and by
the trial judge in his directions on provocation.
alleged offending was not of the same nature and the discreditable evidence
could not have supported improper propensity reasoning.
evidence was not relied on by the State to discredit the appellant on the basis
that he was a drug user or dealer.
direction of the type now suggested to be necessary was not sought by trial
counsel. Further, there was no complaint in regard
to the summing up, nor any
request for a redirection.
may be sound forensic reasons why a direction of this nature would not be
sought. Such a direction could be counterproductive.
prejudice arising from this evidence was said to be of a general nature in that
it went to the character of the appellant. Such
general prejudice was
sufficiently dealt with by the ‘no prejudice’
[66] Ground 3
[67] The appeal
should be dismissed.
I agree with Hall
Transcript of Proceedings (3
February 2025), page 5, lines 35-45.
Transcript of Proceedings (3
February 2025), page 2, lines 35-45.
Transcript of Proceedings (3
February 2025), page 5, line 5.
Transcript of Proceedings (3
February 2025), page 6, lines 40-45.
Transcript of Proceedings (3
February 2025), page 6, lines 40-45.
Transcript of Proceedings (3
February 2025), page 6, line 45.
Transcript of Proceedings (3
February 2025), page 7, line 5.
Transcript of Proceedings (3
February 2025), page 9, lines 10-35.
Transcript of Proceedings (3
February 2025), page 8, lines 15-35.
Transcript of Proceedings
(5 February 2025), page 2, line 20.
Transcript of Proceedings
(5 February 2025), page 2, line 30.
Transcript of Proceedings
(5 February 2025), page 54, lines 35-45.
Transcript of Proceedings
(5 February 2025), page 55, lines 10-20.
Transcript of Proceedings
(5 February 2025), page 55, line 35.
Transcript of Proceedings
(5 February 2025), pages 55-56.
Transcript of Proceedings
(5 February 2025), page 58, line 35.
Transcript of Proceedings
(5 February 2025), page 3, line 30.
Transcript of Proceedings
(5 February 2025), page 3, line 30-35.
Transcript of Proceedings
(5 February 2025), page 3, line 40.
Transcript of Proceedings
(5 February 2025), page 3, line 45.
Transcript of Proceedings
(6 February 2025), pages 15-17.
Appellant’s Outline
of Submissions at [14].
RPS v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
(2000) 199 CLR 620
Castle v The Queen
[2016] HCA 46
(2016) 259 CLR 449
(1992) 173 CLR 555
[2001] QCA 183
Transcript of Proceedings
(6 February 2025), page 9, lines 25-35.
[2012] QCA 209.
[2011] HCA 12
(2011) 242 CLR 610.
[2011] QCA 153.
[2024] HCA 24
LNV v The State of
Western Australia
[2019] WASCA 180
, [103] per Beech JA, [78] per Buss P and
Sofronoff AJA.
Crofts v The Queen
[1996] HCA 22
(1996) 186 CLR 427.
at [59] and
[2000] QCA 211.
[2012] QCA 157.
[2018] WASCA 130.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (316 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter