URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCATA/2025/103.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hoban v Zhang [2025] QCATA 103 (7 November 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Hoban v Zhang
[2025] QCATA 103
CHARLES HOBAN
(appellant)
LUWEN ZHANG
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
ORIGINATING APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
DELIVERED ON:
7 November 2025
HEARING DATE:
On the papers hearing
DECISION OF:
Member Roney KC
appeal is dismissed.
appellant Charles Hoban is to vacate his tenancy at Unit 15, 542 Lower Bowen
Terrace, New Farm within 28 days of the date of the
making of these
grant the parties liberty to apply in respect of any other consequential or
other orders which might be required to be made.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEALS – ANTI-DISCRIMINATION – vilification and racial
discrimination – scope of powers to grant injunctive type
require a vilifying co-tenant to vacate premises shared with the victim
PROCEDURE — state and territory courts: jurisdiction, powers and
generally — inherent and general statutory powers to
scope of powers of
tribunal to grant an injunction
HUMAN RIGHTS — right and freedom to choose where to live —
where purpose of the limitation here was and is to protect
the safety and human
rights of the respondent to effective protection against discrimination and
vilification
Anti-discrimination Act 1991
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 2012
Housing Act 2003
Human Rights Act 2019
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Coop v State of Queensland
[2013] QCAT 263
Fitz-Gibbon & Park v Liu
[2022] QCAT 259
Le Roy v Brisbane City Council
[2025] QCAT 314
Molesworth v Campbell and Patcono Pty Ltd
[2004] QADT 30
Owen v Menzies
[2012] QCA 170
[2013] 2 Qd R 327
Ritson v Ryan
[2023] QCATA 86
Sandy v Queensland Human Rights Commissioner
(2022) 12 QR 556
Taniela v Australian Christian College Moreton Ltd
[2020] QCAT
Wilson v Stevens
[2024] QCAT 471
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
This matter was heard and determined on the papers pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
REASONS FOR DECISION
appellant and the respondent are both tenants in the same community housing
facility in New Farm in Brisbane. The building
is owned by Bric Housing, a
nationally registered community housing provider pursuant to the National
Regulatory System for Community
Housing, implemented through the
Housing Act 2003
(Qld) (‘the
’). The State of Queensland has made registration a condition of
funding for social housing services under the
Housing Act
. This purports to
operate to support the development of a social housing industry, and ensure that
the regulatory protections for
tenants and assets apply to all publicly-funded
social housing services. This social housing is evidently designed for persons
low incomes and who may be otherwise disadvantaged.
respondent alleged that over a ten-year period she has been subjected to racial
vilification, assault, theft, abusive language
and aggression by the appellant.
She alleged that he spread false allegations of discriminatory views by the
respondent towards homosexuals.
She alleged that the behaviour was on the basis
of the respondent’s race. She claimed she had developed a fear of leaving
unit in the anticipation that the appellant would harass her either
personally or through incitation of others. This resulted in
the respondent
having to live in a negative and hostile environment.
September 2024 findings were made by the Tribunal, admittedly in a rather
truncated fashion, after a hearing conducted on
13 September 2024 as
[5] It is apparent from the bundle of documents filed by the applicant that
there is regular police involvement with respect to the
respondent's behaviour
and his repeated breaches of the orders.
[8] At the commencement of the hearing, it appeared that Mr Hoban did not have
any documents with him. He indicated that he had not
been served with anything.
Although that seemed unlikely, and there was evidence of service provided by the
applicant, Mr Hoban was
provided with a copy of the applicant's evidence and
afforded the opportunity to read it and to request an adjournment should he
[9] After a short recess, Mr Hoban informed the Tribunal that he wished the
matter to continue and for it “to be over with”.
[10] In hearing this matter, the Tribunal has a number of functions under s 174A
of the Act. It has power to hear and decide complaints
such as this and may make
a wide range of orders pursuant to s 209 of the Act. The orders may include a
prohibition on further contraventions
of the Act, orders for compensation, and
orders for an apology.
[12] The applicant has filed several statements including sworn statements given
to the police and the Magistrates Court. Her material
includes orders of that
court and statements by other witnesses, Spurway, Daly, Carnes and Millard.
[13] A petition to the owner of the building in which the parties reside was
signed by the applicant and four of Mr Hoban’s
neighbours alleging
bullying, threats, aggression, physical harm and trespass on his part. This was
exhibited to the applicant’s
statement as was photographic evidence
showing damage to property and trespass.
[14] The applicant and Mr Spurway gave oral evidence as to the veracity of their
statements and Mr Hoban was offered the opportunity
to cross examine them and to
give evidence himself. He did not wish to do so.
[15] The evidence showed an ongoing pattern of racial vilification, assault,
theft, abusive language and aggression over a ten-year
period, such behaviour
taking place quite publicly in front of neighbours and others.
[16] The effect of this behaviour on Ms Zhang’s physical and mental health
is concerning and is confirmed by a health professional
report from a
psychologist to whom Ms Zhang was referred by her general practitioner.
[17] Additionally, Mr Hoban has requested and encouraged others to participate
in similar prohibited conduct in a public forum, again
resulting in police
involvement.
[18] The evidence shows that Mr Hoban's behaviour is motivated by the
applicant's Chinese heritage.
[19] Although no evidence was led by Mr Hoban, in oral submissions he asserted
that the evidence is “completely false”
and that he had been
“constantly harassed and bullied”.
[20] The Tribunal accepts the evidence that the public actions of Mr Hoban have
incited hatred towards, serious contempt for and
severe ridicule of Ms Zhang on
the grounds of race. Those actions include requesting or encouraging others to
act similarly.
[21] This constitutes a breach of
and 124A of the Act.
[22] The purpose of the Act is to promote the equality of all people by
prohibiting such objectionable conduct.
[23] Ms Zhang should not need to live in fear due to continued harassment.
[4] Orders were
made that the appellant be restrained from approaching within 150 metres of the
respondent and her residence, be restrained
from contacting her either directly
or indirectly and be restrained from discussing her with any other person.
[5] Critically
an order was also made that the appellant Charles Hoban was to vacate his
tenancy at Unit 15, 542 Lower Bowen Terrace,
New Farm within 28 days of the date
of that order.
Tribunal’s order requiring the appellant to vacate his tenancy was held to
be made on the basis of findings by the Tribunal
at paragraphs [20] and [21] of
the reasons, that the Appellant had acted in breach of
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
(Qld) (‘AD Act’) by inciting
“hatred towards, serious contempt for and severe ridicule of the
[Respondent] on the
grounds of race”. The Tribunal referred (at [15]) to
“an ongoing pattern of racial vilification, assault, theft, abusive
language and aggression over a ten-year period, such behaviour taking place
quite publicly in front of neighbours and others”.
respondent below appealed that decision and the making of that order. The
grounds of appeal are mostly incoherent and unfocussed.
They refer to
the decision being “completely false”
and suggest he was not given a proper hearing. As to the latter, there is no
whatsoever to suggest he was not given a proper hearing, and the
transcript of the hearing reveals that he had ample opportunity
to file and
present material both prior to and at the hearing and have a full say on the
issues about which he wanted to be heard.
[8] It is also
inconsistent with the findings of the Tribunal below which state that the
appellant did not file any material in support
of his case, was afforded and
refused an opportunity to request an adjournment of the hearing, refused an
opportunity to cross-examine
his opponent’s witnesses and refused to give
evidence himself.
[9] How the
decision was said to be false or perhaps factually erroneous, or contrary to the
evidence is not evident. I do not propose
to speculate about what he says the
correct findings ought to have been or why.
[10] Pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(‘QCAT Act’), an appeal only lies to this Tribunal on questions of
law, unless in relation to appeals on a question
of fact or a question of mixed
law and fact the Appellant has obtained the Appeal Tribunal’s leave to
appeal. Pursuant to s
146, in deciding an appeal against a decision on a
question of law, the Appeal Tribunal is not engaged in a rehearing of the
By s 147 an appeal to this Tribunal on a question of fact only or a
question of mixed law and fact, if leave is granted, is by way
[11] On 3 April
the Tribunal ordered that the operation of that
decision is stayed pending determination of the application for leave to appeal
appeal. No stay was granted in relation to the remaining orders in the
decision made in ADL073-22 made 18 September 2024.
9 June 2025 the Tribunal ordered that an application by the respondent for
miscellaneous matters namely to dismiss filed on
1 May 2025 was refused and made
a series of procedural orders which included that the time for the appellant to
comply with Direction
8 of the Appeal Tribunal Directions, to file and serve any
transcript of the hearing below, an appeal book and appeal submissions
with copies of any cases relied upon was extended to 13 June 2025. He did not
comply in any respect with those orders. The
time for the respondent to file and
serve an appeal book, appeal submissions in response and a copy of any cases
that support the
response was extended to 27 June 2025. Submissions were filed.
No responsive submissions were filed by the appellant.
September 2025 the Tribunal heard an application on the papers seeking an order
striking out the appellant's application
for leave to appeal or appeal on the
basis of non-compliance with the Appeal Tribunal’s directions and because
it is said the
appellant has no arguable case in the application for leave to
appeal or appeal. The Tribunal dismissed the application holding:
[7] The appeal raises a novel point as to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to
order the applicant to vacate his tenancy within 28
days of the date of the
order within the context of the power given to the Tribunal under
s 209(1)(c)
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
(Qld). A stay of that part of the order
made on 18 September 2024 was made on 3 April 2025, pending final determination
of the appeal
proceeding.
[8] I requested submissions from both parties on the jurisdiction. of the
Tribunal to make the order requiring the applicant to vacate
his tenancy. The
respondent has provided submissions. The applicant has not.
[9] If I dismiss the application for leave to appeal or appeal and if I order
the stay be removed as a result, the decision below
will stand. A decision
arrived at as a result of an error of law should not be allowed to stand.
[10] For that reason, I do not consider the application to dismiss or strike out
the proceeding can be decided without a final determination
of the proceeding.
[14] Section
209(1) of the AD Act provides as follows:
the tribunal may make if complaint is proven
(1) If the tribunal decides that the respondent contravened
the Act, the tribunal may make 1 or more of the following orders—
(a) an order requiring the respondent not to commit
a further contravention of the Act against an affected person specified in the
(b) an order requiring the respondent to pay to an
affected person, within a specified period, an amount the tribunal considers
appropriate
as compensation for loss or
caused by the contravention;
(c) an order requiring the respondent to do specified things to redress loss or
suffered by an affected person because of the contravention;
(d) an order requiring the respondent to make a private apology or retraction;
(e) an order requiring the respondent to make a public apology or retraction by
publishing the apology or retraction in the way,
and in the form, stated in the
(f) an order requiring the respondent to implement programs to eliminate
unlawful discrimination;
(g) an order requiring the respondent to pay interest on an amount of
compensation;
(h) an order declaring void all or part of an agreement made in connection with
a contravention of this Act, either from the time
the agreement was made or
subsequently.
[15] In section
209 “damage”, in relation to a person, is defined to include the
offence, embarrassment, humiliation,
and intimidation suffered by the
[16] Section
209(4) provides that:
In this section, the specified things a respondent may be required to do,
include, but are not limited to—
(a) employing, reinstating or re-employing a person; or
(b) promoting a person; or
(c) moving a person to a specified position within a specified time.
my view the only part s 209 specifically that might justify the orders made was
that which refers to “an order requiring
the respondent to do specified
things to redress loss or damage suffered”. It was not an order like that
contemplated by s
209(1)(a) requiring the respondent not to commit a further
contravention of the Act against an affected person specified in the order
although it was designed to have that effect. There is no part of s 209(1)(a)
that specifically says there can be an order requiring
the respondent to do
something which would make it more difficult for a person to commit a further
contravention of the AD Act against
an affected person specified in the
respondent submits that the Tribunal has the power to order the appellant to
vacate his tenancy under s 209(1)(c) of the
AD Act. She submits that s 209(1)(c)
is broadly expressed and that is appropriate given that one of the purposes,
identified in s
6(1), is to promote equality of opportunity for everyone by
protecting them from unfair discrimination in certain areas of activity,
including work, education and accommodation. The respondent submits that s
209(1)(c) provides that if the Tribunal decides that the
respondent contravened
the AD Act, the Tribunal may make an order “requiring the respondent to do
specified things to redress
loss or damage suffered by an affected person
because of the contravention”. She submits that this section provides a
power to QCAT to order a person “to do specified things to redress
loss or damage suffered”. She submits that what constitutes
“specified things” is not defined but that non-exhaustive examples
of things a respondent may be required to do are
provided in subsection (4),
including employing, reinstating or promoting a person.
then is the scope of a power to make an order requiring the respondent to do
specified things “to redress loss or
damage suffered by an affected person
because of the contravention”? At first glance it seems to be about
redressing damage
suffered, in the sense that it is damage which has already
occurred not damage which might occur in the future. In my view that is
unduly restrictive approach and would prevent orders being made which might
prevent further damage or exacerbate damage already
inflicted. Clearly s 209
contemplated that the Tribunal could act to prevent further acts of
discriminatory conduct, whether or not
there was damage. Section 209(4) provides
for example that it can be ordered that someone be promoted. Section 209(1)(a)
an order requiring the respondent not to commit a further contravention,
whether or not there was damage or would be further damage.
all Australian jurisdictions a court or tribunal may make an order in which the
respondent is directed to take some positive
action to redress loss or damage
sustained by the victims of acts of unlawful discrimination; even in those
is no express reference to a power to do so, the
courts and tribunals have held that the general power to make mandatory
injunctions
may be used to make orders of this
[21] In a number
of jurisdictions, as well as here because of section 209(1)(c) of the AD Act,
the statutory provisions which grant
the power to make mandatory injunctions
expressly stipulate that the order must be designed to redress any loss or
damage suffered
by the complainant. Consequently, it has been
that orders made in
reliance on these powers must be for the personal benefit of the complainant.
Self-evidently the orders made
here were for the personal benefit of the
respondent to partially assist in remedying the consequences of what had
occurred to her
already but also to prevent them re-occurring.
respondent submits that section 209 has also been applied outside of an
employment context and refers to two decisions. The
Sandy v Queensland Human Rights Commissioner
(2022) 12 QR 556.
That case did not involve the application of section 209, but
did mention it in passing. Submissions for the respondent also referred
Molesworth v Campbell and Patcono Pty Ltd
[2004] QADT 30.
That case is also of no assistance as only s 209(1)(b) was
referred to, not s 209(1)(c), and then purely as the basis for assessing
appropriate amount to award for compensation for loss and damage.
[23] Ultimately
however it is not necessary to decide what the scope of that power is because
pursuant to section 59 of the QCAT Act
the tribunal may, by order, grant an
injunction in a proceeding
if it is just and
convenient to do so. By s 59(5) the tribunal’s power under s 59(1) is in
addition to, and does not limit,
any power of the tribunal under an enabling Act
to make an order in the nature of an injunction. In this context the AD Act is
enabling Act in the relevant sense, but the tribunal’s power goes
beyond what is in section 209(1)(c) of the AD Act.
Le Roy v Brisbane City Council
[2025] QCAT
I made a declaration that the Council unlawfully discriminated against the
applicant and class members and ordered it to cease enforcing
a resolution not
to allow an environmental protest group Extinction Rebellion to use its meeting
rooms. That remedy can be compared
to a mandatory injunction to discontinue
current discriminatory conduct, and prevent further discriminatory conduct.
Wilson v Stevens
[2024] QCAT 471
complained that a female neighbour in a set of 12 public housing units directed
profanities towards him that were heard by
people in the woman’s unit and
other neighbours. Orders were made that the respondent not, by a public act,
incite hatred towards,
serious contempt for, or severe ridicule of the applicant
on the grounds of his race or sexuality. That was also preventative of
discriminatory conduct.
Fitz-Gibbon & Park v Liu
[2022] QCAT 259
a sexual harassment case involving men in a same-sex relationship who complained
insulting language publicly
contraventions of the
Taniela v Australian Christian College Moreton
[2020] QCAT 249
a boy of Cook Island descent commenced school in 2020 at
a Christian private school attended by his older sister. It was a Cook
custom to not cut the firstborn son’s hair until a hair-cutting ceremony
is held. It was ordered that the student was
not to be unenrolled for failure to
comply with a policy in relation to hair length. That remedy can also be
compared to a mandatory
injunction to prevent further discriminatory
Coop v State of Queensland
[2013] QCAT 263
the Tribunal briefly considered the scope of s 144 of the AD Act and s 59 of the
QCAT Act to make an order compelling the employer
to take what would be a
mandatory step to withdraw or to extend the notice of termination in a
discrimination context. The member
touched on the broadness of the powers in s
59 and held:
[15] The answer lies in my view on the nature of the relief provided in s 144.
The statutory scheme set up by the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
requires a complaint about unlawful discriminatory conduct to be referred to
QCAT only after investigation and conciliation
at the Commission. That referral
stage has not yet been reached in Ms Coop’s complaint and so the complaint
itself cannot be
considered to be a proceeding in QCAT. Given that there was no
proceeding before the Tribunal when the application was made under
injunctive provisions in
Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld) are not called into play. Neither can the provisions
for an interim order in terms of s 58 of the QCAT Act be used.
[16] As already stated in [6], s 144 is intended to protect the interests of a
complainant before referral of the complaint to QCAT.
However, the scope of the
protection available to a complainant is limited by the wording of s 144. The
power of the Tribunal is
limited to prohibiting a person from doing an act: the
section does not authorise the Tribunal to require the doing of an act. It
power to restrict action and not a power to compel action.
The powers in ss
58 and 59 of the QCAT Act are much wider but they are not available in this
respondent did not point to s 59 of the QCAT Act, and the Tribunal was not
referred to any authority on the scope of
s 59 but there are no
reasons to treat it as having a narrow scope or purpose, or any different
purpose to that which would apply
were the Supreme Court hearing an injunction,
for example to require a tenant to vacate premises or restrain the commission of
tort. The power is enlivened to make such an order here “if it is just
and convenient to do so”.
Parliament of Queensland, when establishing QCAT under the QCAT Act, provided in
s 164 that QCAT is a “court of record”.
It may be added that by s 53
QCAT may take over certain matters from a court, by s 122 must give written
reasons on request, by s
162(b) is not subject to direction or control by any
entity and by s 237(1) its adjudicating members enjoy the same protection and
immunity as a Supreme Court judge performing judicial functions.
[31] The Court
of Appeal held in
Owen v Menzies
[2012] QCA 170
[2013] 2 Qd
that QCAT is a court of a State by virtue of s 164 of the QCAT Act. I note
the recent criticism of the conclusions of the Court of
by one member of this
who has said that the
Court of Appeal should reconsider the decision in
Owen v Menzies
“at least so far as it concerns the characterisation of the Tribunal as a
court of a state”. I do not agree with those
views. QCAT matters
frequently involve residents of different states. This has jurisdictional
significance in other States and has
caused delay expense and uncertainty, for
example in New South Wales and Victoria where it has been held that the New
South Wales
Civil and Administrative Tribunal and Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal have both been found by the superior courts not
court of a State. The State Courts at every level have been able to deal with
matters that frequently involve residents of
different states. The Tribunals of
those States ought, in principle, to be able to do the same without having to
deal with barren
[32] In any
event the powers of this Tribunal to make orders of the kind made in this case
do not depend on whether the Tribunal is
a court of record. Powers to require
occupiers or tenants of premises to vacate are unexceptional and commonly
exercised including
in the residential tenancy’s jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. The respondent points to the fact that courts often include
conditions” in domestic violence orders under s
Domestic and Family Violence Protection
(Qld) which prohibit a person from remaining at certain premises,
although such an order could not be made here since the parties
are not in a
relevant relationship.
[33] The broad
power given by
s 209(1)(c)
as well as the power in s 59 of the QCAT Act to make
injunctive orders sit in unison with the express power given to the Tribunal
the application of the lessor or the tenant’s domestic associate, pursuant
Residential Tenancies and Rooming Accommodation Act
(Qld) to terminate a tenancy in public or community housing where
there has been “objectionable behaviour”.
[34] In my view
the jurisdiction to make the order made here was enlivened and no error of law
has been demonstrated in making the
orders which were made.
Tribunal below did not refer to the human rights implications of making such an
order. Pursuant to the
Human Rights Act 2019
(Qld) every person has the
right and freedom to choose where to
. A human right may be subject
to reasonable limits that can be demonstrably justified. There are many examples
in everyday experience
where we see limits placed on this right, and some
statutory examples have been mentioned already. The purpose of the limitation
here was and is to protect the safety and human rights of the Respondent to
effective protection against discrimination and vilification
Bric Housing, which runs his present premises manages over 900
tenancies across more than 200 properties, according to its own website.
in these orders would prevent it from permitting him to reside at other premises
it controls and it should be encouraged
It is reasonable to
infer that he will find alternate accommodation. Indeed, he has previously given
an undertaking to the tribunal
on 18 September 2020, after a compulsory
conference, to vacate the premises once he found a “comparable
unit”. That suggests
he saw a solution that involved him vacating the
subject unit.
[36] The appeal
is dismissed. It is ordered that the appellant Charles Hoban is to vacate his
tenancy at Unit 15, 542 Lower Bowen
Terrace, New Farm within 28 days of the date
of the making of these orders. I grant the parties liberty to apply in respect
other consequential or other orders which might be required to be
See Neil Rees, Katherine Lindsay and Simon Rice,
Australian Anti-Discrimination Law
(The Federation Press, 1
ed, 2008) [11.8.2].
Ibid [11.8.4].
Ritson v Ryan
[2023] QCATA 86.
Human Rights Act 2019
(Qld) (HRA)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (203 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter