URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council (No. 3) [2025] ICQ 18 (5 September 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council (No. 3)
[2025] ICQ 018
Mutonhori, Simon
(Appellant)
Mount Isa City Council
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
5 September 2025
HEARING DATE:
1 September 2025
Hartigan DP
appeal is allowed.
decision in GP/2024/20 dated
4 October 2024 is set aside and in lieu
thereof is substituted with a decision granting the Appellant an extension of
time to make
an application relating to his dismissal in proceeding GP/2024/20
24 May 2024.
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – QUEENSLAND – APPEALS – APPEAL TO
INDUSTRIAL COURT – WHEN APPEAL LIES – where the appellant
appeal against a decision of the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission
– where the Commission in the proceedings
below dismissed the appellant's
general protections application in part because the appellant filed outside of
the time limit imposed
Industrial Relations Act 2016
– where the appellant appealed that decision to the
Industrial Court of Queensland - whether the Commission erred in law –
whether the Commission failed to provide adequate reasons in relation to the
decision – whether the Commission failed to consider
considerations – whether the Commission considered irrelevant
considerations – the appeal is allowed
LEGISLATION:
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Ball v State of Queensland (Department of Justice and Attorney-General,
Queensland Corrective Services)
[2019] ICQ 23
DL v The Queen
[2018] HCA 26
(2018) 266 CLR 1
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council (No. 2)
[2024] QIRC 240
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council
Naidoo v Scenic Rim Regional Council
[2024] QIRC 134
Nichols v State of Queensland (Department of Transport and Main
[2023] QIRC 182
Queensland Teachers Union of Employees v
State of Queensland (Department of Education (No 2)
[2021] ICQ 3
APPEARANCES:
Mr S. Mutonhori appeared on his own behalf
Mr B. Meredith of
Preston Law on behalf of the Respondent
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
[1] Mr Simon
Mutonhori ('the Appellant') appeals a decision of the Queensland Industrial
Relations Commission ('the
Commission').
[2] The decision
appealed against is a decision which,
, dismissed the
Appellant's application for an extension of time to file the part of the
application that relates to the dismissal.
The Commission relevantly issued the
following orders:
application for an extension of time to file that part of the application that
relates to dismissal is refused.
part of the application that relates to dismissal is dismissed.
part of the application that relates to suspension from duties may proceed to
further directions.
[3] The decision
appealed against is an interlocutory decision made in the course of
Appellant's substantive general protections proceedings. The effect of the
decision is that it prevents the Appellant from seeking
relief with respect to
dismissal in his current general protections proceeding.
[4] In making
the decision, the Commission was required to consider the relevant factors to
determine whether exceptional circumstances
arose pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld) ('IR Act').
Appellant is seeking that the Primary Decision be set aside and replaced with
one that finds that exceptional circumstances
exist and allows an extension of
time for the Appellant to file the general protections application outside of
the prescribed timeframe.
The appeal to this Court
confers on a person aggrieved by a decision of the
Commission a right of appeal to this Court on the grounds of error of law, or
excess or want of jurisdiction.
Section 557(2)
provides that a
person aggrieved by a decision of the Commission may appeal, with the Court's
leave, on a ground other than those
grounds referred to in
[7] Mr Mutonhori
has not sought leave to appeal on a ground other than those referred to in
Appellant contends that the Commission erred in law and fact on the following
to give adequate reasons for his decision. The Commissioner relied on a
generalised conclusion that allowing an extension
time would disadvantage others
in similar circumstances whose applications were declined in the past. Clearly,
the Commission failed
to examine this case on its own merit based on the
relevant evidence provided. The two case laws he relied on couldn’t be
to consider and give weight to contemporaneous and undisputed evidence of
procedural unfairness in the disciplinary process.
That the applicant was
immediately suspended without a show cause notice after lodging his work place
complaint; that his work place
complaint was totally ignored in favour of the
retaliatory allegations against him which expedited and eventually used to
him; that the applicant was not privy to the investigation details and
was not involved, etc.
to acknowledge and take into consideration work already dedicated into this case
by 4 other Commissioners prior to him and
given that none of the 4 Commissioners
dismissed the applicant's case. The Commissioner barely mentioned these previous
proceedings
but rather brushed them aside as non-events. What a waste of time of
the Commission, spending 7 months involving 4 Commissioners
only to be dismissed
by the 5th Commissioner with totally no regard or acknowledgement of the work
already done by his colleagues.
Commissioner focused at length on wrong evidence claiming the applicant blamed
late application on representation error. This
was never raised by the applicant
but the Commissioner dedicated a significant amount of time and effort on this
irrelevant matter
which weighs heavily in his mind when he formed his final
conclusion. All of that led to the Commissioner being distracted and diverted
from the facts relevant to this case in particular.
Appellant has further expanded on his grounds of appeal in his submissions as
a) Failed to give adequate and sufficient reasons for the decision.
b) Failed to consider and give weight to unequivocal and documented actions
taken to dispute suspension and dismissal right from
in having regard to evidence where no such evidence was produced regarding
representative error and a claim that the applicant
was ignorant of time
restrictions to file this application as a mitigation for delay
d) Erred in placing emphasis on perceived Respondent's evidence which was not
produced. The Commissioner surmised non-existent prejudice
to the Respondent
where the Respondent did not make any submission.
e) Failed to acknowledge and consider extensive work and decisions of the other
four Commissioners involved in this matter prior
f) Failed to consider the gravity of the allegations and the obvious public
interest due to the serious and sensitive nature of the
allegations involving
illegal use of firearms and wanton killing of animals.
g) Failed to consider significant hardships imposed on the applicant caused by
the resultant professional reputational damage from
the allegations. The
Commissioner paid no attention to the plight of the applicant caused due
inability to secure alternative employment
for nearly a year now despite a
concerted effort seeking alternative employment.
expanded grounds were responded to by the Respondent in its written submissions
and the Respondent does not contend that
it will suffer prejudice if they are
considered. To a large degree, the expanded grounds mirror the matters referred
to in the grounds
of appeal in the application and to that extent only will they
be considered in this appeal.
Relevant background
The recusal decision
[11] In the
course of this appeal proceeding, and after the appeal had been listed for
hearing, the Appellant filed an application
for recusal seeking that I recuse
myself from hearing the appeal.
[12] The recusal
application was listed to be heard immediately before this appeal. The parties
were notified, both in writing by
the Industrial Registry and at the
commencement of the recusal application, that the appeal would remain listed and
would proceed
if the recusal application was dismissed. Conversely, if the
recusal application was successful the appeal hearing would be adjourned.
hearing from the parties, the recusal application was dismissed and the Court
proceeded to hear the appeal.
Appellant indicated that he wished to appeal the recusal application decision.
The Appellant was advised that he was entitled
to do so but that the appeal
would proceed to be heard.
Appellant, despite being given an opportunity to provide oral submissions,
declined to do so. Oral submissions were made
on behalf of the Respondent. The
Court has had regard to the written submissions filed by the parties.
The Commission's decision
proceedings below involve a general protections claim brought by the Appellant
pursuant to ch 8
against the Appellant's previous employer,
Mount Isa City Council.
Commission described the essence of the Appellant's claim as being that his
suspension and dismissal contravened
s 285(1)(a)(ii)
carried out
because of complaints he had made about being bullied with such complaints being
in exercise of a workplace right.
provides that an application relating to dismissal must
be filed within 21 days after the dismissal took effect.
Appellant dismissal took effect on 20 December 2023 and his general protections
application was filed on 24 May 2024. Accordingly,
in order to comply with the
prescribed time limit, the application should have been filed on or before 10
January 2024.
[20] In these
circumstances, the application was filed 134 days outside of the time limit
prescribed by
s 310(1)(a)
Commission relevantly identified that the issue that required determination was
whether the time to file the proceedings
should be extended pursuant to
Commission concluded that the determination to grant an extension of time only
related to that part of the application that
contended that the dismissal
amounted to adverse action. The remaining part of the application that contended
that the suspension
amounted to adverse action was not subject to the time limit
prescribed in
s 310(1)(a)
That determination by the
Commission was plainly correct.
[23] On dealing
with the application for extension of time, the Commissioner referred to and
directed himself to
. That provides, at
that the Commission may allow a further period to file an application
relating to dismissal if satisfied there are exceptional circumstances
into account the following:
(a) the reason for the delay; and
(b) any action taken by the person to dispute the dismissal; and
(c) prejudice to the employer (including prejudice caused by the delay); and
(d) the merits of the application; and
(e) fairness as between the person and other persons in a similar position.
Commissioner then directed himself to a number of authorities which considered
the factors relevant to determining whether
there were exceptional circumstances
to allow or not allow an application for an extension of
Commissioner then proceeded to consider whether the Appellant had established
exceptional circumstances to the satisfaction
of the Commission by considering
the relevant factors referred to in
approach adopted by the Commission was a conventional approach to the
consideration of such an application. It is understood
the Appellant does not
complain about the approach adopted but rather complains that the Commission
erred on the basis of the grounds
of appeal which will now be considered below.
Appellant submits that "the Commissioner relied on a generalised conclusion that
allowing an extension of time would disadvantage
others in similar circumstances
whose applications were declined in the past. Clearly, the Commission failed to
examine this case
on its own merit based on the relevant evidence provided".
Appellant also seeks to distinguish his appeal from the authorities of
Nichols v State of Queensland (Department of Transport and Main Roads)
Naidoo v Scenic Rim Regional Council
were each referred to in the reasons of the Commission.
[29] As noted
identifies factors to be taken into account when
determining if "exceptional circumstances" have been established.
provides that the Commission may take into account
fairness as between the person and other persons in a similar position.
Commissioner considered this factor in the following terms:
I cannot accept the Applicant's submissions as to taking a holistic view of
the fairness as between the Applicant and others in similar
cases. The test to
be applied is whether it would be unfair to persons in a similar position to the
Applicant who have had their
applications for extension of time refused. As the
Respondent has pointed out, there are many instances where applicants have
misunderstood
which jurisdiction to file in, or not appreciated the time
limitation period, or the nuances of the law around what they should allege
where they should file their claim. Those applicants had their applications for
extra time refused in similar circumstances to
the Applicant. It would be unfair
to those applicants to allow extra time in this case where their applications
were refused in similar
circumstances. Accordingly, this part of the Applicant's
submissions must be rejected.
Consideration
[31] It is on
the basis outlined above that the Appellant contends that Commissioner provided
inadequate reasons.
v State of Queensland (Department of Justice and Attorney-General, Queensland
Corrective Services)
referred to relevant principles to be applied by courts and quasi-judicial
tribunals in ensuring adequate reasons for decisions
are provided. These
principles include the following:
[15] I have, in
other decisions, set out the principles relating to the requirement for reasons
to be given which are adequate in
the circumstances. Decisions of tribunals do
not attract the same degree of scrutiny as those of the ordinary civil courts.
general principles still apply even though they may not be enforced with
the same degree of rigour. I will repeat some of them which
are particularly
relevant in this case:
(a) the content and detail of reasons will vary according to the nature of the
and of the particular
matter the subject of the decision,
(b) one reason for the obligation to provide adequate reasons is so that an
appellate court can discharge its statutory duty on an
appeal from the decision
and so that the parties can understand the basis for the decision for purposes
including the exercise of
any right to appeal,
(c) a tribunal member will ordinarily be expected to expose his or her reasoning
on points which are critical to the contest between
the parties – this
applies both to evidence and to argument,
(d) where a party relies on relevant and cogent evidence which is rejected by
the tribunal, then the tribunal should provide a reasoned
explanation for the
rejection of that evidence, and
(e) where parties advance conflicting evidence on a matter significant to the
outcome, both sets of evidence should be referred to
and reasons provided for
the preference of the tribunal of one set of evidence to the other.
particular relevance to this case is the observation by Nettle J in
where he said:
" ... in providing reasons, the judge is required to make apparent the steps
he or she has taken in reaching the conclusion expressed,
for reasons are not
intelligible if they leave the reader to speculate as to which of a number of
possible paths of reasoning the
judge may have taken to that conclusion. Failure
sufficiently to expose the path of reasoning is therefore an error of
the High Court
relevantly observed:
At one extreme, reasons for decision will not be inadequate merely because
they fail to address an irrelevant dispute or one which
is peripheral to the
real issues. Nor will they be inadequate merely because they fail to undertake
"a minute explanation of every
step in the reasoning process that leads to the
judge's conclusion". At the other extreme, reasons will often be inadequate if
trial judge fails to explain his or her conclusion on a significant factual
or evidential dispute that is a necessary step to the
final conclusion. In
between these extremes, the adequacy of reasons will depend upon an assessment
of the issues in the case, including
the extent to which they were relied upon
by counsel, their bearing upon the elements of the offence, and their
significance to the
course of the trial. In particular:
"Ordinarily it would be necessary for a trial judge to summarise the crucial
arguments of the parties, to formulate the issues for
decision, to resolve any
issues of law and fact which needed to be determined before the verdict could be
arrived at, in the course
of that resolution to explain how competing arguments
of the parties were to be dealt with and why the resolution arrived at was
arrived at, to apply the law found to the facts found, and to explain how the
verdict followed."
[34] In the
Commission below, the Appellant argued that "a holistic approach" to determining
fairness should be undertaken
and that granting an extension would not create precedent or unfairness to
employees in similar positions.
[35] The reasons
properly had regard to
s 310(2)(e)
and considered the Appellant's
arguments with respect to it. In doing so, the Commission rejected the
Appellant's contention that
when considering
s 310(2)(e)
Commission should adopt a holistic approach to fairness as between the Appellant
and others in similar cases.
[36] Further,
the Commission provided the basis for the rejection, that is, it was stated that
"the test to be applied is whether
it would be unfair to persons in a similar
position to the Applicant who have had their applications for extensions of time
Appellant does not contend that the Commission erred in stating the correct test
to be applied.
Commissioner then provided a basis, having regard to applicants in other cases,
for his conclusion that it would be unfair
to those applicants to allow extra
time in the case where their applications were refused in similar circumstances.
Appellant has not established that the Commission provided inadequate reasons
when taking into account
s 310(2)(e)
. The approach adopted by the
Commission in setting out the Appellant's argument, considering that argument
and providing a basis
for the ultimate conclusion with respect to
s 310(2)(e)
accords with the principles referred to above.
[40] Additionally,
the Appellant, in his submissions before the Court, submits that the
Commission's reference to the decisions in
when considering the relevant principles to be applied, could not "be more
different" from his case.
Appellant then proceeds to identify the basis upon which his case differs from
the facts in
Appellant made no reference to either of those decisions before the Commission.
Commission appropriately had regard to those decisions when considering the
principles to be applied in an application for
an extension of time. The
Appellant's piecemeal critique of the facts and reasons in those cases do not
assist in his argument that
the reasons were inadequate.
[44] Ground one
is dismissed.
Failing to consider relevant considerations and taking into account
irrelevant considerations
[45] Grounds
two, three and four variously contend that the Commission either failed to
consider a relevant consideration or, alternatively,
took into account an
irrelevant consideration.
Queensland Teachers Union of Employees v State of Queensland (Department of
Education (No 2)
Davis J considered the concept of relevant and irrelevant
considerations in the following terms:
The 'something more' requires reference to the dual concepts of 'relevant
considerations' and 'taking into account'. The term 'relevant
considerations' is
widely misunderstood: as used in leading authorities, such as
Minister for
Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
(Mason J) it refers to a matter which the decision-maker is bound to take into
account. The obligation may derive from the
express terms of the
power-conferring statute or may be implied from its subject matter, scope and
purpose. A preferable term would
be 'mandatory consideration'. Further, a matter
traditionally described as an 'irrelevant consideration' is one which is
because, having regard to the subject matter, scope and purpose of
the power being exercised, it can be seen to reflect an extraneous
or improper
purpose or to render the decision arbitrary or capricious. Between these two
categories is usually a wide range of permissible
considerations which the
decision-maker may weigh or disregard without committing an error of
respect to ground two, the Appellant contends the Commission failed "to consider
and give weight to contemporaneous and
undisputed evidence of procedural
unfairness in the disciplinary process. That the applicant was immediately
suspended without a
show cause notice after lodging his work place complaint;
that his work place complaint was totally ignored in favour of the retaliatory
allegations against him which expedited and eventually used to dismiss him; that
the applicant was not privy to the investigation
details and was not involved,
Appellant contends that the Commission erred when it determined that it could
not determine the merits of the case because
of the contested evidence but that
the Commissioner failed to particularise the disputed evidence. The Appellant
contends that there
is no disputed evidence in the case.
[49] In order to
be successful, the Appellant is required to establish that the Commission failed
to take into account matters it
was obliged to pursuant to
or, in the alternative, the Commission had regard to prohibited matters having
regard to the subject matter, scope and purpose of
the power in
being exercised.
Consideration
[50] Relevantly,
as noted above,
s 310(2)(d)
identifies that the Commission may
take into account the merits of the application.
[51] In the
reasons at paragraphs 21 and 22 of the Primary Decision, the Commission
considers the respective positions of the parties
regarding the merit of the
application.
[52] The merit
of the application was further dealt with in the reasons as follows:
As to merit, it is impossible from this early vantage point to form a view
that the Applicant's case is so lacking in merit as the
Respondent suggests that
it is devoid of prospects. Certainly, if the Respondent's assertions come up to
proof at trial, the application
is doomed to fail. But that all rests on
findings of fact. For example, it is a question of fact as to whether the real
the dismissal substantially included proscribed reasons and therefore
contravened the general protections within the
. Findings of the relevant
facts can only occur after hearing all of the evidence. Only then can there be a
determination as to whether
the Respondent has discharged what is commonly
referred to as the "reverse onus of proof" at
section 306
being able to form a view as to the matter's prospects, I find this to be a
neutral consideration.
[53] Given the
stage of the proceedings, the conclusion reached by the Commission with respect
to merit was conventional and appropriate.
In the circumstances of this matter,
and in the absence of any suggestion of jurisdictional (apart from the current
application)
or other legal arguments, the assessment of merit at such a stage
of the proceedings is premature.
[54] There was
no error in the approach adopted by the Commission with respect to the
assessment of merit. On this basis, ground two
fails to establish an appellable
Ground three
Appellant contends that the Commission erred by failing to "acknowledge and take
into consideration work already dedicated
into this case by four other
Commissioners prior to him and given that none of the four Commissioners
dismissed the applicant's case.
The Commissioner barely mentioned these previous
proceedings but rather brushed them aside as non-events. What a waste of time of
the Commission, spending seven months involving four Commissioners only to be
dismissed by the fifth Commissioner with totally no
regard or acknowledgement of
the work already done by his colleagues".
[56] In the
expanded grounds, the Appellant also contends that there was a failure to give
weight to unequivocal and documented actions
taken to dispute suspension and
dismissal right from the start.
Appellant refers in his written submissions to three proceedings being
C/2023170, a proceeding commenced in the Fair Work
Commission and, further,
D/2023/114 and TD/2023/138 ('the unfair dismissal proceeding').
[58] In his
written submissions below, the Appellant attempted to give some context to the
previous proceedings as follows:
Soon after my suspension on 14
November 2023, I lodged an
application for general protections with Fairwork Commission on 21
November 2023 and a file reference number C2023/7120 was allocated to
Commissioner Hunt.
Directions order was issued to attend a conciliatory conference and the
respondent refused to attend citing jurisdiction objection.
Commissioner Hunt referred the matter to QIRC in which I lodged another
general protection application on 30
November 2023 and file
reference number D/2023/114 was created and allocated to Commissioner
December 2023, Commissioner Pidgeon convened a
telephone mention at which the Respondent was put on notice to speedy up the
investigation
process and he was given a deadline of 19 December 2023.
Another telephone mention was held on 19 December 2023 at which the
Respondent failed to provide valid reasons the prolonged delay.
Without warning, late on the following day, 20
December 2023,
the Respondent sent me a termination letter by email. He did not copy the
Registry as required since the matter was
already with QIRC.
I took it upon myself to inform Commissioner Pidgeon of the latest
development by providing a copy of the termination letter to
the existing case
(D/2023/114) on 21
December 2023.
On 22nd December 2023 the Registry acknowledged the updated information on
termination, and they created a new file reference TD/2023/138.
Registry did not give reasons why a new file number had to be created and there
was no explanation either on the fate of the existing
file D/2023/114. This file
is still open and pending with QIRC, it was never closed.
The new file was allocated to Commissioner Power and a directions order
was issued for the Respondent to file his response by 29
January 2024, I lodged an application in existing
proceedings for an interlocutory decision to deal with the urgent issue of
reinstatement.
Respondent was given up to 26 January 2024 to res pond.
In his submission, the Respondent objected on jurisdictional
The Respondent also made a replica jurisdictional objection in the
substantive matter on 29
January 2024.
Commissioner Power released her interlocutory decision on 15th
February 2024, Commissioner Power issued another
Directions Order for me to provide a submission addressing the jurisdictional
objection raised by the Respondent in the substantive matter.
March 2024 I submitted a comprehensive submission
addressing the jurisdictional objection as directed by Commissioner
The Respondent was given up to 18
March 2024 to file any
further submission on the matter. The deadline was later extended to
March 2024, but the Respondent failed to respond to my
comprehensive submission.
April 2024, Commissioner Power noted the failure of the
Respondent to respond to my substantive submission on jurisdiction
In the same mention, Commissioner Power advised that my contentions were
more aligned with General Protections application than Unfair
She then asked me to consider whether I wanted to proceed with the
existing application or change my application and I took the advice
the same day I lodged the General Protections application and also applied to
discontinue the existing application as
apparent, from the above, that while the Appellant did file proceedings in
another jurisdiction, he did also file an application
(TD/2023/138)
relating to his
dismissal with the Commission and within the 21-day time period.
[60] Further,
the Appellant states that during the course of a mention on 13 May
the Commission raised with
him whether what he was really seeking was reinstatement on the basis of adverse
action rather than on
the basis of unfair dismissal.
Appellant states that he advised the Commission that he would consequently file
a general protections application.
[62] Seemingly
consistent with the Appellant's submissions, he sought to file a notice of
discontinuance in TD/2023/138 and a general
protections application on the same
day that TD/2023/138 was mentioned before Commissioner Power.
[63] Due to
matters of procedure, the discontinuance in TD/2023/138 and the application
which would become GP/2024/20 were not accepted
for filing until 24 May 2024.
[64] From the
above, it is apparent that the Appellant filed an application relating to his
dismissal with the Commission within the
21-day time period. The Respondent,
accordingly was on notice from that time, at least, that the Appellant disputed
the dismissal.
[65] Further,
when it was brought to the Appellant's attention by the Commission that his
application relating to his dismissal was
not a general protections matter
claiming he was dismissed for adverse action but rather an application that he
had been unfairly
dismissed he acted in a timely manner to seek to file a notice
of discontinuance in TD/2023/138 and to file a fresh application in
GP/2024/20.
apparent from the above that in addition to seeking remedies in other
dismissal to seek,
, reinstatement before the Commission prior to the expiration of the
21-day time limit. Further, it is apparent that he discontinued
TD/2023/138 and sought to file GP/2024/20 immediately following a mention during
which such a course was discussed.
[67] It is not
apparent from the reasons for the decision that the particulars of the
Appellant's conduct in this regard was considered
by the Commission. These
matters provide an explanation for the reason for delay.
[68] Further,
they are matters that are a relevant consideration with respect to whether the
discretion referred to in
s 310(2)(a)
should be exercised. They
should have properly formed part of the Commission's consideration of the
application.
[69] Accordingly,
ground three of the appeal is allowed.
Ground four
Appellant contends, with respect to ground four that "the Commissioner focused
at length on wrong evidence claiming the applicant
blamed late application on
representation error. This was never raised by the applicant but the
Commissioner dedicated a significant
amount of time and effort on this
irrelevant matter which weighs heavily in his mind when he formed his final
conclusion. All of
that led to the Commissioner being distracted and diverted
from the facts relevant to this case in particular".
[71] Whilst the
Appellant did not use the term "representational error" before the Commission,
under the heading "
S 310(2)(a)
Reason for the delay" the Appellant relevantly
submitted as follows:
Timely effort to seek legal advice.
Immediately
after my suspension, I approached a number of law firms to seek legal advice,
but I could not afford their exorbitant
fees as shown in the attachment C.
even reached out to Legal Aid, but the legal Aid lawyer wouldn't tell me
anything other than encouraging me to contact his firm
for private
engagement.
the steepy [sic] costs of hiring a lawyer, combined with my impecuniousness., I
paid $550.00 for a 15-minute consultation
with a lawyer in which he failed to
give me any meaningful advice because he came unprepared (see attachment
the Respondent with vast financial resources at his disposal, I can't afford the
luxury of legal
representation.
[72] From the
above extract of the Appellant's submissions before the Commission, he sought to
bring to the Commission's attention
his attempts to seek legal advice and that
upon seeking such advise he described the lawyer as failing to provide him with
any "meaningful
advice". These submissions were made in the context of being one
of the matters he pointed to in providing an explanation for the
[73] On the
basis that it was a relevant consideration, the Commissioner properly had regard
to the Appellant's submissions regarding
the failure of the lawyer to provide
"meaningful advice". The Appellant has established no error in the approach
taken by the Commission
or the conclusions drawn. Consequently, ground four of
the appeal does not establish an appellable error.
Disposition
[74] For the
reasons referred to above, grounds one, two and four are dismissed.
Appellant succeeds with respect to ground three insofar as the Commission failed
to have regard to a relevant consideration.
Namely, the particulars of the
Appellant's conduct and attempts within the Commission to dispute the dismissal.
Appellant is entitled to have the application for extension of time considered
having regard to all of the relevant considerations.
[77] The right
of appeal is bestowed to this Court by
Section 557
relevantly states:
557 Appeal from commission
(1) The Minister or another person aggrieved by a decision of the commission
may appeal against the decision to the court on the ground
(a) error of law; or
(b) excess, or want, of jurisdiction.
(2) Also, the Minister or another person aggrieved by a decision of the
commission may appeal against the decision to the court, with
the court’s
leave, on a ground other than—
(a) error of law; or
(b) excess, or want, of jurisdiction.
(3) However, subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to the Minister or another
person aggrieved by a determination of the commission
under chapter 4,
division 2.
(4) If a person may appeal a decision of the commission under both
subsections (1) and (2), the person may only appeal against the
decision with
the court’s leave on a ground mentioned in subsection (2).
(5) In this section—
commission means the commission, other than the full bench constituted by the
president and 2 or more other members.
[78] The failure
to take into account a relevant consideration is an error of law. The error is
significant insofar as it precludes
the Appellant from seeking relief with
respect to a cause of action in the proceeding. Consequently, the decision
should not be permitted
Section 558
provides the powers of the Court on appeal as follows:
558 What court may do
(1) On an appeal under
section 556
, the court may—
(a) dismiss the appeal; or
(b) allow the appeal, set aside the decision and substitute another decision;
(c) allow the appeal and amend the decision; or
(d) allow the appeal, suspend the operation of the decision and remit the
matter, with or without directions, to the commission or
an Industrial
Magistrates Court to act according to law.
(2) Also, the court may direct an industrial magistrate to issue a warrant
for the appellant’s arrest if—
(a) under the decision that was appealed, the appellant was sentenced to a term
of imprisonment; and
(b) the appellant was released from custody by a magistrate under the rules made
section 551
(c) after the appeal is decided, discontinued or struck out, the appellant is
still required to serve all or part of the term of
imprisonment.
(3) The industrial magistrate must comply with the direction.
(4) When arrested, the appellant must be taken to a corrective services
facility within the meaning of the
Corrective Services Act 2006
to serve the
unexpired portion of the term of imprisonment to which the appellant was
[80] Consistent
with the reasons above, I allow the appeal and set aside the decision of the
Commission.
[81] Given that
the application was heard on the papers before the Commission, and that those
papers appear in Exhibit 1, it is convenient
for the Court to exercise the
discretion afresh.
[82] In doing
so, and consistent with the reasons herein, it is not necessary to disturb the
Commission's reasons and how it dealt
with the factors referred to in
-(e) of the
. Consequently, the Court adopts the Commission's
reasons as they appear in the Primary Decision at paragraphs 24 and 26 to 29.
considering the above matters, I am satisfied that there are exceptional
circumstances associated with this matter that warrant
an exercise of the
discretion to grant an extension of time. I consider that the reasons for the
delay are such that, despite the
findings with respect to the other factors
s 310(2)(b)
-(e) of the
, they weigh in favour of the exercise of
the discretion.
[84] I regard
the reasons for the delay as being out of the ordinary course, unusual or
special insofar as the Appellant commenced
an application in relation to the
dismissal in the Commission within the 21-day time limit, further, at a mention
with respect to
that application it was discussed whether the Appellant should
instead file a general protections application. Consistent with the
Appellant's
understanding of the matters raised at the mention the Appellant sought to
discontinue TD/2023/138 and file a general
protections application being
GP/2024/20.
[85] In forming
this view, I have taken into account that the Respondent has been on notice
within the 21-day time period that the
Applicant sought to dispute the dismissal
and further that the grant of the extension of time will result in the addition
of action, relating to the dismissal, to an existing and ongoing
general protections proceeding.
[86] For the
above reasons, the Court exercises its discretion to grant an extension of time
which the Appellant may have to make
an application relating to his dismissal in
proceeding GP/2024/20 to 24 May 2024.
[87] For the
reasons set out above, I make the following orders:
appeal is allowed.
decision in GP/2024/20 dated 4 October 2024 is set aside and in lieu thereof is
substituted with a decision granting the Appellant
an extension of time to make
an application relating to his dismissal in proceeding GP/2024/20 to 24 May
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City
Council (No. 2)
[2024] QIRC 240
('Primary Decision').
Industrial Relations
Primary Decision (n 1)
[2023] QIRC 182.
[2024] QIRC 134.
Primary Decision (n 1)
[2019] ICQ 23
[2018] HCA 26
(2018) 266 CLR 1.
Mount Isa City Council,
'Appeal Book', Exhibit 1 in
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council
24 January 2025, 174 ('Exhibit 1').
Primary Decision (n 1)
[2021] ICQ 3.
Ibid [95], citing
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2013] NSWCA 180.
Primary Decision (n 1)
As well as an earlier
application.
The Appellant erroneously
refers to 13 April 2024 in his written submissions.
Exhibit 1 (n 12) 171-2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (353 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter