URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLPT/2009/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Hay [2009] QLPT 27 (19 November 2009)
Legal Services Commissioner v Hay [2009] QLPT 27 (19 November 2009)
LEGAL PRACTICE TRIBUNAL
Legal Services Commissioner v Hay
[2009] LPT 27
LEGAL SERVICES
COMMISSIONER
(applicant)
BRONWYN LOUISE
(respondent)
BS 10497 of 2008
Legal Practice Tribunal
PROCEEDING:
Discipline Application
DELIVERED ON:
19 November 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
24 August 2009
Mr M Woods and Dr J Lamont,
Adjourned to a date to be fixed for further
submissions
CATCHWORDS:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – MISCONDUCT, UNFITNESS AND
DISCIPLINE – DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS – Statutory
proceedings
– Queensland – where respondent solicitor prepared an affidavit in
the name of the complainant’s sister
– where respondent directed
complainant to execute the affidavit in the name of her sister by signing her
sister’s name
– where complainant signed that affidavit using the
name of her sister and the respondent witnessed that signature –
that conduct should be characterised as unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – MISCONDUCT, UNFITNESS AND
DISCIPLINE – DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS – Statutory
proceedings
– Queensland – where in the course of an application for an
injunction the respondent made oral submissions
referring to the affidavit
signed by the complainant as the affidavit of the complainant’s sister and
stated that she had attended
upon the complainant’s sister at her home on
the afternoon of the hearing which was not true – where respondent
affected by prescribed medication at time of appearance in court
– whether applicant proved that the respondent made the relevant
statements to the Court dishonestly or recklessly
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – MISCONDUCT, UNFITNESS AND
DISCIPLINE – DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS – Statutory
proceedings
– Queensland – where respondent made a statement to the Queensland
Law Society (“QLS”) that the
complainant told the respondent that
she had a power of attorney from her sister which was not true – whether
applicant can
show that was not the respondent’s recollection at the time
she made the statement to the QLS – where respondent provided
the QLS with
an altered version of her original file notes pertaining to the application and
described the notes as contemporaneous
– whether the applicant can prove
that the respondent dishonestly or recklessly described her altered notes as
contemporaneous
notes – whether the applicant can prove that the
respondent’s conduct altering those notes was done dishonestly or
Legal Profession Act
B I McMillan for the applicant
A J H Morris QC for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Services Commission for the applicant
Porter Davies Lawyers for
the respondent
[1] MULLINS J: There are four charges brought by the applicant against the
respondent under
Legal Profession Act 2007
respondent was carrying on a practice as a solicitor when she was retained by Ms
Whittaker on 30 March 2007 to act on behalf
of Ms Whittaker’s sister who
had advanced multiple sclerosis to take urgent legal action to prevent her
sister’s husband
from enrolling their son at a State high school.
[3] The respondent determined that an urgent application should be made to
the Supreme Court of Queensland for an injunction and arranged
for an ex parte
hearing of the application before the Chief Justice on the same afternoon. Ms
Whittaker attended at the respondent’s
office. In support of the
application the respondent prepared an affidavit in the name of Ms
Whittaker’s sister. Ms Whittaker
signed the affidavit using the name of
her sister (and not her own name) and the respondent witnessed that signature on
the affidavit.
[4] The respondent attended with Ms Whittaker before the Chief
Justice on the hearing of the application. Ms Whittaker gave oral
before the Chief Justice. The respondent made oral submissions. The Chief
Justice refused to make the order sought on
an ex parte basis.
Whittaker was unhappy about the way the respondent handled the application on 30
March 2007 and a few days later made a complaint
to the Legal Services
Commission which was referred to the Queensland Law Society (QLS) for
investigation.
The charges
[6] Charges 1, 2 and 3 arise out of the
events that occurred on 30 March 2007. Charge 4 arises out of the investigation
of Ms Whittaker’s complaint.
[7] The respondent was acting
on her own behalf when she filed the statement required under Practice Direction
No 2 of 2008 in which
she responded to the allegations and particulars contained
in the discipline application. The respondent was represented by solicitors
counsel closer to and on the hearing of the application. The affidavit of the
respondent filed on 21 August 2009 is more extensive
than, and in some respects
differs from, the statement of the respondent. In endeavouring to summarise the
issues that arise from
the charges and the respondent’s response to the
allegations, both the respondent’s statement and affidavit have been
into account.
[8] Charge 1 alleges:
(a) directed and procured one [Ms] Whittaker to execute an affidavit (“the
affidavit”) of [her sister] in the circumstances
where she knew that the
said [Ms] Whittaker was not [her sister] and knew or ought to have known that
the said [Ms] Whittaker could
not lawfully execute the affidavit.
(b) falsely attested to the purported signature of [Ms Whittaker’s
[9] Most of the particulars in relation to charge 1 are admitted by the
respondent. By letter dated 1 September 2009 sent to my
associate, the
applicant with the concurrence of the respondent advised that the applicant was
not seeking any finding in respect
of paragraphs (d) and (e) of particular 1.10,
other than they are not proved.
[10] The respondent does not admit
particular 1.7 in which it is alleged that the respondent directed Ms Whittaker
to execute the
affidavit in the name of her sister. Although the basis on which
the respondent did not admit this particular, as set out in her
statement in
response to the discipline application, was that she asked Ms Whittaker whether
she held power of attorney for her sister
and Ms Whittaker replied “yes I
do”, the respondent concedes in her affidavit that she either asked the
question and
got a positive response or the question was unanswered and she
assumed that Ms Whittaker had a power of attorney. The respondent
alleges that
she proceeded on the basis of a genuine (but possibly mistaken) belief that Ms
Whittaker had a power of attorney. The
respondent concedes that she directed Ms
Whittaker to sign the affidavit drawn in the name of her sister, but alleges
time did she direct Ms Whittaker to sign the affidavit using her
sister’s name. The respondent admits that, in her rush to
conclude the
matter, she did not detect the incorrect signature, even when witnessing the
signature. The respondent admits that
she ought to have known the requirements
for making and executing an affidavit by a person holding a power of attorney or
taken steps
to check the requirements and that she ought to have prepared the
affidavit in the name of Ms Whittaker.
[11] Each of charges 2 and 3 arise
out of statements made by the respondent during the course of the hearing before
the Chief Justice
and alleges that the respondent dishonestly, or recklessly,
misled the court. These charges are denied by the respondent. In relation
charge 2, the respondent admits that she referred to the affidavit that had been
signed by Ms Whittaker as the affidavit of her
sister, but claims that she
believed that a person holding a power of attorney did have the legal right to
sign an affidavit on behalf
of the person for whom she held the power of
attorney. The respondent therefore admits that she was careless in not
understanding
the law as it pertains to powers of attorney, but does not admit
that she was dishonest or reckless. In relation to the particulars
of charge 3,
it is alleged that in the course of the hearing that the respondent informed the
Chief Justice that she had attended
upon Ms Whittaker’s sister at her home
on the afternoon of the hearing (which was not true). The respondent alleges
was starting to explain to the court what had occurred that afternoon,
but was cut off and did not complete her explanations. The
respondent denies
any dishonest or reckless conduct or that the Chief Justice was misled by the
incorrect statement that she made
[12] Charge 4 arises out of the
respondent’s conduct during the investigation that was undertaken by the
Queensland Law Society
(QLS). The terms of charge 4 are:
16 April 2007 and 12 December 2007 the respondent dishonestly or, in the
alternative, recklessly misled the Queensland
Law Society (“QLS”) in
relation to an investigation.”
[13] By letter dated 3 May 2007 the QLS required the respondent to provide a
written response to the complaint which the respondent
did by letter dated 22
May 2007. With that letter the respondent enclosed photocopies of five pages of
handwritten notes pertaining
to the application in which she had acted for Ms
Whittaker’s sister. On 28 November 2007 the QLS sought a further response
from the respondent. By letter dated 11 December 2007, the respondent set out
for the QLS her version of events and stated that
“Ms Whittaker stated to
me, that she held Power of Attorney for her sister” and that was
cross-referenced to her “contemporaneous
notes” enclosed with that
letter. The applicant alleges that statement misled the QLS and was
dishonestly, or recklessly,
made by the respondent in the course of the
investigation.
[14] In addition, the photocopies of the five pages of
handwritten notes pertaining to the application that were enclosed with the
respondent’s letter to the QLS dated 11 December 2007 incorporated
additions that were not in the first lot of photocopied
notes that were provided
by the respondent to the QLS in May 2007. The respondent admits that she had
altered her original file
notes between 22 May and 11 December 2007. In
particular 4.15 the applicant alleges the alteration to these file notes were
by the respondent with the intention to mislead the QLS by purporting that
the photocopied file notes provided with the letter of
11 December 2007 were her
original contemporaneous notes. The respondent alleges in her statement in
response that she sought to
clarify the file notes by adding explanations to
assist the QLS to understand what actually occurred. The respondent in
99 of her affidavit denies that she made any of the alterations
dishonestly or recklessly with any intention of misleading the QLS.
particular 4.16 the applicant alleges the respondent dishonestly, or recklessly,
misled the QLS in that she altered her original
file notes for the purpose of
making them more consistent with the stated version of events contained in her
letter to the QLS dated
11 December 2007. This allegation is denied by the
respondent who specifically denies any dishonest or reckless behaviour.
Evidence of Ms Whittaker
[15] The applicant relied on the affidavit of Ms
Whittaker that was filed on 30 June 2009 and a further affidavit of Ms Whittaker
that was filed by leave on the day of the hearing of the discipline application.
Ms Whittaker was cross-examined. In her first affidavit
Ms Whittaker explained
how her sister lived in a nursing home and when Ms Whittaker arrived to visit
her on the morning of 30 March
2007, her sister’s husband was also
visiting. Ms Whittaker was present when her sister’s husband informed her
that he “was thinking” of pulling their son out of the
independent college that he attended. A series of telephone conversations
ensued later that morning including one in which Ms Whittaker rang and spoke to
the deputy principal of the State high school at
which her brother-in-law was
proposing to enrol her nephew. She stated in paragraph 15 of her first
affidavit that the deputy principal
informed her that the only way he could not
accept her nephew’s enrolment was if he had a court injunction preventing
the child’s
father from enrolling the child at the school. When
cross-examined, Ms Whittaker expanded on what she had been told by the deputy
principal (at Transcript 1-25):
deputy principal] informed me that even if [my sister] attended the school
herself that afternoon she could not prevent
[her son] from being enrolled
[16] Ms Whittaker looked through the Yellow Pages to find a solicitor and
eventually telephoned the respondent at about 2:30pm and
enquired about
obtaining an injunction on behalf of her sister to prevent her sister’s
husband from removing their child from
the independent college and enrolling him
in the local State high school. Ms Whittaker stated in paragraph 18 of her
first affidavit
that the respondent advised her “to immediately get Power
of Attorney” as that would enable her to “march out to
high school and prevent this enrolment”. The respondent offered to
arrange the appropriate paperwork for her to
become her sister’s attorney,
but she declined that and informed the respondent of the deputy
principal’s comments.
The respondent said she would start preparing the
documents for the injunction immediately. In cross-examination, Ms Whittaker
(at Transcript 1-25) that she informed the respondent that the deputy
principal had told her that only a court order would suffice
to stop her
nephew’s enrolment proceeding at the State high school. The respondent
also explained in cross-examination (at
Transcript 1-27) that in her initial
telephone call with the respondent, the respondent asked whether she had a power
of attorney
and Ms Whittaker responded that she did not.
respondent spoke to Ms Whittaker by telephone at about 3:30pm and told her that
she had arranged a court hearing in the Supreme
Court at 4:30pm. Ms Whittaker
immediately attended the respondent’s office. When the affidavit was
printed out, Ms Whittaker
noticed that the affidavit was in her sister’s
name and asked if she should sign the document either “per” or
behalf of” her sister, but the respondent replied “no sign
it”. Ms Whittaker then asked if she should sign it
in her name, but the
respondent said “no sign it as your sister – we don’t have
time for this.”
[18] After Ms Whittaker had signed the affidavit, the
respondent informed her that she needed to pay $600 before going to court, but
while Ms Whittaker was logging onto her bank account to transfer the funds, the
respondent said that it would be $900 and that was
the amount that Ms Whittaker
transferred to the respondent’s bank account. Ms Whittaker was unhappy
from $600 to $900 and that was why she contacted the
[19] In her second affidavit, the respondent stated that the first
(and only) mention of a power of attorney was during her initial
conversation with the respondent and that she did not tell the respondent that
she had a power of attorney. Ms Whittaker
stated that there was no mention of a
power of attorney at the time she signed the affidavit.
Evidence of
the respondent
[20] The respondent relied on her affidavit filed on 21
August 2009. She was also cross-examined.
[21] The respondent had worked in
other fields, before obtaining her law degree in 1989. She worked with the New
South Wales Director
of Public Prosecutions between 1990 and 1993. Between 1993
and July 1997 the respondent worked for private law firms, before establishing
her own practice in July 1997 in Sydney. Because of her mother’s illness,
she decided to relocate to Brisbane in 2004. She
wound up her Sydney practice
and arrived in Brisbane on May 2004. Her mother passed away in July 2004. The
respondent commenced
working as an employee for a Brisbane solicitor in October
2004 and practised primarily in the field of family law. She resigned
2006. In July 2006 she commenced in practice in Brisbane on her own account,
specialising in family law.
[22] The respondent’s sister died in 1983,
leaving two young sons for whom the respondent then cared. Because of the anger
issues of one of her nephews, the respondent sought psychiatric assistance in
1999 to enable her to assist her nephew in dealing
with his issues. The
respondent sought psychiatric assistance in 2002 when her mother was diagnosed
with cancer. On their relocation
to Brisbane, the respondent spent the next two
months looking after her mother until her mother’s death. Because of her
illness and death, the respondent sought psychiatric treatment
with consultant psychiatrist Dr Bradley Matthews commencing on 15
She was diagnosed as suffering from a depressive illness and given a range of
medication to alleviate the symptoms of
her depression and anxiety. She was
seeing Dr Matthews on a weekly basis around 30 March 2007, as during that period
her medication
was being adjusted.
[23] When the respondent had attended on
Dr Matthews on 7 December 2006 and complained about the progressive
deterioration in her
symptoms of depression and anxiety, Dr Matthews prescribed
Lamotrigine. There was an immediate improvement, but it was not sustained,
on successive visits in January and February 2007, Dr Matthews increased the
dosage. On 21 March 2007 Dr Matthews prescribed
a further increase in the
dosage. When the respondent visited him on 28 March 2007, she was concerned
that the increased dosage
was having side effects, but the side effects were not
indicated on that day. The respondent experienced progressively worsening
effects during 28 and 29 March 2007 and during the course of each night had
sleep interrupted by nightmares. The respondent
described the side effects in
paragraph 91 of her affidavit:
side effects experienced during the course of 28 and 29 March 2007 were
confusion, short term memory loss, irritability,
nightmares, headaches, nausea
and feelings of disassociation and disconnection from what was going on around
me. I felt light headed
and ‘spaced out’ and I experienced
increasing episodes of panic and anxiety as a result of feelings of loss of
over what I was doing and saying. I did not even possess the ability to
self-observe.”
[24] The respondent considers that the symptoms progressively worsened on 30
March 2007 and that they were exacerbated by the instructions
she received from
Ms Whittaker which she felt placed enormous pressure on her. On the following
day the respondent made the decision
to reduce the dosage of Lamotrigine that
she was taking and, when she had her usual weekly appointment with Dr Matthews
2007, he endorsed taking the reduced dosage.
[25] When the
respondent took the telephone call from Ms Whittaker on 30 March 2007, she
thought that Ms Whittaker sounded extremely
distressed on the telephone
describing her sister’s plight, the family history and her sister’s
desire to keep her son
at the independent college. The respondent then set out
her recollection of the discussion with Ms Whittaker:
“59. Whittaker and I
discussed what course of action she might be able to take in the circumstances.
I suggested an approach
to the [deputy principal of the State High School] ...
to formally advise him that [her sister] wanted [her son] to remain enrolled
[the independent college].
went on to tell me about her sister’s disability (and her complete
incapacity to manage her own affairs) and the extent
to which she was involved
in the management of her sister’s illness and her affairs generally. I
believe this is when I asked
Whittaker if she held a power of attorney for her
sister and I believe I asked this question based on an expectation that a person
in Whittaker’s position with the level of involvement and the management
of her sister’s affairs would, in all probability,
hold a power of
either told me that she held a power of attorney for her sister or may have left
my question unanswered and simply gone
on to say that an approach by her to the
school as [her sister’s] attorney would not be sufficient to prevent [her
enrolment, as [the deputy principal] had told her that school
policy dictated that the consent of only one parent to the enrolment
student was necessary and [her sister’s husband] had given his
accept that, given my disturbed and confused state of mind deposed to in
paragraphs 91 and 92 and my poor recall of events generally,
it is at least
possible that I am mistaken in my recall, but I nevertheless proceeded on the
basis of a genuine (although possibly
mistaken) belief that Whittaker held a
power of attorney.
then informed me that [the deputy principal], in turn, had told her that nothing
less than a court injunction would prevent
[her nephew’s] enrolment, so
her instructions to me were directed to the obtaining of an injunction that
afternoon.”
[26] The respondent’s original file was exhibit 4. There was a page of
post-it notes in the respondent’s handwriting
on which the respondent had
jotted notes as she spoke to Ms Whittaker in the initial telephone call. As the
telephone call progressed,
the respondent took out a notepad on which she
started to write more detailed notes. There is a page of notes relating to the
telephone conversation. There was little time for the respondent to
prepare for the application, as the hearing time before the
Chief Justice had
been fixed for 4:30pm. The respondent hastily prepared the affidavit in the
name of Ms Whittaker’s sister.
The respondent stated in paragraph 76 of
her affidavit:
“Why I thought it legally appropriate to
prepare an affidavit in [her sister’s] name and have Whittaker sign it
power of attorney is completely unclear to me and I have absolutely no
recollection of what thought process on my part led to this
[27] In paragraph 78 of her affidavit, the respondent expressly denies being
asked by Ms Whittaker if she should sign the document
“on behalf of” her sister or saying words to the effect “no
sign it as your sister - we don’t
have time for this.” The
respondent also denies being aware of the fact that Ms Whittaker had signed her
sister’s name
and not her own.
[28] In relation to the appearance
before the Chief Justice, the respondent records that her recollection of events
during the course
of that afternoon was poor. The respondent has read the
transcript of the proceeding before the Chief Justice many times and is
embarrassed by her performance. The respondent explained in her evidence (at
Transcript 1-73) that she had every intention of trying
to give the Chief
Justice the full picture about her instructions, but that she was cut off,
before she was able to explain anything,
and the respondent stated:
“I didn’t have an
opportunity at any stage to give him the information that I thought he needed,
but which he seemed not
to be interested in. His Honour was focusing on whether
the child had already been enrolled or was yet to be enrolled, and that’s
something I couldn’t answer.”
[29] In relation to charge 4, the respondent explained (at Transcript 1-69) that
the focus of the QLS investigation changed between
her letter of 22 May 2007 and
her letter of 11 December 2007. Her letter of 22 May 2007 responded to the
complaints that she brought
the application in the wrong jurisdiction and
relating to her fees of $900. When it came to sending her letter of 11 December
she had forgotten that she had forwarded a copy of her file notes with her
letter of 22 May 2007. The respondent’s explanation
for making the
alterations to her files notes is set out paragraph 106 of her
“When I received a request from the QLS for
additional information on 28 November 2007, I reviewed my entire file, including
the contemporaneous notes and the “post-it notes”. I decided to
incorporate the information contained in the “post-it
notes” into my
more comprehensive file note in the interests of clarification and for the sake
of completeness. The “post-it
notes” were produced
contemporaneously with the events which transpired on the afternoon of 30 March
2007 and that seemed to
be an appropriate and proper course of conduct for me to
[30] When it was put to the respondent in cross-examination (at Transcript 1-74)
that she knew the altered notes were not contemporaneous
“No, I believe that these notes plus the
post-it notes and my memory amounted, correctly or incorrectly, to
contemporaneous
Proceeding before the Chief Justice
[31] The applicant relied on the
affidavit of Mr Graham Inch who was the investigator employed by the QLS who did
the investigation
of Ms Whittaker’s complaint. Mr Inch exhibited to his
affidavit the transcript of the proceeding before the Chief Justice
on 30 March
2007 and the transcript of the reasons given by the Chief Justice for refusing
the application.
[32] A perusal of the transcript of the proceeding confirms
that the respondent was unfamiliar with the requirements of practice in
Supreme Court for obtaining an urgent injunction. Although the respondent felt
that the Chief Justice had cut her off and did
not give her an opportunity to
put additional information before the court, the Chief Justice was confining the
respondent’s
submissions to relevant matters.
[33] The misleading
statements attributed to the respondent were first made at the commencement of
the hearing. After the respondent
gave a brief description of the nature of the
application and stated that the relevant child was “terribly emotionally
distressed,”
as was “the mother in the home” the following
exchange took place (at Transcript p 2):
CHIEF JUSTICE: What home?
MS HAY: In the multiple sclerosis home. I have an affidavit here from the
THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Is relief sought against some person or is there a
respondent?
MS HAY: I’ve named the father as the respondent.
[Details of
statements made about the child omitted]
THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Look, I’m sorry. In this Court we work on evidence.
Do you have an affidavit or anything – or an application?
MS HAY: Since 3 o’clock till 4.30 getting to the home at Annerley,
I’ve only-----
THE CHIEF JUSTICE: I’m not really concerned about that. Do you have an
application you seek leave to file?
MS HAY: I seek leave to make an oral application.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Let me read the affidavit first.”
[34] The misleading statement by the respondent that suggested that the
affidavit was that of Ms Whittaker’s sister was repeated
again by the
respondent when she asked Ms Whittaker the question (at Transcript p 8)
“Your sister says in her affidavit that
she asked you to do
something?”
Psychiatric evidence
[35] The psychiatric evidence that
was adduced on behalf of the respondent was not challenged by the
[36] Dr Matthews provided a treating medical officer’s
report dated 18 April 2008. He confirmed that on 7 December 2006 he
commenced the respondent on Lamotrigine at a dose of 50 mg daily, but then
increased that dose to 100 mg daily on 9 January 2007
and again to 200 mg on 7
February 2007. Because on each of the dose increases there was a significant
improvement in the respondent’s
mood that was non-sustained, he kept
increasing the dosage. He increased her Lamotrigine dose to 300 mg per day on
21 March 2007.
By 28 March 2007 the respondent was describing some
irritability, although this was presumed to be secondary to difficulties with
insomnia. On 3 April 2007 the respondent reported that since the increased to
her dose of Lamotrigine to 300 mg, she had subjectively
felt that she was more
irritable and aggressive and she felt “strange, weird, cannot control what
I am saying”. Dr Matthews’
clinical notes from 3 April 2007 state
“some confusion, increased lability and irritability with increased
Lamictal ...? mixed
state versus confusional state.” Dr Matthews recorded
his opinion that at that time the respondent was experiencing a confusional
state from the Lamotrigine and that a dose of 200 mg per day was the optimal
dose for her.
[37] Dr Matthews was seeing the respondent on a weekly basis
for consultations around 30 March 2007 and was able to prepare his report
the contemporaneous notes he made during this period. Because the evidence of a
deterioration in the respondent’s concentration
and behaviour, with
irritability, concentration disturbance, liability of emotion, and subjective
sensation of feeling “strange”
and “weird”, followed the
increase in dose of Lamotrigine on 21 March 2007, and then those symptoms
gradually resolved
with a decrease in medication dosage, Dr Matthews expressed
the view that the most probable explanation for the symptoms suffered
respondent was an unexpected adverse drug reaction.
[38] For the purpose
of this proceeding the respondent attended on 30 March 2009 on consultant
psychiatrist Professor Philip Mitchell
who is the head of the School of
Psychiatry at the University of New South Wales. Professor Mitchell’s
conclusion about the
respondent’s state is as follows:
light of Ms Hay’s retrospective account to me of her mental state on March
30, 2007 and the period immediately prior
and subsequent to that, and Dr
Matthews reporting of his contemporaneous notes of that period, it would appear
that there was a change
in Ms Hay’s mental state, with altered cognitive
capacities, which are highly likely to have impaired her reasoning and
functioning
at that time. Concerning December 12, 2007, I could find no
evidence of impaired cognitive function at that time.”
[39] Professor Mitchell was requested to express on opinion about the dosage of
Lamotrigine that the respondent was taking, as at
30 March 2007. Professor
Mitchell describes the dose of 300 mg as a high dose, pointing out that the
usual dose for bipolar disorder
(which is the usual condition for which the
medication is prescribed) is up to 200 mg. Professor Mitchell concludes that it
likely that the respondent’s behaviour in late March 2007 was
due to significant adverse effects of the high dose of the
Lamotrigine.
[40] When Ms Whittaker telephoned the respondent on
30 March 2007, she knew that she did not hold her sister’s power of
It made no sense for Ms Whittaker to suggest to the respondent that
she did hold her sister’s power of attorney. After considering
Whittaker’s affidavits and her oral evidence in comparison to that of the
respondent, I have concluded that Ms Whittaker’s
recollection of her
respondent’s admittedly poor recollection.
I am satisfied that Ms
Whittaker did tell the respondent that she did not have a power of attorney from
her sister, but that either
did not register with the respondent or, if it did,
the respondent was in such a confused and agitated state that she proceeded to
act as if Ms Whittaker was the attorney of her sister.
[41] As the respondent
prepared the affidavit, she knew that it had been prepared in the name of Ms
Whittaker’s sister. It
is plausible, and I accept Ms Whittaker’s
evidence, that she would not have signed the affidavit in the name of her
unless that was the direction that was given to her by the respondent.
Charge 1 comprises two paragraphs. In relation to paragraph
(a) of charge 1,
the applicant has proved that the respondent directed Ms Whittaker to execute
the affidavit in the name of her sister
by signing her sister’s name. The
other element of paragraph (a) of charge 1 that has to be established is that
the respondent
knew or ought to have known that Ms Whittaker could not lawfully
execute the affidavit. The particulars that are provided in paragraph
limited to the allegation that the respondent knew that Ms Whittaker could not
lawfully execute the affidavit. At the hearing,
the applicant elected to pursue
this charge by establishing only that the respondent ought to have known that Ms
Whittaker could
not lawfully execute the affidavit by signing in her
sister’s name. As a matter of law, an attorney cannot sign an affidavit
in the name of the principal by subscribing the principal’s name to the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
. It follows that the respondent
ought to have known that Ms Whittaker could not lawfully execute the affidavit
by signing in her
sister’s name and that is therefore established by the
applicant against the respondent.
[42] In relation to paragraph (b) of charge
1, even though the respondent claims she did not notice the manner in which Ms
had signed the affidavit, it is established that the respondent
witnessed the execution of the affidavit by Ms Whittaker who signed
in the name
of her sister. Ms Whittaker’s sister did not execute the affidavit, but
the respondent has witnessed the signature
that Ms Whittaker put on the
affidavit purporting to be in the name of her sister. The initial letter of the
signature corresponds
with the initial of Ms Whittaker’s sister’s
first name and not Ms Whittaker’s first name. The applicant has also
established paragraph (b) of charge 1. The psychiatric evidence about the
respondent’s state of mind and confusion at the
time of this conduct does
not prevent the proof of this charge against the respondent.
question arises whether the conduct that is the subject of charge 1 should be
characterised as unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
[44] The conduct which is the subject of charge 1 occurred prior to the
commencement of the Act, while the
Legal Profession Act 2004
was in force.
Section 423
of the Act applies chapter 4 of the Act (concerned with complaints
and discipline) to the conduct of a legal practitioner in the
before or after the commencement of that provision. The terms
“unsatisfactory professional conduct” and
“professional
misconduct” were defined in the 2004 Act in the same way as they are
defined in ss 418 and 419 of the Act.
[45] The respective definitions of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct are inclusive
and not exhaustive.
Professional misconduct is also unsatisfactory professional
conduct, but is more serious, because it may involve a substantial or
failure to reach or keep a reasonable standard of competence and diligence. Mr
McMillan of counsel focused on the aspect
of charge 1 that involved the false
attestation by the respondent of the signature on the affidavit and contended
that the conduct
should be characterised as professional misconduct. The
respondent’s mental state at the time she witnessed the signature
on the affidavit by Ms Whittaker must be taken into account in characterising
her conduct. In these circumstances, the conduct
that is the subject of charge
1 is appropriately described as unsatisfactory professional conduct on the part
of the respondent.
Charges 2 and 3
[46] Each of charges 2 and 3
require the applicant to prove that the respondent made the relevant statement
to the Chief Justice dishonestly
or recklessly. In light of the
respondent’s own evidence of her mental state on the afternoon in question
and the psychiatric
evidence that explains how the respondent was likely to have
been experiencing symptoms of an adverse drug reaction, I am not satisfied
the applicant has discharged the onus he bears under s 649 of the Act to prove
against the respondent the mental element of
either dishonesty or recklessness
that is an essential part of charges 2 and 3.
[47] The applicant is unable to
prove charges 2 and 3 against the respondent.
[48] There are
three aspects to the respondent’s letter dated 11 December 2007 and
enclosures which are alleged by the applicant
to have misled the QLS in its
investigation:
statement in the letter that “Ms Whittaker stated to me, that she held
Power of Attorney for her sister”;
(b) the description in the
letter of 11 December 2007 of the five pages of handwritten notes as
“contemporaneous notes”;
(c) the alterations that had been
made to the original file notes (as evidenced by those forwarded by the
respondent to the QLS
on 22 May 2007) to produce the copy of the file notes
that accompanied the respondent’s letter dated 11 December 2007
[49] It is of relevance that when the respondent prepared her statement
responding to the discipline application, she alleged that
she made the
statement in her letter of 11 December 2007 that Ms Whittaker had told her that
she had a power of attorney from her
sister, as she believed it to be true and,
as such, there was no intention to mislead the QLS. By the time the respondent
gave instructions
for and swore her affidavit that was filed on 21 August 2009,
she was prepared to acknowledge that her belief that Ms Whittaker had
that she had a power of attorney from her sister was possibly mistaken and that
her recollection of events that occurred
on 30 March 2007 was poor. The
respondent confirmed during her cross-examination (at Transcript 1-70) that what
she had recorded
in her letter of 11 December 2007 as to being told by Ms
Whittaker that she had a power of attorney from her sister was in accordance
with her memory on 11 December 2007, as to what had happened on 30 March
[50] I am not satisfied that in the light of the respondent’s
evidence and the psychiatric evidence adduced on her behalf that
the applicant
can show that, when the respondent made the statement in her letter of 11
December 2007 about being told by Ms Whittaker
that she had a power of attorney
from her sister, that was not the respondent’s recollection at that time.
Even though the
respondent was not on 11 December 2007 suffering the same
affliction that affected her functioning on 30 March 2007, her letter dated
December 2007 was based on her notes made at the time she took instructions from
Ms Whittaker that do suggest that the respondent
recorded that Ms Whittaker held
a power of attorney from her sister. The applicant cannot prove the allegation
in particular 4.8.
[51] To the extent that charge 4 is based on an allegation
that the respondent described her altered notes as “contemporaneous
notes”, the evidence of Mr Inch as to his receipt of those notes is set
out in paragraph 18 of his affidavit:
inspection of the notes provided with the respondent's letter of 11 December
2007, they appeared to be the same notes as
those previously provided with the
respondent's letter of 22 May 2007. When I compared both sets of notes it became
apparent that
additional information had been placed in the second set of notes
provided on 11 December 2007.”
[52] Mr Inch must have made the comparison of the two sets of notes within a day
of receiving the letter of 11 December 2007 (which
had been forwarded by
facsimile transmission), as the letter that was sent by Mr Inch to the
respondent seeking an explanation about
the differences between the two sets of
notes was sent on 12 December 2007.
[53] The use of the description
“contemporaneous” by the respondent to describe her notes conveyed,
unequivocally, that
they were notes that were made by her at the time of the
events recorded in them. The original handwritten file notes were supplemented
by the respondent by reference to other notes made contemporaneously at the time
of her telephone call from Ms Whittaker and her
recollection of what had
occurred on 30 March 2007. Most of the alterations can be linked to comments on
the post-it notes and some
of the alterations are minor or have been added for
emphasis (such as the underlining of two words). The alterations did not change
materially the content of the original file notes when read together with the
post-it notes. Original notes that were altered for
the purpose of providing
such “clarification” should not have been given the description by
the respondent in her letter
to the QLS of “contemporaneous notes.”
The second set of notes that was forwarded by the respondent to the QLS was
described inaccurately as “contemporaneous notes.”
[54] The applicant must prove that the conduct of the respondent in altering
the original handwritten notes, without alerting the
QLS to the fact of the
alterations, was done dishonestly or recklessly.
[55] A critical aspect of
the applicant’s case against the respondent on charge 4 was that Ms
Whittaker did not tell the respondent
that she had a power of attorney from her
sister. The applicant inferred that there was an intention on the part of the
to deceive the QLS in its investigation, as the respondent did not
assert that she was told by Ms Whittaker that she had a power
of attorney from
her sister until the letter of 11 December 2007 that was supported by one of the
alterations to her file notes that
included the words “has POA” to
mean that the respondent was recording that she was told by Ms Whittaker that
a power of attorney from her sister. As the applicant was relying on Ms
Whittaker’s evidence that she did not tell the respondent
that she had a
power of attorney from her sister, the applicant based charge 4 on an allegation
that the respondent intentionally
meant to mislead the QLS (or was reckless
contemporaneous notes.
[56] My conclusion that the applicant cannot show
that, when the respondent made the statement in her letter of 11 December 2007
being told by Ms Whittaker that she had a power of attorney from her
sister, that was not the respondent’s recollection at
that time is also
relevant to determining whether the description applied by the respondent to her
altered notes as contemporaneous
notes was done dishonestly or recklessly.
Because of the terms in which charge 4 has been framed, the applicant must prove
state on the respondent’s part at the time she described her
altered notes as contemporaneous notes that related to misleading
Although the respondent’s explanation for why she described her notes as
contemporaneous notes is objectively unacceptable,
it has to be considered in
the context of what her belief was as to what she had been told by Ms Whittaker
attorney from her sister. The respondent erred in using
the description “contemporaneous” to describe her altered notes,
I am not satisfied that the applicant can prove that the respondent applied that
description to her notes dishonestly or recklessly.
[57] It is therefore
not necessary to consider whether the applicant could prove that use of that
description of contemporaneous notes
by the respondent “misled” the
[58] To the extent that charge 4 is based on an allegation that
alterations had been made by the respondent to her original file notes,
applicant cannot prove that the respondent’s conduct in making the
alterations was done dishonestly or recklessly, consistent
with the other
findings that I have made in relation to charge 4.
[59] The applicant is
unable to prove charge 4 against the respondent.
Appropriate
[60] Further submissions are sought from the parties on what
disciplinary orders should be imposed, in light of the finding of the
that the respondent is guilty of charge 1 only. During the course of the
hearing of the disciplinary application, the applicant
tendered a copy of the
notice of intention to seek compensation order given by Ms Whittaker (exhibit
3). Submissions will need to
be addressed on whether the Tribunal is empowered
to make a compensation order in view of the findings made by the Tribunal and,
if so, whether a compensation order should be made. The question of costs will
also need to be addressed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (136 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter