URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2002/31.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:48:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hunter, Robert & Catherine v National Asset Planning Corporation Pty Ltd & Atkinson, James & Others [2002] QPAMDT 31 (26 June 2002)
PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR DEALERS TRIBUNAL
[2002] QPAMDT 31
26 JUNE 2002
APPLICATION NO:
HUNTER ROBERT PETER & CATHERINE
FIRST RESPONDENT:
NATIONAL ASSET PLANNING CORPORATION PTY LTD
SECOND RESPONDENT:
ATKINSON JAMES COURTNEY
THIRD RESPONDENT:
ATKINSON HOLDINGS PTY LTD
FOURTH RESPONDENT:
BILBOROUGH CHRISTOPHER R
DATE OF HEARING:
4 APRIL 2002
[2002] QPAMDT 31
REASON FOR DECISION:
This is a claim by Robert Peter Hunter
and Catherine Hunter (“the Hunters”) under Section 119 of the
Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971
(“the Repealed Act”) against
the Auctioneers and Agents Fidelity Guarantee Fund (“the former
fund”) established
under the Repealed Act. The claim was in respect of
pecuniary loss suffered by the Hunters because of the alleged contravention
provisions of the Repealed Act by National Asset Planning Corporation Pty Ltd
The claim arose in
relation to the purchase of a townhouse, Unit 34-A “Boca Raton”, 1
Ridgevista Court, Reedy Creek (“the
townhouse”) by the Hunters from
Kentdell Pty Ltd (“Kentdell”). The contract of sale was dated 6
February 1998
and the purchase price was $159,900. NAPC was described as the
Agent in the contract.
The vendor of the
townhouse, Kentdell, pursuant to a deed dated 24 March 1998 and described as
“Joint Venture for Development
and Marketing”, entered into an
agreement with Coral Reef Group Pty Ltd ( “Coral Reef” ) whereby
Coral Reef was
to receive a consultancy fee for each of the units sold in the
development. Coral Reef received $31,900 from the proceeds of the
settlement of
the Hunters’ contract.
The Hunters
claimed that the townhouse was sold by NAPC at an overvalued price and that they
entered into the contract relying on
false and misleading representations made
by NAPC and its agents. In an amended revised claim tendered at the hearing the
claimed to have suffered a pecuniary loss totalling $101,966 and sought
reimbursement for this amount plus costs.
The Repealed Act was repealed by the
Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act 2000
(“the Act”) and
the Hunters’ claim has become a claim against the claim fund established
under Section 408 of the
Act by virtue of the transitional provisions contained
in Section 604 of the Act. The relevant parts of this section are as
The rights and liabilities of the
former fund are taken to be the rights and liabilities of the claim fund.
A claim that has been made against the former fund, and not
finished before the commencement, continues as if it were a claim against
claim fund.”
6. There are no other transitional provisions in the Act to assist the
Tribunal in the management of the Hunters’ claim. Christopher
(“Bilborough”), who was the sole director of NAPC
at the relevant time, is a party to the application by virtue of sub-section
475(3) of the Act. Neither Bilborough nor any of the other Respondents were
parties before the claim was transferred to the Tribunal.
Through various
directions hearings, however, the Tribunal, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 474 and 475 of the Act,
ensured that the Respondents received copies of
all of the relevant material transferred to the Tribunal by the Chief Executive
Section 476 of the Act. As part of these directions, the Hunters were to
file a revised claim complying with Section 473 of the Act,
the relevant
provisions of which are as follows:-
The claim must state –
the event alleged to give rise to the
when the event happened;
if the claimant was not immediately
aware that the claimant suffered financial loss because of the happening of the
event, when the
claimant became aware of the financial loss;
all relevant particulars about the
event and the financial loss; and
claimant’s estimated financial loss.”
7. A revised
claim dated 17 August 2001 was subsequently filed. An amended revised claim was
filed on 28 March 2002 and at the hearing
an amended revised claim dated 4 April
2002 was tendered to the Tribunal. As there was no objection to the amended
revised claim,
the Tribunal gave leave under Section 486 of the Act for the
claim to be so amended. The Hunters were represented at the hearing
Skennar instructed by Carter Capner and Bilborough was represented by Mr T J
Bradley instructed by Mr P Morgan. There was
no appearance by NAPC or the
Second Respondent, James Courtney Atkinson (“Atkinson”) or the Third
Respondent, Atkinson
Holdings Pty Ltd.
8. NAPC’s Liquidator, Mr M Sheehy, had earlier advised the
Tribunal’s Registrar that he would not be participating in
the case on
behalf of NAPC and would leave the matter in the hands of Bilborough as the
former Director of the company. Correspondence
from Bilborough to the Tribunal
indicated that he was aware of this decision by Mr Sheehy.
Written evidence and submissions
9. At the hearing, Ms Skennar tendered further statements of the Hunters
dated 4 April 2002. She also tendered a bundle of documents
(Exhibit 1) upon
which the Hunters intended to rely. Mr Bradley had no objection to the late
tendering of this evidence. The Hunters
had earlier filed witness statements
dated 24 October 2001, a report from G N Gunn, Chartered Accountant, of Geoffrey
Co (“Gunn & Co”) on the Hunters’ pecuniary loss
and a valuation from Taylor Byrne, Valuers (“Taylor Byrne”).
10. Mr Bradley also tendered at the hearing a further statement by Bilborough
dated 3 April 2002. In addition, he tendered a copy
of a letter dated 26
November 1999 from Mr Hunter to Mr P Entriken of the Office of Fair Trading
(Exhibit 2). Ms Skennar had no
objection to this further evidence. Bilborough
had earlier filed a witness statement dated 27 November 2001. Mr Bradley
however, that he would not rely on that statement but relied instead on
the further statement dated 3 April 2002.
11. Neither Counsel required any witnesses for cross-examination but
requested the opportunity to file and serve written submissions,
Tribunal granted. The submissions on behalf of the Hunters were received on 8
April 2002 and the submissions on behalf
of Bilborough were received on 12 April
2002. On 10 April 2002 further submissions were received from Carter Capner
relating to
costs. The Tribunal sought clarification of those submissions. It
also sought clarification of a submission that the Hunters were
entitled to the
sum of $111,660 as determined in Gunn & Co’s report
excluding interest in the sum of $9,694 which the claimants concede
that they cannot recover, leaving a total claim against the Fund
As the Tribunal is enjoined by Section 488 (3)(b) of the
decide the amount of the claimant’s financial
”, it requested submissions on how Gunn & Co had calculated
the interest figure of $9,694. Further material in respect
of the costs was
received from Carter Capner on 16 April 2002 and further material in respect of
the interest calculation on 29 April
2002. Copies of this further material were
provided to the Respondents. Bilborough’s legal representative, Mr P
Morgan, advised
the Tribunal that Bilborough had no further submissions to make.
12. Whilst Section 604(2) of the Act provides that an unfinished claim
against the former fund continues as if it were a claim against
the claim fund,
the actual claim is not a claim in respect of contravention of the provisions
set out in Section 470 of the Act but
is a claim for pecuniary loss because of
contravention of the provisions set out in Section 119 of the Repealed Act. The
provisions of that Section were as follows:-
Application of fund
Subject to this Act, the fund shall be held and applied for
the purpose of reimbursing persons who may suffer pecuniary loss because
the contravention of any provision of section 60, 69, 70, 72, 73
or 74 or of part 7, division 1 by a prescribed person.
In subsection (1)-
“prescribed person”
means a licensee, the licensee’s
partner, employee, agent or any person having the apparent charge or control for
being of the office or business of the licensee.
For the purposes of this section
and sections 120, 121 and 123 to 126
includes a person who
carries on the business of an auctioneer, a real estate agent, a motor dealer or
a commercial agent and is
not the holder of a licence.
13. The revised claim and the submissions on behalf of the Hunters relied on
breaches of Sections 69 and 70 relating to beneficial
interest, Section 72
relating to false representations as to property and Section 73 relating to
representations as to availability
of finance. The relevant provisions of these
sections were as follows:-
Restriction on agents purchasing or selling property
An auctioneer, a real estate agent, motor dealer or any
employee of any such person, who has for sale any property that is owned
person or in which such person is beneficially interested shall, before making
any agreement in respect of the sale of the
property, notify the prospective
purchaser in the approved form of the interest in the property and obtain from
the purchaser an
acknowledgement of receipt of the notice.
When agent prohibited from having interest in option to purchase
An auctioneer or real estate agent shall not, in respect of
land had by the auctioneer or real estate agent for sale, obtain or
way concerned in obtaining from the seller an option to purchase in which that
auctioneer or real estate agent is beneficially
interested.
Maximum penalty – 100 penalty units.
An auctioneer or a real estate
agent shall not as such sell land at any time when, in respect of that land,
there is subsisting an
option to purchase in which that auctioneer or real
estate agent is beneficially interested.
Maximum penalty –
100 penalty units.
False representations as to property
No auctioneer, real estate agent, or motor dealer, or employee
of an auctioneer, a real estate agent, or a motor dealer, shall make
purchaser or prospective purchaser or publish or cause to be published any
statement or representation that is false or misleading
(whether to the
person’s knowledge or not) concerning any real or personal property which
the person, or as the case may be,
the person’s employer, has for sale by
auction or as a real estate agent or as a motor dealer, as the case may be.
Maximum penalty – 100 penalty units.
Without limiting the generality of subsection (1) or (2), a statement or
representation shall, for the purposes of that subsection,
be deemed to be false
or misleading if it is of such a nature that it would reasonably tend to lead to
a belief in the existence
of a state of affairs that does not in fact exist,
whether or not the statement or representation indicates that that state of
does exist.
This section shall be read and
construed as in aid of and not in derogation from any other Act or law relating
to false or misleading
advertisements or other statements.
Representations as to availability of finance
An auctioneer who sells by auction, or a real estate agent who
such or as a principal sells any land, whether improved or unimproved,
shall give to the purchaser a statement in writing in compliance in every
respect with the requirements of this section.
A statement in writing under this section shall—
(a) clearly identify the land to which the statement relates; and
(b) state the names and addresses respectively of the seller and
purchaser; and
(c) state clearly whether or not the auctioneer or real estate agent has
(by the auctioneer or real estate agent or by an employee) made or
offered to the purchaser any representation, promise or term with
respect to the availability of finance for defraying wholly or in part
the purchase price; and
(d) if any such representation, promise, or term has been so made or
offered, in addition to stating clearly that fact, state clearly the
particulars of that representation, promise or term; and
(e) state the date on which the statement is given; and
(f) be signed by the auctioneer or real estate agent or by a person
authorised in writing (prior notice of which, accompanied by a
copy of the authority, has been delivered to the registrar) by the
auctioneer or real estate agent;
and shall not contain any other written, typewritten, or printed matter
the letterhead (if any) of the auctioneer or real estate agent.
A statement in writing under this section shall be given by
auctioneer or real estate agent to the purchaser before the purchaser
any contract, agreement, or document legally binding or intended to bind
purchaser legally in respect of the sale.
An auctioneer or a real estate agent who—
(a) being required by subsection (1) fails to give to a purchaser of
land a statement in writing in compliance in every respect with the
requirements of subsections (2) and (3); or
(b) being liable at law under this section for repayment to a purchaser
of land of any money paid by that purchaser under the contract
entered into by the purchaser, fails to make such repayment in full
within 14 days after becoming so liable;
shall be guilty of an offence against this Act
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units or 12 months imprisonment.
In any civil proceedings arising out of or connected with a
or agreement or document to which this section relates the onus of
that the statement referred to in subsection (2) was duly given shall lie
the party so alleging.
14. The process for deciding a claim against the claim fund is set out in
Section 488 of the Act, which provides as follows:-
488 Deciding claims other than minor claims
The tribunal may allow the claim, wholly or partly, or reject
However, the tribunal may allow the claim only if satisfied, on
balance of probabilities, that—
(a) an event mentioned in section 470(1) happened; and
(b) the claimant suffered financial loss because of the happening of
If the tribunal allows the claim, wholly or partly, the tribunal
(a) take into account—
(i) any amount the claimant might reasonably have received or
recovered if not for the claimant’s neglect or default; and
(ii) any amount ordered to be paid to the claimant as
compensation under section 530A, 572D or 592A; and
(b) decide the amount of the claimant’s financial loss; and
(c) name the person who is liable for the claimant’s financial
15. The orders the Tribunal may make in respect of a claim against the claim
fund are set out in Section 530 of the Act which provides
as follows:-
530 Orders tribunal may make on claim hearing
The tribunal may make the following orders in relation to a claim against
(a) an order allowing the claim, wholly or partly, or rejecting the
(b) an order stating that a named person is liable for a claimant’s
financial loss and the amount of the loss;
(c) an order about recovery of an amount payable in relation to a
(d) an order that no amount is recoverable in relation to a claim.
Discussion and Findings
Agreed Facts
16. It is convenient to give a brief outline of the facts not in dispute:
The Hunters were originally
telemarketed in New South Wales and then attended a seminar conducted by
representatives of NAPC. The
focus of the seminar was negative gearing through
property investment.
The Hunters had
further discussions at their home with an NAPC representative on the advantages
of investment in the Gold Coast area.
They flew to the Gold Coast on 5
February 1998 where they were met by Atkinson who advised them that he worked
for NAPC. Atkinson
took them to the office of Markfair Pty Ltd
(“Markfair”) which carried on a business known as Investlend (Aust)
(“Investlend”).
At this office they had discussions with Stephen
Quinlivan (“Quinlivan”) who showed them some spreadsheets on
investment analysis and projections.
Atkinson then took them to see a number
of properties in the Gold Coast area, including the townhouse. When they
expressed interest
in the townhouse, they were taken back to Quinlivan who took
them through further figures and spreadsheet
At some stage during the
meetings with Quinlivan they completed a Finance Application and Mortgage
Brokerage Agreement.
When the Hunters
indicated that they were interested in buying the property they were taken by
Atkinson to Perrin Pointon, Solicitors,
and signed a contract of sale to
purchase the townhouse for a price of $159,900. They paid a deposit of $750.
Some days after signing the contract,
the Hunters received a letter from Westpac Banking Corporation confirming that
their loan had
been drawn down. They had borrowed
In July 1999 the Hunters
decided to have the value of the townhouse appraised and were told that it was
valued between $100,000 and
$120,000. They subsequently lodged their claim
against the former fund.
Their claim
was lodged on 29 November 1999 and was therefore in time in accordance with
Section 119(5) of the Repealed Act.
The Marketing
17. It is also convenient to outline the detailed submissions of Ms Skennar
in respect of the entities involved in the sale of the
townhouse to the Hunters.
The relevant parts of her submission were as follows:
“16. It is submitted that a scheme was adopted by NAPC and other
entities involved ensuring that the claimants would acquire
a property marketed
by Coral Reef and NAPC. The arrangements between the various parties to this
scheme appear to be:
a. The developer would enter into a joint venture agreement with Coral
Reef which:
i. Entitled Coral Reef to a ‘marketing fee’;
ii. Gave Coral Reef an option to purchase the units;
Provided that the terms of
the joint venture were to form terms of the contract with the
The precise link
between NAPC and Coral Reef is not immediately apparent from the material but it
is clear that despite NAPC apparently
undertaking all the work, payment for the
services rendered by NAPC was made to Coral Reef. The work carried out by NAPC
is precisely
the work to be carried out by Coral Reef pursuant to the joint
venture agreement. Further, Coral Reef did not receive any payment
services until the contract was completed which was brought about by the conduct
of NAPC. The only logical conclusion is
that Coral Reef engaged NAPC to locate
purchasers for the units the subject of the joint venture agreement and that
these two companies
NAPC and Investlend
acted in concert in persuading the claimants to purchase the unit by each having
representatives present during
the financial
Investlend and/or
NAPC would arrange for solicitors to be available for the purchasers immediately
the purchasers agreed to buy the
17. It is apparent
from the bundle of documents (Exhibit 1) that although separate companies were
involved in relation each aspect
of the transaction, that is:
a. Coral Reef entered into the contract with the vendor;
b. NAPC provided the sales team; and
c. Investlend provided the finance team;
d. ‘Independent’ solicitors were engaged to act for the
purchasers;
each of the companies were intimately involved with each other to ensure
that the desired result was achieved namely that the purchasers
bought the unit
on the same day they inspected it and to ensure that the claimants had no
opportunity to question the advice given
by the various companies. This is
particularly apparent from the different settlement statements prepared in this
matter. The claimants
received a settlement statement from their solicitors
which indicated that the ‘Balance payable to vendor at settlement’
was $160,491.60. However in another settlement statement prepared by the same
solicitors (indeed the solicitors acting for the claimants)
it is apparent that
the proceeds of sale were distributed as follows:
I & L Securities Pty
Ltd $126,985.06
Office of State
Revenue $58.75
Coral Reef Group
Pty Ltd $31,900
Conveyancing $320
Gold Coast City
Council $647.79
This is also confirmed by correspondence from Coral Reef dated 31 March
1998 to Perrin Pointon requesting the claimants’ solicitors
‘collect our consultancy cheque in the amount of $31,900’ and the
letter from the claimants’ solicitors to Coral
Reef dated 31 March 1998
enclosing the cheque.
The bundle of documents,
Exhibit 1, includes a “Sign Up Memo” which describes Mr
Atkinson’s role as “Agent/Runner”
and also indicates that
‘professional costs’ were $1,550. Obviously NAPC knew precisely
what the solicitors would charge
the claimants because this is the exact amount
the claimants were invoiced by their solicitors. This intimate involvement
NAPC and the solicitors is confirmed in the document called “New
and Amended Matter Form”. That document indicates that
solicitors’ source of the client (the claimants) was NAPC. Clearly NAPC
was involved in every aspect of the ‘process’
of ensuring a sale of
the Boca Raton unit to the claimants on 5 February
18. Further on in her submissions, she summarised the whole process as
“a. The directors and shareholders of the relevant companies at the
relevant time were:
Shareholder/s
C Bilborough
C Bilborough (1 share)
C Bilborough
C Bilborough (2 shares)
C Bilborough;
Johanna Frances Quinlivan
C Bilborough (50 shares) and (probably, although the dates are not clear
from the search) J Quinlivan (50 shares).
C Bilborough is now the sole director and shareholder
Investlend (Aust.) was a
business carried on by
Clearly there was a
‘scheme’ adopted in relation to the marketing of the units. Each
‘group’ involved in
ensuring the sale of the unit knew exactly what
the other ‘group’ would do. As NAPC was the key to the entire
flowing smoothly, it is submitted that it had the ultimate
There was obviously
no prospect that as part of this ‘process’ that Investlend would not
recommend a unit in the price
bracket being marketed by NAPC or that it would
not provide positive projections about that unit in the form of the
spreadsheet.
Mr Bilborough
says that if a potential purchaser was interested in buying, they would be
referred to Investlend.
f. The claimants’ evidence
is that Quinlivan and Atkinson appeared to be involved in making the decisions
as to which properties
the claimants would inspect.”
19. The Tribunal is satisfied that the evidence before it supports these
submissions. Apart from the uncontradicted evidence of the
Hunters, Bilborough
confirmed in his statement of 3 April 2002 that “
NAPC arranged
investment seminars about negative gearing of real estate property,
telemarketing and in-home consultations with prospective
purchasers of real
estate properties
”. He went on to state that when “
showed an interest in the purchase of real estate, NAPC
referred them to Markfair Pty Ltd trading as Investlend Aust
(“Investlend”).
I understand that Investlend arranged for
prospective purchasers to sign a mortgage brokerage agreement appointing
Investlend on
their behalf to obtain finance in relation to the prospective
property purchases.
” He confirmed that “
NAPC referred
potential purchasers to Investlend, exclusively”
and that Investlend
was managed and controlled by Dudley James Quinlivan”
20. He also confirmed that he was both a Director of NAPC and of Coral Reef
and described Coral Reef’s activities as follows:
“Coral Reef entered into a joint venture agreement with the
developers of the property purchased by the claimants. The joint
venture was in
relation to the marketing and sale of the development. As a result of this
marketing and sales assistance by Coral
Reef, Coral Reef expected to receive
consultancy fees (on average between $20,000 and $30,000) for each of the units
in the development
sold. The consultancy fees were paid to Coral Reef at
settlement by cheques drawn on instructions given to the solicitors for the
purchasers.”
21. Despite Bilborough’s reference to Coral Reef’s
marketing and sales assistance
”, the Tribunal agrees with Ms
Skennar’s submission that the evidence disclosed that NAPC undertook all
of the work and
that the work as carried out was precisely the work that Coral
Reef was supposed to carry out, as detailed in Clause 3 of the joint
agreement. Clause 3 provided:
The Joint Venturer (Coral Reef) at its expense is to engage consultants with
the authority of the developer for the sale of the individual
units in the
Project during the term of this Deed and to specifically carry out the following
3.1 Preparation and implementation of a marketing campaign which may include
seminars, promotions and advertising.
3.2 On behalf of the Developer and as agent for the Developer to appoint
Coral Reef's agents and co-ordinate the selling and marketing
activities of all
Coral Reef's agents and individuals involved in the selling of units in the
Project provided that the terms of
any such appointment are consistent with the
term hereof.
3.3 Liaise with purchasers, financiers and other relevant parties to assist
with the successful satisfaction of any conditions of
contracts so as to bring
the contracts to an unconditional status.
Supply upon execution by a purchaser
completed conforming contracts to the Developer's solicitors for checking and
obtaining execution
by the vendor of such
To make payment to or arrange
with the Developer for payment from the proceeds of settlement the amounts due
and payable to any Coral
Reef's agent that has reached Deed with the Coral Reef
in relation to the sale of units in the
Provide written reports to the
Developer at regular monthly intervals as to the status of sale for every
22. The Tribunal agrees with Ms Skennar’s conclusion that payment for
the services rendered by NAPC was in fact made to Coral
Reef. There is nothing
in the evidence before the Tribunal to indicate that Coral Reef did anything
except receive the payment of
$31,900. The Tribunal is satisfied that the real
position was that Coral Reef engaged NAPC to locate purchasers for the units,
subject of the joint venture agreement, and that NAPC was acting as an agent
for Coral Reef in those activities.
23. The Tribunal is satisfied, moreover, that the evidence confirms Ms
Skennar’s submission that each group involved in the
transaction knew
exactly what the other group would do and that NAPC “
was the key to the
entire process flowing smoothly
” and that “
ultimate control
”. In respect of Markfair / Investlend, the Tribunal
agrees with Ms Skennar’s submission that there was no prospect that
Investlend would not “
recommend a unit in the price bracket being
marketed by NAPC or that it would not provide positive projections about that
the form of the spreadsheets
”. Bilborough stated that NAPC
referred potential purchasers to Investlend “
exclusively
The uncontested evidence of the Hunters is that Atkinson was present at both
meetings with Quinlivan when the financial
analysis took place. Their evidence
was that Quinlivan arranged for them to see the solicitors, Perrin Pointon, and
that Atkinson
drove them there. In their further statements dated 4 April 2002
they stated that both Quinlivan and Atkinson “
appeared to be involved
in making the decision as to which properties to take us to inspect
In the light of all of this evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied that Atkinson
was the agent of NAPC and also that Quinlivan
and Markfair were acting as the
agent of NAPC in the process of persuading the Hunters to purchase the
24. In short, the Tribunal’s inescapable conclusion is that there was
an elaborate and manipulative scheme in operation whereby
all the parties
involved acted together to ensure that the Hunters purchased a property marketed
by NAPC and Coral Reef pursuant
to the joint venture agreement with Kentdell .
NAPC had the ultimate control in marketing the townhouse and Atkinson and
acted on NAPC’s behalf and subject to NAPC’s control and
direction. Everyone – NAPC, Kentdell, Atkinson, Quinlivan,
Markfair, the
solicitors, the bank – knew that Coral Reef was receiving part of the
purchase monies as consultancy fees. Everyone,
that is, except the Hunters.
Prescribed Person
25. Under Section 119 of the Repealed Act a claimant’s pecuniary loss
must be due to the contravention “
by a prescribed person
the provisions specified in that section. The term “
” is defined in sub-section 2 as meaning a licensee or a
licensee’s employee or agent. Sub-section 7 provides that the
” includes a person who carries on the business of a
real estate agent “
and is not the holder of licence
26. NAPC was not licenced as a real estate agent, but the Tribunal is
satisfied on the evidence before it that it was carrying on
the business of a
real estate agent for the purposes of the definition of
”. The contract of sale for the townhouse between
the Hunters and Kentdell refers to NAPC as the vendor’s agent.
Bilborough’s
statement of 3 April 2002, moreover, described the activities
of NAPC as follows:
“4. NAPC arranged investment seminars about negative gearing of
real estate property, telemarketing and in-home consultations
with prospective
purchasers of real estate property. I am aware that NAPC advised attendees at
its seminars that NAPC received its
income from real estate developers. NAPC
dealt predominately with major developers, including Villaworld, Sunland and
At the relevant time, NAPC had between 200 and 500 Units for
8. There were approximately 15 business units within NAPC at the relevant
time, including:
A telemarketing
An in-home consultation
department;
A sales unit;
A customer service
27. The statements of the Hunters of 24 October 2001 provide further evidence
in respect of these activities of NAPC. They refer
to initial contact from a
person representing NAPC inviting them to a seminar, a later visit from a
representative of NAPC referring
to properties on the Gold Coast, and the
statements and conduct of Atkinson who advised that he worked for NAPC. The
Tribunal accepts
this uncontested evidence.
28. Section 2 of the Repealed Act defined the term “real estate
agent” as follows:-
Definitions
In this Act—
“real estate agent”
means any person who, as an agent for
others, and
whether on commission or for or in expectation of any fee, gain, or
reward, and either alone or in connection with any other business, and
either generally or in respect of any 1 transaction, exercises or carries
on or advertises or notifies or states that the person exercises or
on or that the person is willing to exercise or carry on or in any way
holds the person out as ready to undertake the business of buying,
selling, exchanging, or letting houses, land, or estates, or negotiating
for such buying, selling, exchanging, or letting, or buying, selling,
exchanging, or letting hotel businesses, residential businesses,
boarding house businesses, storekeeping businesses, manufacturing
businesses, or businesses of any kind, or any interest in any of such
businesses, or buying, selling, or exchanging livestock but, does not
include a person who—
(a) undertakes any such function as a representative of Her Majesty;
(b) is employed merely as a clerk or servant; or
© is a registered life assurance company or friendly society, or a
financial institution or trustee company.
29. The Tribunal is satisfied on the evidence that NAPC’s conduct and
that of its representatives constituted carrying on the
business of a real
estate agent in terms of the above definition in that, as an agent for others
and in expectation of gain, it carried
on the business of negotiating for
selling houses and land. (
See Kedcorp Pty Ltd –v- Peter David Jenkins
(1999) QCA452
). As such, the Tribunal is satisfied that NAPC was both a
real estate agent as defined in Section 2 of the Repealed Act and a licensee
prescribed person for the purposes of Section 119 of the Repealed Act. The
Tribunal is also satisfied on the evidence before
it that Atkinson, as a
licensee’s agent, was also a prescribed person for the purposes of
Section 119.
Contravention of Sections 69 and 70
30. As already noted, Kentdell entered into a deed dated 24 March 1998
entitled “Joint Venture for Development and Marketing”
Reef. Pursuant to this agreement, Kentdell agreed to sign an irrevocable
authority for payment to Coral Reef of an amount
equal to the difference between
the sale price of a townhouse in the development and a minimum net price to
Kentdell of $130,000.
Kentdell also granted Coral Reef an option to purchase
each unit in the development for the price of $130,000.
31. The submissions on behalf of the Hunters argued that the provisions of
the joint venture agreement had the effect that NAPC was
beneficially interested
in the townhouse when it was sold to the Hunters. The submissions were that no
notice of such interest in
the property was given to the Hunters in breach of
Section 69 (2) of the Repealed Act and that the sale of the townhouse in the
of the option to purchase was a breach of Section 70(2) of the Repealed
Act. The circumstances in which a real estate agent is taken
beneficial interest were set out in detail in Section 71 of the Repealed Act.
In view of the findings the Tribunal has
reached on the submissions, it is not
necessary to further discuss the provisions of Section 71.
32. It was not in dispute that the Hunters were taken to see the townhouse by
Atkinson on 5 February 1998 and signed the contract
to purchase it the same day.
The contract was actually dated 6 February 1998. Mr Bradley submitted that, as
the joint venture agreement
was dated 24 March 1998, it was executed after NAPC
had made the agreement to sell the property to the Hunters and that there could
not therefore be a breach of Sections 69(2) and 70(2) of the Repealed Act.
33. The Tribunal agrees with this submission. Section 69(2) obliges a real
estate agent “
before making any agreement in respect of the sale of the
” to notify the prospective purchaser of the agent’s
beneficial interest in the property. Clearly, NAPC did not have
a beneficial
interest in the property through the joint venture agreement when the Hunters
signed the contract on 5 February 1998.
Clearly also, there could be no
beneficial interest relating to any option because there was no option to
purchase the property
when the Hunters signed the contract on 5 February 1998.
In these circumstances, the Tribunal is satisfied that there has been no
of the provisions of Sections 69 and 70 of the Repealed Act.
Contravention of Section 72
34. The uncontradicted evidence of the Hunters was that during the course of
the seminar they attended in New South Wales they were
advised by a
representative of NAPC that there was an 8% capital growth rate on the Gold
Coast and during the subsequent home visit
they were told that the capital
growth rate on the Gold Coast was up to 11.2%. Their evidence was that
Quinlivan, when discussing
the financial analysis spreadsheets, had said that
the townhouse would increase by 8 – 10% each year. In her submissions,
Skennar referred to the valuation of Taylor Byrne and submitted that it was
apparent from the valuations given in that report
that the capital growth rate
for the townhouse “
has been a negative
35. It is clear from the above that the statements made as to capital growth
rate could have been false or misleading in the absence
of any qualification or
reservations. In this regard, Ms Skennar referred the Tribunal to the following
statement by Lee J
in Wheeler Grace & Pierucci –v- Wright
[1989] FCA 127
ATPR 40-940
A positive unqualified prediction by a corporation may be
misleading conduct in trade or commerce if relevant circumstances show the
for some qualification to be attached to that statement or the possibility of
its non-fulfilment to be disclosed as a requirement
of fair trading. The fact
that the corporation believed or had reasonable grounds for belief that the
prediction would be fulfilled,
would not answer the question as to whether the
conduct was misleading or deceptive conduct in trade or commerce. The misleading
or deceptive conduct may be found in the failure to qualify the statement or
disclose the risk of non-fulfilment and the event of
non-fulfilment of a
prediction or promise may be evidence that raises an inference that such a risk
of non-performance existed or
that qualification of the positive statement,
prediction or promise was required.”
36. Ms Skennar submitted that the representations about the rate of capital
growth on the Gold Coast should have been qualified by
advice such as:
i. If more than the market price is paid in the first instance,
there is no benefit to be derived from payment of any amounts above
market value
and it will never be recovered, irrespective of the rates of capital growth of
real property and irrespective of whether
or not the claimants may eventually be
able to sell the property for more than the purchase price;
The types of averages that
NAPC relied upon really related to very long periods of time, not necessarily an
average every year for
the first ten years after
acquisition;
Real estate is
very much a supply and demand industry and if the property being acquired is in
an area that already has an oversupply,
the value is likely to be suppressed (as
was the case here).
She pointed out that the Taylor
Byrne report disclosed that there were 177 units in the stage of the development
in which the townhouse
was included.
37. While the Tribunal notes that there could be exceptional capital growth
in so-called “boom times”, it generally agrees
submissions. In the light of the evidence before it, the Tribunal is satisfied
that the predictions given to the Hunters
needed some qualification and
disclosure of a risk of non-fulfilment and, in the absence of such qualification
and disclosure, that
the predictions were misleading for the purposes of Section
72 of the Repealed Act.
38. Similar issues arise in respect of the property investment analysis
spreadsheet shown to the Hunters and discussed with them by
Quinlivan. Ms
Skennar submitted that those spreadsheets were express or implied
representations as to the benefits to be derived
from the investment/purchase.
The spreadsheet assumed a property value of $159,900 and a capital growth rate
of 8% and made computer
projections showing the benefits over a period of 10
years. While the spreadsheet contained a disclaimer that the projections simply
illustrated outcomes “
calculated from the input values and the
assumptions contained in the model
” and so they were “
way intended to be a guarantee of future performance
Tribunal’s opinion the spreadsheet has to be viewed in the context in
which it was used. The uncontested evidence
of the Hunters is that Quinlivan
told them that they would not lose out in the long run, that they would not
regret buying the property
and that it would increase in value by 8 – 10%
per annum. They were not told, of course, that $31,900 of the purchase price
was not to be paid to Kentdell but to a separate company, Coral Reef, as a
marketing or consultancy fee. The Tribunal is satisfied
on the evidence that no
realistic qualification or disclosure of the risk of non-fulfilment was made by
Quinlivan when relying on
the spreadsheets to persuade the Hunters to purchase
the townhouse. The Tribunal is satisfied that the use of the spreadsheet and
the representations described above were misleading on Quinlivan’s part
for the purposes of Section 72 of the Repealed Act.
39. Mrs Hunter’s uncontested evidence was that she questioned the value
of the townhouse by saying that she did not like the
idea of borrowing more than
the property was worth. They had agreed to borrow $175,000. She said that
Quinlivan's response was
he hardly thought $15,000 (being the set
up costs) would put the family home at risk
”. Ms Skennar submitted
that this was an implied representation that the Hunters “
paying more than the value of the property because they were only borrowing
$15,000 more than the market value of the property
”. The Tribunal
agrees with this submission. Clearly the response was meant to reassure the
Hunters that they were only borrowing
$15,000 in excess of the value of the
townhouse and that this was the only risk to their home in New South Wales,
which was additional
security for the loan. The Tribunal is satisfied that this
was a misleading representation for the purposes of Section 72 of the
Act, in the light of the non-disclosure of the $31,900 marketing or consultancy
fee paid to Coral Reef. This was an essential
element of the marketing scheme
outlined above and was certainly known to NAPC. As already discussed, the
Tribunal is satisfied
that Markfair through Quinlivan was acting as the agent of
NAPC in this transaction. Additionally, Atkinson was present throughout
financial sessions between the Hunters and Quinlivan and said nothing to qualify
or disclose the risk of non-fulfilment in
respect of Quinlivan’s
statements and the use of the spreadsheet. The Tribunal agrees with the
submission of Ms Skennar that
Atkinson’s silence amounts to misleading
representation for the purposes of Section 72 of the Repealed Act, based on the
she quoted of
Demagogue Pty Ltd –v- Ramensky (1992)
40. As far as Atkinson is concerned, the uncontested evidence of the Hunters
was that he had told them that the Gold Coast was the
area to buy, that the
current value of the townhouse was $159,900, that it was a really good
investment and a very good price for
the unit and that its purchase was a good
deal. Again, there was no qualification or disclosure of the risk of
non-fulfilment by
Atkinson. Ms Skennar submitted that the statement that the
purchase price was a very good price “
impliedly represented that the
purchase price represented at least market value”
and that the
representation in relation to the unit being good value “
reasonably tend to lead to a belief that the price to be paid was market
”. The Tribunal agrees with these submissions. The Tribunal is
satisfied that the statements of Atkinson were misleading for
the purposes of
Section 72 of the Repealed Act, in that they required some qualification and
disclosure of the risk of non-fulfilment.
41. In summary, the Tribunal is satisfied that NAPC, through its
representatives and through Atkinson and Quinlivan acting on its
contravened Section 72 of the Repealed Act. Atkinson, who was also a prescribed
person, contravened it as well.
Contravention of Section 73
42. The uncontradicted evidence of the Hunters is that, based on the
information Quinlivan provided in the spreadsheet, they agreed
to Investlend
obtaining finance for them if they decided to purchase a property. They said
that Quinlivan completed a Finance Application
and Mortgage Brokerage Agreement
which they signed at one of the meetings with him. The Finance Application,
under a heading “LOAN
REQUIRED”, stated that it was for a mortgage
for the purpose of “
purchase investment property
amount of $175,000 and the properties offered as securities were the townhouse
and the Hunters’ home in New South
Wales. In a declaration in the Finance
Application form, the Hunters “
in consideration of the advance
offered as security the properties described in the form,
undertook to execute a mortgage in the form adopted by the bank if the
provided them with a loan approval and authorised the bank to instruct its
solicitors to prepare mortgage documents immediately
the loan was approved. The
declaration went on to state that the Hunters acknowledged that if they were
referred to the bank by
any person “
for the purpose of obtaining
finance that person shall be entitled to receive a referral fee from the
43. There is nothing in the evidence to indicate that a statement in writing
as required by the terms of Section 73 of the Repealed
Act was given to the
Hunters before they signed the contract. Indeed, the uncontradicted evidence of
the Hunters is that no such
statement was provided. As stated earlier, the
Tribunal is satisfied that Quinlivan and Markfair were acting as the agent of
when the financial discussions took place with the Hunters. The Tribunal
also agrees with Ms Skennar’s submission that a crucial
element of this
agency was that Atkinson was present throughout the financial analysis sessions
and by his silence acquiesced in
what was said and done. In these
circumstances, the Tribunal is satisfied that both NAPC and Atkinson
contravened the provisions
of Section 73.
Pecuniary loss
44. The Hunters claim to have suffered a pecuniary loss because of the
contravention of the above Sections. In the amended revised
claim they sought
reimbursement in the sum of $101,966 relying on the report of Gunn & Co.
45. Gunn & Co summarised the loss of the Hunters as follows:
Capital Loss $43,900
Incidental Costs $10,376
Losses relating to income $40,847
Future disposal costs $4,850
Other Costs $1,993
Interest $9,694
Total Losses
46. The capital loss was calculated as being the difference between the
purchase price of $159,900 and the Taylor Byrne valuation
of $116,000, leaving a
capital loss of $43,900.
47. The incidental costs embraced stamp duty on the purchase of $4,296.75, a
mortgage brokerage fee of $4,134, legal fees of $1,550
and an account from
Napier & Blakely, Quantity Surveyors, for Schedule of Property Allowances of
$395. This made a total of
$10,375.75.
48. The Income Losses were calculated from the date of purchase of the
property to 31 January 2002 and were calculated by taking into
account the
rental income received, adjusted expenses including depreciation and building
write-offs, and taxation benefits. The
total losses for the period after
taxation benefits were taken into account were $40,847.
49. Future disposal costs took into account the most likely future costs of
selling the townhouse. In Gunn & Co’s opinion,
the future costs
included real estate agent’s commission of $3,350, advertising/auction
costs of $1,000 and legal costs of
$500, making a total of $4,850.
50. Under the heading “
Other Costs
” the report took
account of the borrowing costs that had not been claimed in the Hunters’
Income Tax Returns. The breakdown
of these costs were $750 for a loan
establishment fee, $722 for stamp duty, $316 for mortgage transfer and discharge
fees and $205
for Swan Insurance Australia, making a total of $1,993.
51. The report claimed interest on income losses “
at the prescribed
”, amounting to a sum of $9,694. No other explanation was given
as to how this amount was calculated. As already noted, in
the amended revised
claim the Hunters deducted the amount shown for interest and in her submissions
Ms Skennar stated that this was
a sum that the Hunters conceded they could not
recover. The Tribunal considered this concession but decided that, in view of
obligation under Section 488(3) of the Act to decide the amount of the
Hunters’ financial loss, it should itself determine
whether interest could
be claimed. The Tribunal formed the view that the concession was probably based
on a misinterpretation of
Section 492(5) of the Act which states that
interest is not payable from the fund in relation to a claim allowed
against the fund
”. In the Tribunal’s opinion, this sub-section
is a reference to interest on the amount ordered to be paid from the fund,
the lines of interest payable on court judgements. The Tribunal is satisfied
that it does not relate to interest representing
losses incurred, such as
outlined in Gunn & Co’s report on the pecuniary loss of the Hunters.
52. After the hearing, the Tribunal sought further information from Carter
Capner in respect of how the interest claim had been calculated.
report dated 29 April 2002 from Gunn & Co was submitted and this report
indicated that Gunn & Co had used Supreme
Court interest rates for default
judgements for the periods covered by the income losses. The Respondents were
provided with a copy
of this further report. Bilborough advised through his
legal representative that he had no submissions to make concerning it. The
Tribunal is of the opinion that it is inappropriate to calculate interest on the
income losses using the Supreme Court interest rates
for default judgements.
The Tribunal is satisfied that the most appropriate rate to apply would be the
bank investment interest
rate over the relevant periods. The Reserve
Bank’s figures for these periods averaged out at 4.51%, 4.15%, 5.0%, 5.05%
3.71% for the financial years ending 30 June 1998, 1999, 2000 and 2001 and
to 31 January 2002 respectively. . The Tribunal therefore
calculates the sums
involved as $90.83, $411.56, $548.20, $570.55 and $246.86 respectively, making a
total of $1868.
53. Ms Skennar’s submissions were that the Hunters were entitled to
claim both a capital loss, being the difference in value
between what they paid
for the townhouse and its real value, and secondly all their ongoing losses.
She referred to the High Court
Decision of
Gould –v- Vaggelas (1983)
( “Gould’s case”)
to support the
submission in respect of the capital loss. We agree with her submission in this
regard. The uncontested evidence
from Taylor Byrne is that the townhouse had a
value of $116,000 as at the date of the contract. As the Hunters paid an amount
$159,900, the Tribunal is satisfied that their capital loss is $43,900.
54. In respect of the Hunters’ ongoing losses, Ms Skennar relied on the
High Court decision in
Henville –v- Walker (2001) 182ALR37
“Henville’s case” ). She submitted that that case could be
relied on to conclude that the Hunters were “
entitled to the difference
in value between what they paid and what they should have paid and their holding
costs to date as determined
in the report of Geoff Gunn
Tribunal agrees with this submission. Gould’s case is clear authority
for it. Gibbs CJ stated in that case
that it was “
well established
that in an action of deceit where the plaintiff has been induced by the
fraudulent misrepresentation of the defendant
to enter into a contract of
purchase, the measure of damage usually applicable is the difference between the
real value of the property
at the time of purchase and what the plaintiff paid
” (p.220). He went on to make the following statement:
“The usual rule is, however, only a special application of the
general principle that “In an action of deceit a plaintiff
is entitled to
recover as damages a sum representing the prejudice or disadvantage he has
suffered in consequence of his altering
his position under the inducement of the
fraudulent misrepresentations made by the defendant”: Toteff –v-
In other words, the general principle is that the plaintiff is to be
put, so far as possible, in the position he would have been
in if he had not
acted on the fraudulent inducement” (p.220-221).
55. Henville’s case is further authority, particularly the judgement of
He noted : “
In substance, the loss claimed was the
amount for which Mr Henville was worse off by embarking on the
(para 94). He went on to state that in that case
the most appropriate approach is to identify what Mr Henville has
suffered by way of prejudice or disadvantage in consequence of altering
position by reason of the breach of the Act. The measure of that loss is not
determined by
reference to what he would have received if Mr
Walker’s representations had been true ... By entering upon the project,
Mr Henville
has lost $319,846.51. If Mr Walker had not made representations in
breach of the Act, none of this loss would have occurred. The
loss suffered is
therefore directly attributable to a contravention of the Act even though other
factors played their part in bringing
56. McHugh J also referred to the statement in
Toteff –v- Antonas
referred to in Gould’s case and said that, although Henville’s
case involved a breach of the Trade Practices Act, he could
any reason why the principles applicable in an action for deceit at
common law should not be applied in the present case. The purposes
include promoting fair trading and protecting consumers from contraventions of
the Act. Those purposes are more readily
achieved by ensuring that consumers
recover the actual losses they have suffered as the
contraventions of the Act. Where a person contravenes the Act and induces a
person to enter upon a course of conduct that
results in loss or damage, an
award of damages that compensates for the actual losses incurre
embarking on that course of conduct best serves the purposes of the Act and
should ordinarily be awarded”
(para 135).
57. The Tribunal is satisfied that the above comments are apposite in this
case. Section 10 of the Act sets out its objects and,
amongst other things,
states that a “
significant object of this Act is to provide a way of
protecting consumers against particular undesirable practices associated with
the promotion of residential property”
(sub-section 2) and provides
that the objects are to be achieved mainly by “
providing protection for
consumers in their dealings with licensees and their employees”
(sub-section 3(b)) and “
establishing a claim fund to provide
compensation in particular circumstances for persons who suffer financial loss
because of their
dealings with persons... regulated under this Act”
(sub-section 3(f)). In the Tribunal’s opinion, moreover, there is nothing
in the words of sub-section 119(1) or anything in
the intended scope and context
of the Repealed Act to suggest that a person cannot recover the whole of the
loss sustained by the
contravention of the provisions enumerated.
58. In the light of all the above, the Tribunal is satisfied for the purposes
of Section 488(3) of the Act that the losses set out
in the report from Gunn
& Co, apart from the figures shown for future disposal costs and interest on
income losses, are the amounts
of the Hunters’ financial loss. Future
disposal costs, being anticipatory, are not ongoing losses and the Tribunal is
that they cannot form part of the Hunters’ “
costs to date
”. The relevant Gunn & C0 figures, therefore, amount
to $97,116 which, together with the figure of $1,868 calculated by
the Tribunal
for interest on income losses, makes a total of $99,984. The Tribunal is
satisfied that this figure represents the
amount of the Hunters’ financial
loss, apart from the question of costs.
59. Ms Skennar submitted that costs should be awarded to the Hunters because
the matter was a complex one involving difficult legal
”, that the amount claimed was “
a significant
”, that the Hunters were entitled to and sought legal assistance
they have incurred substantial costs
” and that they
were successful in their claim because of the contraventions of the Repealed
Act. The Tribunal agrees with
these submissions and is satisfied that for the
purposes of Section 537 of the Act it is appropriate to award costs.
60. Ms Skennar submitted that the costs awarded should be the costs allowed
in the District Court where the amount recovered is greater
than $50,000. As
this required an assessment of the costs, after the hearing Carter Capner filed
further submissions dated 9 April
2002 to the effect that the Hunters had had
their costs assessed by a costs assessor who had assessed a total of $13,182.64
costs of $8,849.80 and outlays of $4,332.84. The Tribunal requested
supporting evidence from the cost assessors and on 16 April
2002 Carter Capner
supplied a costs assessment from Ryan Cost Consultant Pty Ltd dated 8 April
2002. This further material was forwarded
to the Respondents. Bilborough
through his legal representative advised that he had no submissions on it. On
the basis of the report
from Ryan Cost Consultant Pty Ltd, the Tribunal awards
costs of $13,182.64. For the purposes of Section 488(3)(b) of the Act, this
amount is to be included in the Hunters’ financial loss.
Persons liable for the Hunters’ financial loss
61 Under Section 488(3)(c) of the Act if the Tribunal allows a claim it
name the person who is liable for the claimant’s financial
”. Clearly, NAPC is liable in view of the Tribunal’s
findings set out above concerning contravention of the relevant
provisions of
the Repealed Act. Clearly also, Atkinson is liable as the agent of NAPC. There
was no evidence proffered in respect
of any role taken by the Third Respondent,
Atkinson Holdings Pty Ltd. This was conceded in the submissions of Ms Skennar
that the Hunters did not therefore “
persist with the
allegation that there was a breach of the Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971 by
”. In all the circumstances, the Tribunal makes no finding in
respect of Atkinson Holdings Pty Ltd.
62. Mr Bradley’s submission pointed out that no allegation was made
against Bilborough in the amended revised claim. He also
submitted that there
was no evidence that Bilborough had breached any provision of the Repealed Act
because only a person acting
as a real estate agent or an employee could breach
the relevant sections and there was no evidence that Bilborough acted as a real
estate agent or was an employee of a real estate agent. His conclusion was that
the Tribunal cannot be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that
Mr Bilborough breached any of the relevant provisions of the
63. Mr Bradley also submitted that there was no evidence that Bilborough
engaged in any conduct or was involved in any conduct in
relation to the
Hunters’ financial loss. He submitted that, although Bilborough was a
director of NAPC, NAPC’s acts
and failures were its own responsibility as
a separate legal entity. He argued that NAPC’s actions or inactions were
of Bilborough.
64. Finally, Mr Bradley also pointed to the separate recovery processes in
the provisions of the Repealed Act and the Act. Under
the Repealed Act, the
Chief Executive could pursue recovery of the amount paid out of the former fund
and Section 125(1) of the Repealed
Act contained a provision making the
directors of a corporation liable to compensate the former fund where payment
was made out of
the former fund in settlement of a claim relating to the
corporation’s business. Mr Bradley observed that the Act contains
similar provision and concluded that , in the absence of any specific provision
as to liability, the Tribunal could not arbitrarily
name Bilborough as liable
for the Hunters’ financial loss.
65. Mr Bradley did refer to Section 591 of the Act requiring an Executive
Officer to ensure that a Corporation complies with the Act.
As he correctly
stated, however, this section has nothing to do with claims against the claim
fund. He went on to argue that, if
the claim were allowed, payment would be out
of the claim fund and not out of the former fund because it had ceased to
exist. Consequently,
he argued that the transitional provisions did not apply
and that section 125 of the Repealed Act was not preserved so as to apply
the recovery of any amount now paid out of the claim fund.
66. The Tribunal does not agree with these submissions. In the
Tribunal’s opinion, they fail to take proper account of the transitional
provisions of the Act. The claim, if successful, will be paid out of the claim
fund by virtue of Section 604(2) of the Act as if
it were a claim against that
fund. However, the amount in question can be recovered by virtue of Section
604(1) which states as follows:-
The rights and liabilities of the
former fund are taken to be the rights and liabilities of the claim fund.
67. This allows the Chief Executive under the provisions of the
Act to recover monies paid out of the claim fund as a liability of
fund. The rights of the former fund to recover from a director pursuant to
section 125 of the Repealed Act are taken to
be the rights of the claim fund by
virtue of Section 604(1) of the Act. The fact that the former fund no longer
exists is irrelevant.
68. In considering Bilborough’s liability, therefore, the Tribunal is
of the opinion that it can take into account Section 125
of the Repealed Act and
it is satisfied that, as a director of NAPC at the time when the act that gave
rise to the claim occurred,
he is liable to compensate the fund in respect of
any payment in settlement of the claim.
69. As a final point, the Tribunal notes that Mr Bradley submitted that the
Tribunal could not make a finding of liability against
Bilborough because, in
the absence of any allegation by the Hunters that he was liable for their
financial loss, it would be against
the principles of natural justice to find
against him. Proceedings in respect of claims against the claim fund, however,
strictly adversarial. Under Section 408(3) the Tribunal “
inform itself in anyway it considers
appropriate”
gives it an inquisitorial role, subject to the rules of natural justice.
Bilborough was automatically joined as a respondent
because of the provisions of
Section 475(3). The Tribunal did not make him a respondent but for procedural
reasons formally joined
him so that he would have full notice of all documents
and evidence in relation to the proceedings. He was provided with all the
relevant information and evidence and was fully aware that he was a respondent
in the application. The Tribunal is satisfied that
there has been no denial of
natural justice.
70. On a consideration of all of the material before it, the Tribunal allows
the claim under Section 488 of the Act and finds that
the Hunters’
financial loss is $ 99,984 plus costs of $13,182.64 making a total of
$113,166.64. It further decides that the
persons liable for that financial loss
are NAPC, Atkinson and Bilborough who are all jointly and severally liable to
reimburse the
claim fund for the amount paid to the Hunters from the fund.
Orders pursuant to section 530 of the Act are made accordingly, as
attached to
these reasons.
71. The Tribunal makes no order as to the date of payment due to the
requirement of section 489 of the Act that the Chief Executive
shall not pay the
amount until the end of the period allowed for appeal, and if there is an
appeal, until the appeal is finally decided.
.........................................
MR B COTTERELL -
CHAIRPERSON
PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR DEALERS TRIBUNAL
John Gallagher Brett Codd Barry
Member Member Member
mE:\Case Management Files\2001\W-
Claim\W008-01\Decision\W008-01D26-06-02.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (191 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter