URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBCCMCmr/2025/398.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Flow [2025] QBCCMCmr 398 (11 November 2025)
ADJUDICATOR’S ORDER
Office of the
Commissioner
for Body Corporate and Community
[2025] QBCCMCmr 398
The Body Corporate for Flow (
Ammar Mousali (
Flow CTS 37560
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 227(1)(b)
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation Module)
Regulation 2020
Accommodation Module
APPLICATION NO:
DECISION DATE:
11 November 2025
DECISION OF:
S Ananda, Adjudicator
CATCHWORDS:
BY-LAWS – whether the respondent has contravened the scheme’s
REASONABLENESS – whether the body corporate acted reasonably in
denying the respondent’s request to make a change to the
appearance of the lot
This application is hereby
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. Overview
[1] Flow CTS
37560 is a community titles scheme located in West End. It comprises 81
within two building towers,
and common property.
[2] Lot 44 is
relevant to this dispute, as shall be explained below. This lot is located on
Level C of one of the building towers
i.e., Tower B. Lot 44 includes a courtyard
of an area of 34m
[3] Most other
lots at the scheme have similar courtyards or balconies.
is regulated under the Act and the Accommodation
1.2 The dispute
[5] This dispute
is primarily about a purported contravention of the scheme’s by-laws by
the owner of Lot 44.
applicant in this case, is the body corporate. The respondent, Ammar Mousali, is
the said owner of Lot 44.
[7] On or about
January 2023, the respondent replaced a broken white ceiling-fan in the
courtyard within his lot, with a rattan (light-brown)
coloured one. The
applicant body corporate states that the ceiling-fans originally installed
within courtyards and balconies at the
scheme were white in colour.
[8] Approximately
eighteen months later on 2 July 2024, the applicant body corporate raised the
matter with the respondent requesting
that the original fan be reinstalled or
for an application for approval of the new fan to be made in terms of By-law
which essentially requires a lot owner to obtain the written
approval of the committee when making a change to the external appearance
[9] Having not
heard from the respondent, the applicant body corporate issued a contravention
notice on 1 November 2024 citing a contravention
1.2.1 The by-laws in dispute
applicant body corporate claims in the application that the following by-laws
have been contravened by the respondent in
this regard:
(a) By-law 18(a) which states:
An owner or occupier of a Lot must not, without the written approval of the
Committee make a change to the external appearance of
(b) By-law 18(g) which states:
The operation of this By-law is subject to the operation of all other
(c) By-law 19 on ‘window and window coverings’ which states:
(a) An owner or occupier of a lot must keep the windows of the lot and promptly
replace with glass of the same kind, colour and weight
any that are broken or
(b) Subject to any other by-law no shutters, awnings or other window covers may
be affixed externally to the building or be visible
from the exterior of the
(c) An owner or occupier of a lot must not:
(i) Hang curtains visible from outside the lot unless those curtains have a
white backing or the colour and design have been approved
by the committee;
(ii) Installed, renovate or replace a curtain backing or window treatment unless
the colour and design have been approved by the
committee; or
(iii) Install window tinting without having the colour and design of it approved
by the committee.
(d) In giving such approvals, the committee must ensure, so far as is
practicable, that curtain backings and window treatments are
sympathetic to the tones of improvements in the Scheme Land and are
aesthetically pleasing when viewed from the common
property or another lot.
(e) By-Law 19(b) does not apply to security screens, but they may only be
attached to lots with the prior written consent of the
Committee, which may in
its discretion give or refuse consent or give consent subject to conditions.
(f) By way of guidance as to the type of security screens that will be approved:
(i) Only those similar in appearance to insect screens (with flat screening
material and which to all intents and purposes would
be viewed as an insect
screen, so as not to detract from the overall appearance of the building while
still offering sufficient security)
will be approved; and
(ii) Screens of diamond mesh, grills and the like will not be approved.
1.2.2 Reasons for denial of the request for the rattan-coloured
ceiling-fan
[11] On 2 April
2025, the respondent sought retrospective approval of the committee of the
applicant body corporate for the installed
rattan-coloured ceiling-fan.
[12] On 17 April
2025, the committee rejected this request and provided the following reasons for
its decision:
The installed
fan does not meet the criteria outlined in By-law 18 (a) & (g) when applied
in conjunction with By-law 19 (c) (i).
By-Law 19 (c)
(i) specifies that window coverings (blinds/curtains) must be white in colour to
maintain the overall visual appearance
of the building. Although there is no
specific by-law regarding the colour or style of fan fittings, the committee
uses this colour
scheme as a guideline to ensure consistency in the
building’s appearance.
The installed
fan is not in keeping with the overall visual appearance of the building’s
colour scheme, fixtures, and fittings.
By-law 19 (d)
requires that any approvals given by the committee must ensure that colours are
sympathetic to the tones of the improvements
of the scheme.
nutshell, the applicant body corporate rejected the respondent’s request
for retrospective approval on two bases:
(a) Firstly, the installation is non-compliant with By-laws 18(a), 18(g),
19(c)(i) and 19(d)
(b) Secondly, the installation is inconsistent with the buildings’ colour
scheme and not sympathetic to the tones of the improvements
respondent states that the committee objected to the fan, eighteen months
following its installation. He states that it is
a retaliatory measure, upon the
respondent having raised governance issues with the applicant body corporate. He
is of the view that
there are no genuine concerns associated with the appearance
of the scheme.
respondent also states that he formally requested copies of any approval records
for fixtures affecting the external appearance
of other lots including a black
Victorian style garden lamp post and fountain, an orange gate panel, a spotlight
style bollard, a
black pendant light, a dark brown swing-arm wall light, a large
black mesh animal cage and more. He states this request was made
in terms of
section 205(2)
of the Act. He adds that the applicant body corporate produced no
records, implying that there are none.
[16] In these
circumstances, the respondent argues that there is no uniformity in appearance
in the lots across the scheme or any
consistent visual theme. Accordingly, he is
of the view that the by-laws are being selectively and unreasonably enforced.
[17] He also
states that the by-laws do not require fittings and fixtures in the courtyards
and balconies to be white in colour. He
states that it is arbitrary for the
committee to insist upon this.
1.3 Orders sought
[18] In these
circumstances, the applicant body corporate seeks the following
(a) An order confirming that the committee decision dated 17 April 2025
rejecting the respondent’s application for the installed
fan is valid and
enforceable on the basis on non-compliance with By-laws 18(a), 18(g), 19(c)(i)
(b) An order requiring the respondent to remove the non-compliant fan within 14
days and replace it with a fan that is either the
same as that originally
installed or one that is white and streamlined, consistent with other
installations and the scheme buildings’
visual standards;
(c) An order that the respondent must comply with all future by-law requirements
and obtain prior written approval from the committee
before making any
alterations to the external appearance of the lot.
2. Preliminaries
2.1 Jurisdiction
adjudicator may make an order that is just and equitable in the circumstances to
resolve a dispute about a claimed or anticipated
contravention of the Act or the
Community Management Statement
Further, an order may require
a person to act, or prohibit a person from acting in a manner
An order may also contain
ancillary and consequential provisions the adjudicator considers necessary or
appropriate.
satisfied that I have jurisdiction to determine the dispute in question by
virtue of sections 276(1)(a) and (b) of the Act
(read together with
of the Act).
2.2 Procedure
dispute was the subject of department conciliation which concluded on 21 March
2025 with the parties having reached an agreement.
[22] The dispute
however persisted.
application for department adjudication was then lodged on 11 August 2025.
August 2025, the Commissioner’s delegate sought further information from
the applicant body corporate under
section 240
of the Act.
September 2025, the applicant body corporate provided the information sought.
[26] Subsequently,
on 4 September 2025, the Commissioner provided a copy of the application and
invited the respondent and all other
lot owners to make submissions.
[27] The owners
of Lots 2, 3, 5, 8, 11, 30, 74 and 82, and the respondent made submissions.
applicant body corporate did not obtain a copy of or inspect the submissions
made. Accordingly, it made no reply.
[29] I have
investigated the dispute by reviewing the application and submissions in terms
of section 271 of the Act.
3. Analysis
[30] Whilst
I have not set out every aspect of the application and submissions, they have
been duly considered.
[31] I will
consider each of the three orders sought by the applicant body corporate below.
3.1 Is the committee decision valid?
[32] I am not
satisfied that the committee’s decision dated 17 April 2025 is valid, for
reasons explained below.
3.1.1 Did the respondent contravene
the by-laws?
applicant body corporate claims that the respondent contravened By-laws 18(a),
18(g), 19(c)(i) and 19(d).
By-law 18(a)
evidence indicates that the respondent did indeed make a change to the external
appearance of the lot without the written
consent of the committee by installing
the rattan-coloured ceiling-fan. This is not in dispute.
[35] Accordingly,
until 2 April 2025 this by-law had been contravened by the respondent.
[36] However,
the respondent subsequently attempted to regularise this contravention by
formally seeking retrospective committee approval.
[37] If the
committee’s rejection of this request is unreasonable or unlawful for any
other reason, then the respondent may
resist an action brought against him on
the basis that he contravened By-law 18(a).
By-law 19(c)(i) and
[38] By-law
19(c)(i) states that an owner must not hang curtains visible from outside the
lot unless those curtains have a white backing
or the colour and design have
been approved by the committee.
[39] By-law
19(d) states that in giving such approval, the committee must ensure that
curtain backings and window treatments are in
colours sympathetic to the tones
of improvements on scheme land and are aesthetically pleasing when viewed from
common property or
other lots.
applicant body corporate states that whilst these by-laws do not expressly apply
to ceiling-fans, the colour scheme specified
applies to all visible fixtures in
[41] Respectfully,
I do not entirely agree with that view. Whilst community living in Queensland,
especially in apartment buildings,
is often highly regulated, it is also
important to bear in mind that an owner of a lot in a community titles scheme
owns that lot
in fee simple. One of the rights that flow from such freehold
ownership is the right to make improvements or changes to the lot subject
applicable law and the CMS (which includes the scheme’s by-laws). When a
body corporate seeks to curtail that right by way
of its CMS – regardless
of how reasonable it may be to do so in the circumstances – it must be
done explicitly thereunder.
[42] In this
case, where the applicant body corporate alleges that the by-laws require all
fixtures and fittings in a lot courtyard
that are visible from another lot or
common property to be white, the by-laws must be explicit to that effect.
[43] By-law 19
is limited to windows and window coverings. Its wording does not in any manner
capture ceiling-fans specifically, or
the category of fixtures and fittings
applicant body corporate may in the circumstances rely on this by-law to
demonstrate that the colour white is part of the
buildings’ colour scheme
or profile, but no more. It cannot on that basis successfully claim that the
respondent contravened
[45] Accordingly,
I cannot find on any basis whatsoever, that the respondent has contravened
By-laws 19(c)(i) or 19(d) either standalone
or when read together with By-law
By-law 18(g)
[46] This by-law
states that By-law 18 is subject to the operation of all other by-laws.
applicant body corporate states that this by-law outlines the requirements for
maintaining the appearance and integrity of
the building. I presume that it
interprets By-law 18(g) in that manner when read in conjunction with By-law 19
as purportedly applying
to ceiling-fans.
[48] I reiterate
that By-law 19 has no application in the circumstances of this dispute.
[49] Regardless,
By-law 18(g) is declaratory in nature and is not specifically one capable of
being contravened by the respondent
in his capacity as an owner or occupier of a
[50] Accordingly,
I cannot find that the respondent contravened By-law
3.1.2 What is the test of reasonableness?
[51] Central
to the question whether the committee’s decision dated 17 April 2025 is
valid, is whether it was made reasonably.
[52] There is a
general requirement under
of the Act that a body corporate must act
reasonably in among other things, enforcing its CMS (including the by-laws),
carrying out
its functions under the Act and CMS and making or not making any
related decisions.
[53] Similarly,
section 100(5)
of the Act, the committee is required to act reasonably in
making a decision. (Further,
section 100(1)
of the Act states that a decision of
the committee is a decision of the body corporate.)
[54] In the
event this does not occur, an adjudicator may intervene to make an order that is
just and equitable to resolve a dispute.
question of whether a body corporate has acted reasonably is not a
straightforward one. What is reasonable is a question
of fact, based on a
consideration of all relevant matters in the circumstances of the particular
[56] There is
no onus on a body corporate to satisfy an adjudicator that it
acted reasonably.
(In this case
however, I note that it is the body corporate that seeks a declaration that its
decision is valid).
[57] In addition
to the duty to act reasonably, bodies corporate and their committees are subject
to mandatory general law duties
(a) The duty to act in good faith; and
(b) The duty to make fully considered, rational and reasonable decisions that
are not conflicted, arbitrary, patently absurd or plainly
[58] The test of
reasonableness was considered by the Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (‘
Body Corporate for Beaches Surfers
Paradise v Backshall
’) which held as follows:
(a) ‘Reasonable action is evidence-based and
(b) ‘A finding that a decision or action in issue is “not
irrational, absurd or ridiculous” does not necessarily
mean it is a
reasonable one’;
(c) Whether an action is contaminated by unreasonableness is a finding or
inference of fact.
[59] A legally
reasonable decision is not a uniquely right one. It involves matters of degree
– conclusions can be reasonably
reached on the same body of evidence by different lines of reasoning or by
reference to other
determinants without either being demonstrably right or
manifestly wrong’.
Accordingly, it is not sufficient to find that the body corporate could have
made a better or more reasonable decision, or that a
different body corporate
could reasonably have come to a different
It is not the
adjudicator’s role to substitute his/her own view as to what would be the
preferable decision by the body
[60] QCAT also
held in Beaches that legal unreasonableness encompasses decision-making errors
such as irrelevance, adding that decision-making
in practice requires that
‘all relevant matters [be] taken into consideration and irrelevant ones
A decision will offend the relevancy doctrine where it was
made without considering something that the decision maker was bound by
to take account of or, conversely, acting on a factor that had no logical role
to play in resolving the issues.
[61] Where the
body corporate has considered irrelevant factors in making a decision, an
adjudicator in my view is unlikely to invalidate
the decision unless the
irrelevant factors were determinative of the
It was held in
Hilltop Villas at
finding that the body corporate did not properly consider the relevant factors
does not necessarily mean an order deeming
the motion passed is appropriate or
warranted’.
[62] I note the
relevant view posited by the late Sir Neil
cases on the relevancy of grounds of decision, it obviously makes sense to say
that among the plurality of grounds offered,
each may “severally
co-operate” with every other in favour of the decision made and as showing
it to be relevantly grounded.
Yet the attack made upon the decision will seek to
isolate some one or more of the grounds as having been both irrelevant and
determinative
of the decision. If a dominant motive for a decision is a wrong
one, that may be fatal to it even though there are, or might be,
acceptable other reasons for the same decision. [citing
Padfield v Minister
of Agriculture
[1968]]. While “reasonableness” may arise from a
plurality of grounds, it may be that the presence of a single improper
irrelevant consideration is sufficient to “tilt the balance” the
[63] Whilst it
is clear that it is not the adjudicator’s role to weigh up and balance
competing factors and effectively re-determine
the decision of the body
, if it is demonstrated
that the body corporate apportioned sufficient weight to an irrelevant
consideration to tilt the balance the
other way, the decision is at risk of
invalidation or intervention by an adjudicator.
application of this law would be no different if a body corporate considered
irrelevant factors or did not properly consider
relevant factors on account of
bias on its part.
3.1.3 Can the committee deny the
respondent’s request for the rattan-coloured ceiling fan
on the basis of non-compliance with the
applicant body corporate or its committee cannot in the circumstances lawfully
deny a request for approval made in terms
of By-law 18(a), on the basis of a
contravention of
By-laws 18(g), 19(c)(i) and 19(d)
. This is because, (as
explained above) these by-laws were not in fact contravened by the respondent in
any manner.
[66] I also note
that the contravention notice issued on 1 November 2024 contains no reference to
these by-laws, save for By-law 18(a).
importantly, I note that the applicant body corporate has rejected the request
for approval of the ceiling-fan – which
was made by the respondent
pursuant to By-law 18(a) - on the grounds that the respondent has contravened
By-law 18(a)
[68] I must
admit I am unsure as to the rationale for such a contention.
[69] By-law
18(a) does no more that require the respondent to obtain committee approval. It
does not prohibit an owner or occupier
of a lot from making any change to the
external appearance of their lots. Rather, it contemplates that such changes can
made, albeit with committee approval. Accordingly, this by-law should
not be interpreted as having a prohibitive effect. To do so
unreasonable and contrary to the express wording of the by-law.
[70] A committee
cannot then deny a request made under By-law 18(a) on the basis that either a
request was previously not made or
that a request was not made sooner, or that a
request has been made for retrospective approval. In other words, it cannot deny
request on the basis that the respondent had previously contravened By-law
18(a). To do so would constitute unreasonable decision
making – more
specifically, it would mean that the committee considered an irrelevant factor
which as explained above, has
the capacity to infect the lawfulness of a
considering the respondent’s request for approval of the rattan-coloured
ceiling-fan, the following (among other things)
are some relevant
considerations:
(a) The appearance of the fan, including its colour;
(b) The appearance of fans installed within other courtyards or balconies at the
(c) Any consistent visual theme or uniform colour profile across the scheme
buildings considering all fixtures and fittings in courtyards
and balconies;
(d) Any specific colours noted in the scheme’s by-laws as being part of
the scheme buildings’ colour profile.
[72] Similarly,
the following (among other things) constitute irrelevant factors when
considering the respondent’s request:
(a) A misinterpretation of the by-laws;
(b) The respondent’s history of non-compliance with the scheme’s
by-laws, if any;
(c) The fact that the respondent did not seek approval prior to the installation
of the ceiling fan;
(d) The fact that the respondent is seeking retrospective approval.
[73] Accordingly,
I find that for the committee to deny the respondent’s request on the
grounds of a contravention of By-laws
18(g), 19(c)(i) and 19(d), was incorrect
given my finding that these by-laws had not in fact been contravened or even
Accordingly, this was an irrelevant consideration for the
[74] Further, I
find that the prior contravention of By-law 18(a) by the respondent was also an
irrelevant consideration when determining
the respondent’s request for the
approval of the rattan-coloured ceiling-fan.
[75] Moreover,
based on the evidence, I am satisfied that the committee apportioned sufficient
weight to these irrelevant factors,
to the extent that it was determinative of
the decision made and was a dominant motive for it. This is apparent simply upon
of the first order sought by way of this application. In doing so, I
find that the applicant body corporate contravened
sections 100(5)
[76] Accordingly,
I cannot grant the first order sought. Further, it would be prudent for the
applicant body corporate to reconsider
the respondent’s request for the
ceiling-fan.
3.1.4 Would it have been unlawful or
unreasonable for the committee to deny the
respondent’s request solely on the grounds that the rattan-colour does not
the scheme’s colour
[77] In this
case, if the applicant body corporate had reasonably ascertained the colour
profile of the scheme buildings, and was
satisfied that the rattan-colour of the
ceiling-fan installed in the respondent’s lot was not sympathetic to the
existing colour
profile (devoid of any determinative irrelevant considerations),
that decision
prima facie
would not have been unreasonable.
[78] For e.g.,
if all fixtures and fittings in the courtyards and the balconies at a scheme are
black, white and grey, and a lot owner
requests approval to install a large
neon-pink pendant light, the body corporate may under a by-law such as By-law
18(a) reasonably
reject the lot owner’s request on the basis that the
proposed installation does not align with the building’s colour
[79] Consider a
further example and scenario where courtyards and balconies in lots at a scheme
originally contained large black pendant
lights, and the body corporate has
under a by-law such as By-law 18(a) permitted lot owners to replace them with
white pendant lights.
Similarly, ceiling-fans in the same courtyards and
balconies were originally black. However, the body corporate does not permit lot
owners to replace them with white ceiling-fans on the basis that it is not in
keeping with the building’s colour profile. In
such an instance, where the
colour profile clearly includes the colours black and white, it may not
be reasonable to reject the installation of a white fixture.
[80] In this
case, the respondent has provided various photographs of improvements made to
the courtyards and balconies of other lots,
which suggests a colour profile that
is not limited to white. I have not investigated this aspect of this dispute
given I am already
satisfied that the lawfulness of the committee’s
decision dated 17 April 2025 was contaminated by determinative irrelevant
factors (as explained further above).
[81] Accordingly,
it would be prudent for the applicant body corporate to consider the evidence
provided by the respondent in this
regard, and ascertain whether it would be
reasonable in the circumstances to insist on a white ceiling-fan. I have
provided the applicant
body corporate with a copy of the respondent’s
submission at no cost in the interests of natural justice. I am also hopeful
that the perusal of this submission will assist the applicant body corporate in
any determination of the reasonableness on insisting
on a white ceiling-fan.
3.2 Should the respondent be ordered to remove the
rattan-coloured ceiling-fan?
[82] The second
order sought by the applicant body corporate is to require the respondent to
remove the rattan-coloured ceiling-fan
within 14 days from the date of this
decision and replace it with a fan that is either the same as that originally
installed or one
that is white and streamlined.
[83] I am of the
view that it would not be just and equitable to make this order given:
(a) My finding that the applicant body corporate acted unreasonably in rejecting
the respondent’s request for approval of the
rattan-coloured ceiling fan
by considering irrelevant determinative factors; and
(b) My recommendation that the applicant body corporate redetermine the
respondent’s application for approval of the ceiling-fan.
understand that while my decision in this regard does not provide immediate
finality to the resolution of this dispute as the
parties would have hoped, it
is my view that it nevertheless takes cognisance of the autonomy of the
applicant body corporate –
a hallmark of the concept of self-management
enshrined in the legislation.
3.3 Should the respondent be
ordered to obey the by-laws in future?
[85] The third
order sought by the applicant body corporate is to require the respondent in the
future to comply with the scheme’s
by-laws for the time being in force,
especially the prevailing By-law 18(a).
[86] While I am
satisfied that By-law 18(a) is a reasonable one, I am not persuaded that an
adjudicator’s order is required
to give it force and effect.
of the Act states that a scheme’s CMS which includes the by-laws
is binding on each member of the body corporate (i.e., lot
owners). In other
words, the legislation requires the respondent to comply with the by-laws.
[88] Accordingly,
an adjudicator’s order to that same effect would be superfluous.
[89] In these
circumstances, I am not satisfied that the third order sought is
4. Conclusion
[90] I find that
the respondent had previously, until 2 April 2025, contravened By-law 18(a),
given he did indeed make a change to
the external appearance of his lot without
the written consent of the committee. However, he subsequently attempted to
this contravention by formally seeking retrospective committee
approval for the installation of the rattan-coloured ceiling-fan.
committee’s rejection of this request is unlawful then the respondent may
resist by-law enforcement action brought against
him (on the basis of By-law
[91] By-law 19
has no application to the dispute in question given it pertains to windows and
window coverings.
[92] By-law
18(g) is declaratory in nature and is not a by-law capable of being contravened
by the respondent in his capacity as a
lot owner or occupier.
[93] Accordingly,
the applicant body corporate acted unreasonably in making its decision dated 17
April 2025 whereupon it based the
same on the contravention of the said by-laws.
I am satisfied that this was determinative of its decision.
[94] In these
circumstances, I urge the applicant body corporate to redetermine the
respondent’s request for the approval of
the rattan-coloured
ceiling-fan.
[95] For these
reasons, I cannot grant the first and second order sought.
[96] Further, I
am not satisfied that the third order sought would have any utility given the
legislation already requires the respondent
to comply with the scheme’s
[97] Accordingly,
I dismiss this
application.
Note: The lots at this scheme
are not numbered in perfect chronology. For e.g., whilst there are only 81 lots,
there are lots bearing
numbers 82 and 83. This is not
The applicant body
corporate alleges the contravention of an additional by-law, i.e., By-law 19(d),
under the orders sought
CMS includes the scheme’s
Sections 276)(1)(a) and
(b) of the Act
Section 276(2)
Brighton on
Broadwater Breezes
[2018] QBCCMCmr 243
Section 100
Edgecliff Apartments
[2021] QBCCMCmr 30
to [27] citing
Ainsworth v
[2016] HCA 40
Body Corporate for Beaches Surfers
[2016] QCATA
Body Corporate for
Beaches Surfers Paradise v Backshall
[2016] QCATA 177
[2016] QCATA
SZLGP v Minister for
Immigration & Citizenship
[2008] FCA 1198
[15] – [16] as cited in
Body Corporate for Beaches Surfers Paradise v Backshall
[2016] QCATA 177
Secretary, Department of Treasury
[2006] HCA 45
(2006) 228 CLR 423
(Hayne J) as cited in
Body Corporate for Beaches Surfers Paradise v Backshall
[2016] QCATA 177
Woden Valley Glass v Psaila
(1993) 122 ALR 378
, 391 as cited in
Body Corporate for Beaches Surfers
Paradise v Backshall
[2016] QCATA 177
Edgecliff Apartments
[2021] QBCCMCmr 30
to [27] citing
Ainsworth v
[2016] HCA 40
Body Corporate for Beaches Surfers
[2016] QCATA
Body Corporate for
Beaches Surfers Paradise v Backshall
[2016] QCATA 177
Crown Towers
[2021] QBCCMCmr 372
Bowen Terrace Apartments
QBCCMCmr 33
[2024] QBCCMCmr 68
This is also consistent
with the decision of the High Court of Australia in
Craig v South
[1995] HCA 58
regarding ignoring relevant material or relying on
irrelevant material in a way that affected the exercise of power. (See also
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZRKT
[2013] FCA 317)
Neil MacCormick,
Reasonableness and Objectivity
74 Notre Dame L. Rev. 1575
Body Corporate
for Beaches Surfers Paradise v Backshall
[2016] QCATA 177
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (194 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter