URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2009/75.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:38:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HAD, Re [2009] QGAAT 75 (1 October 2009)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL,
[2009] QGAAT 75
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Leave to Resign as Attorney
Application for the Appointment of a
Application for a Declaration about Capacity of an Adult
Application for an Order about an Enduring Power of Attorney
Application
for the Appointment of an Administrator
In the matter of HAD
MATTER NUMBERS:
GAA3097 GAA3100 GAA4003
GAA4004 GAA4005 GAA4006
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal.
DATE OF HEARING:
3 September 2009
DATE OF ORDER:
3 September 2009
DATE OF REASONS:
1 October 2009
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
C Endicott Deputy President
J Allen Member
J Casey Member
CATCHWORDS:
GUARDIANS-ADMINISTRATORS- ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY-INVALIDITY-Where
considerable family conflict-Where independent appointees appropriate.
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
DECLARATION ABOUT CAPACITY
HAD does not have capacity for all personal matters (including deciding her
domicile and accommodation) and financial matters.
LEAVE TO RESIGN AS ATTORNEY
leave was granted to TS to withdraw her application to resign as attorney for
ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
following Enduring Power of Attorney for HAD is declared invalid pursuant to
section 113(2)
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
and section 84(2) of
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(a) The Enduring Power of Attorney dated 4 November 2007 appointing
TS and TA as attorneys for financial, personal and health matters.
GUARDIANSHIP
the Adult Guardian is appointed as guardian for HAD for all personal matters.
the Tribunal orders otherwise, this appointment remains current for two (2)
ADMINISTRATION
The Public Trustee of Queensland is appointed as administrator for HAD for all
financial matters.
administrator is to provide a financial management plan to the Tribunal within
four (4) months.
Tribunal directs the administrator to provide accounts to the Tribunal when
9. This appointment remains current until further order of the
NOTICE OF INTEREST IN LAND
the administrator shall within three (3) months:
by way of a search of the records held by the Registrar of Titles or other
means, any interest in real property registered
in the name of HAD (“the
with the Registrar of Titles a copy of this order and a notice notifying the
Registrar of any interest in land held by the adult
which is subject to this
administration order.
to the Tribunal:
(i) a copy of the search of records held by the Registrar
of Titles referred to above and;
(ii) a copy of the lodgement summary with the dealing number showing
lodgement of the order in respect of any interests in land held
by the adult
which is subject to this administration order.
if any change is made in an interest in land held by the adult which is the
subject of this administration order or if there
are any further dealings in
land on behalf of the adult by the administrator, the administrator shall lodge
with the Registrar of
Titles within 14 days of the finalisation of such interest
a copy of this order and a notice (in a form prescribed by the Registrar
Titles), concerning such changes or dealings.
the administrator pay, from the adult’s funds, any fee associated with the
above notices.
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
[1] HAD is 88 years of age. She appointed her daughter, TS, and her grandson,
TA, as her attorneys for financial, personal and health
matters under an
Enduring Power of Attorney signed on 4 November 2007.
[2] On 18 May 2009 TS applied to the Tribunal for leave to resign as attorney
due to conflict between TS and her sisters, NB and
SL. On 25 May 2009 TS applied
to the Tribunal for the appointment of a guardian for HAD and she subsequently
sought leave to withdraw
her application for leave to resign as attorney.
[3] On 29 June 2009 NB and SL applied to the Tribunal for a declaration about
the validity of the Enduring Power of Attorney dated
4 November 2007, for a
declaration about the capacity of HAD to make decisions about personal, health
and financial matters save
for accommodation decisions and for the appointment
of a guardian and administrator for HAD.
[4] On 7 July 2009 the Tribunal made an interim order appointing the Adult
Guardian as guardian for all personal matters for HAD
for a period of three
months. A hearing of the applications by TS and by NB and SL was scheduled for 3
September 2009.
The Issues and the Legislation
[5] The issues for the Tribunal are:
(a) Did HAD have capacity to
make an Enduring Power of Attorney on 4 November 2007?
(b) Does HAD have capacity to make decisions about personal, health and
financial matters?
(c) Is there a need for a guardian? If so, who should be appointed?
(d) Is there a need for an administrator? If so, who should be appointed?
[6] The criteria for establishing whether an adult has capacity to make an
Enduring Power of Attorney are set out in
Attorney Act 1998
as follows:
41 Principal’s capacity to make an enduring power of
(1) A principal may make an enduring power of attorney only if the
principal understands the nature and effect of the enduring power
(2) Understanding the nature and effect of the enduring power of attorney
includes understanding the following matters—
(a) the principal may, in the power of attorney, specify or limit the
power to be given to an attorney and instruct an attorney about
the exercise of
(b) when the power begins;
(c) once the power for a matter begins, the attorney has power to make,
and will have full control over, the matter subject to terms
or information
(d) the principal may revoke the enduring power of attorney at any time
the principal is capable of making an enduring power of attorney
giving the same
(e) the power the principal has given continues even if the principal
becomes a person who has impaired capacity;
(f) at any time the principal is not capable of revoking the enduring
power of attorney, the principal is unable to effectively oversee
the use of the
[7] Overarching that provision is a statutory presumption of capacity which is
articulated in
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(“the Act”) which states that an adult is presumed to have capacity
for a matter. Unless there is sufficient evidence
to rebut that presumption, it
must stand. The Act provides a definition of decision making capacity in
Schedule 4 of the Act as follows:
, for a person for a
matter, means the person is capable of-
(a) understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the matter;
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
(c) communicating the decisions in some way.
[8] Section 12 of the Act deals with the question of need for an appointment and
provides, where relevant, as follows:
12 Appointment
The tribunal may, by order, appoint a guardian for a
personal matter, or an administrator for a financial matter, for an adult if
tribunal is satisfied—
(a) the adult has impaired capacity for the matter; and
(b) there is a need for a decision in relation to the matter or the adult
is likely to do something in relation to the matter that
involves, or is likely
to involve, unreasonable risk to the adult’s health, welfare or property;
(c) without an appointment—
(i) the adult’s needs will not be adequately met; or
(ii) the adult’s interests will not be adequately
protected.....
[9] Section 15 of the Act provides considerations for deciding whether a person
is appropriate for appointment as a guardian and
administrator as follows:
15 Appropriateness considerations
In deciding whether a person is appropriate for
appointment as a guardian or administrator for an adult, the tribunal must
the following matters (
appropriateness
considerations
(a) the general principles and whether the person is likely to apply
(b) if the appointment is for a health matter—the health care
principle and whether the person is likely to apply it;
(c) the extent to which the adult’s and person’s interests are
likely to conflict;
(d) whether the adult and person are compatible including, for example,
whether the person has appropriate communication skills or
appropriate cultural
or social knowledge or experience, to be compatible with the adult;
(e) if more than 1 person is to be appointed—whether the persons are
compatible;
(f) whether the person would be available and accessible to the
(g) the person’s appropriateness and competence to perform functions
and exercise powers under an appointment order.
The fact a person is a relation of the adult does not,
of itself, mean the adult’s and person’s interests are likely
Also, the fact a person may be a beneficiary of the
adult’s estate on the adult’s death does not, of itself, mean the
adult’s and person’s interests are likely to conflict.....
[10] Section 11 of the Act and
Powers of Attorney Act
both provide that a person exercising a power under those Acts must
apply the General Principles which are set out in those Acts.
THE PARTIES
[11] HAD did not attend the hearing. Present at the
hearing were the following active parties in the proceedings:
TS – daughter, attorney, applicant and proposed
TA (by telephone) – grandson and attorney
NB – daughter, applicant and proposed guardian and proposed
administrator
BL – representative of the Adult Guardian
CT - representative of the Adult Guardian
NX – representative of The Public Trustee of Queensland
[12] Also present were the following persons:
HE – granddaughter
NY – former son-in-law
SC – grandson and carer
DC – director of nursing YYY Nursing Home
SS – former carer
The Evidence
[13] In addition to the written material contained on the Tribunal file, all of
the parties attending the hearing were given the
opportunity to express their
views. These views where specifically relied on by the Tribunal are discussed
DID HAD HAVE CAPACITY TO MAKE AN ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
ON 4 NOVEMBER 2007?
[14] HAD made an Enduring Power of Attorney on 4 November 2007 by which she
appointed TS and TA as her attorneys for financial, personal
and health matters.
The appointment for financial matters commenced immediately. The attorneys were
appointed severally in that either
attorney could make a decision on their own.
When HAD signed the document, she signed under wording entitled “Statement
Understanding” and which set out a statement that she fully understood
the matters required by
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
[15] The Enduring Power of Attorney was signed in the presence of a witness, CM,
who identified himself in the document as a commissioner
for declarations. CM
certified in the document that HAD appeared to him to understand the matters
stated in the Statement of Understanding.
CM gave evidence in the
proceedings.
[16] In a letter to the Tribunal dated 28 July 2009, CM stated that HAD had
appeared to him to completely and totally understand
the fact that she was
appointing TS and TA as her attorneys. He also stated in the letter that HAD
appeared to him to fully understand
the nature and effect of the Enduring Power
of Attorney document.
[17] At the hearing CM gave oral evidence about the occasion when HAD signed the
Enduring Power of Attorney and he stated that he
had a good recall of the
occasion. He had not met HAD before 4 November 2007 but his wife knew HAD who
had lived near them for many
years. He had not been provided with any
information about any of HAD’s medical conditions prior to meeting her on
[18] CM told the Tribunal that he was fully cognisant of his responsibility as a
certifying witness to an Enduring Power of Attorney.
He had been a Justice of
the Peace for over 40 years. He had assessed her capacity to grant the Enduring
Power of Attorney while
chatting to HAD on the patio of his house. He had asked
HAD whether she was prepared to give the Enduring Power of Attorney to her
daughter and grandson and she was “clear as a bell” in her positive
response. He had discussed the Enduring Power of
Attorney with her but he did
not keep any record of the questions he had put to HAD at that time. He had been
satisfied by her response
to his questions that she had understood the Enduring
Power of Attorney.
[19] While CM was certain that he had asked HAD whether she wanted to appoint TS
and TA as her attorneys, he was not certain whether
he had gone through each of
the matters set out in the Statement of Understanding with HAD. In response to
questions from the Tribunal,
CM stated that the document had been filled out
with the names of the attorneys before HAD had come to his house. Although TS
accompanied HAD to his house, TS had not remained on the patio when he spoke
with HAD about the Enduring Power of Attorney. He estimated
that the meeting had
lasted about 20 minutes.
[20] The Tribunal had been provided with a copy of a medical report dated 1
November 2007 by DR P, a geriatrician, who had examined
HAD on referral from her
general medical practitioner. Dr P reported that HAD had lost the sense of time
and space. Dr P reported
as to a cognitive decline over at least five years,
great difficulty adjusting to a change in location or routine, disorientated
time, confusion, increasing anxiety and low mood. HAD thought one of her
daughters lived at the Gold Coast when in fact she lived
in Perth and HAD could
recall the name of only one out of five of her grandchildren.
[21] Dr P reported that she had seen two CT brain scans which had reported as
showing deep white matter ischaemic change and atrophy.
On examination HAD was
found to be quite clearly confused but was adept at covering it up. A Mini
Mental State Examination scored
at 19 out of 30. Dr P described HAD’s
cognitive deficits as widespread and included orientation, recall, attention and
concentration,
calculation and praxis.
[22] Dr P gave a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. The report stated that
two of HAD’s daughters had attended the appointment
with HAD. Those
daughters were TS and NB. Dr P reported that she queried the capacity of HAD to
make an Enduring Power of Attorney.
Dr P provided information about an Enduring
Power of Attorney to HAD. Dr P expressed an opinion that HAD’s ability to
an Enduring Power of Attorney would need to be assessed independently.
Dr P provided one of the daughters with information about
Alzheimer’s
[23] TS confirmed that she had attended the appointment with Dr P and she had
been given a booklet about Alzheimer’s disease.
She gave evidence that she
had spoken to HAD about making an Enduring Power of Attorney after the visit to
Dr P in terms of formalising
what TS was already doing for HAD. TS had in her
written evidence told the Tribunal that she had helped HAD for many years with
financial matters such as attending her Body Corporate meetings, assisting
HAD to organise information for her tax returns, becoming
a signatory on
HAD’s bank accounts in 2006 and discussing HAD’s managed investments
with her bank.
[24] The Tribunal was told that TS had been instrumental in arranging the
Enduring Power of Attorney. She had purchased the form
and she had filled it out
for HAD. TS had not discussed whether HAD wanted to appoint any other persons as
her attorneys apart from
[25] The evidence given by Dr P in her report dated 1 November 2007 was not
challenged and is accepted by the Tribunal. She had examined
HAD just a few days
before HAD signed the Enduring Power of Attorney on 4 November 2007. Dr P, a
geriatrician, identified that HAD
had widespread cognitive deficits in the areas
of orientation, recall, attention and concentration, calculation and praxis. Dr
found HAD to be confused but adept at covering up her confusion.
[26] Dr P expressed doubt about whether HAD had the capacity to execute an
Enduring Power of Attorney. The Tribunal is satisfied
that Dr P had discussed
this specific matter with HAD and with her daughters at that appointment and
that Dr P had provided TS with
information about Alzheimer’s disease being
the diagnosis made by Dr P at the time of her examination of HAD.
[27] Despite being aware of the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and being
aware of the medical opinion from a geriatrician
that there was doubt about
HAD’s capacity to make an Enduring Power of Attorney, the Tribunal is
satisfied that TS took the
initiative in having HAD make an Enduring Power of
Attorney on 4 November 2007. TS purchased the form, discussed formalising
arrangements with her mother, filled out the names of the attorneys and
arranged the appointment with the person she chose to witness
the signing of the
[28] The Tribunal is satisfied that the actions of TS went beyond merely
supporting HAD to implement a desire on her part to keep
in place arrangements
that allowed her daughter to assist her with financial or personal matters. An
Enduring Power of Attorney went
far beyond formalising the then current informal
arrangements and gave TS and TA full authority over the financial affairs of
HAD was not asked whether she wanted any persons other than TS or TA to be
her attorneys. The Tribunal is satisfied that due to her
widespread cognitive
deficits HAD was merely a passive participant in the process that resulted in
the granting of the Power of Attorney
on 4 November 2007.
[29] TS did not disclose to the witness that HAD had been diagnosed with
Alzheimer’s disease and did not mention to the witness
that doubts about
HAD’s capacity had been expressed by a geriatrician. The Tribunal is not
satisfied that the witness took
any effective measures to ensure that HAD
understood all of the matters required by
Attorney Act 1998
He did not record what questions he had asked of HAD nor
was he certain whether he had gone through each of the matters set out in
Statement of Understanding with HAD. The Tribunal is satisfied that the
certification given by the witness that HAD had understood
what she was doing in
terms of the requirements of the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
[30] The Tribunal is satisfied after analysing the evidence that the presumption
that HAD had capacity to make an Enduring Power
of Attorney on 4 November 2007
has been rebutted. Her cognition was impaired, she exhibited confusion, she had
poor orientation to
time and place and poor recall and her concentration skills
were poor. She could not accurately remember all her close family members
where one of her daughters lived. There is no satisfactory evidence that she had
understood the nature and effect of the Enduring
Power of Attorney or that she
could make a decision freely and voluntarily about granting an Enduring Power of
Attorney to TS and
to TA at that time.
[31] The Tribunal found that HAD did not have the capacity to make an Enduring
Power of Attorney on 4 November 2007 and declared
that document invalid.
DOES HAD HAVE CAPACITY TO MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT PERSONAL,
HEALTH AND FINANCIAL MATTERS?
[32] The Tribunal was provided with medical and lay evidence as to the capacity
of HAD to make personal, health and financial decisions
at the present time. Dr
W was HAD’s treating general medical practitioner from 20 June 2006 to 30
October 2008. Dr W provided
a Health Professional Report dated 18 May 2009. In
that report, Dr W stated that HAD had dementia, presumably Alzheimer’s
and that Mini Mental State Examinations had been conducted in 2006
(score 22 out of 30) and in 2007 (score 20 out of 30). Dr W referred
to the Mini
Mental State Examination conducted by Dr P in November 2007 which had scored 19
[33] Dr W however did not express any opinion about the capacity of HAD to
understand the nature and effect of decisions or to make
decisions freely and
voluntarily. She had not seen HAD since 30 October 2008.
[34] A Health Professional Report was provided by Dr F dated 10 June 2009. He
stated that he had known HAD in the period from 14
November 2008 to 21 April
2009. He stated a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and urinary
incontinence. He considered that HAD
was aware of preferences about her
environment and she had expressed a wish to live with NB and had stated that she
did not like
the nursing home. Dr F considered that HAD had no ability to
operate bank accounts, pay bills or plan financially. He expressed the
that HAD could make decisions freely and voluntarily if presented as clear
choices and that she appeared to be negatively
influenced by her daughter who
had removed HAD from NB’s care.
[35] Dr F considered that dementia was the cause of HAD’s impaired
decision making capacity. He reported that there had been
definite cognitive
decline since 2007 when HAD was seen by Dr P.
[36] Dr F stated an opinion that HAD could make only simple decisions about
health care but she could make both simple and complex
decisions about
lifestyle/accommodation choices. In his report Dr F referred to comments made by
HAD on 14 April 2009 that she would
prefer to live with NB and that she had a
dislike of living in the nursing home where she had lived earlier in the year.
[37] Evidence was provided by DC who is part of the senior nursing staff at YYY
where HAD had lived from 30 May 2009 to 3 July 2009.
DC told the Tribunal that
HAD achieved a score of 15 out of 21 on the Psychogeriatric Assessment Scales
(PAS), administered at the
time when HAD came to live at the hone. DC informed
the Tribunal that these results indicated a severe cognitive impairment.
[38] DC told the Tribunal that HAD had exhibited short term and long term memory
deficits, along with very limited ability to make
even simple choices about what
clothes she wanted to wear each day. She had become anxious about making choices
and was easily flustered.
DC told the Tribunal that dementia had advanced to the
stage where she was doubly incontinent and she was not independently mobile.
did not have the ability to take part in group activities.
[39] There was general agreement from all of the family members who took part in
the hearing that HAD’s dementia had advanced
to the point where her
physical and cognitive functioning was impaired but for most of the hearing
there was disagreement as to whether
HAD had capacity to make decisions about
where she lived. In particular NB and her immediate family were of the opinion
could make a valid accommodation decision but TS and her immediate
family were of the opinion that HAD had not been able to make
accommodation decision for some time.
[40] TS gave evidence that HAD exhibits poor cognitive functioning, she was no
longer able to sustain conversation, she would speak
no more than 15 words in an
hour and she could not recall whether someone had been with her recently. She
was confused and not interested
in her surroundings. She needed assistance for
feeding, mobility and with transfers for toileting. She had previously taken an
interest in the royal family but she no longer could recognise prominent
members of the royal family in magazines.
[41] NB gave evidence that HAD’s spirit had remained unchanged despite the
effects of the advancing dementia. NB stated that
HAD becomes confused about the
identity of family members (she confuses SL with NB) and waits for a voice cue
for recognition purposes.
NB stated that HAD cannot roll over in bed, she cannot
weight bear, she needs two persons to lift her and she has lost the ability
feed herself with a knife and fork. On a recent Mini Mental State Examination
conducted in Perth, HAD scored 7 out of 30. In response
to a question from the
Tribunal, NB stated that it was likely that HAD was not aware that she was in
[42] NB gave an explanation as to how the decision was made by HAD to go to
Perth. The Adult Guardian, appointed as guardian for
HAD under an interim order
of the Tribunal, had made the decision on 27 July 2009 that HAD was to return to
live at the YYY nursing
the nursing home. When she received a negative response, NB then asked HAD
whether she wanted to go interstate to stay with SL. When HAD said she wanted to
go, NB made arrangements to fly with HAD to Perth.
[43] SC, a grandson of HAD, is the carer of HAD interstate. He told the Tribunal
that HAD is confused and at times asks for her mother.
He described HAD as
living in the moment. Although SC was initially of the opinion that HAD had
capacity to make her own decision
would not be able to identify accommodation options, weigh up the advantages and
disadvantages
of the various options and work out the consequences of making a
choice between the various options.
[44] The diagnosis made by Dr P that HAD has Alzheimer’s disease was not
challenged and has been accepted by the Tribunal.
That diagnosis was accepted by
Drs W and F. The scores from the Mini Mental State Examinations confirm that
HAD’s cognitive
functioning had declined between 2006 and 2007 and the
score from August 2009 reveals a very significant further decline since November
[45] The Tribunal accepts the evidence of family members and of her carers that
HAD cannot make day to day choices about her clothing,
she cannot sustain a
conversation, she is confused, she is not orientated to time or person, she has
lost the ability to feed herself,
she is doubly incontinent and she lives in the
moment with poor recall.
[46] The Tribunal is satisfied that HAD’s cognitive functioning was
impaired by November 2007 and has declined significantly
further since November
2007. The Tribunal is satisfied that HAD cannot retain, manipulate and
understand information about her personal
or financial affairs in order to make
a decision that took account of the consequences flowing from such a decision.
At best the
evidence reveals that HAD on occasions can respond “yes”
or “no” when asked a question but the evidence is
compelling that
she could not independently formulate options herself due to her severely
impaired cognition. She lives in the moment
without recall of past actions or
appreciation of future consequences.
[47] The Tribunal was satisfied that HAD no longer had capacity to make a
decision about where she lived in July 2009. The Tribunal
was satisfied that HAD
has impaired decision making capacity for all personal and financial matters.
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF A GUARDIAN?
[48] Up until December 2008, most personal decisions were being made informally
for HAD by her family. Following discharge from hospital
after a fall in 2007,
HAD went to live with NB as the family recognised that HAD could no longer
adequately care for herself in her
[49] By December 2008 TS had formed the opinion that HAD’s care needs
would only appropriately be met in a nursing home environment
and acting under
the Enduring Power of Attorney TS relocated HAD from NB’s home to XXX
Nursing Home in December 2008. This
decision was not supported by NB and at a
later stage SL did not agree to HAD continuing to live in a nursing home.
[50] On 11 April 2009 a decision was implemented by NB and SL to relocate HAD
from the nursing home back to NB’s house. This
situation was in place
until May 2009 when TS placed HAD into YYY nursing home. HAD was removed from
the nursing home by NB inJuly
2009 to reside once again at her house.
[51] Under an interim appointment made by the Tribunal on 7 July 2009, the Adult
Guardian made a decision on 27 July 2009 to accommodate
HAD in YYY nursing home
and made arrangements for HAD to be taken back to the nursing home in July 2009.
However, NB took HAD interstate
on or before 29 July 2009 where she resides with
SL and her grandson SC.
[52] Evidence was given at the hearing that HAD is cared for by her grandson and
by another carer. The Adult Guardian submitted in
the guardianship report that
HAD is a frail elderly adult who needs full assistance with all activities of
daily living including
hoisting for all transfers, feeding and continence care.
A decision had been made that HAD’s complex care needs would be best
by nursing home accommodation. TS was of the same opinion that HAD’s care
needs could only be adequately met by professional
care in a nursing home
environment. NB told the Tribunal that she would never agree to place HAD in a
care facility unless her doctors
said that HAD needed palliative care.
[53] Investigations facilitated by the Adult Guardian revealed that in her
interstate residence HAD only had one carer in attendance
although she needs
hoisting or the assistance of two persons for all transfers. The investigations
revealed there was no clarity
regarding the management of HAD’s
medications and that she was located downstairs in the property and may have no
the living area upstairs.
[54] The Tribunal was told contradictory evidence about the wishes expressed by
HAD as to where she wanted to live. TS told the Tribunal
that HAD had begged her
to remove her from NB’s house but NB told the Tribunal that HAD had begged
her to remove her from the
nursing home and was happy to reside in NB’s
[55] Seven decisions have been made since late 2007 about where HAD should live.
The three daughters of HAD, who would otherwise
be her informal decision makers,
had not reached agreement on six of those decisions. Many of those decisions
impacted directly on
the quality of care provided to HAD at a time when both her
cognitive and physical functioning were deteriorating rapidly. Many of
decisions were made without an independent and professional assessment of the
varying care needs of HAD and in circumstances
where it appears to the Tribunal
that more consideration was given to catering to the prejudices of various
family members than was
given to protecting the interests of HAD.
[56] HAD is currently living interstate in circumstances where the Tribunal is
satisfied that she did not have capacity to make a
decision to change her
domicile from Queensland. The Adult Guardian, appointed on an interim basis as
guardian by this Tribunal,
had made a decision in July 2009 that HAD was to
deteriorating
cognitive functioning of HAD and her frail physical condition,
that decision will have to be reviewed to determine whether it is
safe for HAD
to travel back to Queensland.
[57] Decisions as to where HAD should live, what medical care should be provided
to her, what services and equipment should be provided
to make her comfortable
and to improve her quality of life and what contact should be arranged with her
family must be made. Other
personal decisions may be required in the near future
depending on the outcome of investigations into the actions of her family in
obstructing the actions of her appointed guardian.
[58] The Tribunal was satisfied that HAD’s needs would not be adequately
met by leaving personal decision making to be made
informally by her family. The
events of the last two years have clearly established that there is a level of
conflict within HAD’s
family that has impeded a proper assessment and
management of her care needs. The conflict has resulted in a series of decisions
being reached by TS, NB and SL not just without proper consultation but covertly
and maliciously. The proper protection of HAD’s
interests, and indeed her
welfare, compels the Tribunal to appoint a guardian for all personal matters for
IF SO WHO SHOULD BE APPOINTED?
[59] TS applied to be appointed as guardian for HAD. NB had originally sought
the appointment of the Adult Guardian as guardian for
HAD but prior to the
hearing she had notified the Tribunal that she would seek appointment to the
role herself. The Adult Guardian
submitted that the Tribunal should appoint the
Adult Guardian as HAD’s guardian for all personal matters.
[60] TS had applied for appointment at a time when the accommodation decisions
she had made as attorney were being disputed by other
family members. Her
decision to place HAD into nursing home care had been reversed when HAD was
removed from care and returned to
NB’s residence in April 2009. TS removed
HAD from NB’s residence several weeks after lodging her application for
appointment
as guardian and did so without consultation with key family members
who had been part of HAD’s support network.
[61] NB stated her belief that HAD would want her family to look after her as
she was suspicious all her life of people trying to
control her. She did not
believe that her mother would want the Adult Guardian to be involved in her
[62] The Tribunal had provided NB with a list of the General Principles during
the hearing. The Tribunal asked her to explain, given
the conflict between
family members, how she would go about applying General Principle
when making
decisions for HAD if she were to be appointed guardian. NB responded that she
would invite all the family to Christmas
dinner interstate so that they had an
opportunity to have contact with HAD and when they were all together, matters of
conflict could
be addressed. This proposition was immediately rejected by TS.
[63] The Tribunal asked NB to explain how she would apply the Health Care
Principles when making health care decisions for HAD in
particular how she would
go about exercising decision making power in the adult’s best interests
and with regard to the increasingly
complex care requirements of HAD. NB stated
that HAD came from a family background where people did not go to the doctor
very often.
NB stated that she had similar views about seeking medical
treatment. While she was not opposed to following advice from a doctor
HAD, she held a firm belief that she and her family could provide adequate and
appropriate care for HAD and she would not agree
to place her mother into care
unless the medical advice was that palliative care was required.
[64] The representative of the Adult Guardian submitted that the family’s
persistent and ongoing conflict regarding HAD’s
care needs, the history of
each sister removing HAD from accommodation arrangements that they believe their
mother was not happy
with, the existence of possible legal issues to be
investigated and pursued surrounding the abduction of HAD from her various
accommodations
and the posting of images of HAD on YouTube by family members
militated against a family member being appointed as guardian for HAD.
[65] The Tribunal was satisfied that neither TS nor NB could properly perform
the duties of a guardian as they were unlikely to apply
the General Principles
when making personal decisions for HAD. The Tribunal was also satisfied that NB
was unlikely to apply the
Health Care Principles when making health care
decisions. Neither TS nor NB had consulted with each other before changing
residence in December 2008, April, May and July 2009 and the actions
of NB in removing HAD from Brisbane effectively cut off HAD
from family members
in Brisbane who have had a continuous and supportive relationship with her. NB
had acted without seeking prior
medical advice or an adequate assessment of
HAD’s care needs and has consistently declined to consider the efficacy of
that professional care is required to adequately respond to the
deteriorating physical and cognitive functioning of HAD.
[66] The Tribunal did not doubt that NB believed that her actions since April
2009 in removing her mother from nursing home accommodation
on two occasions and
in removing her mother to Perth to avoid the implementation of a decision by
HAD’s then guardian were
in accordance with her mother’s wishes.
However the evidence clearly establishes that HAD did not have the capacity to
a reasoned decision about her accommodation or health care needs.
[67] The evidence revealed that due to her advancing dementia, HAD lived in the
moment and given the widely divergent preferences
she expressed to different
members of her family at the same time, her wishes varied according to the
person she was speaking to
at the time. NB failed to recognise, or to
acknowledge to herself, the extent of her mother’s impaired cognitive
functioning.
The Tribunal considers that she went about making decisions that
were based on presumptions that NB considered would result in a
comfortable and
enjoyable life for her mother for her remaining lifetime. Those presumptions had
not been informed by an adequate
professional assessment of the needs of HAD at
this stage of her life.
[68] The Tribunal was not satisfied that TS could exercise her decision making
powers with a view to maintaining the existing support
that was provided to HAD
by NBs and SL given the intense conflict that exists between them. The Tribunal
was satisfied that NB would
not be able to make decisions that were appropriate
to the needs of HAD. She had categorically ruled out the option of placing HAD
into care without analysing the assessment that had resulted in such an option
being accepted as appropriate on at least two occasions
by TS and more recently
by the Adult Guardian. The strategy she articulated at the hearing for
maintaining HAD’s relationship
with her Brisbane family was superficial
and impractical.
[69] The Tribunal accepted that under
of the Act it was inappropriate
to appoint a family member as HAD’s guardian given the past actions of
family members, the
unlikelihood that the family member applicant would apply
the General Principles and the Health Care Principle and the ongoing conflict
that had on more than one occasion adversely impacted on HAD’s wellbeing
and welfare. The Tribunal concluded that the Adult
Guardian should be appointed
as HAD’s guardian.
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF AN ADMINISTRATOR?
[70] TS had been managing the financial affairs of HAD for some years before she
arranged for her appointment as HAD’s attorney
in November 2007 as HAD had
manifested an inability to keep up with the demands of bill paying, could not
organise her income tax
returns or deal with correspondence about her financial
affairs. TS told the hearing that she was prepared to continue managing the
financial affairs of HAD informally and that she did not consider that the
appointment of an administrator was necessary.
[71] HAD has extensive assets including a house, a unit on the north coast and
funds in several bank accounts and under management
of about $1 million. The
cost of her care is high, presently estimated at $1,000 per week. Over the past
year there have been occasions
when family members caring for HAD have
complained that TS had not willingly made funds available in response to their
requests to
pay for or reimburse purchase cost of items obtained for HAD. In
turn TS has alleged that family members had opened a bank account
using funds
obtained from HAD without TS’s knowledge or approval.
[72] NB and SL applied for the appointment of an administrator for HAD. They
alleged in their application that TS was taking advantage
of HAD financially and
that she intended to sell HAD’s house. Those allegations were not expanded
on at the hearing but NB
stated that there was a great deal of tension between
herself and TS who would no longer speak to NB. It was not anticipated that
tension would dissipate quickly. TS stated that she did not persist with
telephone calls in which she was abused.
[73] HAD has extensive assets and funds which must be secured and managed for
her benefit. Informal arrangements had been in place
for some years to assist
HAD manage her financial affairs but those arrangements have broken down due to
conflict between family
members which resulted in mutual allegations of misuse
of HAD’s funds and distrust about claims for payments made on HAD’s
[74] In the absence of reliable informal management of her financial affairs, an
appointment of an administrator is the only way
in which HAD’s interests
will be adequately met. There is a need for decisions to be made about
HAD’s assets if she is
unable to return to her own home, if she resides in
a residential care facility or if she resides with family with paid care.
IF SO WHO SHOULD BE APPOINTED?
[75] NB and SL had sought the appointment of The Public Trustee of Queensland as
HAD’s administrator. At the hearing, TS indicated
that she wanted to be
considered for appointment if the Tribunal determined that an administrator
should be appointed.
[76] The Tribunal was satisfied that the conflict between TS and her sisters was
intense and would not quickly dissipate. The Tribunal
was satisfied that the
family members who did not support TS maintaining a role in managing HAD’s
financial affairs would distrust
and dispute decisions made by her. The Tribunal
was satisfied that the communication difficulties which had marred the
relationship
within the family would not readily resolve but would continue and
would hinder an effective decision making role for a family member.
[77] The Tribunal determined that it was not
appropriate to appoint a family member as HAD’s administrator. The mere
of intense conflict between TS and her sisters did not render her
inappropriate for appointment but the real likelihood that the
conflict would
have an adverse impact on communication and would lead to further disputation
over decisions made by the administrator
would not be in the interests of HAD
who has already been the subject of much disputation and unilateral action. It
is appropriate
that a decision maker is appointed who can impartially consider
claims by the family, whose decisions are not invariably distrusted
and who can
make independently decisions with the interests of the adult in mind.
[78] In these circumstances the Tribunal appointed The Public Trustee of
Queensland as HAD’s administrator.
[79] The Tribunal was made aware that an application about HAD had been to the
State Administrative Tribunal in another jurisdiction
and that a hearing would
take place in the near future. The Tribunal is satisfied under
section 112
the Act that it is in the interests of HAD that these reasons are published in
an identified form to the interstate
General Principle
8 – The importance of maintaining an adult’s existing supportive
relationships must be taken into account.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (281 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter