URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/141.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lina v Twadle [2025] QDC 141 (10 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Lina v Twadle
[2025] QDC 141
JAYSON LINA
(Applicant/Appellant)
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Magistrates Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
10 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
3 October 2025 (on the papers)
Porter KC DCJ
appeal is allowed.
orders of the Magistrates Court made 16 May 2025 are dismissed.
application filed 1 April 2025 is dismissed.
parties should provide written submissions of not more than 2 pages on costs of
the application and the appeal by 4pm on 16 October
the Magistrates Court of Queensland have jurisdiction to determine a claim in
negligence for damages for property damage
arising out of a car accident which
occurred in Victoria involving two Victorian residents where the defendant is
served under the
Service and Execution of Process Act 1992
The proceedings below
plaintiff sued the defendant for damages of $18,519.09, alleging that the
defendant negligently caused damage to the plaintiff’s
car by colliding
with it when the defendant was backing out of the defendant’s driveway.
It is not disputed that the collision
occurred on Flemington Crescent in
Werribee, a suburb of Melbourne.
plaintiff sued in the Magistrates Court of Queensland and filed his proceedings
in the central (Brisbane) registry of that
Court. The defendant filed a
Conditional Notice of Intention to Defend. The conditional defence alleged that
the collision occurred
in Victoria, the defendant resides in Victoria and does
not carry on business in Queensland. It alleged that the plaintiff commenced
proceedings “in the incorrect Court and/or district” and in breach
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
[5] Consistent
Rule 144(5)(a)
UCPR, the defendant filed an application for an order under
That application sought that the plaintiff’s claim be set aside
pursuant to
Rules 16(a)
(e) UCPR or stayed pursuant to
claim was in breach of
[6] Before the
learned Magistrate, the parties were agreed that the collision happened when and
where the statement of claim alleged
it did. It was also uncontentious that the
plaintiff and defendant both resided in Victoria at the time of the collision
do and that neither operated a business in Queensland.
[7] The hearing
and decision were brief.
appearances, this exchange occurred:
MR FITZSIMONS: ....
We’ve exchanged our outlines. This is a jurisdiction question.
HIS HONOUR: Where the collision occurred in Victoria, the defendant lives
in Victoria – seems fairly straightforward from
my view, Mr Randall.
MR RANDALL: Your Honour, the application today that’s been filed are
both rule – are both on a breach of
That’s the application
that we’ve come to respond to today. Now,
is a part of division 2
of chapter 2 of the UCPR. That is about filing in a registry other
than a central registry under
So the application that’s been
brought today, in my respectful submission, is misconceived because
they’re relying on
entirely a breach of
, but they ---
HIS HONOUR: Well, Mr Randall, it’s quite clear. The
proceeding’s been issued in the wrong jurisdiction. It should be
Victoria. It’s where the defendant lives. That’s where the collision
occurred. It’s where the cause of action
occurred. What I am – what
am I missing?
MR RANDALL: Your Honour, the application that the plaintiffs – the
defendant applicants have brought is not that.
MR FITZSIMONS: Yes, your Honour. The application is pursuant to 16(a),
amongst other things, which provides that, “The court
may declare that a
proceeding for which an originating process has been issued has not, for want of
So, your Honour, the application is
pursuant to 16(a). Notwithstanding my friend’s argument about
it’s – the application itself has been brought pursuant to that rule
and further, in my submission, in circumstances
where the court – where
it’s abundantly clear that there’s no jurisdiction, your Honour, in
my submission, can
make the orders pursuant to
regardless. And pursuant
, your Honour can grant relief other than relief which is
specifically sought.
HIS HONOUR: Mr Twadle. Sorry, My Randall. Apologies.
MR RANDALL: Yes, Your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: It’s your last chance to put something cogent before me.
MR RANDALL: Yes, your Honour. There is no objection in the application
before you about personal jurisdiction or anything of that
nature. It is the
plaintiff claim against the defendant be satisfied pursuant to
(e) of the UCPR as the plaintiff’s claim is in breach of
UCPR. That’s the application that’s before you. That’s the
application that the defendants have brought,
and there’s no doubt that
this is a central registry. It’s been filed in a central registry, and
is only applicable in deciding which registry to file in other than a
central registry, so it’s – in my respectful submission,
they should
be held to the application that they have brought.
[9] His Honour
apparently did not receive the plaintiff’s outline, and neither outline is
Honour’s reasons are brief:
HIS HONOUR: This is an
....application that the plaintiff’s claim against the defendant be set
aside pursuant to
rules 16(a)
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
That comes within chapter 2,
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
provides that setting aside the originating process, the court may declare
that a proceeding for which an originating process has
been issued has not for
want of jurisdiction been properly started.
In support of the application is the affidavit of Mr William John Sass,
deposes to the nature of the claim, that being a motor vehicle
collision that
occurred in Victoria, also that the defendant resides in Victoria. It is quite
clear the jurisdiction for this matter
resides in the Victorian court, not in
the Queensland court.
costs, his Honour relevantly observed in awarding costs to the
HIS HONOUR: In awarding costs today, I acknowledge that
the defendant has been wholly successful with his application. He was quite
clear from the outset, the filing of that conditional notice of intention to
defend, where it is provided that the collision occurred
in Werribee in the
south of Victoria. The defendant resides in Victoria. The defendant does not
carry on a business in Queensland,
and the complainant commenced these
proceedings in the incorrect court and/or district.
Yet despite that being blatantly clear and further in consideration of
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
that the purpose of these rules is to
facilitate the just and expeditions resolution of the real issues in civil
proceedings at a
minimum of expense.
The application for leave
to appeal is required because the amount involved is less than the minor civil
dispute limit (as it is here). Leave shall
not be granted unless the Judge is
satisfied that some important principle of law or justice is
application for leave raises the following substantive grounds (I have
articulated the points in the application for leave
by reference to these
material grounds):
(a) That his Honour erred in concluding the Magistrates Court did not have
(b) That his Honour denied the applicant procedural fairness by determining the
application on grounds other than that raised by
the defendant’s
application; and
(c) That his Honour’s conduct of the hearing gave rise to a reasonable
apprehension that he had pre-determined the matter.
applicant did not press the third ground.
[15] There will
be a grant of leave to appeal. The judgment raises an important principle
concerning the jurisdiction of the Magistrates
Court of Queensland within the
Commonwealth, and wrongly confines the jurisdiction of the Court.
Some general principles
word jurisdiction is protean in character. Where it is used to refer to the
authority of a court to decide a dispute, the
following principles
[20] Courts have
authority to decide a matter when two conditions are
...when the exercise of judicial power resolves a justiciable controversy of
a kind which falls within the Court’s limits, and
when the person bound by
the exercise of judicial power are amenable to its exercise. In short, the court
subject matter
order to have authority to decide any particular proceedings.
[21] That distinction is reflected in
v The Queen
(1999) CLR 485
, where the joint judgment observed at [79]
(footnotes omitted):
“Jurisdiction” may be used (i) to describe the amenability of a
defendant to the court's writ and the geographical reach
of that writ, or (ii)
rather differently, to identify the subject matter of those actions entertained
by a particular court, or,
finally (iii) to locate a particular territorial or
“law area” or “law district”. The distinction
(i) and (ii) was drawn by Mason A-CJ, Wilson and Dawson JJ in
Flaherty v Girgis
. In passages in their joint judgment in
Mason CJ and Dawson J used the term “jurisdiction” in all three of
these senses.
[22] Similarly, in
Masson v Parsons
, Edelman J observed, at [57]:
... First, there is “jurisdiction”, which means an authority to
decide. Federal jurisdiction is therefore a federal authority
to decide. It has
a personal dimension concerning the persons over whom authority to decide is
exercised. It has a territorial dimension
concerning the geographical area
within which authority to decide can be exercised. And it has a subject matter
dimension concerning
the issues in respect of which authority to decide can be
[23] In my respectful view, the tripartite articulation in those cases can
sit comfortably with the subject matter/personal jurisdiction
dichotomy, with
territorial jurisdiction having a place in both.
[24] As to personal jurisdiction, amenability to the authority of a court
primarily turns on physical presence in the court’s
territorial
statutory provisions conferring jurisdiction
over persons not present in the
geographical jurisdiction of the court.
UCPR is such a provision. The
rules as to legal service of a claim define the limits of a court’s
personal jurisdiction beyond
physical presence in the territorial jurisdiction
of the court.
[25] As to subject matter jurisdiction, territorial jurisdiction can inform
the scope of causes of action otherwise within the subject
matter jurisdiction
of a court. The conduct issues give rise to issues of territorial jurisdiction
in the “subject matter”
decision in
(just cited)
is of interest to this
application. Sportec sold goods online in Australia under the name SportsGPS.
Leatherman was a U.S. incorporated
company which carried on the business of
making Leatherman tools. Sportec sued Leatherman for damages suffered by reason
of misleading
or deceptive conduct allegedly engaged in by Leatherman in breach
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
conduct arose out of communications between Leatherman in the US and Amazon
alleging that Sportec was engaged in the sale
of counterfeit products.
[18] Sportec
served the proceedings on Leatherman in the USA under rule 129F UCPR. Leatherman
did not challenge the validity of service,
nor that the Court had personal
[19] Leatherman
contended, however, that there was no jurisdiction because Sportec could not
establish that Leatherman has engaged
in conduct to which
ACL applies. In
particular, Leatherman alleged that there was no conduct within Australia by
Leatherman, nor was it carrying on
business within Australia, and therefore the
ACL did not apply to any conduct alleged.
[20] While that
case seems to resemble this on the facts, it is a salutary example of how much
care must be exercised when analysing
questions of jurisdiction.
Leatherman’s argument arose from the interplay between the subject matter
territorial scope of that conferral of jurisdiction arising
out of the words of the statute that created the cause of action.
[21] I explained
the distinction in
as follows:
while the two issues raised by Leatherman might be able to be technically
characterised as issues of territorial limits informing
the scope of subject
matter jurisdiction, they are, in substance, issues which go to the existence of
the cause of action sued upon,
in that each conduct issue goes to whether there
is conduct capable of being conduct in breach of
ACL. There is no question
that the District Court has jurisdiction over claims for damages and injunctions
arising out of misleading
or deceptive conduct under
CCA. The question of whether particular conduct, otherwise misleading or
deceptive, was conduct which occurred in Australia (or by
a person carrying on
business in Australia) is closely related to the conduct element of the cause of
action and, in my view, ought
to be approached in a similar manner; i.e. that
Sportec is entitled to have the issue determined at trial unless it can be
on an interlocutory basis, to lack any real prospect of success.
[56] Further, Mr Hastie submitted that the conduct issues, though involving
territorial issues, are not true jurisdictional issue.
I think this submission
is correct. It seems to me that both conduct issues are issues of a kind which
this Court could conclusively
determine pursuant to the jurisdiction conferred
and (2) CAA on the Court to hear and determine “any matter
arising under this Act in respect of which a civil proceeding has...been
instituted”: see
Bray v F Hoffman-La Roche
at [197]. They are not issues which can be characterised as going to
existence of
should not be treated in the same manner
as jurisdictional facts which are
statutory pre-conditions to a court’s jurisdiction. It is doubtful that
the duty to decide
such matters is the same as for statutory pre-conditions to
Indeed such matters
ought ordinarily to be dealt with at trial rather than in some form of
preliminary hearing on substantive jurisdiction.
In my view, in this case, they
are more appropriately dealt with at trial.
[22] The line
between a Court’s subject matter jurisdiction on the one hand, and
disputed facts as to whether conduct or a cause
of action falls within it
because of some extraterritorial aspect of the facts on the other, can on
occasions be difficult to draw.
All the more reason why caution must be
exercised when dealing with applications seeking dismissal on jurisdictional
[23] In my view,
the issue raised in Sportec did not go to the jurisdiction of the District Court
but to whether the cause of action
over which it had jurisdiction would be made
out at trial. There can be no assumption that an extraterritorial element in a
automatically goes to jurisdiction.
The issues for the appeal
is convenient to clarify the real issues in the appeal. The application below
sought dismissal of the proceeding in reliance
UCPR, which
35 General rule
(1) A person must start a proceeding before a court in 1 of the following
(a) the district in which the defendant or respondent lives or carries on
(b) if there is more than 1 defendant or respondent—the district in which
1 or more of the defendants or respondents live or
carry on business;
(c) if the parties to a proceeding to be started in a Magistrates Court or the
District Court consent in writing and file the consent
with the registrar—
(i) for a Magistrates Court—any Magistrates Courts district; or
(ii) for the District Court—any district of the District Court;
(d) if a defendant has agreed or undertaken in writing to pay a debt or another
amount at a particular place—the district in
which the place is
(e) the district in which all or part of the claim or cause of action arose;
(f) if the proceeding is a claim for the recovery of possession of
land—the district in which the land is located.
(2) However, if the proceeding is to be started in the District Court and
subrule (1) does not apply—
(a) a person may, without notice to a proposed party, apply to the District
Court for directions about the district in which the
proceeding should be
started; and
(b) the person may start the proceeding in accordance with the court’s
directions.
(3) For these rules, a division of the Brisbane Magistrates Court is taken to
be a district.
unclear whether his Honour was acting based on this rule because of the brevity
of his reasons. It might be so given that
his Honour’s observations
matched the considerations articulated in that rule. One matter is clear,
did not apply, not least because that rule does not apply where proceedings
are commenced in the central registry of the Magistrates
Court (as this
proceeding was). Further, non-compliance with
does not go to
Magistrates Courts have that jurisdiction
within their respect districts to hear
all actions:
Magistrates Courts Act 1921
(Qld). At most,
commencing in breach of rule 35 is an irregularity which can be addressed by a
transfer application or an order under
[26] I mention
this because in my respectful view, there was merit in the applicant’s
submission to his Honour that that was
the application they had come to Court to
meet. It should have been dismissed.
[27] His Honour
was of course entitled to consider for himself whether he had jurisdiction.
Indeed, there is an obligation imposed
on every court to consider for itself
whether it has jurisdiction in relation to a proceeding. However, what is
required to establish
depending on the nature of the jurisdictional issue and the scope of the
of the court.
the obligation is sometimes described as the first duty of a Court, it does not
have to be done immediately. A court has jurisdiction
sufficient to consider its
own jurisdiction. When and how a court should determine a challenge to
court and, amongst other things, can be
deferred until trial.
[28] However, if
his Honour had in mind grounds other than rule 35 for dismissal, he ought in my
respectful view, have given the plaintiff
an opportunity to address the issues
he wished to raise. The defendant’s submission that mere mention of
meant his Honour could dismiss the application on other grounds if he
chose without an opportunity for the plaintiff to respond to
a different
argument was wrong, as was the defendant’s reference to rule 156, which
only applies to pleadings.
[29] That has
significance in this case because the plaintiff submits that it did not file
evidence of service out of the jurisdiction
under SEPA because of the form of
the application. In its written submissions, the plaintiff seeks leave to put
evidence of service
under SEPA before the Court. The defendant’s
submissions did not take issue with that leave, nor did it cavil with valid
under SEPA. I therefore grant leave to the plaintiff to rely on the
affidavits of Mr Vance dated 11 July 2025 and the affidavit
of Mr Fenton sworn
20 February 2025.
Personal jurisdiction
paragraphs 30 to 37 of the plaintiff’s submissions, the plaintiff sets out
law applicable to service under the SEPA.
The defendant does not cavil with
those propositions. It is sufficient to note the following.
a Court has personal jurisdiction, that is jurisdiction over a defendant,
whenever an originating process can be lawfully served
on that defendant. It is
not limited to personal service within the geographical jurisdiction of the
[32] Second,
service of an originating process outside of Queensland, but within
Australia, is effective if it is served in accordance with
As observed by Kerby J, the
section 51(xxiv)
Constitution
and of SEPA was to prevent the
issues arising in the United States where a court in one state did not have
in personam
the effect of SEPA is to extend the personal jurisdiction of each Court in the
Commonwealth to the geographical limits of Australia,
such that the Commonwealth
is a single jurisdictional area in so far as personal jurisdiction is
Accordingly, nothing
more needs to be shown to establish territorial nexus between the State Court
and the defendant other than
service under SEPA. In
Mobil Oil Australia Pty
Ltd v Victoria
(2002) 211 CLR 1 at 37-38, Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ
observed (footnotes omitted):
In the ordinary case, where service of
the proceeding is effected within the State, the territorial nexus between the
proceeding and
the State is evident. In some cases of so-called
‘‘long arm jurisdiction’’ where service is effected
Australia, unless the defendant voluntarily submits to the jurisdiction,
there must be some nexus between the subject matter and
the State or between the
defendant and the State. By contrast, where service is effected within
Australia, under the
Service and Execution of Process Act 1992
nexus must be shown.
[34] So much is
expressly provided by
[35] Accordingly,
the Magistrates Court had jurisdiction over the defendant despite the fact that
he was resident in Victoria and
had not been served in Queensland. To the
extent that his Honour relied on the defendant’s place of residence as
the conclusion that the Magistrates Court did not have jurisdiction
over him, his Honour erred.
Subject matter jurisdiction
is convenient to start with the jurisdiction provision in question which is
Magistrates Court Act
which provides:
4 Jurisdiction
of Magistrates Courts
(1) Subject to this Act—
(a) every personal action in which the amount, value or damage sought to be
recovered is not more than the prescribed limit, whether
on a balance of account
or after an admitted set-off or otherwise, including any claim for detention of
goods or chattels; and
(b) every action brought to recover a sum of not more than the prescribed limit,
which is the whole or part of the unliquidated balance
of a partnership account,
or the amount or part of the amount of the distributive share under an intestacy
or of a legacy under a
(c) every action in which a person has an equitable claim or demand against
another person in respect of which—
(i) the only relief sought is—
(A) the recovery
of a sum of money or of damages, whether liquidated or unliquidated; or
(B) the delivery
of possession of goods or chattels in relation to a right, security interest,
encumbrance, charge or lien; and
(ii) the amount, value or damage claimed is not more than the prescribed limit;
may be commenced in a Magistrates Court, and all Magistrates Courts shall
within their respective districts have power and authority
to hear and determine
in a summary way all such actions.
[37] I note the
the jurisdiction conferred is not primarily defined by cause of action, but by
remedy. The section effectively confers jurisdiction
to hear and determine any
action for money howsoever arising. It has been given a broad
construction,
as jurisdiction
conferring provisions should be.
[39] Second
it contains no express limit arising from where the facts which give rise to the
action occur. Nor does it contain any limit on
where such proceedings may be
brought. In my view, it confers jurisdiction in respect of all actions on all
Magistrates Courts.
The reference to “within their respective
districts” simply recognises that Magistrates Courts sit in several
To the extent that gives rise to any issue, it is dealt with by
rules 34 and 35 UCPR already
defendant does not, and could not, cavil with the proposition that the
plaintiff’s claim prima facie falls within the
scope of the jurisdiction
conferred by s. 4(1). A claim for damages for negligence of some $18,000 is a
personal action for an amount
not more than the prescribed limit.
defendant submits, however, that claim does not fall within jurisdiction because
there are no connecting factors to the State
of Queensland. The argument was
put as follows:
to maters “in and of Queensland”,
unless expressly extended
is a presumption against extraterritoriality unless expressly or impliedly
extraterritorial effect, Queensland statutes are “...limited in (their)
operation to the State of
Queensland.”
That is the
Broken Hill South Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
Dixon J defined the
“extraterritorial doctrine” as:
The power to
make laws for the peace, order and good government of a State does not enable
the State Parliament to impose by reference
to some act, matter or thing
occurring outside the State a liability upon a person unconnected with the State
whether by domicil,
residence or otherwise. But it is within the competence of
the State legislature to make any fact, circumstance, occurrence or thing
connected with the territory the occasion of the imposition upon any person
concerned therein of a liability to taxation or
of any other liability. It is
also within the competence of the legislature to base the imposition of
liability on no more than the
relation of the person to the territory.
key to jurisdiction is that there must be “connecting factors” to
[42] One answer
to this given by the plaintiff to that proposition is to rely on the so called
double actionability test set out by
Brennan J in
Breavington v Godleman
[1988] HCA 40
(1988) 169 CLR 41
at 110-111. There are difficulties in relying on that test as
one which goes to jurisdiction, though it has been characterised as
identifying
disputes in tort which are justiciable. However, the real difficulty with
reliance on that case is that it is no longer
the law in Australia. In
Pfieffer Pty Limited v Rogerson
[2000] HCA 36
(2000) 203 CLR 503
, the majority
rejected the double actionability test for non-federal jurisdiction cases, being
cases in which the courts of one State
were hearing a claim based on a tort
committed in another State. The majority concluded that the law governing all
questions of
substance in Australian torts involving an interstate element is
lex loci deliciti
[43] However,
there is another answer to the defendant’s argument. The connecting
factor which the defendant seeks is provided
by the personal jurisdiction of the
Court over the defendant arising from, in this case, SEPA. Once that connection
is established,
the only question is whether the plaintiff’s claim can be
characterised as falling within the scope of the express terms of
s. 4(1). That
might be a complex question in cases involving unfamiliar claims arising under
quite different legal systems. But
that is not this case. The
plaintiff’s claim is unquestionably an action for damages within the
monetary limit.
conclusion is supported by
Mobil Oil Australia Pty Ltd v Victoria
211 CLR 1. That case concerned the question of whether class action legislation
in Victoria based on an opt out model that
applied to all members of the defined
class regardless of location and which purported to bind all class members who
did not opt
out was constitutionally valid. Mobil argued that there was an
insufficient territorial nexus between the subject matter of the
legislation and
the State of Victoria. The argument focussed on application of the statute to
plaintiffs, rather than defendants.
It was summarised by Gleeson CJ as
Mobil contends that Pt 4A represents a constitutionally
impermissible attempt to confer upon the Supreme Court of Victoria
national jurisdiction in group proceedings’’. Group
members may be persons who are non-residents of Victoria, whose claims
Mobil arise from transactions or events outside Victoria, and who have not
chosen Victoria as the forum for resolution of
those claims in any sense other
than that they have failed to ‘‘opt out’’ of the group
proceedings, perhaps
without knowing that the proceedings were on foot. As to
group members who are residents of Victoria, Mobil appears to accept that
fact of such residence would empower the Parliament of Victoria to enact
provisions of the kind found in Pt 4A if they were confined
to Victorian
residents, even though such residents may not know of the group proceedings. But
the application of such provisions
to group members resident in other States or
Territories is said to exceed legislative power.
[45] However,
while considering the position of plaintiffs, the High Court accepted that the
nexus between a defendant and a State
was sufficiently established for
constitutional purposes where that jurisdiction arose from, inter alia, service
under the SEPA scheme.
The Court considered those provisions were within the
power of the State to legislate extraterritorially despite the constitutional
limits on the power of State Parliaments to legislate in and for the State.
Indeed, Mobile made no submission to the
[46] In my view,
that conclusion also is supported by a line of authority referred to in
Tuckerman v Neville
(1992) 2 Qd R 657.
That case concerned the issue of
whether the District Court had jurisdiction to hear and determine an action in
which the defendant
was present in the jurisdiction, but the cause of action
arose outside the jurisdiction. Relevantly, Justice McPherson referred
which establish that inferior Courts have jurisdiction over actions arising
outside the State in which they are located,
subject to jurisdiction over the
defendant. His Honour observed:
Both before federation and shortly
after it, the question was much debated whether a District Court or its
equivalent had territorial
defendant was within territorial limits, the cause of action had arisen abroad.
In Victoria
it was held that no such jurisdiction reposed in the county courts
of that colony: see
Brooks Robinson & Co. v. Howard Smith & Sons
[1890] VicLawRp 37
(1890) 16 V.L.R. 245.
In New South Wales the opposite approach prevailed:
Thompson v. Hood
(1884) 15 L.R. (N.S.W.) 202
, 204–205, where
Martin C.J. said that the law had always been that a personal and therefore
“ambulatory” action
might be brought in a superior court although
the cause of action arose in another country. He went on:
“It is said that the rule is different so far as inferior jurisdiction
is concerned. I do not think there is any difference.
If an action is brought in
a court of inferior jurisdiction, all that must be established is that the
action is within the limited
When the question rose in Queensland it was resolved in favour of the New
South Wales decision: see
Maschwitz v. Searles
[1903] St.R.Qd. 238.
the Full Court held that a defendant to a Supreme Court action, who resided and
carried on business in Queensland at Longreach,
could have been sued in the
District Court under the equivalent of r. 9(a) even though the contract on which
the action was brought
was made and its breach took place in Sydney. Speaking on
behalf of this Court, Griffith C.J. said that if any of the conditions
in the contemporary analogue of r. 9 existed, the power of the Court arose.
The Distillers Company Ltd v. Hayes
[1911] Q.W.N. 22
Macnaughton D.C.J. found jurisdiction in the District Court to entertain an
action for goods sold and delivered in Victoria to a
defendant who at the time
of service was resident in Queensland at Sandgate. More recently those decisions
were followed by Mills
National Bank of Australasia v. Trout
2 N.Z.L.R. 303
, where the action was commenced by service on a resident of New
Zealand of process issuing out of the magistrates court in an action
in that country arising out of a contract entered into in Vila in what is now
These decisions seem to me to establish that, at least if the defendant is
personally within the territorial jurisdiction, he may
be sued in an appropriate
District Court in Queensland if the action falls within one or more of the
prescriptions in r. 9 or its
equivalent.
defendant might think this case assists, but the statutory context has changed.
Rule 9 previously provided that the district
in which an action shall be
commenced was as follows:
(a) The district within which the defendant ... resides or carries on
(b) The district within which the cause of action or claim, either wholly or in
some material point, arose; and
(c) The district within which by an engagement or promise in writing given by
the defendant a debt or sum of money is payable.
[48] That rule,
and its earlier statutory form considered by Griffith CJ, was taken as extending
civil jurisdiction of the then District
Court to all cases which fell within
those parameters.
[49] The modern
equivalent of rule 9 seems to be rule 35. However, that rule is overtaken by
rule 34, which by necessary implication
does not recognise any requirement for
connection to a district as a condition for jurisdiction over an action.
[50] What is
left is the recognition in
Tuckerman v Neville
(and the cases which
preceded it) that inferior Courts have jurisdiction over any action which falls
within its subject matter jurisdiction,
even if it arises outside the
[51] This is of
course consistent with the general principle that a proceeding which comes
within the subject matter jurisdiction
involving a defendant over whom the Court
has personal jurisdiction, is a proceeding which is within jurisdiction.
[52] Once that
is established, it is a matter for Queensland choice of law rules (or Australian
choice of law rules if one is speaking
of single common law of the Commonwealth)
as to the proper law for the resolution of that action.
Appropriate forum issues
might be that Victoria is a more appropriate forum for the determination of
these proceedings. However, that is a matter
which can be pursued by an
application under s. 20 SEPA. No such application was brought before his
Honour. Issues of jurisdiction
and discretion should not be confused.
the reasons I have given, the appeal is allowed, the orders the Magistrate Court
made 16 May 2025 are set aside and the application
filed 1 April 2025 is
Magistrates Courts Act 1921
s 45(2)(a).
Sportec Pty Ltd v Leatherman Tool Group Inc
[2024] QDC 188.
Mark Leeming,
Authority to
The Law of Jurisdiction in Australia
(The Federation
ed, 2020) ch 1, pp. 2-3. See also,
91 NSWLR 226;
[2015] NSWCCA 309
PT Garuda Indonesia Ltd v
(2012) 247 CLR 240
[2012] HCA 33
Bray v F Hoffman-La
[2002] FCA 243
(2002) 190 ALR 1
to [198]. This case is also
similar in that respect to
East West Airlines Ltd v Turner
[2010] NSWCA 53
, where the issue was dealt with as part of the
Mark Leeming,
Authority to Decide
The Law of Jurisdiction in Australia
(The Federation Press, 2
ed, 2020) ch 2.5, pp.
Ibid p. 44.
Laurie v Carroll
[1958] HCA 4
at 322-323.
Mobil Oil Australia
Pty Ltd v Victoria
(2002) 211 CLR at [116], citing the United States
decision of
Pennoyer v Neff
[1877] USSC 166
Schmidt v Won
[1997] VSC 24
at 452; ss 12 and 130
Ron Kingham Real
Estate Pty Ltd v Edgar
[1999] 2 Qd R
Mark Leeming,
Authority to Decide
The Law of Jurisdiction in Australia
(The Federation Press, 2
ed, 2020) p.
That statutory
framework differs materially from that considered in
Tuckerman v Neville
(1992) 2 Qd R 657.
Commissioners of Stamps (Qld) v Arnold Wienholt
(1915) HCA 49
(2 August 1915).
Isaacs, Gavan Duffy and Powers JJ at page 4.
[1937] HCA 4
(1937) 56 CLR 337.
See Gleeson CJ at [10] and
[17], Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ at [56] to [58]; Kirby J at [135] to
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (483 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter