URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2008/340.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hickey v. Crime and Misconduct Commission [2008] QDC 340 (15 August 2014)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Hickey v Crime and Misconduct Commission
[2008] QDC 340
ANTHONY WILLIAM HICKEY
(Appellant)
CRIME AND MISCONDUCT COMMISSION
(Respondent)
2868 of 2006
PROCEEDING:
Appeal – Costs
ORIGINATING COURT:
Magistrates’ Court Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
15 August 2008
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
19 May 2008
Shanahan DCJ
Respondent to pay $11,760 as costs of the appeal. I
direct that such an amount be paid to the Registrar of the District Court,
by 15 October 2008 to be then paid to the Appellant.
Respondent to pay $26,960 as costs of the summary trial.
CATCHWORDS:
Ms K Mellifont for the appellant
Mr M Plunkett for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Gilshenan and Luton Legal Group for the appellant
Official Solicitor, Crime and Misconduct Commission for the
[1] On 13 September 2007 I allowed the appellant’s appeal against
conviction and entered a finding of not guilty in relation
to an offence against
s 218(1) of the Crime and Misconduct Act 2001 (Qld). The appellant had been
convicted after a three day summary
trial. I indicated in my decision that I
would hear the parties as to costs.
[2] On 19 May 2008 the parties argued the
issue of costs as well as providing written outlines and other material upon
wish to rely.
[3] The appellant sought payment of his costs in
relation to the public enquiry conducted by the Crime and Misconduct Commission
the three day summary trial and the appeal. The hearing of the appeal
took one day. At the hearing on 19 May 2008 the appellant
abandoned the claim
for the costs of the CMC hearing. The respondent opposes the award of costs.
If costs are to be awarded, the
respondent argues that costs should be limited
as prescribed by the
Justices Act 1886
[4] The appellant has provided
material that shows that the costs he actually incurred were $83,585.73 for the
summary trial and $119,686.90
for the appeal. An affidavit of Mr A Bloom,
Queensland General Manager of D G Thompson Legal Costs was received on the costs
over objection by the respondent. That indicated two assessment bases.
One was based on the solicitor/client costs in accordance
with the client
agreement and the second based on the District Court scale. The costs assessed
using the client agreement were $75,200
for the summary trial and $114,600 for
the appeal. The costs assessed using the District Court scale were $68,000 for
the summary
trial and $108,400 for the appeal. The respondent argues that those
assessment bases were inappropriate in the circumstances, are
extravagant and,
in any event, contain items which should not be allowed on any assessment basis
(e.g. costs of a press release).
The Background
[5] The appellant was
convicted of an offence that on 13 April 2005 he gave the CMC a document
containing information which was false
or misleading in a material particular.
To prove that charge it was accepted by the parties that the prosecution was
required to
prove that the appellant knew that the information was false or
misleading and that he knew of the materiality.
[6] The CMC was assessing
allegations of suspected official misconduct in relation to the Gold Coast City
election of March 2004.
In the course of that assessment the appellant was
asked to supply information concerning details of a trust fund administered by
the appellant. The appellant supplied information on 13 April 2005. The
provision of that information founded the charge.
[7] A CMC hearing later
took place during the investigation of the matter. The appellant gave evidence
on 18 and 19 October and 24
November 2005. He was extensively questioned about
his response to the requests by the CMC for information.
[8] At some stage of
the CMC investigation, the appellant had provided his office file in relation to
that trust account. As I noted
in my reasons, that file was properly
maintained, was subject to the Law Society’s trust account regime and
contained full
details of the trust account.
[9] This background is set out
in more detail in my judgment in relation to the appeal, particularly at
paragraphs [9] – [39].
[10] The appellant faced a summary trial on 8, 9
and 31 August 2006. Each party was represented by senior counsel on the trial.
On the trial the prosecution called three employees of the appellant’s
firm. They gave evidence of the directions given by
the appellant for the
preparation of the documents of 13 April 2005 and the office procedures adopted
by them in the preparation
of those documents. That evidence, as I found on the
appeal, was crucial in determining whether the prosecution had proved its case
to the required standard. It was also clearly within the knowledge of the CMC
who prosecuted the matter directly.
[11] The appellant was convicted, a fine
was imposed and a conviction was recorded. The appeal was heard on 16 July
2007. Again,
each of the parties was represented by senior counsel as well as a
junior counsel with respect to the appellant.
Costs Under the
Justices Act
[12] At common law a successful defendant in a criminal case is not
entitled to costs (Berry and British Transport Commission [1961]
3 AIIER 65).
That rule was well recognised in Queensland (R v Kimmins, ex parte A-G
; R v Foggo, ex parte A-G
[1989] 2 Qd R 49).
In Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
170 CLR 534
the High Court, by a majority, found that, in ordinary
circumstances, an order for costs should be made in favour of a successful
defendant in a criminal matter.
[13] The Queensland legislature, by a series
of amendments to the
Justices Act 1886
, introduced a regime in relation to the
award of costs which was clearly intended to replace the principles laid down in
v Casey (see Murray v Radford
[2003] QCA 91).
The clear principle
behind the amendments is to place limits on the discretion to award costs to a
successful defendant in a criminal
prosecution so that a prosecuting authority
is not deterred from properly bringing charges in accordance with its public
obligation (Lewis v Utting, ex parte Utting
[1985] 1 Qd R 423
[14] This appeal was brought pursuant to
Justices Act 1886
decision whether or not to award costs and the quantum of any costs is governed
by the provisions of that Act. On the hearing
of an appeal under s 222, the
Judge may confirm, set aside or vary the order or make any other order in the
matter the Judge considers
just (s 225(1)). The Judge may exercise any
power that could have been exercised by whoever made the order appealed against
(s 225(3)).
Accordingly it falls for consideration whether orders should be
made for costs of both the appeal and the summary trial and if so
[15] In relation to costs on appeal, s 226
Justices Act 1886
The Judge may make such order as to costs to be paid by either party as the
Judge may think just.”
Section 232A
232A Costs for Division
(1) In deciding the costs that are just for this division, the Judge may
award costs only –
(a) for an item allowed for this division under a scale of costs prescribed
under a regulation; and
(b) up to the amount allowed for the item under the scale.
(2) However, the Judge may allow a higher amount for costs if the Judge is
satisfied that the higher amount is just having regard
to the special
difficulty, complexity or importance of the appeal.”
[17] In relation to the costs of the appeal, I must be satisfied that it is just
to make such an order and then the provisions of
relation to the costs of the summary trial, the relevant provisions of the
Justices Act 1886
are, as relevant here,
158 Costs on
(1) When justices instead of convicting or making an order dismiss the
complaint, they may by their order of dismissal order that
the complainant shall
pay to the defendant such costs as to them seem just and reasonable.
158A Exercise of Discretion in Relation to an Award of Costs
(1) Despite
, justices who dismiss a complaint may make an order for
costs in favour of the defendant against a complainant who was a police officer
or public officer only if the justices are satisfied that it is proper that the
order for costs should be made.
(2) In deciding whether it is proper to make the order for costs, the
justices must take into account all relevant circumstances,
including, for
(a) whether the proceeding was brought and continued in good faith; and
(b) whether there was a failure to take appropriate steps to investigate a
matter coming to, or within, the knowledge of a person
responsible for bringing
or continuing the proceeding; and
(c) whether the investigation into the offence was conducted in an
appropriate way; and
(d) whether the order of dismissal was made on technical grounds and not on a
finding that there was insufficient evidence to convict
or make an order against
the defendant; and
(e) whether the defendant brought suspicion on himself or herself by conduct
engaged in after the events constituting the commission
of the offence; and
(f) whether the defendant unreasonably declined an opportunity before a
charge was laid –
(i) to explain the defendant’s version of the events; or
(ii) to produce evidence likely to exonerate the defendant; and
(iii) the explanation or evidence could have avoided a prosecution; and
(g) whether there was a failure to comply with a direction given under
(h) whether the defendant conducted the defence in a way that prolonged the
proceeding unreasonably; and
(i) whether the defendant was acquitted on a charge, but convicted on
158B Costs for Division
(1) In deciding the costs that are just and reasonable for this division, the
justices may award costs only –
(a) for an item allowed for this division under a scale of costs prescribed
under a regulation; and
(b) up to the amount allowed for the item under the scale.
(2) However, the justices may allow a higher amount for costs if the justices
are satisfied that the higher amount is just and reasonable
having regard to the
special difficulty, complexity or importance of the case.”
[19] In relation to the costs of the summary trial, I must be satisfied that it
is just and reasonable to make such an order and
also be satisfied that it is
proper that the order for costs should be made
(s 158A(1)).
complainant in the summary trial was a public officer. If I am so satisfied
then the provisions of
Costs of the Appeal
[20] In the
investigation stage of the CMC enquiry, the appellant fully co-operated. He
provided his office file, he allowed investigators
access to his office computer
system and he allowed the use of his office for CMC investigators to interview
his staff. He answered
questions during the CMC hearing over three days without
being legally represented and without once claiming privilege.
[21] The CMC
were well aware of the evidence of the appellant’s staff which I found was
of substantial importance in the decision
as to whether the prosecution could
establish its case to the required standard. Written submissions were provided
to the CMC hearing
on behalf of the appellant emphasising those issues. The
prosecution was instituted with that knowledge.
[22] It was submitted on
behalf of the appellant that the CMC had shown bad faith in the way it dealt
with the appellant during the
CMC hearing and its institution of the
prosecution. It was submitted that this was relevant to my decision as to
whether to award
costs as well as to the quantum of those costs. Whilst the
appellant was treated somewhat robustly during the CMC hearing, being
legal representation and with no attempt being made to ensure that he was aware
of his rights, the appellant was, of course,
a practising solicitor. I am not
satisfied there was any improper motive in the prosecution. The issue
investigated by the CMC
was of significant public importance and there was a
public interest in fully canvassing the issues. The only criticism which could
be made of the CMC was that it did not refer the issue of the appellant’s
prosecution to an independent prosecuting authority
(the DPP) as submitted by
counsel assisting the CMC hearing. Such a reference would have allowed an
independent objective assessment
of the strength of the case against the
appellant. This is particular the case where the CMC was the actual alleged
victim of the
supply of misleading information.
[23] Of relevance also to the
issue of costs is the appellant’s conduct of the summary trial. Through
negotiation between legal
representatives the issues were clearly defined and
the number of witnesses required was limited. The appellant’s
co-operation
in this is relevant to the question as to whether it is just to
award costs.
[24] The crucial matter, in my view, is that the CMC were
clearly made aware of the issues raised in the evidence of the staff of
appellant and should have assessed the impact that that had on the chances of a
successful prosecution. The appellant made concerted
efforts to ensure that the
CMC was aware of these issues and the impact they had on the prosecution case.
As I found on the appeal,
the impact of these issues was telling. The
prosecution proceeded in any event.
[25] For those reasons, I am of the view
that it is just to award costs in relation to the appeal.
[26] I am also of
the view that it is just, having regard to the special difficulty, complexity or
importance of the appeal, to allow
a higher amount for costs than under the
scale provided.
[27] The amount of material to be considered in relation to
the transcript of the CMC hearing and the summary trial itself was extensive.
Whilst the issues on the appeal were not particularly complex, there were a
number of grounds of appeal that the learned Magistrate
had misdirected himself.
That entailed a detailed recourse to the evidence.
[28] The matter itself was
an important one. It was of considerable public importance in relation to the
conduct of a local government
election and had attracted substantial media
attention. The importance to the appellant himself of the outcome is also, in
relevant. Whilst it is trite to say that the outcome of a criminal
trial is important for any accused, here the impact that a conviction
an offence would have on the appellant’s profession, his business and his
public reputation would be substantial.
The “importance of the
appeal” must also be assessed in that regard.
[29] Another relevant
factor in my view as to whether the appeal could be characterised as having
“special difficulty, complexity
or importance” is the way in which
the prosecuting authority approached the matter. At both the summary trial and
the CMC was represented by senior counsel. That indicates the
importance with which the CMC regarded the matter.
[30] For those reasons, I
am satisfied that it is just to allow a higher amount for costs than provided
under the scale. I will deal
with quantum later.
Costs of the Summary
[31] I must be satisfied that it seems “just and
reasonable” to order the complainant to pay the costs of the summary
and also that it is “proper” that the order for costs should be
[32] Again the CMC was well aware of the issues to be raised by the
appellant on his summary trial and should have been aware of the
difficulties
occasioned to the prospects of the success of a prosecution by the evidence to
be given by the appellant’s staff.
As noted above, the appellant had
fully co-operated in the investigation prior to the institution of the charge
against him. The
prosecution however proceeded.
[33] For that reason, I am
also of the view that it is just and reasonable to award costs in relation to
the summary trial and that
it is also proper for the costs order to be made. In
relation to some of the specific considerations contained in
clear in my view that the proceeding was brought and continued in good faith but
that there should have been a more objective
assessment of the strength of the
prosecution case; the order for dismissal (on the successful appeal) was not
made on technical
grounds; the appellant did not unreasonably decline to give an
explanation or to produce evidence which could have avoided a prosecution
(indeed he actively provided such evidence) and he in fact conducted his defence
in a way that shortened the length of the summary
[34] I am also of
the view, pursuant to
, that it is just and reasonable, having regard
to the special difficulty, complexity or importance of the case, to allow a
amount than under the scale. There was a voluminous amount of material
to assess from the CMC hearing. As described above the
matter had considerable
public importance and also substantial personal importance for the appellant.
Again the CMC briefed senior
counsel to prosecute in the summary trial. For
those reasons, I am satisfied that the case had “special difficulty,
or importance”.
Quantum of Costs
[35] With respect to the
costs of the appeal,
provides that when deciding the “costs that
are just for this division” (Division 1,
, the judge may award
costs only “for an item allowed for this division under a scale of costs
prescribed under a regulation
and up to the amount allowed for the item under
the scale”. Sub-section (2) allows for a higher amount in the way
[36] With respect to the costs of the summary trial,
provides that when in deciding the “costs that are just and reasonable for
this division” (Division 8,
, the Justices may award costs only
“for an item allowed for this division under a scale of costs prescribed
under a regulation
and up to the amount allowed for the item under the
scale”. Sub-section (2) allows for a higher amount in the way described
Section 266
Justices Act 1886
Regulations
(1) The Governor in Council may make regulations for the purposes of this
(2) A regulation may make provision with respect to:
(a) the matters for which fees, costs and charges are payable under this Act,
the amounts of the fees, costs and charges, the persons
who are liable to pay
fees, costs and charges, when fees, costs and charges are payable, and the
recovery of any unpaid amount of
fees, costs and charges; and
(b) prescribing offences for contraventions of a regulation, and fixing a
maximum penalty of a fine of two penalty units for such
a contravention.
(3) The power conferred by this section to make a regulation providing for
the imposition of fees may be exercised by providing for
all or any of the
following matters:-
(a) specific fees;
(b) maximum or minimum fees;
(c) scales of fees;
(d) the reduction, waiver or refund of fees.
(4) The power to make a regulation about costs includes power to provide for
a scale of costs.”
[38] Justices Regulation 2004 provides at Regulation 18 that the scale of costs
for Part 6, Division 8 and Part 9, Division 1 of
the Act is contained in
Schedule 2.
[39] Schedule 2 of that Regulation provides,
Scale sets out amounts up to which costs may be allowed
This scale sets out –
(a) the only items for which costs may be allowed for Part 6, Division 8 and
Part 9, Division 1 of the Act; and
(b) the amount up to which costs may be allowed for each item.
A higher amount for costs may be allowed under s 158B(2) or 232A(2) of the
Item of costs covers all professional work
An item in Part 2 covers all legal professional work, even if the work is
done by more than one lawyer.
Only necessary or proper costs may be allowed.
A cost is to be allowed only to the extent to which –
(a) incurring the cost was necessary or proper to achieve justice or to
defend the rights of the party; or
(b) the cost was not incurred by over caution, negligence, mistake or merely
at the wish of the party.
to District Court Judge
Professional costs are 20% higher than for complaint.
For an appeal to a District Court Judge under Part 9, Division 1 of the Act,
the amount up to which costs may be allowed for legal
professional work is the
amount that may be allowed under Part 2, as if the work were for a complaint,
increased by 20%.
Part 2 Amounts up to which costs may be allowed for legal professional
Work for hearing of complaint up to and including day one.
Instructions
and preparation for the hearing, including attendance on day one of the hearing
... up to $1,500.
After day one.
2. For each day of the hearing after day one ... up to $875.
Other Court Attendances
attendance, other than on the hearing of the complaint ... up to $250.”
[40] The appellant submits that it is just (and reasonable) to award costs at
the full indemnity solicitor/client basis or on the
amount as calculated on the
District Court scale. The respondent submits that if costs above scale are to
be awarded, that such
costs must bear some relationship to the scale provided in
Justices Regulation 2004.
[41] The appellant basically submits that I have an
unfettered discretion to assess the quantum of costs if I am satisfied it is
(and reasonable, in relation to the costs of the summary trial) to allow
costs above the scale.
[42] The respondent submits that the scale should be
used as a guide in arriving at a quantum above the scale (Washburn v State
Commission (WA)
1992 8 WAR 188
at 193, 194; Durrant v Gardner
, McGill DCJ, 23 June 2000 at [46]). It is submitted that the amount awarded
should be a small multiple of that scale.
[43] To my mind, it is clear that
the legislature has limited the discretion to award costs to successful
defendants in criminal prosecutions
as a matter of policy. That policy is based
on the public interest of ensuring that the bringing of proper prosecutions is
not fettered
by the prospects of extensive costs orders being made in the event
of unsuccessful prosecutions. Any award of costs above the scale
must be made
with that principle in mind. No authorities have been placed before me where
solicitor/client costs or indemnity costs
have been awarded in these
circumstances.
[44] The costs to be awarded must be “just” in
relation to the appeal and “just and reasonable” in relation
summary trial. The amounts to be awarded must be made bearing in mind the
policy of the legislation. The scale in the regulation
is a clear indication of
that policy as it bears little relation to present day economics. However, to
my mind, the legislative
intent is clear.
[45] The respondent submits that
rather than descending into the minutiae of the legal bills, the court could
refer the matter to
taxation for a detailed assessment or award a lump sum upon
global considerations. I prefer to award a global sum for the purposes
certainty and to bring a conclusion to the matter.
[46] It must also be
remembered that the case involved a three day hearing before a magistrate and a
one day appeal before a single
judge. Any assessment of what is just (and
reasonable) must bear that in mind.
[47] The Respondent also submits that the
amount of costs should be limited to the items set out in Schedule 2 of the
Regulation.
That may be so when costs are awarded under s 158B(2) and s 232A(1)
but I am of the view that no such limitation applies when it
is appropriate to
award a higher amount under s 158B(2) or s 232A(2). In that regard, the Note to
paragraph 1 of the Schedule 2
of the Regulation recognises the discretion to
allow a higher amount for costs which, in my view, qualifies the limitation in
[48] The respondent submits that a fair assessment for a global
sum may include two days preparation for counsel and solicitor and
appearing at hearing for counsel and solicitor for the summary trial and one
day’s preparation for counsel and solicitor
and one day’s appearance
for counsel and solicitor at the appeal. That submission appears to overlook
that the summary trial
took three days of hearing.
The respondent also
submits as an alternative that a daily fee for the appearance of senior counsel
(based on the National Guide to
Counsel Fees, Registrar, Federal Court of
Australia, 27 July 2006) be used to calculate a maximum sum based on the days of
That equates to maximum costs of $17,210 for the summary trial and
$6,360 for the appeal.
I am satisfied that it was appropriate to brief senior
counsel in this matter. Any award of costs that is just (and reasonable) should
recognise that.
In relation to the summary trial I am of the view that it is
just and reasonable to award costs based on the daily rate for senior
provided by the Federal Court scale but also to award costs for the
solicitor’s preparation as a function of the
scale set by the Justices
Regulation 2004. To my mind a multiple of three times that scale would be
appropriate.
The calculations to achieve a just and reasonable lump sum
1. Court attendance for mention.
2. Instructions and preparation for hearing including first day and including
fee for senior counsel.
($4,500 plus $6,360)
3. Second day of hearing including fee for senior counsel.
($2,625 plus
4. Third day of hearing including for senior counsel.
($2,625 plus $5,300)
In relation to the appeal I am of the view that is just to award costs based on
the daily rate for senior counsel as provided by
the Federal Court scale but
also to award costs of the solicitor’s preparation as a function of the
scale set by the Justices
Regulation 2004. Again a multiple of three is
appropriate.
The calculations to achieve a just lump sum are:
1. Appeal hearing including preparation for hearing, first day and fee for
senior counsel
($5,400 plus $6,360)
Section 232(1) sets out the form for any order for costs of appeal.
respect to the costs of the appeal, I order the respondent pay $11,760.00 to the
appellant. I direct that such amount be paid
to the Registrar of the District
Court, Brisbane by 15 October 2008 to be then paid over to the
With respect to the costs of the summary trial, I order the
respondent to pay $26,960.00 to the appellant.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (133 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter