URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Genamson Holdings Pty Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council [2025] QLAC 2 (27 August 2025)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Genamson Holdings Pty Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council
[2025] QLAC
Genamson Holdings Pty Ltd
ACN 053 174 271
(appellant)
Moreton Bay Regional Council
(respondent)
LAC No 001-25
Land Court No AQL037-23
PROCEEDING:
Appeal from the Land Court of Queensland
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
19 August 2025
DELIVERED AT:
9 June 2025
PG Stilgoe OAM, President of the Land Court
ND Loos, Member of the Land Court
The appeal is allowed. The preliminary question should be answered
CATCHWORDS:
STATUTES – INTERPRETATION – where the respondent issued two
notices of intention to resume land owned by the appellant
– where those
notices were discontinued and the land was not resumed – where the
appellant contended they were entitled
to various heads of loss under
Acquisition of Land Act 1967
(Qld) (“ALA”) allegedly
suffered as a consequence of the respondent’s issuance of the notices of
intention to resume
– where a preliminary question was submitted to the
Land Court of Queensland for determination – where that preliminary
question concerned whether compensation claimed under
of the ALA was
relevantly limited to costs and expenses of a legal, valuation or other
professional nature which was reasonably incurred,
reasonable in amount, and was
incurred in connection with the consideration or preparation of a claim for
compensation – where
the Court, at first instance, answered that question
affirmatively – where
of the ALA provided that the constructing
authority may have costs and expenses taxed by an officer of the Supreme Court
no person shall be entitled to compensation in excess of the value of
his or her estate or interest in the land –
where the Court
relevantly concluded that compensation under
was limited by
– whether the Court erred in the conclusion that the preliminary question
should be answered in the affirmative
Acquisition of Land Act 1967
Acquisition of Land and Other Legislative Amendment Act 2009
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 679, r 702, r 705, r 723, r 724
Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxes (SA) v Elder’s Trustee
& Executor Co Ltd
[1936] HCA 64
(1936) 57 CLR 610
Genamson Holdings Pty
Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council (No 2)
[2024] QLC 24
Elevators Board (Vict) v Dunmunkle Corporation
[1946] HCA 13
(1946) 73 CLR 70
Emanuel (No 14) Pty Ltd v Council of the Shire of Caboolture
(1994-1995) 15 QLCR 130
, considered
Hunter Resources Ltd v Melville
[1988] HCA 5
(1988) 164 CLR 234
Kettering Pty Ltd v Noosa Shire Council
[2004] HCA 33
(2004) 78 ALJR 1022
, considered
Logan City Shopping Centre Pty Ltd v
Retail Shop Leases Tribunal
[2006] QSC 172
[2007] 1 Qd R 246
Mabo v State of
Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Marshall v Director-General,
Department of Transport
[2001] HCA 37
(2001) 205 CLR 603
, considered
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507
Ridgehaven Retirement Village Pty Ltd v
Caloundra City Council
[2004] QPEC 2
[2004] QPELR 439
, considered
Roads and Maritime
Services (NSW) v United Petroleum Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWCA 41
(2019) 99 NSWLR 279
SAS Trustee Corporation v Miles
[2018] HCA 55
(2018) 265 CLR 137
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
262 CLR 362
Taylor v Owners – Strata Plan No 11564
253 CLR 531
Weld v Gold Coast City Council
(1979) 6 QLCR 8
APPEARANCES:
RJ Anderson KC, with WDJ Macintosh (instructed by HWL Ebsworth) for the
DR Gore KC, with DA Quayle (instructed by Moreton Bay Regional
Council) for the respondent
In 2016 and 2017, Moreton Bay Regional Council issued two notices of
intention to resume land at Morayfield Road, Caboolture South.
The notices were
issued to Genamson Holdings Pty Ltd, the owner of the land. The notices were
discontinued. The land was not resumed.
[2] In those
circumstances, Genamson is entitled to claim compensation for “costs and
expenses” under
Acquisition of Land Act 1967
(“ALA”). The parties disagree about the amount of compensation.
The primary area of dispute is whether
allows Genamson to recover
losses which it says were occasioned by the service of both notices of intention
[3] Genamson
claims four broad heads of compensation:
(a) additional costs incurred to obtain a development approval over the subject
land, which it says would not have been incurred
if the notices of intention to
resume had not been served;
(b) losses of rent, additional letting up costs, additional incentive costs, and
fit-out contributions offered to tenants occupying
its development on the
subject land to address the impact which the notices of intention to resume had
on tenant occupancy within
the development;
(c) costs incurred by reason of the sterilisation of the development potential
of the subject land caused by the notices of intention
to resume; and
(d) reasonable legal, valuation and other professional costs incurred in
responding to the notices of intention to resume and in
preparing its claims for
compensation.
[4] The Council
asserts that Genamson is only entitled to claim the fourth head of compensation
preliminary question, the Court below was asked:
On the proper construction of
section 16(1A)
Acquisition of Land
(Qld) (ALA), is a claim for compensation pursuant to that provision
limited to:
of pocket costs and expenses in the nature of legal, valuation and other
professional fees:
(i) reasonably incurred;
(ii) themselves reasonable; and
(iii) which are incurred in connection with the consideration of and/or in the
preparation of a claim for compensation following
the resumption of land
foreshadowed by the notice of intention to resume; and
b. any actual damage done to the land by the construction authority.
[6] The court
answered this question, “yes”. Genamson has appealed, contending
that the answer should be “no”.
[7] Much of the
argument on the appeal was directed to Genamson’s contention that, on the
proper construction of
, a claim for compensation for “costs and
expenses” could include financial
[8] Although
Genamson’s written submissions alleged five material errors by the Court
below, its oral submissions focused on
propositions:
(a) the Court below failed to consider the ordinary meaning of “costs and
expenses” (appeal ground 1);
(b) the Court below failed to properly construe the extent of the right to
compensation, particularly in light of High Court authority
confirming that
Courts should take a liberal approach to the construction of compensation
statutes (appeal grounds 2 and 7); and
Section 16(1C)
ought not be construed to limit the amount recoverable under
(appeal ground 3).
[9] We propose
to consider the second proposition first.
Did the Court below
fail to properly construe the extent of the right to compensation?
parties acknowledge that the principles which apply to the task of statutory
construction are well settled. Perhaps the
best articulation of those principles
is provided by Gageler J (as the Chief Justice then was) in
SAS Trustee
Corporation v Miles
“Statutory construction is the process by which meaning is attributed to
statutory text
In a doubtful case, it involves constructional choice. The statutory text must
be considered from the outset in context
attribution of meaning to the text in context must be guided so far as possible
by statutory purpose on the understanding that
a legislature ordinarily intends
to pursue its purposes by coherent means.”
[11] His Honour
reiterated those principles in
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border
Section 14A(1)
Acts Interpretation Act
(Qld) echoes that approach: the
interpretation that will best achieve the purpose of the ALA is to be preferred
over any other interpretation.
does not state its purposes or objectives. Genamson submits that
the purpose of the ALA is to compensate a person who is affected
by the taking
of land. The Council submits that it is to resume land, not to protect the
dispossessed landowner. In our view, the
purpose of the ALA is twofold: to
provide a regime for the taking of land by constructing authorities, while
providing compensation
for a party whose land is taken.
ALA contemplates three resumption scenarios, which, listed from most impactful
on the landowner to least, are:
(a) a complete compulsory acquisition
) – title in the land
is transferred to the constructing authority. The claimant is entitled to be
compensated for the value
of the land taken plus “costs attributable to
disturbance”, as defined in
These disturbance costs include an
amount reasonably attributed to the “loss of profits” resulting from
interruption
to the claimant’s business that is a direct and natural
consequence of the taking of the land
(s 20(5)(f))
and “other economic
losses and costs” reasonably incurred by the claimant that are a direct
and natural consequence of
the taking of the land
(s 20(5)(g))
(b) an acquisition which is revoked before the amount of compensation payable in
respect of the taking of the land has been determined
the land transfers to the constructing authority but is later revested in the
claimant. The claimant is entitled
to compensation for “the loss or
damage and (if any) costs or expenses” incurred by the claimant in
consequence of the
taking of the land prior to its revesting
(c) discontinuance of resumption before the publication of the gazette
resumption notice (s 16) – the resumption is discontinued
before title to
the land is transferred to the constructing authority. The claimant is entitled
to “costs and expenses”
and any actual damage done to the land by
the constructing authority (s 16(1A)).
logical that a person whose land is permanently taken is given the greatest
right to compensation. A person whose land
is taken and then given back is
given a lesser right to compensation, but more than simply “costs or
expenses”. A person
who simply lives under a threat of land being taken
– but which is not ultimately taken – is limited, in terms of
costs, to a claim for “costs and expenses”.
last point is made clear by the text of s 16(1A) which provides that:
... no person shall have any claim for compensation or other right or remedy
whatsoever against the constructing authority for any
loss or damage alleged to
have been occasioned (directly or indirectly) by the service of the notice of
intention to resume or the
discontinuance of the resumption except a claim for
compensation for costs and expenses incurred by the person who was served with
the notice and any actual damage done to the land concerned by the constructing
[16] Section 16
stands apart from the compensation provisions which address the first two
resumption scenarios for two reasons.
[17] First, it
addresses a situation where title in the land never changes hands. In that
respect, Genamson contends that the Court
below erred in concluding that the
broader scope of compensation provided for in
means that s 16(1A) should
be construed more narrowly.
submits that the entitlement to claim compensation for “loss or
damage” under
is explained by the land having been taken, albeit
temporarily, whereas under the scenario addressed by s 16(1A) the land is not
taken. That both sections permit recovery of the same head of compensation
– “costs or expenses” under
and “costs and
expenses” under s 16(1A) – is explained on the basis that a claimant
might incur the same type of
“costs and expenses” under either
cannot see how the matters upon which Genamson relies impugn the conclusion of
the Court below. As Genamson identifies, “the
loss” referred to in
is a loss incurred by the claimant because of the taking of the land.
That loss is not the value of the land (which is ultimately
revested in the
claimant) but some other form of financial loss. The use of the word
“loss” to describe such compensable
financial loss, and to
separately confer an express entitlement to claim compensation for “costs
or expenses”, being
a similar compound phrase to that used in s 16(1A),
suggests the legislature has drawn a distinction between financial loss in the
broader sense and “costs and expenses”. Only the latter is
compensable under s 16(1A).
[19] Secondly, s
16(1A) starts with a blanket prohibition (stated in the words extracted in
up to and including the
word “resumption”) and then provides an exception to that blanket
prohibition (stated in the
words extracted in paragraph
commencing with the word
[20] As to this,
Genamson submits that the Court below erroneously applied the reasoning of the
High Court in
Kettering Pty Ltd v Noosa Shire
by finding that the
correct approach to the construction of s 16(1A) was “to identify the
extent to which the ‘very expansive
denial’ [to compensation] is
reduced by the narrow exception of costs and
It submits that
is authority for the broad principle that a right ought not be
construed by reference to the restrictions on that right; that the
approach is to commence by determining what the right of compensation is, not by
determining how the right to compensation
is diminished, whether by way of
exception or other restriction.
[21] The High
considered a right to compensation under very
different legislation. The broad principle identified by Genamson provides
assistance in this case, where s 16(1A) commences with a denial of the
entitlement to claim compensation.
is not authority for the
converse principle identified by Genamson: that a prohibition on compensation
should be construed by a broad
reading of a right that forms an exception to
that prohibition. That approach would ignore the structure of the provision.
[22] Genamson
further argues that, based on the decision in
Marshall v Director-General,
Department of Transport
the fact the land was not taken is of no relevance. It relied on the
comments of McHugh J:
“... In the case of legislation dealing with the compensation to be
awarded in respect of the compulsory acquisition of land,
however, a different
presumption operates. The legislation is intended to ensure that the person
whose land has been taken is justly
compensated. Such legislation should be
construed with the presumption that the legislature intended the claimant to be
compensated. That being so, it would be wrong to construe a provision
[of the ALA] as conferring compensation only for damage that
results from an act that is “the very thing, or an integral part
step in the very thing, which the provisions of the Act” gave the
constructing authority power to carry out. Whenever
the constructing authority
takes steps to achieve any purpose or carry out any function that is incidental
to the purpose for which
part of the land was acquired, it should be regarded as
the exercise of a statutory power within the meaning of s 20(1)(b).”
[23] To similar
effect, Genamson referred to the following statement of Gaudron J:
“Although the rule that legislative provisions are to be construed
according to their natural and ordinary meaning is a rule
application, it is particularly important that it be given its full effect when,
to do otherwise, would limit or impair
individual rights, particularly property
rights. The right to compensation for injurious affection following upon the
of land is an important right of that kind and statutory provisions
conferring such a right should be construed with all the generality
words permit. Certainly, such provisions should not be construed on the basis
that the right to compensation is subject
to limitations or qualifications which
are not found in the terms of the statute.”
[24] As those
passages confirm, this liberal interpretation of compensation legislation
applies in circumstances where the land was
taken. There is no basis in
, however, to suggest that the same approach must be adopted in
every circumstance where a party interacts with a constructing authority,
regardless of whether the land was actually taken. That is, there is nothing
which tells against a narrowing of the right to compensation
as the impact of
the resumption decreases in the manner described at
[25] It should
also be remembered that, as was the case in
, the provision
construed in
differed from s 16(1A) in material ways. The
provisions considered in those authorities began by conferring a right to
compensation
and then imposing a limitation on the scope of that right. As we
have already noted, s 16(1A) does the opposite: it starts with
the prohibition
on claims for compensation for “any loss or damage” and then
provides a limited exception. Providing
a limited right to recover costs and
expenses cannot reinstate an entitlement to claim compensation that has been
expressly excluded.
[26] Genamson
submits that service of a notice of intention to resume amounts to an
interference with property rights because, while
extant, it operates as an
effective bar to the ability of a landowner to transfer the land or to otherwise
grant an interest in it.
It says that those are rights that the landowner would
otherwise have as a matter of practicality. It relies on the observation
Planning and Environment Court in
Ridgehaven Retirement Village Pty Ltd v
Caloundra City Council
that the use of land earmarked for resumption is
“sterilised”.
involved an application for a material change of use as a retirement village.
The land was potentially affected by a transport corridor
to accommodate a rail
link between the North Coast rail line and Maroochydore. The Caloundra City
Council approved the application
subject to a condition that the development be
redesigned to incorporate the future transport corridor.
Court’s acknowledgement that the transport corridor land was sterilised
included an acknowledgement that when the land
was resumed Ridgehaven would be
entitled to compensation at market value. Once again, the case, and the
principle extracted from
it, can be distinguished both on its facts and the
legislative regime from which the right to compensation derives.
[29] Genamson
also urges us to interpret compensation legislation liberally in accordance with
the general rule of statutory interpretation
that clear language must be used in
order to impute a legislative intention that valuable property rights are to be
appropriated
or extinguished without fair
compensation.
Again, that
principle does not assist Genamson in this case where no property rights were
expropriated or extinguished. In any
case, the words used in s 16(1A) are
clear. Those words deny “any claim for compensation ... whatsoever ...
for any loss or
damage”, subject only to the exceptions of a claim for
costs and expenses or actual damage done to the land by the constructing
authority. The application of the general rule does not permit this Court to
ignore such clear words simply to assuage a sense of
unfairness.
[30] For these
reasons, the Court below did not err in identifying the correct approach to the
construction of s 16(1A).
Did the Court below fail to consider
the natural and ordinary meaning of “costs and expenses”?
[31] Genamson
contends that the Court below failed to consider the natural and ordinary
meaning of “costs”, which includes
“a sacrifice, loss or
penalty”. Of course, that is only one of the natural meanings of the
word. As the Court below
identified, there are two natural meanings. The other
is “the price paid to acquire, produce, accomplish or maintain
Having regard
to what we have said above in addressing Genamson’s second proposition,
and taking the ALA as a whole, we consider
that to be the more logical natural
meaning to be applied when construing s 16(1A).
[32] Genamson
submits that s 16(1A) gives it a right to compensation that is, arguably, wider
than the right to costs attributable
to disturbance under s 20(5). That cannot
be correct. Such an interpretation ignores the wide-ranging prohibition at the
of s 16(1A). As the Council points out, such an interpretation gives no
weight to the words “
claim for compensation or other
right or remedy
damage (directly or indirectly)” (emphasis added).
parties made submissions about the effect of
Roads and Maritime Services
(NSW) v United Petroleum Pty
which is noteworthy
because it is a decision of the New South Wales Court of Appeal constituted by
five judges. Genamson relies
on statements by Sackville AJA (with whom Payne JA
agreed) and Preston CJ of the New South Wales Land and Environment Court, to the
effect that the word “costs” is capable of bearing a wide meaning
and can include losses.
the differences between s 16(1A) and the statutory provision considered in
United Petroleum
the debate about that authority was ultimately
not determinative of the question here. The best that can be taken from the
that the interpretation of a provision in legislation depends upon
context. For the reasons already set out above, we consider that
the context of
the ALA supports a construction whereby the words “costs” and
“loss” are used to refer to
different concepts.
[34] Genamson
can take no comfort from earlier decisions of this Court that equate
“costs and expenses” with the common
law concept of disturbance
Those cases were
concerned with different facts. Costs of the type Genamson claims under its
fourth head of compensation were found
to be compensable, whereas the costs of
contesting a notice to resume were found not to
The important distinction
is that none of those cases considered whether losses of the type claimed by
Genamson under its first
three heads of compensation could be recovered on a
claim under s 16(1A).
[35] In any
event, we consider “costs and expenses” in the context of s 16(1A)
and common law disturbance costs to be
separate and distinct concepts.
Consequently, we do not accept Genamson’s contention that the Court below
erred in concluding
that the common law test for disturbance costs does not
apply to a claim for compensation under s
Section 20(5) now sets
out what can be claimed under the head of disturbance costs in some detail.
That provision was inserted
into the ALA when s 20 was amended in
The effect of that
amendment was to define the phrase “costs attributable to
disturbance” in relation to the taking
of land, and thereby exhaustively
prescribe what comprises such costs and displace the common law concept of
disturbance costs.
[36] In that
context, Genamson’s argument about the continued application of the common
law test for disturbance costs on a
claim under s 16(1A) proceeds as
(a) the authorities which have stated that the costs or expenses provided for in
s 16(1A) are disturbance items to which the common
law test applies, were
decided prior to the 2009
amendments;
(b) this explains the statements that the same common law test for disturbance
would apply to claims under both s 16 and 20 of the
(c) the enactment of s 20(5) has prescribed limits as to what constitutes costs
that are attributable to disturbance for the purposes
of a claim under s 20
(albeit in a manner which Genamson contends is consistent with the common law
(d) as no such definition has been enacted for the purposes of s 16(1A), the
common law test for disturbance has not been displaced
by any amendment or other
enactment and ought to continue to apply to claims made under that section.
[37] We cannot
accept that argument. It fails to take account of a second important feature of
the 2009 amendments. Prior to those
amendments, the ALA (like other compulsory
acquisition statutes in Australia and the United Kingdom) did not make specific
for disturbance costs as a separate head of compensation.
Nevertheless, these costs were accepted as compensable by the Courts.
2009 amendments, s 20(1)(b) was inserted to expressly provide that, in assessing
a claim for compensation under a completed
compulsory acquisition scenario,
regard should be had to the owner’s costs attributable to disturbance.
The insertion of s
20(1)(b) thus clarified and confirmed the entitlement to
claim disturbance costs under s 20. There was no similar equivalent
clarification
or confirmation regarding a claim under s 16(1A).
[38] In some
circumstances, a court is entitled to examine a later statute to interpret an
earlier version of it.
the interpretation of a statute is ambiguous, or readily capable of more than
one interpretation, light may be thrown on the
correct construction by the aims
and provisions of a subsequent
There are limits to
this approach. It is not permissible to construe an unambiguous phrase in an
earlier statute by an erroneous
assumption of its effect contained in a later
statute which did not purport to amend or alter the earlier
do not consider that such a limitation applies here. The legislature amended s
20 to confirm, by the insertion of s 20(1)(b),
the entitlement to claim costs
attributable to disturbance and at the same time to prescribe, by the insertion
of s 20(5), what those
costs were. That the legislature did not amend s 16(1A)
to confirm the existence of an entitlement to claim costs attributable to
disturbance or to prescribe what those costs were is a strong indication that,
as we have already observed, the legislature has treated
expenses” in the context of s 16(1A) and disturbance costs as separate and
distinct concepts.
[40] Finally, we
note that the phrase “costs and expenses” occurs in only two
sections of the Act, the other being s 14(3):
The costs and expenses in connection with the recording or registration of
documents rendered necessary by the taking of the land
shall be borne by the
constructing authority.
further demonstrates that the legislature’s use of “costs and
expenses” in both provisions was a deliberate
choice and is clearly
different from the concept of loss or damage.
[42] For these
reasons, we do not accept Genamson’s argument that the Court below erred
in not having regard to the ordinary
meaning of “costs and
The effect of s 16(1C)
question remains, however, whether the “costs and expenses”
compensable under s 16(1A) should be limited to amounts
recoverable under the
costs assessment regime provided for in the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
(Qld) (“UCPR”).
[44] The Council
contends this is the proper construction because of
of the ALA which
(1C) However, the constructing authority may have such costs and expenses taxed
by the proper officer of the Supreme Court under
the rules of that court and
that no person shall be entitled to compensation in excess of the value of his
or her estate or interest
in the land.
[45] Genamson
contends that this cannot be the intention of the legislature. It points out
and (b)(iii) specifically refer to “legal costs” so
it would have been an easy drafting exercise to repeat that phrase
This reasoning is not persuasive. If correct, it would apply equally to
Genamson’s proposition that “costs and expenses”
construed to include financial costs (based on the statements in
discussed earlier);
s 20(5)(b)(ii)
and (e) specifically refer to
financial costs. If the legislature intended “costs and expenses”
to mean financial costs
there was also a simple way to achieve that.
[46] Genamson
further submits that the Council’s construction of
ignores the
legislature’s failure to update the ALA
to harmonise it with the
[47] It is true
that the assessment of costs regime in the UCPR sits somewhat uneasily with the
right to recover costs and expenses
As Genamson points out, the
UCPR ordinarily limits a party to recover standard costs which, typically, do
not fully compensate a
person involved in litigation. The UCPR also refers to
scales of costs and
does not articulate which scale is
appropriate.
[48] The latter
point can be dealt with easily. The Land Court routinely orders costs by
nominating the scale that should apply.
Often, the scale is linked to the value
of the subject matter. There is no reason why a costs assessor could not
undertake the
same exercise in assessing an entitlement under
[49] Although
standard costs usually apply, there is the ability to seek the assessment of
costs on a fixed or indemnity basis. Even
in cases where costs are to be
assessed on the standard basis, under r 702(2) a costs assessor must allow all
costs necessary or
proper for the attainment of justice.
[50] Genamson
also submits that there is an important difference in the language used in
– which refers to having “costs and expenses” taxed
– and in the UCPR, which on Genamson’s argument
provides for the
assessment of “costs” but not “expenses”. On that
basis, Genamson argues that if (as was
found by the Court
“costs” and
“expenses” are linked but have different meanings then, in
circumstances where only “costs”
can be assessed under the UCPR,
there is no work for the word “expenses” to do under
[51] We do not
accept this argument. As the Council submits, the inclusion of the word
“expenses” in
is consistent with the language used to deal
with the taxation of costs in the
Supreme Court Rules
which preceded the
UCPR and were in force at the time the ALA was enacted. Those earlier rules
provided for the taxation of both
costs and expenses (with expenses including
various professional fees). Since the introduction of the UCPR, the rules
dealing with
assessment address costs and disbursements. In r 679, the words
“assessed costs” are defined for the purposes of chapter
UCPR to mean “costs and disbursements” assessed under that chapter.
By r 705(2)(b), a costs statement served
by a party entitled to be paid costs
must, if practicable, have attached to it copies of all invoices for the
disbursements claimed
in that costs
From this, it seems
tolerably clear to us that an “expense” referred to in s 16(1C)
could be assessed as a disbursement
under chapter 17A of the UCPR.
[52] Notwithstanding
that conclusion, we consider the Court below erred in accepting the
Council’s submission that, having regard
to the operation of s 16(1C), the
“costs and expenses” which can be claimed under s 16(1A) are limited
to amounts recoverable
upon an assessment under chapter 17A of the UCPR.
[53] In reaching
that conclusion, the Court below stated that the words of s 16(1C) operate
harmoniously with s 16(1A) when they are
understood as permitting the
constructing authority to have the whole of a claim for costs and expenses under
s 16(1A) taxed (now
assessed) and, consequently, that those “costs and
expenses” are to be understood as being limited to out of pocket costs
expenses in the nature of legal, valuation and other professional
[54] In support
of the conclusion reached below, the Council submits the legislature intended
that the process of taxation (now assessment)
provided for in s 16(1C) would
finally determine the total compensation payable under s 16(1A). It relies on
two matters in support
of that argument. First, the process of taxation
provided for in s 16(1C) should be understood as providing an alternative
only to the constructing authority) to either of the processes
referred to in s 16(1B); namely that the constructing authority and
the claimant
may agree upon the amount of the compensation to be paid under s 16(1A) or, upon
reference by either party, the amount
of compensation may be determined by the
Land Court. Second, that the proviso at the end of s 16(1C), that “no
person shall
be entitled to compensation in excess of the value of his or her
estate or interest in the land”, can only be meaningful if
the taxation
process finally determines the total compensation payable under s 16(1A).
[55] Plainly, s
16(1C) confers a right on the constructing authority which the claimant does not
have. If the parties do not agree
the amount of compensation payable under s
16(1A), then either of them may refer the dispute for determination by the Land
It is important to note, however, that the dispute might not be limited
to the amount of “costs and expenses” incurred
by the claimant after
being served with the notice of intention to resume. It might also include a
dispute about the amount of compensation
payable in relation to actual damage
done to the subject land by the constructing authority. In such a case, even if
the constructing
authority elects to engage the taxation process under s 16(1C),
taxation of the costs and expenses would not finally determine the
total amount
of compensation payable pursuant to s 16(1A). The amount of compensation
payable for the damage done to the subject
land would have to be determined by
the Land Court. That outcome is not consistent with a legislative intention
that the taxation
process in s 16(1C) should finally determine the total
compensation payable under s 16(1A).
[56] We also
cannot accept that the proviso at the end of s 16(1C) necessarily evidences such
an intention. There is no reason to
think that, in circumstances where a claim
for compensation under s 16(1A) involves damage done to the subject land in
addition to
costs and expenses, the proviso could not operate. If, in that
event, the constructing authority has the costs and expenses taxed,
Land Court left to determine the amount of compensation payable for the damage
done to the subject land, then the proviso
would operate on the aggregate amount
of compensation assessed by those separate determinations. Again, that the
legislation allows
for separate determinations of different aspects of the
compensation claim is not consistent with an intention that the taxation
should finally determine the total compensation.
[57] In the
absence of the legislative intention relied on by the Council, we consider that
s 16(1A) should be construed as allowing
a claim for “costs and
expenses” which includes costs or expenses that are not amenable to
assessment under chapter 17A
of the UCPR. This does not mean we accept that
“costs and expenses” includes all forms of financial loss. The
set out above in addressing Genamson’s first two propositions
explain why. But the rejection of those propositions does not
mean that the
limitation proposed by the Council is the proper construction. As the Court
below acknowledged,
owner’s right to be compensated for the effect of the service of the
notice of intention to resume or the discontinuance
of the resumption should be
protected to the fullest extent allowed under the ALA. Put another way, the
exception to the prohibition
on claims for compensation should not be construed
more narrowly than is necessary. We agree that is the correct approach. Unlike
the Court below, however, we consider that the construction of s 16(1A) which
the Council advances, reflected in the wording of the
preliminary question,
would unduly restrict the owner’s right to claim compensation.
[58] For the
reasons set out above, we consider that s 16(1A) evinces a legislative intention
that the right to claim compensation
for costs and expenses could include
something more than legal costs and disbursements, but still less than the
rights of a claimant
under a completed acquisition scenario (ss 18–20) or
a claimant under a revoked acquisition scenario (s 17). In this regard,
agree with the observation of the Court below that the scope of compensation for
disturbance costs under s 20(5) should not be
narrower than the right to
compensation under s 16(1A).
However, that assessment requires a comparison of the right to compensation
under s 16(1A) with the full scope of compensation for
disturbance costs under s
20(5), not simply one category of such costs.
[59] In that
regard, we note that the preliminary question, as framed for determination by
the Court below, interposed language which
does not appear in s 16(1A). Neither
party submits that we should read words into the legislation. There is
authority cautioning
against inserting words into
legislation.
Neither party
submits that the circumstances exist here to permit that to occur.
[60] As the
Court below identified,
language included in the preliminary question broadly reflects that which
appears in s 20(5)(a) – “legal costs and
valuation or other
professional fees reasonably incurred by the claimant in relation to the
preparation and filing of the claimant’s
claim for compensation”.
Those words have been used in s 20(5)(a) to describe one of the categories of
disturbance costs which
can be claimed under a completed acquisition scenario.
We have explained, at
above, our reasons for concluding that
“costs and expenses” compensable under s 16(1A) and disturbance
costs should be
treated as separate and distinct concepts. Just as we do not
accept Genamson’s argument that “costs and expenses”
16(1A) should be interpreted broadly because they are to be treated as
disturbance costs, we also do not accept that it is
appropriate to read those
words down by reference to a single category of disturbance
[61] The answer
to the preliminary question should be “no”. That is because the
phrase “costs and expenses”
in s 16(1A) should not be construed as
limiting a claim for compensation to the recovery of legal costs and
disbursements. It is,
however, clear that the words give Genamson no right to
claim loss or damage. What Genamson can claim as costs and expenses will
question for the hearing member.
[62] The appeal
should be allowed. The answer to the question posed is “no”.
[63] The matter
is remitted to the Land Court for further determination according to
T1-7:11-21; T1-22:17-44.
In addition to these three
primary propositions, Genamson’s written submissions addressed two further
arguments: the Court
below erred (i) in concluding that the common law test for
disturbance costs does not apply to a claim for compensation under s 16(1A)
the ALA (appeal grounds 4 and 6); and (ii), in concluding that the broader scope
of compensation provided for in s 17(4) of the
ALA means that s 16(1A) should be
construed more narrowly (appeal ground 5). Given the overlap between these
further arguments and
the three primary propositions, we have addressed the
further arguments in our consideration of those primary propositions.
[2018] HCA 55
(2018) 265 CLR 137
(citations omitted).
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
374–377 [35]–[43].
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507
520–522 [32]–[37].
Appeal ground 5.
[2004] HCA 33
(2004) 78 ALJR 1022.
Genamson Holdings Pty Ltd v
Moreton Bay Regional Council (No 2)
[2024] QLC 24
[2001] HCA 37
(2001) 205 CLR 603.
[2001] HCA 37
(2001) 205 CLR 603
[48] (citations omitted).
[2001] HCA 37
(2001) 205 CLR 603
[2004] QPEC 2
[2004] QPELR 439
Mabo v State of
Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Genamson Holdings Pty
Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council (No 2)
[2024] QLC 24
[2019] NSWCA 41
(2019) 99 NSWLR 279.
[2019] NSWCA 41
(2019) 99 NSWLR 279
[94], 310 [135].
Weld v Gold
Coast City Council
(1979) 6 QLCR 8
Emanuel (No 14) Pty Ltd v Council of
the Shire of Caboolture
(1994-1995) 15 QLCR 130.
Emanuel (No 14)
Pty Ltd v Council of the Shire of Caboolture
(1994-1995) 15 QLCR 130
Grounds 4 and 6.
Acquisition of Land
and Other Legislation Amendment Act
Emanuel (No 14)
Pty Ltd v Council of the Shire of Caboolture
(1994-1995) 15 QLCR 130
Grain Elevators Board
(Vict) v Dunmunkle Corporation
[1946] HCA 13
(1946) 73 CLR 70
Logan City Shopping
Centre Pty Ltd v Retail Shop Leases Tribunal
[2006] QSC 172
[2007] 1 Qd R 246
Deputy Federal
Commissioner of Taxes (SA) v Elder’s Trustee & Executor Co Ltd
[1936] HCA 64
(1936) 57 CLR 610
Hunter Resources Ltd v
[1988] HCA 5
(1988) 164 CLR 234
Genamson Holdings Pty
Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council (No 2)
[2024] QLC 24
See also r 723(1), which
provides that if a party’s costs statement includes an account that has
not been paid the party may
claim the amount as a disbursement, and r 724(3),
which provides that if a costs statement includes a charge for work done by a
practising outside Queensland, the charge may be shown as a disbursement.
Genamson Holdings Pty
Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council (No 2)
[2024] QLC 24
Genamson Holdings Pty
Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council (No 2)
[2024] QLC 24
Genamson Holdings Pty
Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council (No 2)
[2024] QLC 24
Taylor v Owners –
Strata Plan No 11564
(2014) 253 CLR 531
, 547–549 [35]–[40].
Genamson Holdings Pty
Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council (No 2)
[2024] QLC 24
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (347 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter