URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRVT/2002/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Carr & Dudman & Fisher & Others v Chancellor Park Retirement Village Pty Ltd [2002] QRVT 1 (18 June 2002)
RETIREMENT VILLAGES TRIBUNAL
[2002] QRVT 1
13 JUNE 2002
APPLICATION NO:
CARR F D & J; DUDMAN G H & E A; FISHER E S; HARVEY I M & R
L; HILTON J C; KING C P & J M; MATSEN I D & N
M; PROUDMAN G H;
ROBINSON R V J & R F
RESPONDENT:
CHANCELLOR PARK RETIREMENT VILLAGE PTY LTD
DATE OF HEARING:
9 & 10 APRIL 2002 AND 13 MAY 2002
[2002] QRVT 1
REASON FOR DECISION:
1. This is an application against Chancellor Park Retirement Village Pty
Ltd ("the Respondent") under
section 170
Retirement Villages Act 1999
") which relies upon alleged contraventions of
The Applicants are:
Mr F D & Mrs J Carr (the Carrs);
& Mrs E A Dudman (the Dudmans);
Ms E S Fisher (Ms Fisher);
& Mrs R L Harvey (the Harveys);
Ms J C Hilton (Ms Hilton);
& Mrs J M King (the Kings);
Mr I D & Mrs N M Matsen (the Matsens);
Mr G H Proudman (Mr Proudman);
Mr R V J & Mrs R F Robinson (the
Section 170
provides as follows:
Resident may
apply for order if given false or misleading documents
This section applies if-
(a) a scheme operator of a retirement village
contravenes
(b) a resident of the retirement village is
materially prejudiced by the contravention
The resident
may apply to the chief executive for an order by a Tribunal to have the
resident's residence contract set aside.
provides as
False or misleading documents
operator must not give the chief executive or a resident a document containing
information the scheme operator knows is false
or misleading.
penalty-200 penalty units.
A complaint against a scheme operator
for an offence against subsection (1) is sufficient if it states the information
was false or
misleading to the scheme operator's knowledge.
Applicants seek orders under
section 193
on the basis that they allege they are
materially prejudiced by the various contraventions to which they refer in their
application.
Section 193
provides as follows:
orders under
section 170
This section applies if a
resident applies for a Tribunal order under
section 170.
setting a contract aside, the Tribunal may make the orders it considers
appropriate including, for example, the following-
(a) an order that the
scheme operator refund to the resident the ingoing contribution or another
amount paid under the contract;
(b) an order that the scheme operator
compensate the resident for damages or loss caused by the
contravention.
6. The Applicants seek orders by the Tribunal that each of
their respective residence contracts be set aside, that the Respondent
them their ingoing contribution and that the Respondent compensate them for the
damages or loss caused by the contraventions.
7. In relation to the
contraventions under
, the documents upon which the Applicants rely
are as follows:
the audited report of outgoings
contributions account to 30 June 2000 (Applicant's document No E6-8 and
Respondent’s document
audited report of outgoings contributions account to 30 June 2001 (Applicant's
document No G1-6 and Respondent’s document
the annual budget for the year ending
30 June 2001 (Applicant's document No E9 and Respondent’s document No
the annual budget for the year ending
30 June 2002 (Applicant's document No G11 and Respondent’s document No
Representation
8. The Applicants
were represented at the hearing by Mr F Dawson of Counsel and the Respondent was
represented by Mr EJ Read of Counsel.
Proceedings
hearing was held at Maroochydore on 9 and 10 April and on 13 May 2002. The
parties were given an opportunity to attempt to
settle the matter at
Maroochydore and were encouraged to do so before the matter resumed on 13 May
Mr Robinson, Ms Fisher, Mr Matsen, Mr
Proudman, Mr King, Mrs Harvey, Mr Carr, Mr Dudman and Ms Hilton gave evidence
for the Applicants
and all were cross-examined.
Mr Rodney Nunn ("Mr Nunn"), the manager
of the village at the relevant time, Mr Jonathon Ives, the Respondent’s
financial manager,
Mr Robert Sandes, the current manager of the village, Mr
Swan, an accountant from KPMG Accountants, and Ms Fiona Campbell (“Ms
Campbell"), the former General Manager of the Respondent, were the only
witnesses on behalf of the Respondent required by for cross
examination.
The Applicants all entered into written
leases with the Respondent when the Retirement Villages Act 1988 ("the repealed
in force, as follows:
Commencement Date of Lease
Incoming Contribution
Mr F D & Mrs J Carr
Mr G H & Mrs E A Dudman
Ms E S Fisher
Mr I M & Mrs R L Harvey
Mr J C Hilton
Mr C P & Mrs J M King
Mr I D & Mrs N M Matsen
Mr G H Proudman
Mr R V J & Mrs R F Robinson
The above information was extracted from
Attachment FMC1 of Ms Campbell’s Statement of 8 February 2002.
The Act commenced on 1 July 2000. By
section 23 of the Act, the Act applies to an existing residence contract such as
that entered
into by the parties here. By virtue of Sections 21 and 22 of the
Act, the dispute between the parties constitutes both a retirement
dispute and a retirement village issue.
All actions by the parties prior to 1
July 2000 were required to comply with the repealed Act and the Tribunal is not
given any specific
powers to deal with matters which arose before 1 July
In applying section 86, the first
question is whether the document contains information which is false or
misleading. Then the second
question is did the scheme operator know that the
information was false or misleading at the time it was given.
The third question arises from section
170 and involves determining whether or not the resident was materially
prejudiced by the contravention.
The character of the document said to be
false or misleading is to be tested at the date of giving it, not with the
benefit of hindsight
Bill Acceptance Corporation Ltd. v. GWA Ltd
[1983] FCA 269
(1983) 78 FLR 171).
Conduct is misleading or deceptive if it
induces or is capable of inducing error -
Keehn v Medical Benefits Fund of
Australia Ltd
v Katies Ltd
Parkdale Custom Built Furniture Pty
[1982] HCA 44
149 CLR 191
at 198 (Gibbs J);
Rhone-Poulenc Agrochimie SA v UMI Chemical Services Pty
12 FCR 477.
By analogy a document is misleading if it induces or is capable of
inducing error.
20. False is defined in the
Pocket Dictaurus
as not true or correct, apocryphal, erroneous, fallacious,
unhistorical, untrue, wrong or used to deceive or mislead, bodgie, bogus,
counterfeit, dummy, fake, phoney, sham, not genuine, artificial,
21. Mislead is defined in the same
or guide wrongly, bamboozle, bluff, bull, catch, cheat on, come the raw prawn,
deceive, delude, dupe, equivocate, fast-talk,
fool, fox, gull, handle, have,
have someone on, hoodwink, humbug, lead astray, lead up the garden path, take
for a ride, take in
22. There is an evaluative judgment
involved in determining this issue. As the Full Court said in
SAP Australia
Pty Ltd v Sapient Australia Pty Ltd
[1999] FCA 1821
(1999) 169 ALR 1
characterisation of conduct as "misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or
deceive" involves a judgment of a notional cause
and effect relationship between
the conduct and the putative consumer's state of mind. Implicit in that
judgment is a selection
process which can reject some causal connections, which,
although theoretically open, are too tenuous or impose responsibility otherwise
than in accordance with the policy of the
legislation."
23. Where it is necessary, as here, to
prove that a document is knowingly false or misleading, regard should be had to
the meaning
intended by the giver if the explanation is not so unreasonable or
unrealistic as to not be fairly open. The critical question
is whether, having
regard to the finding that the document was objectively false or misleading, it
was given deliberately knowing
it to be false or misleading.
two concepts involve a mental element. The scheme operator giving the document
must either know the document is false if
given but still give it or, realising
it may be wrong, gives it without caring whether it is true or false. If the
scheme operator
asserts it has neither of these states of mind but the true
facts are widely divergent from what has been said, a tribunal of fact
persuaded that the inference should be drawn that one or other of the states of
mind exists.
25. The third question involves determining whether or not
the resident was materially prejudiced by the contravention and will depend
the resident being able to establish the prejudice and the causal connection.
“Material” is defined in the
CCH Macquarie Concise Dictionary of
as meaning “substantial; significant”.
26. While the phrase “materially prejudiced” is used in
several Queensland statutes it is not defined and does not appear
to have been
judicially considered. However, whether parties have been “materially
prejudiced” has been considered in
several cases involving applications to
proceed after considerable delay and in those cases it is clear that being
“materially
prejudiced” can result from a range of matters and is
not limited to financial considerations (See
Brisbane South Regional Health
Authority v. Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1986) 186 CLR 541)
A similar approach was taken by
the High Court in
The Commonwealth v Verwayen
, (1990) 170 CLR 394, where
“materially disadvantaged” and “detriment” were being
considered and the judges’
statements make it clear that it must be
"material" or "real" although pecuniary loss may not be necessary. Dawson J. at
461-2 observed
that justice cannot always be measured in terms of money. Deane
J. was of a similar view (see 448-9). Applying that logic here
would suggest
that pecuniary loss may not be necessary.
27. The reference to
in section 86
be read widely
as it is not defined as in section 85 to mean a “relevant
document”. That definition is said to apply only to section
Therefore, subject to the surrounding circumstances, any document may
qualify and certainly the documents to which the section refers
are not limited
to the residence contract or the public information document.
The audited report of the outgoings contributions
account to 30 June 2000
This document was prepared after 1 July
2000 and given to the residents after that date. The Applicants allege that the
information
in relation to street lighting is false and misleading and that the
Respondent knew that it was false and misleading.
The Respondent has admitted that the
nursery expenses were incorrectly described in the audited report as street
lighting but says
that they were fully refunded by the Respondent into the
residents outgoing contribution account by 29 August 2000.
The fact that the nursery expenses were
included under the heading of “street lighting” meant that the
nursery expenses,
which were inappropriately charged to the residents outgoing
contribution account as they were an owner’s expense, did not
the accounts.
In the matter of
Schintler v
Chancellor Park Retirement Village Pty Ltd
, RVT V001-01 4 September 2001, Mr
Nunn gave evidence that he first became aware of this error in relation to the
annual financial
statements the day before the annual meeting and that he
discussed this with Ms Roberts and because the Respondent would look bad
because it was too late to cancel the meeting, the Respondent had to proceed
with the meeting.
What Mr Nunn had to say in the
matter is set-out in full below:
happened then was that there was the AGM, I researched this matter that
afternoon, I went and immediately across to Head Office
and saw, ah, I produced
some written notes obviously. Just to substantiate what I had found, and I
went straight across and I saw
Mrs Roberts and I saw Mrs Poulsen at the same
time. Mrs Poulsen being the Accountant, and the Staff Accountant. I left the
in her hands immediately to check out because there was an obvious
challenge there with one Accountant talking to another and professional
matters and so forth.
And I expressed at that stage fact that the whole
company would look like a damn fool, with something like this being put in front
of the residents.
What actually occurred with that meeting was that I
spoke to Mrs Roberts on the afternoon when I got those accounts, which was
approximately
That was the day before the meeting
, and we had two
options. One was to continue with the meeting, and the other one was to call
it off. Calling it off was not really
an option, because at that time of
afternoon there was no way of notifying a large retirement village, with people
all in their homes
at that time of day,
so we decided to proceed with it
(The Tribunal’s highlighting)
What then happened was I met, while I was
away getting those accounts, I had a message go out to the Residents Committee
many of them as were available in. The Residents Committee than
came in, I met with them, I showed them the Budget. I showed
them the papers,
I said ‘There hot off the press, I haven’t had time to go through
them”, I gave them each a copy.
In fact I was talking to them while the
copies were being printed, I pinned a copy on the Notice Board outside. We
printed copies
so that the residents coming to the meeting next day could get
them. The residents were already upset in relation to matters of
GST etc., so
they were justifiably angry before this occurred.
It could only be
described as a pretty hostile meeting, and after that Mrs Roberts instructed me
to make myself available for residents
to come and talk to. I put a notice up
for the residents, saying they could come and talk to me, and I would sit down
and explain
what had happened to them. I would give them, try to answer all of
their queries. If I could not answer their queries I would
questions and get answers provided for them.
Mr Nunn gave different evidence in his
statement to this Tribunal in that he said he first became aware of this error
the afternoon
after the audited statements were presented to the residents at
the Annual Meeting. He said that he was asked a question at the
Annual Meeting
which he could not answer but investigation after the meeting revealed the
Mr Nunn said that he then went straight
across and saw Mrs Roberts and Mrs Poulsen at the same time and that it was at
this meeting
that he said that the whole company would look like a damn fool,
with something like this being put in front of the residents.
Mr Nunn said that his reference to
“something like this being put in front of the residents” related to
the meetings he
was to have with residents after the Annual Meeting or at
another Annual Meeting, which the residents had requested at the Annual
and was not a reference to the Annual Meeting which had occurred on 17 August
Mr Nunn was questioned in relation to
this evidence by Mr Dawson on behalf of the Applicants at the hearing of this
matter. Mr Nunn
said in relation to the above evidence:
Nunn There are no incorrect parts in that evidence that I gave Sir. It just
appears that I gave it in such a manner that I confused
the Tribunal, that it
appears jumbled.
Mr Dawson So the factual information contained in that
passage, is an accurate record of your evidence.
Mr Nunn That is correct
The Tribunal drew to Mr Read’s
attention the fact that Mr Nunn had given two different and contradictory
versions in relation
to the same incident and that for the Tribunal to decide
which version to accept it might be of assistance if Mrs Roberts or Mrs
who Mr Nunn referred to as being party to his conversations, gave evidence. The
Tribunal specifically advised Mr Read that
if they were not called it would
request submissions on the question of the drawing of adverse inferences.
Ms Campbell gave evidence that Mrs
Roberts worked for Mal Pratt and Associates. Mr Pratt is the director of the
Respondent. However,
Mr Read advised the Tribunal that he did not seek leave to
call further witnesses in this regard.
It is also clear from Mr Nunn’s
evidence that the Respondent did not make what the Tribunal would regard as full
disclosure of the errors, but Mr Nunn said that he did acknowledge
that the accounts were not accurate if the residents asked.
When questioned by
Mr Dawson he said:
Mr Nunn I made myself available to the
residents, freely available to answer any questions, and I invited them to
approach me. And
I was quite happy to discuss it with anybody.
Dawson You didn’t see it as your obligation to actually make it known to
the residents that there was a mistake.
Mr Nunn I acted under
instructions from Mrs Roberts, and that is what I did, Sir.
On the basis of the Respondent’s
admission and the other evidence, the Tribunal finds that audited report of the
outgoings contributions
account to 30 June 2000, was false and
misleading.
The Tribunal considers that the
Respondent would have been aware that Mr Nunn’s evidence in this matter
would be subject to
challenge as not credible and despite that, and the Tribunal
specifically drawing Mr Read’s attention to the possibility of
inference being drawn, the Respondent chose not to call Mrs Roberts or Mrs
Poulsen to support Mr Nunn’s version
of events as contained in his
evidence to this Tribunal. The Tribunal, therefore, considers that the only
reasonable inference to
be drawn is that neither Mrs Roberts nor Mrs Poulsen
could confirm Mr Nunn’s evidence. For these reasons, the Tribunal prefers
Mr Nunn’s evidence given in the
matter and set-out above
to his evidence given in this matter.
On the basis of the Tribunal’s
findings in relation to Mr Nunn’s evidence, the Tribunal finds that the
fact that this
information was false and misleading was known to the Respondent
before the audited statements were given to the residents, including
Applicants, at the annual meeting.
The Tribunal is of the opinion that this
was a very serious breach of the Respondents obligations to all of the residents
of the village.
44. The giving of this document to the
Applicants was required to comply with the Act and the document comes within
section 86 for
the reasons given above.
45. As the Tribunal stated in the
matter, the Respondent is
to blame for the false and misleading audited statements. In the High Court in
Esanda Finance Corporation Limited v Peat Marwick Hungerfords (Reg)
March 1997, McHugh J. discussed the role of the auditor and the client and
... the accounts are ordinarily prepared by the client and, in any event,
are that person's
responsibility
(Bily 834 P 2d 745 at 762 (1992)).
Each case must be judged on its own facts. But it would have to be an
exceptional case for the client and all its servants and agents
to be innocent
of fraud or negligence in relation to the publication of accounts that are false
or misleading.
Likewise, the Tribunal rejects the
suggestion that the certification of the auditor absolves the Respondent from
liability for giving
the residents false and misleading financial statements.
It is clear from Mr Nunn’s evidence to the Tribunal that he was
aware of how the auditor’s certification of false financial
would leave the Respondent exposed to criticism.
The Respondent has admitted that audited
report was not given to the Residents Committee until after 4pm on 16 August
2000 and to
the Applicants and other residents until approximately 9am on 17
August 2000 at the meeting.
More significantly the Respondent has
admitted that the residents who attended the meeting were denied the opportunity
to properly
consider and seek professional advice on the reports due to their
late provision.
The Respondent has admitted that the
Applicants did suffer prejudice but denies that it was material prejudice.
50. The Tribunal finds that the Applicants have been
materially prejudiced by the Respondent’s contravention of the Act because
they were denied the benefit required by the Act of having audited statements,
which could be relied upon. Further, because of the
Respondents failure to make
full and proper disclosure of the errors, they were denied the opportunity to
properly question the scheme
operator about the accounts. This also has
relevance to the payments required by the Budget for the year ending 30 June
The fact that the meeting is required to
be held by the Act and is only required to be held once each year is significant
Applicants’ rights. The annual meeting is the only formal
opportunity where the Applicants and the other residents have the
statements given to them by the Respondent, when the Respondent is then
available to publicly respond to questions in relation
to the statements.
The residents ability to realistically
assess the Budget also depends upon the expenditure actually incurred and the
income actually
received in the previous year. Once the budget is presented,
and approved, where that is required under section 106, that is the
one and only
time the Applicants had an opportunity to formally question the Respondent in
relation to the Budget at a public meeting.
It is the denial of the
Applicants’ rights in all of these regards that the Tribunal considers
amounts to material prejudice.
53. If further proof was
necessary of the material prejudice suffered by the Applicants in relation to
the presentation of these false
and misleading financial statements, it comes
from the Respondents refusal to hold another annual meeting when requested by
the residents
54. The Applicants, therefore, were denied
their one and only opportunity to exercise their rights in a meaningful way by
the Respondent’s
contravention of the Act. The prejudice was substantial
and significant and resulted directly from being given the false and misleading
document by the Respondent when it knew it was false and misleading.
The audited report of the outgoings contributions account to 30 June
According to the submissions on behalf
of the Applicants, this claim depends on the Respondents admission “that
the document
did not separate the wages for administrative assistant, gardeners
and managers”. There is no allegation that the Respondent
knew that they
document was false or misleading.
There was no evidence as to how the way
this information was presented was misleading or that the information itself was
The material prejudice is said to arise
because “the Applicants were given financial documentation for the second
row that was not informative ...”
The Tribunal rejects the claims that the
audited report of the outgoings contributions account to 30 June 2001 was false
or misleading
on the basis of that the evidence does not substantiate this
claim. For this reason, the Tribunal does not intend to further deal
allegations.
The annual budget for the year ending 30
The Respondent has admitted that the
budget contained an over-estimate of rates to the extent that residents,
including the Applicants,
were charged $1,047.03 per unit per year. According to
the Respondent, residents should have only been charged $987.65 per unit per
year which resulted in an over-charge of $59.38 per unit per
matter, the
Tribunal considered the amount estimated by the Respondent for rates and
concluded as follows:
On the basis of this evidence, the
Tribunal finds that the figure $423,000 was false and misleading and on the
balance of probability,
the Respondent knew it was false and misleading.
The over-charge here arose from the same
reason as in the
The Tribunal in the
matter went on to say:
The next question is whether or
not Mr Schintler has been materially prejudiced by the Respondent’s
contravention of the Act.
Provided that the Respondent does for what is
referred to in its solicitors letter of 29 September 2000, and credits any
overpayments
of rates to Mr Schintler and the other residents, Mr Schintler will
not be materially prejudiced.
Significantly, shortly before the
hearing of this matter, the Respondent refunded the Applicants an amount of
$128.40 of which $60.00
was said to relate to the over-charge for 2000-01 and
$68.40 to the over-charge for 2001-02. These amounts were calculated on the
basis of a report by Mr Swan, an accountant from KPMG Accountants. While the
KPMG report was questioned by Mr Dawson in cross-examination
the figures were
not significantly challenged and no alternative figures were in evidence before
the Tribunal.
By the time of the Tribunal hearing the
over-charge had been refunded. Although the refund did not occur as quickly as
the Applicants
might have hoped and its timing may have been connected to the
progress of this application through the Tribunal, the Tribunal was
of the view
that the Applicants were not now materially
prejudiced.
The annual budget for the year ending 30 June
The Respondent has admitted that the
budget contained an over-estimate of rates to the extent that residents,
including the Applicants,
were over-charged $68.40 per unit per
By the time of the Tribunal hearing the
over-charge had been refunded and the Tribunal was of the view that the
Applicants were not
now materially prejudiced.
Evidence and Submissions
The Tribunal has considered the other
evidence and the submissions of both parties but in view of the
Applicants’ claims, which
by the end of the hearing had reduced to the
four claims of false or misleading documents being knowingly given to them, the
considers that it has dealt with all issues of relevance to the
Problems arising from the Format of the
68. The Tribunal commented in the
the fact that, in relation to the audited statements for 1999-2000 and the
Budget for the year ending 2001, there was no
consistency between the headings
for Budget purposes and the Audited Statement headings or between budget
headings from year to year.
The Budget document for the year ended 30 June 2001
did not show the actual income received and expenditure incurred in the previous
year or the budget for the previous year. In fact, it did not show any
anticipated income. It also failed to show any total percentage
increase let
alone comply with the requirements of sections 106 and 107 as referred to above.
Even the Notes to the Audited Statements
for the year ended 30 June 2000 did not
use the same headings as were used in the Audited Statement making cross
referencing difficult.
69. The Tribunal notes that these inadequacies
had been corrected by the Respondent in relation to the audited statements for
and the Budget for the year ending 2002.
Problems arising
from sections 106 and 107 of the Act
Sections 103 to 108 all relate to
charges for general services and sections 106 to 108 inclusive, all relate to
increasing the general
services charge.
71. Sections 106
and 107 of the Act provide as follows:
Increasing general services
A scheme operator may increase charges for general
services for a retirement village only under this section or as allowed under
The scheme operator must not increase the general
services charge above the percentage increase in the CPI for a particular year,
unless the increase is approved by the retirement village residents by special
resolution at a residents meeting.
Maximum penalty-200 penalty
If the retirement village residents, by special resolution
at a residents meeting, approve an increase in the general services charge
the retirement village above the percentage increase in the CPI for a particular
year, the general services charge may be increased
only by the amount of the
approved increase.
For applying this section, the percentage
increase in the CPI for a particular year is the percentage increase between the
published before the start of the particular year and the CPI published
for the quarter ending immediately before the residents meeting
In this section-
means the all
groups consumer price index for Brisbane published by the Australian
statistician.
Resident’s responsibility for paying increased general
services charge
A resident is not required to pay a charge
for a general service under a residence contract to the extent that the charge
than that payable under the contract and increased under section 106,
unless the excess is attributable to an increase in-
(a) rates, taxes or
charges levied under an Act in relation to the retirement village land or its
(b) the salary or wages of a person engaged in the retirement
village’s operation and payable under an award, certified agreement,
enterprise flexibility agreement, industrial agreement, Queensland workplace
agreement or other industrial agreement made,
approved, certified, or
continued in force under-
Industrial Relations Act 199
(ii) a Commonwealth Act; or
© insurance premiums in relation to
the retirement village or its use;
(d) maintenance reserve fund
contributions.
While these sections appear to cover
similar matters there is a difference in terminology used. Section 107 refers to
for a general service” which is the same terminology used
in sub-section 106(1) which allows a scheme operator to increase
for general services” only under section 106 or as allowed under section
107. However, sub-section 106(2) refers
to the “general services
charge” and caps any increase in the “general services charge”
to the CPI, unless
the increase is approved by the residents.
Section 107 imposes a liability on the
scheme operator to ensure that a charge for general services is payable under
the residence
contract and that any increase in the charge is valid under
section 106. If the scheme operator fails to do these two things the
is not required to pay the charge unless the excess is attributable to an
increase in things such as rates, salary or wages
or insurance premiums as
listed in section 107 (a) to (d) inclusive.
Presumably, the items section 107 (a) to
(d) inclusive are not capped to the CPI level because they are determined by
bodies or processes
independent of scheme operators, and for this reason, may
exceed the CPI increase.
However, it is important to note that
while “rates, taxes or charges” may be increased beyond the CPI
increase without
resident approval, section 107 only applies to those rates,
taxes or charges “levied under an Act”.
In determining a general services charge
for a particular year, a scheme operator must start with those charges for
general services
payable under the residence contract and may increase those
charges under section 106 or 107 of the Act.
Sub-section 106(2) imposes a CPI limit
on the “general services charge” unless a greater increase is
approved by the residents.
However, increases in individual charges for general
services are not so limited but the general service must payable under the
residence contract and the increases in the items in section 107 (a) to (d)
inclusive are limited to those “levied under an
Act or otherwise
determined independent of scheme operators and justified as
For these reasons, the Tribunal
considers that it would be appropriate for scheme operators to categorise the
charges for general
services into those under sections 106 and 107 and to show
the relevant percentage increases for each category and the resultant
services charge percentage increase.
This approach should result in
transparency of the process and lead to greater trust on the part of
The Tribunal is aware that it is
necessary for scheme operators and village residents to have an on-going
relationship and, for that
reason, wherever possible it attempts to improve
rather than exacerbate that relationship by its orders. However, here the
relationship
has broken down entirely.
The Tribunal accepts that the Applicants
have satisfied the requirements of sections 170 and 86 and intends to exercise
its discretion
to make the appropriate orders available to it under section
On the basis of the evidence the
Tribunal has seen and heard of the Respondent’s behaviour as referred to
above and for the
reasons set-out above the Tribunal accepts that the setting
aside of the residence contracts is the appropriate remedy.
Section 193(2) provides that “in
setting a contract aside” the tribunal may make the orders it considers
appropriate and
gives two examples.
The Applicants have been materially
prejudiced by the Respondent’s behaviour on 17 August 2000. The on-going
relationship from
that date has been and will be adversely affected by what
occurred and the lack of trust which has flowed from that occurrence.
However, prior to that date, while there
was some dissatisfaction in evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied that the
Applicants had the
benefits provided by the Respondent from their residency in
the village. For this reason, the Tribunal, in setting aside each of
contracts, orders that the Respondent refund to each of the Applicants the
amount of their ingoing contribution less an amount
of two and a half percent
(2.5%) per year or part thereof from the commencement of each lease to 17 August
The Tribunal also orders that the
Respondent pay each Applicant, in accordance with the residence contract for any
improvements made
by them, a reasonable amount (a) to be agreed between the
parties or (b) if agreement is not possible, to be assessed by the Tribunal
after the serving of written submissions by the Applicant on the Respondent as
to each amount in dispute and the reason for the payment
of each amount,
including an allowance for depreciation in each case, and the filing of the
Applicant’s submissions and the
Respondent’s response in the
Registry of the Tribunal within seven days of the Respondent’s receipt of
the Applicant’s
submissions.
87. For the above
reasons the Tribunal makes the following orders:
That the residence contract between each
of the Applicants and Chancellor Park Retirement Village Pty Ltd be set aside
with effect
from 4pm 30 July 2002; and
That Chancellor Park Retirement Village
Pty Ltd refund to each of the Applicants the amount of their ingoing
contribution less an
amount of two and a half percent (2.5%) per year or part
thereof from the commencement of their lease to 17 August 2000. Such sum
paid to each of the Applicants by 4pm 30 July 2002;
That Chancellor Park Retirement Village
Pty Ltd pay each Applicant, in accordance with the residence contract for any
improvements
made by them, a reasonable amount
(a) to be agreed
between the parties; or
(b) if agreement is not possible, to be assessed by the Tribunal after the
serving of written submissions by the Applicant on the
Respondent as to each
amount in dispute and the reason for the payment of each amount, including an
allowance for depreciation in
each case, and the filing of the Applicant’s
submissions and the Respondent’s response in the Registry of the Tribunal
within seven days of the Respondent’s receipt of the Applicant’s
submissions.
Such sum to be paid to each of the Applicants by 4pm 30
July 2002 unless the Applicant has served written submissions on the Respondent
as to the costs of improvements which remain in dispute and in that case all
monies not the subject of dispute are to be paid by
4pm 30 July 2002;
That this decision and its reasons be
......................................................
B A COTTERELL - CHAIRPERSON
RETIREMENT VILLAGES TRIBUNAL
Barry Cotterell Ms Zardani Mr Blackwood
Chairperson Member Member
E:\Case Management Files\2001\V- Retire
Village\V012-01\Decision\CarrV012-01D13-06-02.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (228 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter