URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMC/2025/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Queensland Police Service v Uprichard [2025] QMC 17 (29 May 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURTS OF QUEENSLAND
Queensland Police Service v Uprichard
[2025] QMC 17
QUEENSLAND POLICE SERVICE
(Prosecution)
RONALD WILLIAM UPRICHARD
(Defendant)
MAG-00174706/24(7)
MAG-00178264/24(9)
MAG-00022483/25(1)
Magistrates Courts
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
29 May 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
21 May 2025
MAGISTRATE:
Magistrate Lodziak
See annexure to this decision
CATCHWORDS:
CAN MAKE SENTENCING ORDERS THAT RESULT IN A PERIOD OF IMPRISONMENT
GREATER THAN
THREE YEARS
SOLICITORS:
Ms Verwey for the prosecution
Mr Cuthbertson of Cuthbertson & Co Lawyers, for the defendant
[1] This is a sentence hearing. The hearing was adjourned because it was
initially submitted that I could not make orders that would
result in the
defendant being sentenced to a period of imprisonment greater than three years.
I advised the parties I was not convinced
of that and allowed time for further
submissions to be made. Ultimately, I am satisfied the offending in this case
warrants sentencing
orders that result in a period of imprisonment beyond three
years. I see no reason why I could not or should not make those orders
case and sentence the defendant accordingly. My reasons for so finding
[2] Mr Uprichard is a 31-year-old
man who, on 21 May 2025, pleaded guilty before me to 27 offences. The following
timeline sets out
the charges (in bold) in the context of other events relevant
to the sentencing process:
15 February 2023 Sentenced to 18 months
imprisonment
15 August 2023 Released to court ordered parole
28 August 2023
Unlawful use of a motor vehicle in company
1 November 2023 Parole suspended
3 November 2023 Returned to jail
11 April 2024 Released from jail (then end date of that period of
imprisonment)
Stealing after previous conviction
Disqualified driving
28 May 2024
Enter dwelling and commit indictable offence
31 May 2024
Enter dwelling and commit indictable offence
9 July 2024
Stealing after previous conviction
Disqualified driving
15 July 2024
Stealing after previous conviction
Disqualified driving
10 August 2024
Stealing after previous conviction
Disqualified driving
11 August 2024
Stealing after previous conviction
Disqualified driving
13-17 August 2024
Stealing after previous conviction
16 August 2024
Stealing after previous conviction
Disqualified driving
23 October 2024
Disqualified driving
Participated in a recorded interview with police
10 November 2024
Disqualified driving
13 November 2024 Allowed bail
18 December 2024
Fail to appear in court
7 January 2025
Common assault (domestic violence offence)
Wilful damage (domestic violence offence)
6 February 2025
Evasion offence, after previous conviction
Disqualified driving
Evasion offence, in the night, after previous conviction
Disqualified driving
7 February 2025
Disqualified driving
Returned to custody, on remand
[3] Mr Uprichard has remained in custody since being arrested on 7 February
2025. There are 111 declarable days of presentence
The facts of the
Unlawful use of a motor vehicle in company
[4] This offence was
committed less than a fortnight after Mr Uprichard was released on parole. He,
wearing gloves and a mask, was
a passenger in a stolen car. He was on parole
for earlier offences of unlawfully using motor vehicles (although those two
did not involve any circumstance of aggravation).
[5] Mr Uprichard
was returned to custody on 3 November 2023 to serve the then remaining five
months and eight days of his sentence.
[6] The maximum penalty for this
offence, given the circumstance of aggravation, is 14 years
imprisonment.
[7] No co-offenders have been charged.
Fuel stealing and
associated charges
[8] Mr Uprichard drove a 1999 white Toyota Hilux with
Queensland registration 520STT to various petrol stations on different days
refuelled it, but left without paying for the fuel, as follows:
$40.07 of fuel
9 July 2024 $40.00 of fuel
15 July 2024 $50.00 of
10 August 2024 $90.00 of fuel
11 August 2024 $51.19 of fuel
either 14, 15 or 16 August 2024, Mr Uprichard stole a Queensland registration
plate (430CL2).
[10] On 16 August 2024, Mr Uprichard again refuelled the 1999
white Toyota Hilux (this time displaying the 430CL2 plate) without paying
$56.83 owed for it.
[11] The police next saw Mr Uprichard driving (while
disqualified) on 23 October 2024.
[12] On 10 November 2024, Mr Uprichard
again stole fuel, this time after putting in $40.00 of fuel into a blue Mazda 3
[13] On each of the six instances he stole fuel using the Toyota
Hilux, Mr Uprichard spoke to the attendant at the petrol station,
advising that
he could not pay for the fuel. He then left without returning to
[14] The maximum penalty for the stealing offences, given the
circumstance of aggravation, is 10 years imprisonment.
[15] Restitution is
sought with respect of each of the seven instances of stealing
[16] Additionally, Mr Uprichard drove while disqualified by court order
from holding or obtaining a driver licence at the time of
each of the instances
of stealing fuel.
[17] The maximum penalty for that offence is 18 months
imprisonment. A disqualification period of at least two years must also attach
to each instance of that offending.
Enter dwelling and commit indictable
offence (stealing)
[18] At some time between midnight and 7:30am on 28 May
2024, Mr Uprichard stole a $1,500 electric scooter from within a dwelling.
victim of that offending did not immediately report that offence, only going to
the police after discovering her home had been
burgled a second time.
Restitution is sought.
[19] Mr Uprichard returned to the same address three
days later and stole an $1,800 electric scooter he had observed on his first
visit to the house. He also stole a battery charger for the scooter and keys to
the victim’s car.
Again, restitution is
[20] The maximum penalty for each of these offences is life
imprisonment.
Fail to appear in court in accordance with an
undertaking
[21] Mr Uprichard was granted bail on 13 November 2024 and was
required to appear in court on 18 December 2024. He did not appear.
continued to commit offences (outlined below) and was not located by police
until 7 February 2025. He would not give police
his name but was not charged
with an offence in that regard.
[22] The maximum penalty for this offence is
2 years imprisonment.
[23] The following
offences were committed after Mr Uprichard was granted bail and failed to appear
The domestic violence offences
[24] On 7 January 2025, Mr
Uprichard and his then partner were at an address in Innisfail when the victim
told him to leave after
he told her crying child “to shut the fuck
up”. Mr Uprichard then started to throw items at the victim, grabbed her
by the hair and punched her in the head multiple times.
[25] She then used
her mobile phone to call police, but Mr Uprichard grabbed the phone from her and
threw it on the ground, causing
the screen to smash.
[26] The victim was
pregnant at the time of these offences.
[27] The maximum penalties for the
common assault and wilful damage offences are three and five years imprisonment
respectively.
The evasion offences
[28] At 10:27pm on 6 February 2025,
police activated their car’s lights and siren to intercept the blue Mazda
3 (288MSK) being
driven by Mr Uprichard. Evading police, he sped up and
travelled on the wrong side of the road.
[29] At 11:48pm, police observed the
same car and again activated lights and siren to intercept it. Although the car
initially slowed,
it ultimately sped up and evaded police.
[30] The minimum
penalty for this offending is 50 penalty units or 50 days imprisonment served
wholly in a corrective services facility.
The maximum penalty, because of the
aggravating features, is 300 penalty units or 5 years imprisonment. A
disqualification period
of at least two years must also attach to each instance
of this offending.
[31] On each occasion, Mr Uprichard was again driving
while disqualified by court order from holding or obtaining a driver
The arrest of Mr Uprichard
[32] Police found the Mazda at
Smithfield Shopping Centre on the afternoon of 7 February 2025. They entered
the shopping centre and
found Mr Uprichard inside with the car’s keys in
his possession. He initially denied driving there but later admitted to
[33] Mr Uprichard was arrested and remanded in custody.
Uprichard’s antecedents
[34] Mr Uprichard is currently 31 years of age.
He was 29 and 30 at the time of the subject offending.
[35] His family
relocated from Papua New Guinea when he was 7 years old. He completed Year 11
and is the father of two children,
a five year old and a four year old. Both
children are in the care of his parents due to the intervention of the
Department of Families,
Seniors, Disability Services and Child Safety (the
Department). His third child is expected to be born at the start of
[36] He has a limited employment history, having worked as a wood
machinist with his father and later intermittently as a removalist
course of six years.
[37] Mr Uprichard’s relationship with the mother
of his two children commenced in 2018. The Department became involved two
after their separation.
At that time, Mr
Uprichard was consuming methylamphetamine and was unable to assist with the care
of the children. The Department
was reportedly also concerned about the
mother’s capacity. Tragically, she took her own life in August 2024. Mr
Cuthbertson
tendered a Cairns Post article which conveyed the grief in the
community at her sudden passing.
[38] Mr Uprichard had moved to Innisfail
common assault
and wilful damage offences (currently pregnant with his third
[39] He is reportedly plagued by guilt for not being able to care for
his children and prevent them from being taken into care. He
was heavily
impacted by the death of his former partner and his drug use spiralled. It was
submitted that he was “not in the
right state of mind” after August
[40] It was said that some of the driving offending occurred because Mr
Uprichard was driving up from Innisfail for work.
[41] Since being remanded
in custody, Mr Uprichard has remained free of illicit substances, has found work
in the kitchen, arranged
for his car to be sold and enrolled in substance
intervention courses.
Criminal and traffic histories
[42] A seven page
Queensland criminal history and an eight page Queensland traffic record were
[43] Mr Uprichard has previously been convicted of unlicenced
driving 19 times. He was additionally disqualified by court order at
of 12 of those instances of driving.
[44] Nine of the previous instances of
driving while disqualified by court order occurred between 5 January 2019 and 7
October 2022.
Each of those nine instances
attracted a term of imprisonment ranging from three months to 15 months
imprisonment.
[45] He has six previous convictions for unlawfully using motor
vehicles and four previous convictions for evading police and two
for failing to
section 754
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
[46] He has four previous convictions for failing to appear and several
previous convictions for dishonesty offending including stealing,
entering and using vehicles, receiving tainted property and burglary.
Uprichard’s criminal offending commenced in
He has received several terms of
imprisonment in the past. On 17 May 2019, he received 2 months imprisonment
served wholly in a
correctional centre for evasion offences. On 9 September
2020, he received a 12 month period of imprisonment for evading police,
burglary, stealing and receiving tainted
On 9 March 2022, he was sentenced
to a 15 month period of imprisonment for unlawful use of vehicles, evading
police, and multiple
instances of stealing and receiving tainted
[48] Finally, on 15 February
2023, he was sentenced to an 18 month period of imprisonment for two instances
of unlawfully using motor
vehicles and one of receiving tainted property. 128
days of presentence custody were declared as time already served under the
and a parole release date of 15
August 2023 was set. The sentencing court further convicted but did not further
punish Mr Uprichard
of an offence of possessing utensils or pipes and of
[49] As already mentioned, Mr Uprichard was on parole for two
instances of unlawfully using motor vehicles at the time of the unlawful
offence I am to sentence him for, having been sentenced for that earlier
offending only 6 months prior and being released on
parole 13 days prior. The
rest of the present offending commenced less than a month after he was later
released from prison.
Submissions
For the prosecution
[50] At one point
Ms Verwey submitted that I would abstain from determining the matter, but
ultimately submitted that I would sentence
Mr Uprichard to a period of
imprisonment between two and a half and three years. It was initially submitted
that the burglary offending
on its own, in circumstances where there was the
aggravating feature of a return to the same address, warranted a term of between
two and a half and three years imprisonment.
[51] It was otherwise submitted
that the common assault and wilful damage offences warranted a sentence of 12 to
15 months imprisonment.
The disqualified driving offences were said to warrant
15 months in prison and the evasion offences warranted six to nine months
imprisonment to be served cumulatively.
[52] Ms Verwey later provided written
submissions arguing that I can impose terms of imprisonment that would result in
a period of
imprisonment greater than three years.
[53] Mr Cuthbertson, appearing for Mr Uprichard, submitted that I
would not sentence Mr Uprichard to a period of imprisonment any
longer than
three years. He submitted that a 33 month (two year and nine month) period of
imprisonment be imposed, made up of a
three month term for the fail to appear
offence being added to a 30 month period attaching to the remaining offences.
It was anticipated,
however, that this sentence would be ordered to be served
cumulatively on the contingent liability Mr Uprichard owes under his previous
period of imprisonment.
[54] He submitted that a parole eligibility date be
set at a third of that period (7 January
[55] Mr Cuthbertson noted the
combined effect of mandatory minimum disqualification periods for the driving
offences would already
produce a 26 year period of disqualification and sought I
impose only the minimum periods of disqualification.
[56] It was further
submitted that Mr Uprichard was not able to pay restitution.
[57] On the
question of jurisdiction, Mr Cuthbertson argued that I was not able to make
orders resulting in a period of imprisonment
greater than three years and
ultimately relied on the case of Commissioner of Police v Aplin
Can I make orders that would result in an overall sentence in excess of
three years?
[58] As indicated, I invited submissions during the hearing on
whether I could impose cumulative terms of imprisonment where the result
offences before the Court would be a period of imprisonment exceeding three
years. I first stood the matter down and later
adjourned to allow both parties
to advance further submissions and material if they wished.
[59] Section
22A of the Justices Act states:
Magistrates Courts are to have the civil,
criminal and other jurisdiction—
(a) that Courts of Petty Sessions or
justices sitting in Petty Sessions had before the commencement of the Justices
Acts Amendment
Act 1964 ; and
(b) that is conferred on them by this Act and
other Acts.
[60] One of those other Acts is the Criminal Code Act 1899 which
contains The Criminal Code (Qld) (the Criminal Code).
[61] Section 3(4) of
the Criminal Code states that “A person guilty of a regulatory offence or
simple offence may be summarily
convicted by a Magistrates Court”. An
offence not otherwise designated is a simple
[62] Additionally, Chapter 58A
of the Criminal Code deals with indictable offences that must and may be dealt
with summarily.
[63] Section 552D(1) states that a Magistrates Court must
abstain from dealing summarily with a charge that would otherwise, because
Chapter 58A, be dealt with by a Magistrates Court if satisfied the defendant may
not be adequately punished on summary conviction.
In the ordinary course, a
Magistrate sentencing a defendant for such an offence is limited to imposing a
maximum penalty of 100
penalty units or three years
imprisonment.
[64] My view of the
relevant provisions is that the three year limitation applies to the term of
imprisonment imposed for a single
charge and not the period of imprisonment that
results from the imposition of multiple terms of imprisonment on multiple
[65] I have not found anything in the Magistrates Court Act 1921
(Qld) or the
Justices Act 1886
(Qld) to indicate a Magistrates Court is
precluded from making sentencing orders that would result in a period of
imprisonment greater
than three years.
[66] There is nothing in the
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
(Qld) to suggest the ability to impose
cumulative terms of imprisonment under
section 156
of that Act is somehow
limited in sentencing proceedings before the Magistrates Court.
[67] Consider this scenario under
section 156A
Penalties and
Sentences Act
. A prisoner is serving a three year period of imprisonment in
jail. While serving that sentence, he commits, is convicted of, and
sentenced for an offence of preparing to escape from lawful custody under
section 124(1)(a)
Corrective Services Act 2006
(Qld). That is an offence
found in Schedule 1 of the
Penalties and Sentences Act
. Because of that and
section 156A
, any “sentence of imprisonment imposed for the offence must
be ordered to be served cumulatively with any other term of imprisonment
offender is liable to
[68] The maximum penalty
section 124(1)(a)
offence is two years imprisonment. As it is an offence
not otherwise designated (it is not, for example, a misdemeanour or crime),
is a simple offence and so may be dealt with by a Magistrates
[69] If the submission advanced
on behalf of Mr Uprichard is correct, a Magistrates Court in that circumstance
would not be able to
sentence the prisoner to any term of imprisonment. That
cannot be correct.
[70] It was suggested there might be a distinction between
a scenario where one magistrate sentences a defendant to multiple offences
the one day in one sentence hearing and a scenario where that defendant instead
had two separate sentence hearings, held on separate
days. That is, it was
agreed that Magistrate X could sentence a defendant to a three year period of
imprisonment on one day and,
while serving that sentence, Magistrate Y could
some days, weeks or months later impose a cumulative term of imprisonment,
that term was also no longer than three years in length. I agree that
a Magistrate can make such orders, but I do not see how, if
those hearings were
combined, the same result could not lawfully be ordered by the one
magistrate.
[71] Such an anomaly would mean that the Magistrates Court
defendant’s
matters to be finalised and how many charges they might
accumulate while awaiting sentencing. It would also mean that a piecemeal
finalisation of matters could see the charges remain in the Magistrates
at once, which
would be a neater way to deal with totality considerations, could lead to
charges being committed to a higher court.
[72] While that is plainly a
desirable result where the seriousness of the offending truly requires it, I
respectfully suggest it
would not be desirable in the circumstances I am
contemplating, especially where the charges would potentially be split. In Mr
Uprichard’s
case, if I was to find I could not adequately punish him for
the charges before the Court, I would commit him only on the offences
under Chapter 58A. The remaining charges would remain in the summary
under section 651 of the
Criminal Code. That would require section 652 to be complied with.
then begs the question of what a magistrate should do with a defendant who
pleads guilty to a very large number of simple
offences that warrant a period of
imprisonment greater than three years. Suppose those offences each carry
maximum penalties of
at least two years imprisonment and the defendant has a
lengthy criminal history showing multiple previous periods of incarceration
such offending. Is that offender spared the risk of a Magistrates Court
sentencing them to a period greater than three years?
If so, provided that
offender was successful in obtaining repeated adjournments of their sentencing,
they would be free to continue
to commit further offences without fear of their
penalty exceeding a three year period of imprisonment.
[74] I see no
distinction between an example in which Magistrate X sentences a defendant to
charge A on one day to two and a half
years imprisonment and Magistrate B
sentences them the next day on charge B to a cumulative 12 month term of
imprisonment and an
example in which the one magistrate sentences that defendant
to a term of two and a half years imprisonment on charge A and a cumulative
of 12 months imprisonment on charge B at the same sentencing hearing. There was
agreement at the Bar table that there was no
difficulty with the former
[75] In R v Hall and Ors
[1980] Qd R 304
, it was stated:
there would not seem to be any reason why a magistrate cannot make sentences
cumulative, it is undesirable that they should
do so to achieve a sentence far
outside the range of sentence entrusted to them.
[76] There, when the maximum
sentence which could be imposed on summary conviction was two years
imprisonment, the sentencing Magistrate
imposed cumulative terms of two, two and
one year imprisonment (a resultant five year period of imprisonment). The
period of imprisonment
imposed in that case was two and a half times the maximum
penalty that could be imposed for a single offence.
[77] I do not think the
decision of Hall precludes me from imposing a period of imprisonment greater
than three years on Mr Uprichard.
I am not contemplating “a sentence far
outside the range of sentence entrusted to [me]”. Instead, given I am not
contemplating
such a sentence, I consider Hall to be authority for the
proposition that a Magistrates Court can, in appropriate cases, sentence
defendants to periods (as opposed to terms) of imprisonment greater than three
[78] While I accept it is not
strictly an authority for the proposition that a magistrate can impose periods
of imprisonment greater
than three years, Hobson v Queensland Police Service
[2009] QDC 246
was an appeal of a 37 month period of imprisonment imposed by a
magistrate. The appeal succeeded because the resultant period was
deemed to be
an excessive one, not because a magistrate is not permitted to impose sentencing
orders that would result in a 37 month
period of imprisonment. That point was
not argued in that appeal.
[79] In Commissioner of Police v Aplin
, his Honour Judge Dearden referred to the following statement made by the
sentencing Magistrate during submissions:
And so the sentence that I have to
impose, to keep her [the appellant] within the jurisdiction of the court, may
have to involve a
parole release date which is more than one-third. Now, in
accordance with that [indistinct] case, I'm thinking I warn you, Mrs Blundstone,
that what I propose to do is have a parole release date which is more than the
usual one-third and ask you to tell me why you think
inappropriate.
[80] The sentencing
Magistrate in that case imposed a sentence of two years and nine months
imprisonment with a parole release date
at the 18 month mark. It is clear from
the above passage that the sentencing Magistrate imposed such orders “to
defendant] within the jurisdiction of the
[81] Dearden J went on to say:
Simply put, if the learned
magistrate was concerned that he could not adequately punish the appellant
within the limits of his jurisdiction
(see Criminal Code s.552C(2)(b),
s.552D(1), s.552H(1)(a)), then the proceedings should have been committed to the
District Court
pursuant to Criminal Code s.552B(3).
[82] Again, the case of
Aplin was not one in which the District Court was asked to consider whether a
magistrate can make sentencing
orders that would result in a period of
imprisonment greater than three years.
[83] I do not intend to manipulate the
sentencing orders I consider appropriate to keep Mr Uprichard within the
Magistrates Court. Further, I am not concerned that I
cannot adequately punish Mr Uprichard within the limits of my jurisdiction.
do not therefore find that the decision of Aplin precludes me from sentencing Mr
Uprichard to a period of imprisonment greater
than three years.
also referred to the decision of GAF v QPS
[2008] QCA 190.
Although it
considered a different aspect of section 552H, the judgment of Justice Lyons
[t]he purpose of [section 552H] is to limit the penalty that a
Magistrate can impose for that offence.
underlining)
[85] It is plain that a magistrate, unless specifically
authorised,
cannot impose a term of
imprisonment greater than three years on a single charge. However, in
appropriate cases, I see no prohibition
on a magistrate making sentencing orders
that would result in a period of imprisonment greater than three years, provided
no individual
term of imprisonment exceeds three years.
The appropriate
[86] Relevant to the exercise of my sentencing discretion, among
other things, are:
• The pleas of guilty;
Uprichard’s cooperation and, where made, the admissions to
• The unsophisticated nature of most of the
• The principle that, other than for the common assault
offence, a sentence of imprisonment should be one of last resort and
that would see Mr Uprichard stay in the community is to be
• The commission of an offence of violence that was also a
domestic violence offence;
• Mr Uprichard’s antecedents and the
circumstances in which the offending occurred;
• The criminal and
traffic histories;
• The time he has spent on remand (103 days between
7 February and 20 May 2025);
• The time he may be liable to serve under
previously imposed orders (64
• The fact that one of the
offences occurred on parole and for like offending;
• The fact that
some of the offences occurred while Mr Uprichard was on bail and after he failed
to appear in court in accordance
with that bail undertaking; and
fact that the offending spanned 16 separate days over a period of more than 17
months (although 26 of the 27 offences
spanned a period of about nine
[87] I was taken to several cases. In the case of Jones v
Queensland Police Service
[2022] QDC 281
, a 15 month period of imprisonment was
imposed on a 42 year old offender for 15 offences, the most serious of which was
premises and commit indictable offence by break offence. She was
required to serve five of those months in jail before being released
While she had been on a six month probation order at the time of the latter,
less serious offences (including a charge
of receiving tainted property, three
instances of public nuisance and three seemingly minor drug offences), she was
not subject to
any court orders at the time of the most serious offending. Ms
Jones had a “relevant and prolific criminal history”
in the context
of a deprived upbringing which included exposure to domestic violence and being
a victim of domestic violence. Her
offending was described as “street and
property offending”. The most serious offence involved her breaking into
after hours in desperation after being subjected to unwanted sexual
advances and becoming stranded. It was described as unsophisticated
unplanned. The offending in that case was far less serious and less varied as
compared to the offending by Mr Uprichard.
[88] The three year period of
imprisonment with a requirement that the appellant serve half of that period in
prison was not disturbed
on appeal in Pamtoonda v Commissioner of Police
There was more serious and repeated violence in that case, but no
domestic violence and no offending on parole. Apart from there
being multiple
offences committed on several days over several months, the offending in that
case is not overly comparable to the
offending engaged in by Mr
[89] The appellant in Annas v Queensland Police Service
was a 31 year old with 12 pages of criminal history including 36 previous
convictions of a similar nature who was sentenced to 3
years imprisonment for
related offences of burglary and stealing and unlawful use of a motor vehicle.
His sentence was not disturbed
on appeal. He and co-offenders entered the
dwelling through an unlocked door and untidily searched the house. Somewhere
$1,000 and $5,000 in cash, a video camera, navigation device and tools
were taken. Finally, the appellant removed a motorcycle from
a shed and moved
it to the driveway attempting to start it before falling asleep on it and later
being found by the victim. That
offending occurred six days after release on
parole and, significantly, the three year sentence was imposed cumulatively on
months or so that remained to be served under the earlier
[90] The appellant in Ratcliffe v Queensland Police Service
pleaded guilty to 13 offences he committed over a five month period as a
26 year old. He had a challenging childhood and presented
to the Court with a
seven page criminal history and two pages of traffic history. He was not on any
court orders at the time of
his offending. It is not said that he was on bail
at the time of his offending. His offending did not include any burglaries or
domestic violence offences and included only one instance of an evasion offence
and no instances of driving while disqualified by
court order (although there
were repeated instances of unlicenced driving). He was resentenced on appeal to
a 20 month period of
imprisonment. Mr Uprichard’s offending was plainly
more serious than that of Mr Ratcliffe.
[91] I was also taken to R v
[2013] QCA 243
where a three and half year period of imprisonment was
imposed for a burglary, two aggravated break and enter premises charges and
other lesser offences. There were totality considerations in that case,
[92] A cumulative sentence of 15 months imprisonment was replaced by a
cumulative sentence of eight months imprisonment for an unsophisticated
committed by a 19 year old offender on parole in Age v Queensland Police Service
[2020] QDC 169.
That appellant had pleaded guilty also to an offence of
trespass for which he received no further penalty. He had a poor criminal
history but had identified his co-offender. He had a disadvantaged upbringing.
The sentence there was moderated because it had
to be served cumulatively on the
sentence the offender was already serving.
[93] Mr Uprichard does not have
the benefit of youth. He is certainly not as young as the offender in Age was.
Further, his offending
only ceased when he was apprehended by police. Previous
sentences of imprisonment, including actual imprisonment, and orders for
be disqualified from holding or obtaining a driver licence have not deterred him
from committing further like offences.
[94] Mr Uprichard’s offending
involved a variety of offences committed at different times and against
different victims. There
were distinct episodes of offending that call for the
consideration of cumulative sentences, at least in respect of the domestic
violence offences and the offences committed on 6 February 2025.
taken to cases that considered the offence of entering a premises in
circumstances where Mr Uprichard is to be sentenced
for entering a dwelling. I
am conscious of the fact that the victim of the burglary offence would barely
have had time to begin
to try and deal with the 28 May 2024 offence when Mr
Uprichard returned to commit another such offence only three days later. He
took more items on that occasion, including the victim’s car keys. She
would have been perfectly entitled to fear a third
return of Mr Uprichard to
facilitate the theft of her car.
[96] Being cognisant of decisions that have
at times found there to be little to distinguish the two, I consider the crime
of entering
a person’s home and stealing from them to be one of generally
greater concern to the community than a like offence committed
in an unoccupied
business premises.
[97] It is reasonable to infer that the invasion of a
person’s home, all else being equal, would generally have greater impacts
on the victim or victims and is offending I consider to be more deserving of a
deterrent sentence. Notably, the maximum penalty
for entering a dwelling and
stealing is life imprisonment, while the maximum penalty for entering a premises
and stealing is 14 years
imprisonment.
[98] I must avoid a sentence that is
crushing. It would be wrong for me to simply add up the sentences that I might
attribute to
each offence or even each incident of offending. If I did, Mr
Uprichard would likely be facing a sentence in excess of seven years
imprisonment. To illustrate this point, the imposition of even the most lenient
sentence of imprisonment previously imposed on him
for driving while
disqualified by a court of three months on just each of those offences here,
would accumulate to a period of almost
three years imprisonment.
that, I have determined to impose a cumulative sentence of imprisonment on the
evasion offences, but not on the offences
of domestic violence. I do not for a
moment mean for that determination to suggest that the domestic violence
offences are less
serious than the evasion offences, but the offending from 6
February 2025 deserves to be singled out given Mr Uprichard’s woeful
history of driving related offences.
[100] The domestic violence offences are
serious. The common assault culminated with repeated strikes to the head of Mr
Uprichard’s
pregnant partner. Despite that, no injuries are alleged. Mr
Uprichard then damaged her phone when she sought to contact police
assistance. The offending occurred in the presence of her child.
Uprichard does not have any previous convictions for domestic violence or
obviously violent offending.
consider the fail to appear in court offence in this case to be a serious
example of the offence, especially given the earlier
convictions for such
offending. A term of imprisonment is warranted for that offence and is required
to be served cumulatively.
[103] I sentence Mr Uprichard as
(a) For the 31 May 2024 burglary offence, taking the remaining offending into
account (other than the offending for which cumulative
terms are imposed): two
and a half years imprisonment;
the aggravated unlawful use of a motor vehicle offence: 19 months
imprisonment;
(c) For failing to appear in accordance with his bail
undertaking: two months imprisonment (cumulative);
(d) For evading police at
night after a previous conviction: seven months imprisonment
(cumulative);
(e) Shorter concurrent terms of imprisonment are imposed for
the remaining offences.
[104] I have arrived at this three year and three month period of imprisonment
after moderating the terms of imprisonment imposed
cumulatively and reviewing
the aggregate sentence and determining that it is just and
appropriate.
I do not consider this
sentence, especially in light of the parole eligibility date, to be
[105] The presentence custody of 111 days (7 February to 28 May
2025) is declared as time already served under that period of
imprisonment.
[106] Given the orders I have made, Mr Uprichard is not
entitled to a parole release date. He has been in continual custody for three
months and three weeks and the suspension of his parole order in November 2023
saw him spend about five months and one week in prison,
serving out the rest of
his earlier sentence. That further period is relevant to the aggravated
unlawful use of a motor vehicle
offence from 28 August 2023 and therefore the
sentencing process overall.
The term of
imprisonment imposed on that 28 August 2023 offence will cancel that earlier
parole order. I proceed on the basis that,
short of a Schedule 1 offence being
involved or a court order to the contrary being made, any time Mr Uprichard
might additionally
be required to serve because of that cancellation will be
served concurrently with the sentences I am imposing. No submissions were
to the contrary. In all the circumstances, I consider the appropriate parole
eligibility date in this case to be 6 January
[107] Although I do not consider
it necessary to state, I make it clear that I do not intend the sentence I
impose to be served cumulatively
on Mr Uprichard’s contingent
[108] Given Mr
Uprichard’s incarceration and there not appearing to be any suggestion he
has or will in the near future have
the means to make payment of restitution or
compensation, I decline to make such an order.
[109] The full list of orders
I make, including the periods of disqualification, are set out in the annexure
to these reasons.
[110] Naturally, convictions are recorded for each
A. The sentencing orders are:
28 August 2023
UUMV in company
19 months imprisonment
Stealing after previous
2 months imprisonment
Driving while disqualified
9 months imprisonment
28 May 2024
Burglary and steal
20 months imprisonment
31 May 2024
Burglary and steal
30 months imprisonment
9 July 2024
Stealing after previous
3 months imprisonment
Driving while disqualified
9 months imprisonment
15 July 2024
Stealing after previous
3 months imprisonment
Driving while disqualified
9 months imprisonment
10 August 2024
Stealing after previous
3 months imprisonment
Driving while disqualified
9 months imprisonment
11 August 2024
Stealing after previous
3 months imprisonment
Driving while disqualified
9 months imprisonment
13-17 August 2024
Stealing after previous
6 months imprisonment
16 August 2024
Stealing after previous
6 months imprisonment
Driving while disqualified
12 months imprisonment
23 October 2024
Driving while disqualified
12 months imprisonment
10 November 2024
3 months imprisonment
Driving while disqualified
12 months imprisonment
18 December 2024
Fail to appear
2 months imprisonment
7 January 2025
Common assault – domestic violence offence
12 months imprisonment
Wilful damage – domestic violence offence
6 months imprisonment
6 February 2025
Evasion offence after previous at night
Driving while disqualified
Evasion offence after previous
Driving while disqualified
7 February 2025
Driving while disqualified
12 months imprisonment
B. The terms of imprisonment imposed for the offences committed on 6
February 2025 are to be served concurrently with each other,
but cumulatively on
the term of imprisonment imposed on the 31 May 2024 burglary offence.
term of imprisonment imposed for the fail to appear offence will necessarily
commence at the conclusion of the 37-month period
of imprisonment created by the
sentencing orders on the remaining offences. The defendant is therefore subject
to a 39-month period
of imprisonment.
D. 111 days (7 February to 28 May 2025)
of presentence custody are declared as time already served under the
E. The parole eligibility date is set at 6 January
F. Separate two-year disqualification orders (the defendant is
disqualified from holding or obtaining a driver licence) are made with
to each instance of disqualified driving and evasion offence.
See paragraphs [57] – [84] for my reasons concerning the jurisdiction
unlawful use of a motor vehicle, 1 x receiving tainted property, 1 x stealing
and 1 x possess utensil. A declaration of
presentence custody was made from 10
October 2022.
7 February to 28 May
The agreed facts state entry was gained by breaking, but no such circumstance is
charged. Although such a circumstance of aggravation
could not further increase
the maximum penalty here, I have disregarded it in determining the appropriate
R v De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR 383.
Sections 33
Bail Act 1980
Neither date is known to
For context, Mr Uprichard spent at least 11 months in prison during that period
and the 7 October 2022 offence was committed while
on parole for unlawfully
using motor vehicles and evading police.
With an offence of enter dwelling with intent.
He was also
convicted but not further punished for failing to appear in
also convicted but not further punished for failing to appear in court,
possessing utensils or pipes and obstructing a police
10 October 2022 to 14 February
It was submitted that a parole eligibility date would be set because it was
conceded that a term of imprisonment would attach to
the unlawful use of a motor
vehicle offence committed on parole and that would trigger a cancellation of
that parole order. Given
my conclusion as to the appropriate sentence to be
imposed, I do not need to consider this point.
Section 552H(1)(b). The maximum penalty is four years imprisonment for a
magistrate imposing a drug and alcohol treatment order
552H(1)(a).
Section 156A(2) of the
Penalties and Sentence Act 1992
Section 3 of the
See the definitions of “period of imprisonment” and “term of
imprisonment” in
Penalties and Sentences Act
Page 5 of that decision.
Paragraph [22] of the judgment.
As is the case under section 552H(1)(a) of the
Criminal Code
28 August 2023 to 1 November 2023.
There is an assault or obstruct police conviction from 2017 for which I was not
provided the facts.
The annexure to these reasons sets out these orders in tabular form.
[2003] QCA 175
[2004] 1 Qd R 63.
Mill v The Queen
[1988] HCA 70
[1988] 166 CLR
[2016] QCA 322
and [33]-[42]. No evidence was
put before me that the 3 November 2023 to 11 April 2024 period in custody was
declarable. However,
if Mr Uprichard was remanded on the unlawful use of a
motor vehicle in company offence at that time, I would have elected not to
declare that time given he was also serving his previous sentence. I have taken
that time into
months into the 39 month period of imprisonment, giving full credit for the
presentence custody between 7 February to 28 May 2025
and some allowance for the
3 November 2023 and 11 April 2024.
The period of unserved imprisonment from 28 August 2023 to 1 November 2023.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (375 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter