URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBCCMCmr/2025/402.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vardon Point Apartments [2025] QBCCMCmr 402 (11 November 2025)
ADJUDICATOR’S ORDER
Office of the
Commissioner
for Body Corporate and Community
Vardon Point Apartments
[2025] QBCCMCmr 402
Peter Milton, former co-owner of Lot 50 (
Body Corporate for Vardon Point Apartments (
Vardon Point Apartments CTS 29516
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 227(1)(b)
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation Module)
Regulation 2020
Accommodation Module
APPLICATION NO:
DECISION DATE:
11 November 2025
DECISION OF:
I Rosemann, Adjudicator
CATCHWORDS:
MAINTENANCE – where the body corporate engaged a contractor to
undertake tiling and waterproofing works on the balcony of a
lot – where
the body corporate invoiced the owners for the tiling works – whether the
body corporate was entitled to
pass the costs on to the owners.
; Accommodation Module,
Body Corporate for Vardon Point Apartments is not entitled to charge any former
or current owner of Lot 50 for costs associated
with tiling works undertaken on
Lot 50 in February 2025.
Body Corporate for Vardon Point Apartments must cancel the invoice dated 3 July
2025 for $14,276.50, remove any debt for that
amount from the account for Lot
50, and cease any debt recovery actions in relation to that amount.
application is otherwise
REASONS FOR DECISION
application relates the responsibility for the cost of tiling works undertaken
by the body corporate on the balcony of Lot
50 (known as apartment 69).
[2] In 2024
water ingress was identified in the common property basement carpark, in an area
below the balcony of Lot 50. The body
corporate apparently decided the water
ingress originated from the balcony and that the Lot 50 owners were responsible
for repairs.
In February 2025 a contractor organised by the body corporate
removed the tiles, waterproofed the balcony, and laid new tiles.
corporate then invoiced the owners for the tiling.
[3] The lot
owners dispute liability for the work. They assert the water ingress arose from
a failure of the waterproofing membrane
(a body corporate responsibility). They
say there is evidence of absent or inadequate waterproofing and no evidence that
the condition
of the tiles and grout caused the water ingress. They further
assert the body corporate failed to act reasonably.
applicant seeks orders that the body corporate cease enforcement of the invoice
it issued and be declared responsible for
the cost of removing and replacing the
tiles. They also seek to invalidate a committee resolution determining the lot
owners were
responsible. The substantive question to decide then is who is
responsible for the cost of the tiling work.
Preliminaries
Point Apartments community titles scheme 29516 (
Vardon Point Apartments
is a 70-lot scheme in Pelican Waters. The community management statement
) shows the Accommodation Module applies. The scheme is registered
as survey plans 138675, 140379 and 143131. The scheme is part
of a layered
arrangement.
application seeks the following orders:
That the Body Corporate for
Vardon Point Apartments be ordered to:
all recovery or enforcement action in relation to the invoice dated 3 July 2025
for $14,276.50 issued to Lot 50;
declared responsible for the cost of removing and replacing the balcony tiles on
Lot 50; and
the resolution passed by the committee at its meeting on 18 July 2024, directing
that Lot 50 be responsible for the repair or
replacement of tiles, be declared
void and of no effect.
Proceedings
applicant initially applied for conciliation of the dispute on 2 June
The parties participated in
conciliation but did not reach an agreement.
application was lodged on 15 July 2025. The Commissioner’s delegate
sought clarification from the applicant on some
aspects of the
application.
The application was
subsequently amended.
Commissioner invited submissions from the committee and all
Five submissions were
received. The applicant obtained and responded to the
submissions.
application was referred to department
adjudication.
[11] I have now
investigated the dispute, including reviewing the submitted
I sought further
information from the body corporate on several matters, the responses to which I
will note below where appropriate.
adjudicator may make an order that is just and equitable in the circumstances to
resolve a dispute about a claimed or anticipated
contravention of the Act or the
CMS, or the exercise of rights or powers or performance of duties under the Act
or the CMS.
facie, I have jurisdiction to determine this matter under the dispute resolution
provisions.
However, there are
some preliminary matters to note.
Interest in the dispute
[14] The Act
defines disputes by reference to the parties. The applicant was an owner of Lot
50 when the application was lodged.
However, titles records show ownership of
the lot was transferred in August 2025. As such, the applicant is no longer a
named in section 227(1) of the Act for the purposes of this dispute. In
such situations, an application could be dismissed if the
outcome sought was no
longer relevant or required.
However, I am satisfied that in the current circumstances the applicant has a
continuing interest in the order sought.
Debt disputes
[15] Another
issue arises where the applicant is disputing a body corporate invoice and
seeking to stop debt recovery action. An
adjudicator does not have jurisdiction
to determine a debt dispute.
‘debt dispute’ is defined in the Act as a dispute between a body
corporate and an owner about the recovery, by the
body corporate from the owner,
of a debt under this Act.
there to be a debt dispute, there needs to be an amount owing under the
So, if an amount claimed
is not owed under the Act, a dispute about the amount is not a debt dispute. If
the body corporate cannot
lawfully invoice the owners of Lot 50 for the disputed
amount, there will be no amount owing under the Act. Accordingly, to determine
if I have jurisdiction to decide this dispute, I must consider if the invoiced
amount was validly owing under the Act.
[16] The Act
provides, in part, that an application to invalidate a committee resolution must
be lodged within 3 months of the date
The Commissioner must
deal with a late application as if it were in time. An adjudicator may then
waive the time limit for ‘good
reason’. A person will have complied
with the time limit if they apply for conciliation with the time limit.
[17] Whether
there is ‘good reason’ to waive the time limit requires
consideration of circumstances such as the length
of the delay, the reason for
it, any prejudice to the respondent and others, and the prospects of success if
the application had
been made in time.
applicant seeks to invalidate a committee resolution purportedly passed on 18
July 2024. An application to do so needed
to be lodged by 18 October 2024.
However, the conciliation application was lodged on 2 June 2025, more than 10
months after the
applicant details their actions after the July meeting and say they accepted in
good faith a verbal agreement with the body
corporate. They say the work did
not occur until 6 months later and there was no indication until March 2025 that
they would be
invoiced for it. They say they then tried to resolve the matter
directly, before applying for conciliation.
questionable from the relevant minutes that the committee actually voted on and
passed a resolution, rather than simply
noting action to be taken. And the body
corporate submission does not dispute the agreement claimed by the applicant.
there does not appear to be any prejudice to the body corporate from
any delay. I am satisfied there is sufficient reason to waive
any time limit
that would apply to this application.
History of the
[21] The body
corporate says on 10 July 2024 it identified that water was leaking into the
basement car park below the balcony of
the applicant’s Lot 50.
[22] The matter
was discussed at a committee meeting on 18 July 2024. The minutes (at item 7.1)
say water was leaking through the
balcony tiles and owners had been advised in
2018 that balconies needed remedial action as identified in an engineer’s
for water seeping through ground floor balconies. The minutes said the
body corporate manager (
) would write to the owners of Lot 50 advising
the balcony tiles must be repaired or replaced and then the body corporate would
the balcony surface. It seems the body corporate did not obtain or
consider any professional advice on the source or cause of the
water ingress or
the condition of the balcony tiles before concluding that work was required on
[23] The BCM
wrote to the owners in these terms a month later. The owners responded saying
they believed the water leakage was a
result of the balcony not being adequately
waterproofed, which was a body corporate responsibility. They referred to a
adjudicator’s order.
[24] The body
corporate organised a tiler to inspect the balcony tiles. On 19 September
Trev’s Tiling provided a brief report
based on their inspection of the lot
on that day. It quoted $27,600 plus GST to remove the tiles, waterproof, and
lay new tiles.
It said it observed:
Evidence is showing water is
leaking through to the downstairs carpark
Drummy unstable tiles
cracked and deteriorating grout
No waterproofing returning up the walls which would suggest no waterproofing
Very little if any fall away from unit which is resulting in water pooling
further communication, the applicant says two committee members verbally advised
in September that, due to the carpark
damage, the committee would proceed with
the work and pay for it upfront, but then seek adjudication about the cost. The
says they agreed.
CFS QLD Pty Ltd (
) provided a
quote to the body corporate for $16,472.50 for work including to remove tiles,
vary falls, waterproof, and install new
December the onsite manager told the lot owners the body corporate had advised
it was happy to proceed with CFS as the cheapest
quote. They said CFS was
available in February.
[28] It does not
appear there was a body corporate resolution to undertake the work. The BCM
asserts there was no need to make or
record a decision because the lot owners
engaged the tiler, and the bulk of the cost was invoiced to owners.
apparently undertook the work in February 2025. It issued an invoice naming the
lot owners on 28 February for $14,276.50
including GST. The invoice total
excluded amounts ($5,760 for waterproofing and $1,361.36 representing 10% of the
labour to remove
the border tiles, rails and reinstate the rails) as being paid
by the body corporate.
[30] On 7 March
CFS provided the body corporate a report which said:
The tiles in
Unit 69 were found to be drummy, indicating detachment or voids beneath the
surface. The overall condition of the tiles
was poor, requiring attention to
prevent further deterioration or safety hazards.
Grout was observed to be cracked and missing in several areas, compromising
the structural integrity and appearance of the tiled surfaces.
Water pooling was identified on the balcony, raising concerns about drainage
and waterproofing. This issue posed potential risks
for water damage and safety
concerns if left unresolved.
[31] The BCM
gave the owners the CFS invoice (but apparently not the report) on 24 March
referring to it as their contribution to
retiling the balcony. The BCM said the
body corporate would pay for the waterproofing and about 10% of the tiling but
owed the balance.
[32] The owners
again disputed liability for replacing the tiles. They referred to the verbal
agreement that the body corporate would
cover the cost of the work and then seek
a ruling. They said they did not agree to pay for the tiling and if they had
been responsible
for tiling, they would have engaged their own tiler who was
some $5,000 cheaper.
[33] On 9 May
the committee resolved to advise the owners the cost of the tiling would be
added to the owner’s account as a
debt. The body corporate then issued an
invoice dated 3 July.
[34] On 11 July
the committee rejected an offer by the owners to contribute to the cost of the
Submissions
submission made on behalf of the committee says the dispute is not about the
cost of removing tiles to facilitate the installation
of a waterproof membrane
but the lack of maintenance of the tiling and grouting. It said the entire
balcony needed repair due to
the adherence of the tiles to the substrate,
degraded grout, and expansion joints. It includes:
did not advise the owner that the balcony needed waterproofing, but rather the
owner must repair their balcony tiles.
other balconies where the tiles were in good condition, but the membrane had
broken down, it had to remove good tiles and grouting
to replace the
previous decision implies that if tiles are not in good condition, the tiles
would not have to be removed for the sole purpose
of applying the membrane and
the owner would be responsible for the repair or replacement of the tiles.
selected the contractor based on the lowest quote. The applicant was made aware
of the quotes received but did not engage on the
reports showed the tiles were drummy and the grout was cracked and badly
deteriorated. That was the responsibility of the lot
the tiling and grouting was in good condition, it would have used a much cheaper
over-the-top waterproofing membrane. That was
used in other similar
situations.
corporate representatives observed a leaking tap on the balcony, with tiles
detached and water underneath. It appeared the tap
had been leaking for some
disputes the water ingress was more likely attributable to the membrane failure
than the poor tile condition. There is no evidence
membranes typically fail
before tiles or grout deteriorates. Professional advice indicated poor tiling
maintenance will lead over
time to the degradation of the tile adhesive and the
professional advice clearly indicated the position of the leaks in the car park
were from locations on the balcony where drummy
tiles and bad grouting were
of waterproofing under the balcony tiles does exist, as the remains of a black
tar-based membrane were revealed when the
tiles and adhesive was removed.
of non-compliant original waterproofing installation is speculative. The lack
of waterproofing on the vertical returns does
not indicate the slab was not
waterproofed. The evidence is there was waterproofing. It has taken 20 years
for leaks to occur.
tiles due to grout deterioration will damage the adhesion of the tiles to the
substrate and to the waterproof membrane over
Conversations
showed the owners did not believe they were responsible for lifting or replacing
the tiles, while the body corporate’s
position was that the applicants
were responsible for maintaining the tiles. It invoiced the owners on that
body corporate had an obligation to engage a contractor as soon as possible to
prevent any further damage to the infrastructure.
owners made submissions in support of the application.
says it is clear the balcony tiles were removed and replaced to stop water
penetration into the garage and the body corporate
should be responsible for the
full cost. They note past orders and object to the body corporate’s
handling of the matter.
notes a previous order and says it was their understanding that if the tiles
were in good condition, it was a body corporate
responsibility to carry out the
third says the body corporate appears to base its position on the assertion that
the deterioration of the tiles or grout caused
the water ingress, but the tiling
reports make no such finding. Further, one report identified the absence of
waterproofing returns
suggestion original structural non-compliance. They also
say the applicant acted reasonably and in reliance on the verbal assurance
costs would not be imposed unilaterally. They say the body corporate failed to
consider the applicant’s motions, delayed
the release of expert reports,
and did not issue clear notice that costs would be recovered from the owners.
They say the committee
failed to conduct a proper assessment of what actually
caused the water ingress or consider the expert advice.
[37] The former
co-owner of Lot 50 notes the impact of the dispute. They say the body
corporate said it would pay for the tiling
and then proceed to adjudication, and
but instead sent them the invoice with no reason. They say the body corporate
did not give
them the tiling reports before removing the tiles and nothing in
those reports link the tiles to the water ingress. The submitter
even if the tiles had been in excellent condition, the waterproofing would have
required their removal. They say the
alternative of putting sealer over the top
of the existing tiles, would have deteriorated more quickly and was not a
long-term solution.
They say they were given no choice in the scope,
contractor, timing, or cost of the work, other than the choice of tiles, as it
was entirely managed by the committee. They say their motions were ignored.
applicant’s response to the body corporate’s submission
dispute their entire balcony needed repair and say only a small patch of tiles
was drummy. A photograph taken before the removal
shows most tiles were in
reasonable condition. Even if there were minor grout issues, grout is porous
which is why under-tile membranes
are standard industry practice.
tile reports were obtained for the other balconies mentioned and so claims about
their condition cannot be relied on.
photograph of the balcony after the tiles were removed show no evidence of
waterproofing or black tar on the wall return and only
remnants of adhesive are
body corporate relies on the CFS report prepared after the work was completed.
That cannot credibly establish the condition
of the tiles or presence of
waterproofing.
had no dealing with the body corporate’s tiler and were never involved in
managing the project. They did not agree to
any variation costs.
body corporate refers to photographs from Trev’s Tiling, but these were
not given to them and were not included in the submission.
The report from
Trev’s Tiling makes no finding that their tiles caused the carpark ceiling
leak. There were no leak detection
tests and no evidence linking their tiles to
the water ingress.
balcony is leaking, full under-tile waterproofing is required. Over-tile
coatings do not perform as effectively or and durably.
was a leaking tap on the balcony, but it was only leaking for a couple of days
due to an incorrect hose fitting and was fixed
once identified. It cannot
reasonably explain the water ingress into the basement. And it highlights the
need for waterproof membranes
to protect against water passing through tiles and
body corporate has never disputed their account of a meeting with committee
members where they were verbally assured the body
corporate would fund the
tiling works and then take the matter to adjudication.
body corporate has not provided credible evidence that their balcony tiles or
grout caused the water ingress into the carpark
ceiling. Its own photographs
show the tiles were in good condition before removal, and there was no membrane
under the tiles. The
body corporate itself rejected the over-tile waterproofing
and it arranged and controlled all the works. The cost of the work should
be recoverable from them.
issue in this dispute is the responsibility for the cost of removing and
replacing tiles on the balcony of Lot 50. In deciding
this matter, I will note
the legislation and case law relevant to the dispute and then discuss the
circumstances and submitted evidence.
Maintenance
responsibilities generally
[40] Vardon
Point Apartments is registered as a building format plan of subdivision
). In this type of survey plan, the boundaries are defined by the
structural elements of a building, including the floors, walls,
and ceilings.
Where a lot is separated from another lot or common property by a floor, wall or
ceiling, the boundary is the centre
of the floor, wall, or
[41] A lot owner
must maintain their lot in good condition, except where it is the body
corporate’s responsibility to
A body corporate must
maintain common property in good and structurally sound
But in a BFP, a body
corporate must also maintain the following things that are not on common
property in
parapets, and balustrades on the boundary of a lot and common property
windows, and fittings in the boundary of a lot and common property, and
membranes that provide protection for lots or common
Similarly, it must maintain foundation
structures, roofing structures providing protection, and essential supporting
framework including
load-bearing walls, in
structurally sound
[42] In the
context of a body corporate’s maintenance obligations, the District Court
of Queensland has considered the statutory
duty in the Act to maintain. The
Court has said:
The statutory duty imposed ... is one which obliges
it to remedy any defect as soon as any of the building parts covered by the duty
fall into disrepair or were not operating properly. Failure to do so, once
aware, gave rise to a breach of its
...there is an intention disclosed by the legislation for a duty of care to
[43] The latter
decision applied a Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division case:
The duty to maintain: involves an obligation to keep a thing in
proper order by acts of maintenance before it falls out of condition,
which enables it to serve the purpose for which it exists; requires the body
corporate not only to attend to cases where
there is a malfunction, but also to
take preventative measures to ensure that there not be a malfunction; extends to
require remediation
of defects in the original construction of the common
property; and extends to oblige the body corporate to do things which could
be for the benefit of the proprietors as a whole or even a majority of them.
There is a breach of the duty as soon as something
in the common property is no
longer operating effectively or at all, or has fallen into disrepair.
regulations provide that despite the body corporate obligation to maintain parts
of a lot in a BFP, it can recover costs
as a debt from a person whose actions
cause or contribute to the damage or deterioration of part of the
The costs claimable will
be the portion of the reasonable cost to the body corporate of carrying out
maintenance that the body corporate
reasonably considers can be fairly
attributed to the person’s actions.
[45] Also, the
regulations provide for circumstances where an owner or occupier does not carry
out work that they have an obligation
to carry out under the legislation, a
statutory notice, the CMS, an adjudicator’s order, or a court or tribunal
In that case, the body
corporate may carry out the work and recover the reasonable cost of carrying out
the work as a debt.
Responsibility for the Lot 50 balcony
[46] Survey plan
143131 shows the balcony on Lot 50 is located within the boundaries of the lot.
Prima facie, the lot owners are
responsible for maintaining the balcony,
including its tiles.
[47] However,
the balcony slab can be viewed as a roofing structure that provides protection
for the common property on the level
below, as well as being essential
supporting framework. On that basis, the body corporate is responsible for
maintaining the balcony
slab in a structurally sound condition. It is also
responsible for maintaining the waterproofing on the balcony, as a roofing
that provides protection for lots or common property, in good
[48] Where a
body corporate must maintain a roofing membrane, it is liable for any damage
(including to a lot) arising from a failure
And it is responsible
for all work necessary to meet its maintenance obligations. If, for example,
balcony tiles need to be removed
and replaced to enable the body corporate to
rectify the underlying membrane, it would be responsible for the tiling work
the owner’s general responsibility for the tiles. But if tiling
work was not necessitated by work the body corporate was required
or chose to
undertake on the membrane, the body corporate would prima facie not be liable
Previous orders
[49] There is
reference to previous orders made about tiling at this scheme. There may have
been some misunderstanding about those
orders. I will note the substance of the
[50] In March
2017 and adjudication dismissed an application by owners seeking reimbursement
of the cost to tile their
The owners argued the
works were necessary due to cracking to the slab beneath. However, the
adjudicator was not persuaded on the
evidence that the body corporate had failed
to maintain the slab of that lot in a structurally sound condition.
[51] However, in
that decision the adjudicator said a building defects report obtained by the
body corporate in August 2016 recommended
tiles in certain affected balconies be
pulled up, a waterproof membrane applied, and the tiles re-laid. The
adjudicator noted that
if the body corporate had to remove the tiles from lot
owner’s balconies for the purpose of applying a waterproof membrane,
would likely be responsible for the tile removal and
replacement.
[52] In December
2019 an adjudicator made an order requiring the body corporate to pay for all
work to the balcony of another
The body corporate sought
to rectify the waterproof membrane on a balcony. It agreed to pay for some work
but said the owner was
responsible for replacing tiles. The owner challenged
that. The adjudicator noted the owner was obliged to maintain the balcony
tiles, but there was no indication the tiles were not in good condition or were
to be replaced for that reason. Rather, they were
being removed to give access
to the slab to apply the membrane. The adjudicator noted the committee had
submitted that the balcony
probably did not have a membrane, as other lots with
similar problems were found not to have membranes. The committee had asserted
the deterioration of the tiles and grouting had probably led to the problem but
presented no evidence to support that claim. The
adjudicator noted previous
decisions in which the same approach had been
circumstances
[53] I have
considerable concern about the adequacy of the communication and decision-making
evidenced by the committee in this dispute.
It appears to have pursued work to
address water ingress to the car park without obtaining professional advice on
the source or
cause of that water ingress. It similarly appeared to have formed
a view that the tiles on the Lot 50 balcony needed to be replaced
obtaining professional advice about those tiles. It appeared to have engaged a
contractor to undertake work without actually
passing a resolution to approve
the work, the contractor, or the expenditure. And it purported to pass the
invoice for most of the
cost of the work onto the owners of Lot 50 long before
resolving to do so.
[54] I do not
accept the assertion from the BCM (in response to my request for further
information) that the body corporate did not
need to pass a resolution to engage
CFS because the lot owners engaged CFS. That conflicts with the submitted
material, including
statements in the committee’s submission that the body
corporate selected the contractor and approved the quote. And even
owners had engaged CFS for all or some of the work, the body corporate does not
dispute that it was at least responsible for
the membrane works. So, it needed
to pass a resolution to agree to that work and the associated expenditure.
[55] From the
submitted material I am satisfied the body corporate, or persons purportedly
acting on behalf of the body corporate,
engaged CFS to undertake the work that
was undertaken in February 2025. Moreover, it seems tolerably clear that the
body corporate
pursued the work for the purpose of rectifying the water ingress
into the common property basement, rather than simply to rectify
the tiles on
the Lot 50 balcony.
[56] It was
certainly appropriate for the body corporate to act to rectify the water ingress
affecting the common property. But when
it then sought to recover some of the
cost of the work it organised from the owners of Lot 50, the body corporate
needed to establish
the work it was claiming for was actually necessary and was
a responsibility of the owners. In this case the body corporate provided
or no evidence that the owners were liable for the cost of the tiling work
either before organising the work or afterwards.
[57] The power
of a body corporate and its committee to make decisions and take action is
limited by its statutory
Regardless of what
it considers fair or justifiable, a body corporate is only empowered to pass on
costs to owners or occupiers
or impose fees if there is a specific legislative
power to do so.
liability for the work in this case arises from the reason for the work. It
seems the reason was the water ingress. While
it may be undisputed that the
of the water ingress was the Lot 50 balcony, no professional
evidence was obtained on the
of the water ingress.
applicant queries whether there was an existing waterproof membrane under the
tiles. It appears the absence of waterproofing
was previously identified in
other lots in the scheme. The tiling report in September 2024 said there was no
waterproofing returning
up the walls which suggested there was no waterproofing.
The body corporate submission disputes this, claiming evidence of black
waterproofing when the tiles were removed. The submission appears to be
referring to a photograph provided by the applicant,
but no clear evidence of
waterproofing on the concrete slab is evident in that photograph or any other
submitted material. The applicant
suggests only remnants of adhesive are
visible in this photograph. The CFS report did not comment on whether
waterproofing was found
or its condition.
[60] But it is
largely immaterial for present purposes whether a membrane had been installed on
the balcony. If there was a membrane,
that does not mean it was
So, the existence of a
membrane is not determinative of the cause of the water ingress.
[61] Moreover,
it seems the body corporate intended to install a waterproof membrane on the
balcony (either over or under the tiles)
regardless of the condition of the
tiles. It does not dispute being responsible for the waterproofing work.
[62] The body
corporate claims it would have installed a membrane over the top of the tiles if
the tiles had been in good condition,
as it had apparently done in other lots.
I have been given no evidence substantiate that claim. For example, I have no
the body corporate sought quotes to do so, or that any contractor
advised that method of membrane application would be suitable to
address the
water ingress but for the condition of the tiles.
[63] The two
reports on the condition of the tiles on the Lot 50 balcony are very limited.
The September 2024 report refers to drummy,
unstable tiles and cracked and
deteriorating grout. But it does not detail the extent of those issues, for
example whether the entire
area was affected or only part. The CFS report in
March 2025, after the tiling work had been completed, also said tiles were
but did not say whether all tiles were drummy or only some. It said
grout was cracked and missing in ‘several areas’
but did not explain
the extent of the grout issues. But it said the ‘overall condition’
of the tiles was poor.
[64] Despite
that, the applicant provides a photograph of the balcony tiles apparently taken
before the work commenced. Although
not all the grouting can be clearly seen
and drumminess would not be evident in a photograph, I can see no indication of
or missing grout or damage to the tiles in the photograph. Even the
photographs recently provided by the BCM do not clearly evidence
tiles or grout
in poor condition.
[65] As such,
the body corporate did not demonstrate that the owners of Lot 50 failed to
maintain the tiling on their lot in good
condition. And to the extent that any
tiles, adhesive, or grouting were not in good condition, the body corporate did
not demonstrate
the whole balcony needed to be retiled, rather than simply
repairing affected tiles. I have insufficient evidence, and it does not
that any evidence was given to the lot owners, that there was a requirement to
replace all tiles on the Lot 50 balcony independent
of any need to remedy the
[66] Importantly,
nothing in the two brief statements from the tilers indicates the condition of
the tiles on the balcony caused the
water ingress to the basement below rather
than, for example, an absent, inadequate, or deteriorated waterproof membrane
tiles. The reports also do not indicate that the condition of the
tiles caused or contributed to any deterioration of any membrane
tiles. The reports do not note any correlation between the location of any
tiles in poor condition and any leaks. And,
to the extent that any tiles or
grouting were not in good condition, there is nothing in the reports to suggest
that arose from inadequate
owner maintenance rather than, for example, any
absence, inadequacy, or deterioration of the waterproof membrane under the
I understand that drummy tiles, for example, can be caused by a
compromised waterproof membrane.
[67] If the body
corporate genuinely just wanted to apply a membrane over the balcony tiles but
had professional advice that it could
not because of the condition of the tiles,
and if it asserted the owners were responsible or the condition of the tiles, it
had two options. It could have asked the owners of Lot 50 to repair or
replace their tiles and take action against them if it did
not. Or it could
have specifically resolved to undertake tiling work on behalf of the owners,
notifying the owners that it would
do so and would recover the reasonable costs
of the work from them as a debt. But instead, it simply proceeded to install a
in a manner that involved removing the existing tiles and then sought
to invoice the owners.
[68] I am not
satisfied on the evidence that the tiles on the Lot 50 balcony were replaced to
ensure the lot was maintained in good
condition. On the evidence, I consider it
more probable that the body corporate replaced the tiles to facilitate their
replacement
or installation of the waterproof membrane. In that circumstance,
the body corporate was responsible for the tiling work.
applicant bears the onus of proof in this application. But where the body
corporate invoiced lot owners for work it organised
and controlled, the body
corporate had an obligation to establish the work was an owner responsibility.
[70] Notwithstanding
the inadequate body corporate decision-making, on the submitted evidence it
seems probable that the body corporate
elected to remove and replace the tiles
on the Lot 50 balcony to enable it to apply a waterproofing membrane to address
water ingress
into the common property basement. The body corporate did not
provide the owners with any cogent evidence the water ingress was
caused by the
condition of the balcony tiles. It did not submit such evidence in this
application. To the extent that the tiles
were not wholly in good condition, I
have no evidence as that the entirety of the tiles needed to be replaced to
ensure the lot was
maintained in good condition. It is not even clear there was
professional advice that the tiles needed to be repaired or replaced
to enable a
membrane to be installed over them if that was otherwise a viable solution to
the water ingress issue.
[71] I am not
satisfied on the submitted evidence that the owners of Lot 50 were liable for
the tiling works undertaken on their balcony
in February 2025. Accordingly, I
am satisfied the body corporate failed to act reasonably in purporting to pass
the cost of the
work onto the
[72] Given my
findings, I do not consider the amount invoiced to the owners of Lot 50 was an
amount owing under the Act. Accordingly,
this is not a debt dispute.
[73] I have
considered the particular the orders sought, particularly where the applicant is
no longer an owner of Lot 50. I consider
what would be most appropriate to
resolve the dispute in the circumstances is to declare the body corporate is not
entitled to charge
any former or current owner of Lot 50 for the tiling works,
that it must cancel the disputed invoice, remove any charge from the
account, and cease any debt recovery action relating to that amount.
[74] I see no
utility in invalidating the committee resolution from 18 July 2024. While it
may have been the intent, the minutes
do not explicitly record a committee
decision to hold the owners of Lot 50 responsible for the repair or replacement
of tiles. Rather,
the minutes just said the BCM would write to the owner to
advise the tiles must be repaired or replaced (but did not say by whom
whose expense) and then the body corporate would waterproof the surface. And
clearly events since overtook that. Accordingly,
while the substantive
application has been successful, I will dismiss the balance.
Conciliation application
Section 241 of the
Section 245 of the
Section 243 of the Act
Sections 246 and 244 of the Act
Section 248 of the
Section 271 of the
Section 276 of the
Sections 227, 228, 276 and
schedule 5 of the Act
Section 270(1)(e) of the Act
Section 229A(3) of the Act
Section 229A(7) of the Act
The Body Corporate for The Grove CTS9356 v Comerford
[2019] QCATA
Section 242 of the
Sections 48C
Land Title Act
Section 211
Standard Module
Section 180
of the Standard Module
Section 180(2)(a)
of the Standard
Section 180(2)(b)
the Standard Module
Klinger & Anor v Body Corporate for Costa D'Ora Apartments
[2007] QDC 300
Magog (No.15) Pty Ltd v The Body Corporate for The Moroccan
Brereton J in
The Owner’s Strata Plan 35042
[2006] NSWSC 1157
4 and 5, cited in
Magog (No.15) Pty Ltd v The Body Corporate for The Moroccan
[2010] QDC 70
Section 180(5)
Standard Module
Section 222
of the Accommodation Module
Noting section 281 of the
James v Body Corporate for Aarons Community Title Scheme 11476
[2003] QCA 329
Klinger & Anor v Body Corporate for Costa D’Ora
Vardon Point
[2017] QBCCMCmr 151
, application reference
Vardon Point
[2017] QBCCMCmr 151
Vardon Point
[2019] QBCCMCmr 659
, application reference 0901-2019
Klinger & Anor v Body
Corporate for Costa D’Ora Apartments
[2007] QDC 300
at 70 and 72;
Columbia Tower
[2009] QBCCMCmr 227
Oceans Mooloolaba
QBCCMCmr 293
, para 118;
Stella Grande
[2017] QBCCMCmr 556
Arti’s Villas
[2013] QBCCMCmr 330
, paras 32-33;
Park Avenue
[2010] QBCCMCmr 512
Sanctuary Gardens
[2007] QBCCMCmr
sections 94
of the Act.
See for example
Chevron Renaissance
[2020] QBCCMCmr 358
A membrane would usually
extend up the sides of adjacent walls and may be inadequate if it does not.
I understand membranes under
tiles typically have a life of 10-15 years, and this scheme is over 24 years
old, so it may not be surprising
if any installed membrane had
deteriorated.
sections 94(2)
(5) of the Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (245 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter