URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/150.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workers' Compensation Regulator v Maxwell [2025] QDC 150 (23 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Workers’ Compensation Regulator v Maxwell
[2025] QDC 150
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION REGULATOR
(appellant)
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Magistrates court
DELIVERED ON:
23 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
29 July 2025
decision of the learned Magistrate is set aside.
will be heard on whether the Fraud Charge and Attempted Fraud Charge should
proceed to be determined on the amended complaints
and proposed orders.
will be heard on orders as to costs.
CATCHWORDS:
MAGISTRATES – APPEAL AND REVIEW – QUEENSLAND – APPEAL
– NATURE OF APPEAL – where the appeal is brought
Justices Act 1886
section 579(5)
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION – OFFENCES – where numerous charges
laid against the respondent concern a statutory workers'
compensation claim
– where the charges against the respondent concern fraud, attempted fraud
and providing false and misleading
information under the
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
MAGISTRATES – COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS – PARTICLARS AND
CONTENT OF INITIATING PROCESS – GENERAL PRINCIPLES ––where
charges comprise of three separate complaints – where the learned
Magistrate at first instance found that the fraud charges
were not recurrent and
bad for latent duplicity – where the learned Magistrate at first instance
found that the charge of attempted
fraud was bad for latent duplicity –
whether the Magistrate made a legal error in the findings relating to
LEGISLATION:
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Criminal Code 1899
Justices Act 1886
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
WorkCover Queensland Act 1996
(Qld) (repealed)
Workers’ Compensation Act 1990
Biddle v Dimmock
[1992] QCA 265
Coco v the Queen
[1994] HCA 15
(1999) 179 CLR 427
Cohen v Macefield Pty Ltd
[2010] QCA 95
Director of Public Prosecutions v Merriman
[1973] AC 584
Fahey v Keating
[2002] QIC 61;
(2003) 172 QGIG 78
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Hannes v Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) (No 2)
[2006] NSWCCA
165 A Crim R 151
Johnson v Miller
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467
Jones v WorkCover Queensland
[1999] QIC 63
(1999) 162 QGIG 333
McDonald v Higgins
[2013] WASC 61
(2013) 227 A Crim R 130
McDonald v Queensland Police Service
[2017] QCA 255
[2018] 2 Qd R
Montgomery v Stewart
[1967] HCA 11
(1967) 116 CLR 220
PPP v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 110
(2010) 27 VR 68
[2020] QCA 27
[1999] NSWCCA 324
(1999) 110 A Crim R 198
R v Garget-Bennett
[2010] QCA 231
[2013] 1 Qd R 547
(1994) 74 A Crim R 341
R v Jayaweera
[2022] QCA 103
(2022) 307 A Crim R 296
R v Leivers and Ballinger
[1998] QCA 99
[1999] 1 Qd R 649
R v Morrow and Flynn
[1991] 2 Qd R 309
Romeyko v Samuels
(1972) 2 SASR 529
S v The Queen
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR 266
Walsh v Tattersall
[1996] HCA 26
(1996) 188 CLR 77
Weinel v Fedcheshen
[1995] SASC 5216
65 SASR 156
SECONDARY SOURCES:
Mark Lucraft (ed),
Archbold 2025
(Thomson Reuters, 2025)
Ross on Crime
ed, 2022, Thomson Reuters)
Appellant: E Cooper and C O’Neil
Respondent: D V Nguyen and L R Newton
SOLICITORS:
Appellant: Worker’s Compensation Regulators Prosecution
Respondent: Lewis Law Group
Introduction
matter is an appeal from a decision of a learned Magistrate to strike out
charges of fraud and attempted fraud laid against
the respondent on the grounds
(a) the learned Magistrate made a legal error in determining that the charge of
fraud was not recurrent in the terms of
section 533(2)
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
) and was bad
for latent duplicity; and
(b) the learned Magistrate made a legal error in determining that the charge of
attempted fraud was bad for latent duplicity.
[2] The numerous
charges laid against the respondent concern a statutory workers' compensation
claim made by the respondent under
the WCR Act for an injury allegedly sustained
[3] As a result
of her compensation claim, the respondent received $74,648.84 in compensation,
comprised of medical expenses, rehabilitation
and weekly benefits (
Compensation Claim
). The Statutory Compensation Claim is relevant to the
struck-out fraud charge. The respondent also claimed common law damages
$420,179.00 (
Damages Claim)
. The Damages Claim was not paid to
the respondent and is relevant to the struck-out attempted fraud charge.
appellant claims that the respondent did not sustain an injury at work and,
therefore, her compensation claim was made based
on false and misleading
information and was fraudulent.
[5] There are
three separate complaints made by the appellant against the respondent:
(a) Complaint and Summons filed on 28 March 2024 in the Industrial Magistrates
Court at Brisbane (
Brisbane Complaint
(b) Complaint and Summons filed on 2 April 2024 in the Industrial Magistrates
Court at Holland Park (
Holland Park Complaint
(c) Complaint and Summons filed on 2 April 2024 in the Industrial Magistrates
Court at Caboolture (
Caboolture Complaint
[6] The charges
which are the subject of this appeal are:
Charge one on the
Holland Park Complaint
Fraud Charge
Between 06/10/2020 and 14/01/2022 at Moorooka or elsewhere in the Holland
Park Division of the Magistrates Court District in the State
of Queensland,
Lorraine Maxwell, defrauded an insurer, namely WorkCover Queensland, in
contravention of section 533 of the WCR Act.
Charge four on the Caboolture Complaint
Between 06/03/2022 and 26/03/2024 at Caboolture or elsewhere in the
Caboolture Magistrates Court District in the State of Queensland,
Maxwell attempted to defraud an insurer, namely WorkCover Queensland in
contravention of section 533 of the WCR Act.
(collectively, the ‘
Fraud Charges
particulars of the Fraud Charges are set out in the Annexure 1 to this
[8] In addition
to the Fraud Charges, the respondent is also charged with other offences of
providing false and misleading statements,
which relate to alleged
representations made by the respondent to medical practitioners and the
appellant in the course of making
her compensation claims.
proceedings below, the respondent submitted that the:
(a) Fraud Charge was duplicitous with charges 1, 2, 4 and 5 of the Holland Park
Complaint, charges 1 and 2 of the Brisbane complaint
and charges 1 and 2 of the
Caboolture complaint; and
(b) The Attempted Fraud Charge was duplicitous with charge 4 of the Brisbane
Complaint and charges 5, 7 and 8 of the Caboolture Complaint.
particulars of the Fraud Charge (considered by the learned Magistrate) were that
the respondent had been dishonest to the
insurer and various registered persons
in completing the WorkCover claim, reporting the incident, and telling various
medical/allied
health professionals she had injured herself at work.
respondent points out there was no reference to the obtaining of any benefit (an
element of fraud) in the particulars before
the learned Magistrate. There was no
reference to the respondent providing the insurer with certifications from a
particular medical
practitioner that she was totally unfit for any type of work,
which caused her to continue receiving payments (i.e. benefits).
particulars of the Attempted Fraud Charge (considered by the learned Magistrate)
were that the respondent had been dishonest
when providing information to the
insurer or registered person by telling various medical professionals she had
injured herself at
work and signing a statement to that effect.
respondent submitted that the particulars before the learned Magistrate did not
make clear that the respondent’s acts
were complete upon receipt of the
benefit. The appellant failed to precisely connect any of the respondent’s
alleged acts to
the receipt of the actual benefit or particularise the benefit
[14] It was
conceded by the appellant that the particulars could have been better, and a
further amended complaint was prepared and
provided as part of its outline of
submissions. The appellant seeks orders setting aside the decision of the
Magistrate and orders
that the Fraud Charges and Attempted Fraud Charges proceed
to be determined on the further amended complaints which now articulate
benefit obtained.
[15] The issue
here is whether the particulars of the Fraud Charges (as they were before the
learned Magistrate) disclose more than
one offence, although only one offence is
If yes, are the charges
bad for latent duplicity?
The Decision Below
learned Magistrate found that in relation to the Fraud Charge, the particulars
underpinning it “clearly involved acts
that were one-off acts and could
not be described in terms of those particular acts as recurrent”.
Following this finding,
the prosecution made an application, unopposed, to amend
the particulars. Leave was granted to amend the particulars and the matter
back on after the exchange of further written submissions.
[17] The learned
Magistrate held that the Fraud Charges should be struck out for latent
duplicity. The learned Magistrate accepted
the respondent’s contention
that the Fraud Charges should be struck out on the basis that the respondent
was being charged
with two offences for the same conduct, particularised for the
false and misleading statement charges.
[18] The learned
Magistrate found the Fraud Charges did not comply with section 533(2) of the WCR
Act because they included acts which
were not recurrent.
[19] In relation
to the Attempted Fraud Charge, the prosecution conceded that the amendment to
charge 4 still failed to particularise
the element of dishonesty and therefore
offended section 533(2) due to latent duplicity.
[20] The learned
Magistrate permitted amendment to the particulars before the matter
[21] In relation
to the Fraud Charge, as amended, the learned Magistrate
“[it] may satisfy the authorities relied upon to sustain
a single charge against the charge of duplicity, to take the words
of President
Hall, it is of no avail here, and that is because of section 533, subsection (2)
very narrow interpretation given to that subsection by the Industrial
Court in the cases of Jones and Fahey.
When I apply that and consider the
amendments, it is my view it still suffers from latent duplicity, and that
charge is struck out.”
[22] In coming
to the decision, the learned Magistrate relied on the decisions in
WorkCover Queensland
[1999] QIC 63
(1999) 162 QGIG 333
Fahey v Keating
[2002] QIC 61;
(2003) 172 QGIG 78
Appeal Ground
appellant appeals the decision of the learned Magistrate on the grounds that the
Magistrate erred at law in determining:
(a) the application of section 533(2) of the WCR Act to this case; and
(b) the Fraud Charge and Attempted Fraud Charge were latently duplicitous.
appellant seeks orders setting aside the decision of the Magistrate and orders
that the Fraud Charges proceed to be determined
on the amended
complaints.
Contentions - Summary
appellant submits:
(a) the learned Magistrate was wrong to rely on section 43 of the
Justices Act
) on the ground that it was not
(b) in relation to section 533 of the WCR Act:
(i) the Fraud Charges are recurrent, and duplications of the other charges laid
which relate to complaints of making false and misleading
statements. That is,
the Fraud Charges that were struck out are different offences made up of
different elements;
(ii) the word “conduct” in section 533(2) should be interpreted as
conduct which constitutes all elements that go to
constituting an offence.
(c) the learned Magistrate’s reliance on the decisions of
was wrong. The appellant submits:
(i) those cases are distinguishable because the charges under consideration in
those decisions were fraud as a “return to calling”
offence and
providing dishonest information; and
(ii) those cases are not determinative of any point of law that is relevant to
the current charges.
(d) the learned Magistrate did not refer to
Walsh v Tattersall
(1996) 188 CLR 77
Walsh v Tattersall
respondent submits that the Fraud Charges were impermissibly charged
(a) it is not permissible to do so pursuant to section 43 of the Justices
(b) the charges did not comply with section 533(2) of the WCR Act;
(c) they fell afoul of the principles in
Walsh v Tattersall
(d) the facts of the false and misleading offences were relied upon as
particulars of the fraud offence, and hence were duplicitous;
(e) they failed to properly particularise the offence of fraud under section
(f) they did not make clear that the respondent’s acts as particularised
were complete upon receipt of the benefit; and
(g) they did not precisely connect any of the respondent’s alleged acts to
the receipt of the actual benefit.
respondent acknowledged that the further revised Fraud Charges now particularise
the benefit obtained, but these were not
the versions before the learned
Magistrate.
Appeal Process
appeal is brought under s 222(1) of the Justices Act and section 579(5) of the
WRC Act, which provides that a person aggrieved
by a decision upon summary
hearing of a charge may appeal against the decision to a District Court Judge
under the Justices Act.
[29] The powers
of a judge on the hearing of such an appeal are set out in section 225 of the
Justices Act
as follows:
of judge on hearing appeal
(1) On the hearing of an appeal, the judge may confirm, set aside or vary the
appealed order or make any other order in the matter
the judge considers
(2) If the judge sets aside an order, the judge may send the proceeding back to
whoever made the order or to any Magistrates Court
with directions of any kind
for the further conduct of the proceedings including, for example, directions
for rehearing or reconsideration.
For subsection (1)
, the judge may exercise any power that could
have been exercised by whoever made the order appealed against.
(4) An order made under
subsection (1)
has effect, and may be
enforced in the same way, as if it had been made by whoever made the appealed
[30] On appeal,
the onus is on the appellant to demonstrate that there has been some legal,
factual, or discretionary error made by
[31] It must be
shown that there has been some error either in acting upon irrelevant matters or
failing to take into account a material
consideration.
Relevant Legal Provisions
WCR Act establishes a statutory workers' compensation scheme for persons who
suffer injuries in the course of their employment
in Queensland.
[33] The general
principle is that a worker is entitled to compensation for an
“injury”. “Injury” is defined
in section 32 of the WCR
Act to mean:
(1) An injury is personal injury arising out of, or in the course of,
employment if the employment is a significant contributing
factor to the injury
[34] When an
employee sustains an eligible injury, the WRC Act provides for compensation,
damages and other benefits that may be claimed.
[35] The WRC Act
provides for a number of offences. The offence involving fraud is provided for
in section 533 and offences for false
and misleading information or documents is
provided for in section 534.
[36] Section 533
is pivotal to this matter. It provides as follows:
533 Offences
involving fraud
(1) A person must not in any way defraud or attempt to defraud an insurer.
Maximum penalty—500 penalty units or 5 years imprisonment.
conduct that constitutes an offence
defined in subsection (1)
is recurrent
so that, but for this subsection, each instance of the
conduct would constitute a separate offence, 2 or more instances of the conduct
are to be taken to constitute but 1 offence committed over a period specified in
the complaint laid in relation to the conduct, and
may be charged and be dealt
with on 1 complaint.
[emphasis added]
[37] Subsection
(2) concerns continuing repetition of the same conduct making up the offence of
fraud. Rather than bringing separate
complaints in relation to each time the
conduct has occurred, the person may instead be dealt with on one complaint.
This section
is procedural or administrative in nature.
[38] There are
very few cases that have specifically analysed section 533 of the WCR Act.
[39] Section 534
534 False or misleading information or documents
(1) This section applies to a statement made or document given—
(a) to the Regulator or WorkCover for the purpose of its functions under this
(b) to an entity or person as a self-insurer; or
(c) to a registered person for the purpose of an application for compensation or
a claim for damages.
(2) A person must not state anything to the Regulator, WorkCover, a
self-insurer or a registered person the person knows is false
or misleading in a
material particular.
Maximum penalty—150 penalty units or 1 year’s imprisonment.
(3) A person must not give the Regulator, WorkCover, a self-insurer or a
registered person a document containing information the person
knows is false or
misleading in a material particular.
Maximum penalty—150 penalty units or 1 year’s imprisonment.
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply to a person who, when giving the
(a) informs the Regulator, WorkCover, the self-insurer or the registered
person, to the best of the person’s ability, how
it is false or
misleading; and
(b) gives the correct information to the Regulator, WorkCover, the self-insurer
or the registered person, if the person has, or
can reasonably obtain, the
correct information.
(5) It is enough for a complaint against a person for an offence against
subsection (2) or (3) to state the information or document
was false or
misleading to the person’s knowledge, without specifying which.
[40] If a person
is convicted under s 533 in relation to a claim for compensation or damages, any
entitlement to compensation or damages
ends, and the person may be required to
repay all amounts
Justices Act
[41] Section
43 of the Justices Act
provides as follows:
43 Matter of
(1) Every complaint shall be for 1 matter only, and not for 2 or more
matters, except—
(a) in the case of indictable offences—if the matters of complaint are
such that they may be charged in 1 indictment; or
(b) in cases other than cases of indictable offences—if the matters of
(i) are alleged to be constituted by the same act or omission on the part of the
defendant; or
(ii) are alleged to be constituted by a series of acts done or omitted to be
done in the prosecution of a single purpose; or
(iii) are founded on substantially the same facts; or
(iv) are, or form part of, a series of offences or matters of complaint of the
same or a similar character; or
(c) when otherwise expressly provided.
(2) When 2 or more matters of complaint are joined in the 1 complaint each
matter of complaint shall be set out in a separate paragraph.
(3) At the hearing of a complaint in which 2 or more matters of complaint
have been joined but which does not comply with the provisions
(a) if an objection is taken to the complaint on the ground of such
noncompliance—the court shall require the complainant to
choose 1 matter
of complaint on which to proceed at that hearing; or
(b) if no such objection is taken to the complaint—the court may proceed
with the hearing and may determine the matters of
complaint, and may convict or
acquit the defendant in accordance with such determination.
(4) If, at the hearing of a complaint, it appears to the court that a
defendant may be prejudiced or embarrassed in the defendant’s
because the complaint contains more than 1 matter of complaint or that for any
other reason it is desirable that 1 or more
matters of complaint should be heard
separately, the court may order that such 1 or more matters of complaint be
heard separately.
What is the rule against duplicity and how is it assessed at
principle is that a person cannot allege more than one offence in a single
charge on an indictment. Latent duplicity refers
to uncertainty or ambiguity in
the charge such that the defendant does not know what is
The principle developed at
common law is essentially one of providing procedural
Walsh v Tattersall
is the leading High
Court authority for the proposition cited from Archbold,
Evidence and Practice in Criminal
no one count of
the indictment should charge the defendant with having committed two or more
separate offences
Walsh v Tattersall
, an employee was charged
with obtaining by dishonest means payments or benefits under the South
Australian workers compensation legislation.
While there was only one charge, he
had obtained benefits on several occasions in a 12 month period. On appeal, it
was contended
that the complaint and count 1 was bad for duplicity in that a
number of alleged offences were contained in the overall charge. The
held otherwise. It described the prosecution’s case as one of “a
course of conduct which amounted to one compendious
false pretence of incapacity
for work”. The hospital in that case continued to make the payments on the
basis of continuing
representations of incapacity as conveyed by medical
psychiatric and psychological reports together with medical
certificates. The
case was not that he obtained benefits from separate
dishonest acts but rather from a “continuing false pretence” that
was incapacitated for work. The appellant contended the matter was duplicitous
because there were many acts of obtaining a benefit,
each of which would
individually constitute an offence. The legislation under consideration in
Walsh v Tattersall
did not contain a provision equivalent to section
533(2) of the WCR Act.
[44] The High
Court set aside the decision of the Full Court.
[45] Kirby J
under which the appellant was charged clearly contemplated that obtaining each
payment or benefit was a separate offence.
Each should have been the subject of
a separate charge. This was apparently the original intention of the police and
perhaps of the
prosecutor. Unwisely, and in my view unlawfully, it was departed
from. That departure resulted in a count which manifested the defect
duplicity.”
[46] Kirby J
discussed the common law exceptions, or qualifications, to the rule against
duplicity in considerable depth. Kirby J
acknowledged the difficulty of
formulating a test for whether the criminal acts are sufficiently close in time
and space as to “fairly
and properly be identified as part of the same
criminal enterprise or the one criminal
McDonald v Higgins
[2013] WASC 61
(2013) 227 A Crim R 130
), Edelman J (as his Honour then was) noted the
application of the duplicity principle can involve fine questions of fact and
activity comprised a continuous trespass from entry into the place without
consent, being in the place without consent and remaining
in the place without
consent after having been asked to leave by a person in authority. An issue was
whether it was permissible for
the prosecution not to cause multiple charges to
be issued from this trespass. At first instance, the Magistrate did not dismiss
the charge for duplicity. On appeal, Mr McDonald argued that the prosecution
notice, on its face, charged two different offences
of trespass (patent
duplicity) or, alternatively, that the evidence led by the prosecution
potentially disclosed more than one act
of criminal trespass (latent duplicity)
and that it was therefore uncertain. Mr McDonald's submission was
that latent duplicity arose
because the prosecution, by its
particulars, proceeded on the basis that it could prove either of the
definitions of trespass as
alternatives.
[48] Edelman J
McDonald did not commit a series of separate trespasses. The prosecution was
correct to charge him with a single offence
of trespass on the basis that the
facts disclosed a composite activity or “part of the same transaction or
criminal enterprise”.”
[49] Edelman J
explained the concepts of patent and latent duplicity as
“[24] There is sometimes confusion between the
different concepts of patent duplicity, latent duplicity, ambiguity and
uncertainty.
Historically the labels have been used in different senses from
those in which they are commonly used today.
[25] Duplicity arises on the face of the indictment or prosecution notice if
more than one offence is contained, either conjunctively
or disjunctively, in
the indictment or prosecution notice. Such cases are now commonly now described
as one of patent duplicity,
although historically the term 'uncertainty' was
used to describe formal errors in an information which joined more than one
disjunctively.
[26] Alternatively, 'duplicity' might emerge from the facts at trial, in the
sense that the way that the prosecution case is to be,
or has been, conducted
gives rise to the possibility of the accused person being convicted of one of a
number of distinct offences.
In that case, the prosecution notice or indictment
is sometimes now described as giving rise to 'latent duplicity'. Historically,
the notice or indictment would have been described as being bad for
'ambiguity'.
[31] [...] [T]here will be no latent duplicity if the case falls
into the well established exception that applies to cases where multiple
can properly be treated as a single offence.
[55] [...] [L]atent duplicity can arise if there is only one charge on
the indictment but two or more separate acts are relied on
by the prosecution,
each of which is itself capable of constituting the offence.”
Exceptions or Qualifications to the Rule Against
are exceptions to the rule, such as the continuing offence exception. An example
of a continuing offence is where a person
fails to do something by a certain
time in accordance with a statutory obligation or court order, such as lodge an
income tax return.
The ongoing failure to comply is continual but involves only
one offence.
v Tattersall
, Kirby J suggested that whether a count is duplicitous is a
matter of fact and degree.
[52] Kirby J
identified that conduct constituted by activities over time could quite properly
be charged in a single count in some
circumstances.
referred to the example of charges of harassment or drug trafficking which have
been upheld as exceptions or qualifications
to the duplicity rule. His Honour
then set out various indicia which may assist in the assessment (although the
matter is always
one of fact and degree in the particular circumstances). Those
indicia include:
(a) the connection of the events in point of time;
(b) the similarity of the acts;
(c) the physical proximity of the place where the events happened; and
(d) the intention of the accused throughout the conduct.
[53] Kirby J
notes that the exception to the rule has been
(a) where the multiple acts relied on are so close in time and place that they
can be viewed as one composite activity; and
(b) where the offence is one that can be classified as continuing in nature.
[54] His Honour
held a strict approach to duplicity should be maintained.
[55] Exceptions
to the rule against duplicity also exist under statute. This is relevant here in
the context of section 533(2) of
the WCR Act.
, the learned author
statute may proscribe various acts. When those acts are included in one charge,
the construction of the statute determines
whether there
is duplicity.”
example, section 568(3) of the
Criminal Code 1899
) permits a possible exception for an indictment for one charge of fraud
even where:
(a) any number of specific frauds of the same type has been committed, whether
or not each specific act of fraud can be identified;
(b) the frauds have extended over any space of time; or
(c) property applied belongs to different persons, and has come into the
possession or control of the accused person at different
times and subject to
different trusts, directions, conditions, or duties to account; or
(d) the property, benefit, detriment or inducement belongs to or is caused to
different persons.
[58] Section
568(3) of the Criminal Code reflects situations where there is an overall
scheme. However, the Court of Appeal in
R v Jayaweera
[2022] QCA 103
(2022) 307 A Crim R 296
made it clear that this section does not override
“the reasons which underpin the basic requirement in a given case that
offence should be charged in a separate
certainty and fairness.
v Macefield Pty Ltd
[2010] QCA 95
), Holmes JA (as her
Honour then was) explained the answer to duplicity can be found by a
determination of whether the relevant statute
which creates the offence/s under
consideration, creates a single offence or not. Holmes JA referred to Bray CJ
Romeyko v Samuels
(1972) 19 FLR 322
at 552, as offering the following
true distinction, broadly speaking, it seems to me, is between a statute which
penalises one or more acts, in which case
two or more offences are created, and
a statute which penalises one act if it possesses one or more forbidden
characteristics. In
the latter case there is only one offence, whether the
act under consideration in fact possesses one or several of such
characteristics.”
(citations omitted)
[60] An example
often referred to in relation to a prohibited act with more than one prescribed
quality is that of
Montgomery v Stewart
[1967] HCA 11; (1967) 116 CLR
That case concerned the
issue of a company prospectus which contained a number of untrue or misleading
statements. Although each
misleading statement would have been sufficient to
constitute the offence, the prohibited act was the issue of a prospectus
an untrue statement. The High Court decided there was only one
offence committed, the issuing the prospectus, and that the reference
the misleading statements within the prospectus was not bad
for duplicity.
v Tattersall
, the majority, Gaudron and Gummow JJ ordered that the
conviction be quashed because the South Australian legislation created a
offence upon the receipt of any one payment or benefit, whereas the
charge spoke of multiple payments or benefits. As a result, the
charge did not
correspond with the statutory offence.
exception to the rule against duplicity is provided for in section 533(2) of the
WCR Act where there are multiple instances
of the same conduct or a recurrent
[63] The WCR Act
creates two distinct offences: the first involving fraud, and the second
attempted fraud.
The statute
makes it an offence to defraud
attempt to defraud as separate acts,
which, would result in separate independent offences as has occurred here.
[64] The WCR Act
also creates the offence of knowingly stating anything false or misleading in a
material particular.
[65] The Fraud
Charges here concern “alternative legal formulations of liability based on
the same or substantially the same
facts” not “alternative factual
bases of liability”.
Morrow and Flynn
[1991] 2 Qd R 309
, the evidence established at least
seven separate incidents which could have been the subject of the one count of
unlawful assault
causing bodily harm in the indictment. The Court of Appeal held
that the indictment was latently defective because four of the possible
could not be said to be the same offence. Connolly J referred to the decision of
Lord Morris in
Director of Public Prosecutions v Merriman
[1972] 3 WLR 545
56 Cr App R 766
[1972] 3 All ER
). Connolly J had no objection to charging the
incident as one offence, provided that it is always clear what the offender is
Importance of Particulars
charged offences must be properly particularised. Redlich JA in
[2010] VSCA 110
(2010) 27 VR 68
, explained the reasons for why proper
particularisation of an offence is
(1) to enable the accused to exercise the right to object to evidence on
the ground of relevance;
(2) to permit the accused to know how the charge might be answered;
(3) to provide the accused with the opportunity to test the credibility of
the complainant by reference to the surrounding circumstances
disclosed as a
result of the particularisation of the count;
(4) to enable the trial judge to instruct the jury properly as to the
law to be applied;
(5) to ensure that there is an unanimity of view by the jury as to a specific
act by the accused;
(6) in the event of conviction, to enable the court to know the
offence for which the defendant is to be punished;
(7) to ensure that the record discloses of what offence a person has been
acquitted or convicted in order for that person to avail
himself or herself, if
the need should arise, of a plea of autrefois acquit or autrefois convict.
[2020] QCA 27
Boddice J explained the importance of particulars as
“[98] Particularity of criminal conduct is essential
to eliminate the risk of duplicity and to give an accused person sufficient
indication of the allegations. A minimum requirement is that there be
sufficient particularity in the allegations to demonstrate
one identifiable
transaction meeting the description of the charged offence, which is
distinguishable from any other similar incidents
contained in the
Recurrent Offences
[69] Recurrent
offences are repeated offences. Each repeated act could give rise to a separate
offence being charged. This involves
multiple acts being bundled into one
charge. An example of a recurrent offence would be the repeated sale of illicit
tobacco over
, a publican was stabbed in the back by A and then
immediately seven or more times by both A and B. A and B were indicted in the
count for wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm. The following
judgment of Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest provides some examples
of where disputes
“If A attacks B and, in doing so, stabs B five times with a
knife, has A committed one offence or five? If A in the dwelling
steals ten different chattels, some perhaps from one room and some from others,
has he committed one offence or several?
In many different situations comparable
questions could be asked. In my view,
such questions when they arise are best
answered by applying common sense and by deciding what is fair in the
circumstances
. ... I agree respectfully with Lord Widgery CJ
[in Jemmison v Priddle
[1972] 1 QB 489]
that it will often be
legitimate to bring a single charge in respect of what might be called one
activity even though that activity
may involve more than one act. It must, of
course, depend upon the circumstances.”
[emphasis added] (citations omitted)
Consideration
Section 43, Justices Act
appellant submits section 43 of the Justices Act
is not relevant here
because section 43 concerns multiple charges included on one complaint, but it
does not concern when multiple
charges may be incorporated into one charge.
[72] Section 43
prescribes what may be contained in a complaint and also deals with joinder of
charges in a complaint.
intention of section 43 is to avoid duplicity and uncertainty of charges.
Holmes JA explained:
“[22] [...] sub-sections
43(1)(b)(ii) and (iv) [...] do not authorise the charging of a series of acts
done in the prosecution
of a single purpose, or a series of offences of the same
or a similar character, in a single count; they merely permit joinder of
matters in a single complaint. Where such joinder is
permitted, s 43(2) requires that each be the subject of a
separate paragraph
[75] It is only
where the series of acts relied on cannot be properly charged as a single
activity and as a single matter of complaint,
section 43(2) requires each
act to be charged in a separate count.
[76] Before the
learned Magistrate, the defendant sought to rely on
Honour, Moynihan J (acting President of the Industrial Court of Queensland, as
his Honour then was), considered that the
then equivalent of section 533(2) of
the WCR Act had to be looked at in the context of what was provided for by
section 43 of the
Justices Act.
[77] The default
position in section 43(1) only applies except “
when otherwise expressly
section 533 provides an exception to the default position articulated in section
43 of the Justices Act.
[79] I find that
section 43 is not relevant, or more accurately, not determinative of the issue.
The respondent did not press this
point on appeal.
Application
of section 533, WCR Act
Appellant’s submissions re application of s 533
appellant submits that:
(a) the learned Magistrate erred in:
(i) her consideration of the meaning of “conduct” for the
application of section 533(2) in that she proceeded on an erroneous
the conduct referred to in the provision was a dishonest representation and that
that conduct was what had to be recurrent;
(ii) considering that if that conduct was by way of something being said over a
telephone call or by completing a form that it was
conduct of a different nature
and therefore was not “recurrent”;
(iii) the reference to “conduct” in s 533(2) relates to all elements
of the offence being completed;
(b) on each occasion a benefit has been obtained as a result of dishonest
conduct that is recurrent conduct.
appellant identified that if each separate offence was charged, this would
amount to 248 separate offences to be charged
as the defendant obtained a
benefit on 248 separate occasions as a consequence of her application being
approved where she claimed
that her back injury was caused at work. It is
submitted that to insist on separate charges in this manner would be contrary to
statutory intent.
appellant submits the word recurrent should be interpreted in accordance with
its plain meaning. The recurrent conduct relied
upon is the repeated obtainment
of the benefit.
appellant contends that section 533(2) is not permissive or restrictive in its
terms but rather is prescriptive in that it
provides that where conduct is
recurrent it is to be taken to constitute one offence.
Respondent’s submissions re application of s 533
[84] Following
the decision in
, the respondent submitted that section 533(2) must
be interpreted narrowly to limit the circumstances that would allow for a number
of separate offences to be bundled together to support one charge of
Consideration
determination of this matter turns on the construction and application of
section 533 of the WCR Act.
[86] The rules
of statutory construction are well known.
[87] Section
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
requires a provision of an Act to be interpreted in a way which best achieves
the Act’s purpose.
ordinary meaning of a word must be taken to mean its ordinary meaning within the
context of the legislative scheme in which
it is found. This is set out in
section 14B(2)(a) of the AIA which provides relevantly that:
(2) In determining whether consideration should be given to extrinsic material,
and in determining the weight to be given to extrinsic
material, regard is to be
the desirability of a provision being interpreted as having its ordinary
[emphasis added]
[89] The WRC Act
replaced the
WorkCover Queensland Act 1996
(Qld) (repealed) (
). The predecessor to section 533 was found in section 482 of the WQ Act.
The Explanatory Notes to the Workcover Queensland Bill explains
the creation of
the fraud offences and the statutory purpose as
part creates offences for fraudulent and misleading conduct with respect to the
workers' compensation scheme. Fraud is
regarded as a very serious offence, in
view of the financial impost it places on the scheme and consequently all
Queensland employers.
The part contains penalties for persons convicted of
fraud, to reflect the seriousness of the offence and to act as a deterrent to
those considering fraudulent activity.
The clause [s 482] also reflects section 194(5) of the
Compensation Act 1990
which outlines the provision for dealing with recurrent
offences in a complaint.”
[90] The same
words in section 533(2) can be found in section 194(5) of the of the
Workers’ Compensation Act 1990
(repealed).
[91] Section
533(2) can be broken down into the following elements:
conduct that
constitutes an offence defined in subsection (1);
the conduct must
be recurrent – i.e. each instance of the conduct would constitute a
separate offence;
two or more
instances of the conduct are to be taken to constitute but one offence committed
over a period specified in the complaint
laid in relation to the conduct;
the conduct may
be charged and be dealt with on one complaint.
Conduct that Constitutes an Offence
[92] Conduct
that constitutes an offence defined in subsection (1), on a plain ordinary
reading, must mean the conduct relied upon
to establish (or constitute) the
offence of fraud. Once that conduct has been identified, the question is whether
it is “recurrent”.
uncontroversial that:
(a) the elements for the fraud offence are:
(i) the defendant did an act or omission (the conduct);
(ii) the conduct was dishonest; and
(iii) the defendant obtained a benefit as a result of the conduct.
(b) the elements for the attempted fraud offence are:
(i) the defendant did an act or omission (the conduct);
(ii) the conduct was dishonest; and
(iii) the defendant attempted to obtain a benefit as a result of the conduct.
Macquarie Dictionary (9
ed, 2023) (
Macquarie Dictionary
defines “constitute” as:
constituted
constituting
elements, etc.) to compose; form.
2. to appoint to an office or function; make or create.
3. to set up or found (an institution, etc.).
4. to give legal form to (an assembly, court, etc.).
to set up or establish (laws,
to set or place.
Macquarie Dictionary defines “conduct” as:
1. personal behaviour; way of acting; deportment:
2. direction or management; execution:
the conduct of a
3. the act of conducting; guidance; escort.
[96] A plain
reading of section 533(2) establishes that it is only when conduct which meets
the requirements of a fraud offence are
present will it apply.
[97] Here the
conduct stated to constitute the elements of fraud are:
(a) the claim for compensation;
(b) the claim was dishonest;
(c) the dishonesty continued throughout the entire period;
(d) the dishonesty was maintained throughout the period – by maintaining
the injury and its cause; and
(e) the respondent obtained a benefit from that dishonesty.
[98] In relation
to the attempted fraud, no benefit is obtained. The attempted fraud related to
the claim for damages for which nothing
was received. The dishonesty in relation
to that claim was repeated. The appellant submits there was only one benefit in
to the attempted fraud. A notice of claim was completed, the claim was
dishonest, and the dishonesty was maintained over the course
of that claim.
Therefore, it does not need to comply with section 533(2) as it is not bad for
[99] The benefit
can include a financial benefit (i.e. wages) and non-financial benefit (i.e.
treatment and rehabilitation costs).
What is recurrent conduct?
[100] “Recurrent”
is not defined in the WCR Act and therefore takes its ordinary meaning within
the context of the legislative
scheme in which it is found.
Macquarie Dictionary defines “recurrent” as:
recurs; occurring or appearing again, especially repeatedly or
periodically
conduct to be recurrent it must be repeated and not a one off. Only repeated
conduct will be caught by section 533(2).
[103] In my
view, the section should be read as follows: if the repeated conduct would
constitute a separate offence of fraud repeatedly,
that repeated conduct is to
be treated as the commission of one offence over a specified period of time. In
that instance, a person
may be charged and dealt with on one complaint.
[104] All of the
elements of the fraud or attempted fraud must be present and then repeated for
section 533(2) to have application.
[105] Here, the
facts said to prove the various offences were part of an ongoing continuous
offence. An injury was reported to Workcover,
which the respondent alleged was
sustained at work, for which compensation was claimed. Workcover alleges this
was not how the injury
was sustained, and this is when the dishonesty arose.
appellant submitted the key indicia here is the intention of the accused
throughout the period. The accused repeats the
same lie over and over again with
the intention to gain compensation. It does not matter whether that lie is told
to different people;
it is a singular dishonest intention. The revenant parties
are the same, the injury is the same.
[107] There is
no express language in s 533 to indicate that s 533(2) was intended to oust the
common law exceptions to the rule against
duplicity. If that is what was
intended, Parliament could have expressly provided as much. Section 533(2)
modifies the rule for providing
for a specific exception under that Act, but it
is not clear that other exceptions or principles relating to the rule against
have no relevance or role to play. The High Court made it clear in
Coco v the Queen
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
that any statutory
intention to override common law rights must be express and
unambiguous.
matter of general principle this may be accepted. But each matter must be
considered based on its own particulars.
[109] Section
533(2) is a machinery provision which permits reference to more than one
contravention within a single charge.
[110] In my
respectful view, the Magistrate erred in relying only on some of the elements of
the offence (namely the dishonest act/omission)
in determining whether the
conduct was recurrent. The dishonesty is only one element of the offence of
fraud. The remaining element,
namely the benefit, is also part of the relevant
conduct for the purpose of section 533. Having considered whether that conduct
present, the next question is whether it is recurrent.
[111] In my
view, the Fraud Charges fall within the well-established exception that applies
to cases where multiple acts can properly
be treated as a single offence.
(a) the intention is the same – namely to obtain compensation for an
alleged work injury;
(b) the acts are similar – they involved attendances on medical
practitioners for the purpose of obtaining medical reports
to support the
compensation claim, and filing compensation claim forms, all related to the same
alleged work injury; and
(c) the respondent continued to receive compensation as a consequence of those
actions through the period alleged on the charge.
[112] In my view
the offences can be described as continuing in nature. Lord Diplock in
explained that the rule against duplicity should be applied practically,
rather than in an overly strict and technical way. He explained
rule against duplicity
has always been applied in a practical,
rather than in a strictly analytical
, way for the purpose of determining
what constituted one offence. Where a number of
acts of a similar nature
committed by one or more defendants were
with one another, in
the time and place of their commission or
by their common purpose, in such a
way that they could fairly be regarded as forming part of the same transaction
or criminal enterprise,
it was the practice, as early as the eighteenth century,
to charge them in a single count of an indictment
[emphasis added]
[113] The acts
relied upon are part of a common intention and enterprise. They are not distinct
in the circumstances.
[114] In my
view, the learned Magistrate erred in finding the Fraud Charge was not recurrent
in terms of section 533(2) of the WCR
relation to the Attempted Fraud Charge, I agree with the appellant that
the means adopted to that end was to lie about the cause of her back
injury to various people and on various forms. But it was a singular
.” The Attempted Fraud Charge is, therefore, not duplicitous and
does not fall afoul of the principles.
[116] I also
accept the appellant’s submissions that the Fraud Charges are not
duplicitous with the offences of false or misleading
information as those other
offences were referred to within the original complaints only to provide the
defendant with information
the defendant acted dishonestly.
relation to the submission that the Fraud Charge contains insufficient
particulars, the appellant accepts that the particulars
on the complaint could
have been clearer about the basis upon which it was referring to the conduct
relating to the charges of false
and misleading particulars. The difficulty for
the prosecution is that no mention of the benefit element is present in the
particulars before the learned Magistrate. However, the particulars have
now been amended again and cure this issue and sufficiently
respondent to know the particulars relied upon with respect to each charge.
[118] As already
noted, for the purposes of the appeal, the appellant provided a further amended
appellant seeks orders setting aside the decision of the Magistrate and orders
that the charges of fraud and attempted fraud
proceed to be determined on the
amended complaints. Subject to any further submissions, I agree this is the
appropriate path.
Jones and Fahey
concerned a return to calling fraud charge under section
482 of the WQ Act (the predecessor to section 533). Acting President Moynihan
stated the complaint referred to a number of instances of conduct, each instance
of which would constitute a separate offence notwithstanding
that they are
described as particulars. For example, there was a reference to a number of
medical certificates provided to Workcover
which stated Mr Jones was totally
incapacitated for work, as particulars of the fraud. It became known that Mr
Jones had in fact
returned to work during that relevant period. Acting
President Moynihan said, “
each such occasion is at least arguably an
instance of conduct constituting a separate offence which is recurrent in terms
of s. 482(2)
the complaint concerned the making of a false statement to
Workcover, and fraud. It was contended that the charge of making of a false
statement was duplicitous in that two falsehoods were alleged this was rejected
on the grounds that it was a compendious lie. President
“[...] there is no obstacle to the complainant wrapping
the statements into a compendious lie and alleging a single offence,
v. Bartlett
, op. cit., at 343 per Campbell J and
(1987) 45 SASR 473 (Court
of Appeal).”
[122] President
Hall went on to say:
“The purpose of the subsection is to
expressly limit the circumstances in which a series of actions each of which
might itself
be made the subject of a charge may be bundled together in a
compendious way to support one charge of fraud.”
Appellants submissions
appellant submitted the decisions of
(a) are distinguishable; and
(b) not determinative of any point of law relevant to the current charges.
relation to
the appellant submitted it is distinguishable from the
present case because:
(a) the comments of Acting President Moynihan were obiter;
(b) it concerned a different offence, namely a “return to calling”
(c) the concern his Honour noted in
was that within the
particulars, it was alleged that the worker engaged in a calling and separately
alleged within the same charge
that the worker had made dishonest
representations that they were totally incapacitated for work while obtaining
benefits. Acting
President Moynihan considered that while the second of those
particulars (dishonest receipt of benefits) could itself have involved
conduct in the terms of the provision, it was problematic when combined within a
single charge that also alleged particulars
around the return to a calling
allegation; and
(d) the matter was determined on the basis that the Magistrate did not consider
each particular element separately, not on the ground
of duplicity.
appellant submits:
(a) for the above reasons, that
is not authority for the
proposition relied upon by the respondent and that the acts were not recurrent
under section 533(2) because
they were different types of acts; and
(b) the comments made by Acting President Moynihan about recurrent acts must be
understood in that context, and do not apply where
the conduct alleged involves
a single type of dishonest behaviour, as in the current charges.
relation to
, the appellant submits it involved a different offence
and merely followed
; therefore, the same arguments apply.
[127] For the
above reason the appellant contends the learned Magistrate was wrong to consider
that the decisions of
constrained her in
considering whether the charges were bad for latent duplicity.
Respondent’s submissions
the contrary, the respondent submitted that the learned Magistrate was correct
in following
(a) the authorities of
are directly on point;
(b) the decisions make it clear section 533(2) must be interpreted narrowly to
limit the circumstances that would allow for several
separate offences to be
bundled together to support one charge of fraud; and
(c) the proposition in
should be followed here,
where there is no appellate authority to the contrary.
respondent accepts what Acting President Moynihan said in
obiter dicta.
Consideration
was an appeal from a conviction for having defrauded WorkCover Queensland. The
complaint was laid in reliance on section 482 of
the WQ Act (the equivalent to s
was concerned with the offence under section 535 of the WCR
Act. Section 535 provides:
535 Particular acts taken to be fraud
(1) This section applies if a person—
(a) lodges an application for compensation with an insurer; and
(b) engages in a calling; and
(c) without reasonable excuse, does not inform the insurer, in the way stated
under section 136, of the person’s engagement
in the calling.
(2) If compensation is paid by the insurer under the application to the
person or anyone else—
(a) after the start of the engagement in the calling; and
(b) before the insurer is informed in the way stated under section 136 of the
engagement in the calling;
the person is taken to have defrauded the insurer of the payments under
section 533.
(3) If payments to which subsection (2) applies are not made, the person is
taken to have attempted to defraud the insurer under section
[131] Section
535 is concerned with “return to call” fraud. “Return to
call” fraud is where someone returns
during the course of a
claim while in receipt of compensation and does not inform Workcover. Under
section 136 of the WRC Act, an
employee is under a strict obligation to notify
the insurer of their return to work. If a compensated employee fails to comply
the obligation under section 136 without a reasonable excuse, they are
taken to have defrauded the insurer of the payments under
section 533. The
reasonable excuse element in section 535 is different from a charge of fraud
under s 533.
[132] Several
sets of facts (i.e. particulars) were identified, and each set amounted to the
commission of the fraud offence. Acting
President Moynihan found that it was for
the prosecution to specify which set, of several possible sets, sets out the
subject matter
of the charge. Acting President Moynihan found there was an issue
with the complaint in terms of section 43 of the Justices Act because
instance of conduct would constitute a separate offence.
[133] Acting
President Moynihan noted that section 482 of the WQ Act falls within the
category of “otherwise expressly provides”
in section 43 of the
Justices Act. That is, section 43 only applies unless expressly provided for
elsewhere. I agree with Acting
President Moynihan that section 43 is subject to
section 482 (i.e. the equivalent section 533). Section 533 (and its earlier
equivalent)
creates an exception to the default procedural rule in section 43
and permits the grouping of multiple acts into a single charge
as opposed to
insisting on a separate complaint for each charge.
particulars of the offence in
are a person who made application for worker's compensation benefits and after
commencing to be in receipt of such benefits you
did engage in a calling as a
baker without advising WorkCover Queensland of your return to work.
did cause Medical Certificates to be received by WorkCover Queensland stating
that you were totally incapacitated for work between
the abovementioned dates
when such was not the case.
did complete a statement dated 27/5/97 and in that statement you did state '1
have not been engaged in any employment of any kind
during the paid period'.
Such statement was false and misleading contrary to the Acts in such case made
and provided.
[135] In Acting
President Moynihan’s opinion (at 334):
“On the face of
it the complaint in the present case complains of a number of instances of
conduct each instance of which would
constitute a separate offence
notwithstanding that they are described as particulars. What is described as
particular 2 itself involves
a number of distinct offences constituted by the
activities complained of with respect to each of a number of certificates. Each
such occasion is at least arguably an instance of conduct constituting a
separate offence which is recurrent in terms of s. 482(2).
The same cannot
however be said of the offences constituted by the conduct complained of by
particulars 1, 2 and 3 as compared one
to the other.”
respondent submitted that
are directly on point
and should be followed, and that the learned Magistrate was correct to rely on
these decisions.
[137] I agree
with Acting President Moynihan’s opinion with respect to the interplay
between section 43 of the Justices Act
and section 533 of the WCR Act. I also
agree with his expression of a possible argument about the particulars in that
matter. However,
no final decision on these matters was required. No point was
taken about these considerations before the Industrial Magistrate
Acting President Moynihan.
[138] Aside from
that, there is nothing in particular that is binding or otherwise assists me to
determine whether in this particular
circumstance there is latent
referred to,
was concerned with section 535, not section 533.
Consideration of the particulars and duplicity need to be considered in the
statutory context.
, President Hall adopted what was said in
was an appeal from three counts of fraud. This was another return to calling
matter. The offender claimed compensation when his employment
ceased but then
recommenced part-time work which he engaged in on two separate occasions. The
complaint was:
“[...] on and from the 17th day of March 2001
up to and including 1st day of October 2001 at Rockhampton in the Magistrates
Court District of Rockhampton in the State of Queensland Francis Michael FAHEY
did make a false statement to WorkCover, that he knew
was false or misleading in
a material particular.”
particulars of offence 1 were:
statement was contained in a document, namely an ‘Application for
Compensation’ which was dated 01.02.01 and received
by the Rockhampton
Office of WorkCover on the 14.02.01
statement which Fahey knew to be false or misleading consisted of an answer to
questions contained in such application, namely
(a) the answer ‘Yes’ to question ‘Did you stop work because of
this injury?’
(b) the answer ‘No’ to the question ‘Have you
returned to work?’
3. Fahey knew the statement to be false or misleading as he
(a) did not stop work because of any injury,
(b) continued to work, and was then working for remuneration in the capacity of
a ‘Specialist in First Response and Emergency
Procedure Training’.
[142] It was
contended that the charge was duplicitous in that two falsehoods were alleged,
viz (1) stopping work because of the injury
and (2) not returning to work.
President decided that the criticism was unfounded and
“He who drew the particulars was careful to allege but
one falsehood, viz the appellant stopped work on 19 December 2000 because
injury and has not done any work since. Whilst it is true that the lie arises
out of two statements – made by way of
ticking circles in answer to two
questions – each of which could conceivably have been pleaded as a breach
of s. 482, there
is no obstacle to the complainant wrapping the statements into
a compendious lie and alleging a single offence, R v. Bartlett, op.
cit., at 343
per Campbell J and R v. Traino
(1987) 45 SASR 473 (Court
of Appeal). Of course,
having pleaded a compendious lie, the complainant must prove.”
[144] The second
charge was:
“That on and from the 14th February 2001 up to and
including the 1st day of October 2001 at Rockhampton in the Magistrates Court
District of Rockhampton in the state of Queensland Francis Michael Fahey did
defraud WorkCover.”
particulars of offence 2 were:
obtained and supplied to WorkCover medical certificates alleging he was totally
incapacitated for work.
knew such allegations to be untrue as he was not totally incapacitated for work
or at all. During the period alleged Fahey worked
for remuneration in the
capacity of a specialist “in First Response and Emergency Procedure
Training” and was not incapacitated
for work as he alleged.
complainant repeats and relies on the particulars set out in charge 1 and says
such statements was (sic) made by Fahey for the
purpose of misleading WorkCover
to its detriment by causing WorkCover to pay to and on behalf of him
compensation/benefits in the
sum of $4,055.35 to which he knew he was not
knowingly misleads a general practitioner to believe he was incapacitated for
work when he knew such was not the case.
knew he was not incapacitated for work and not entitled to compensation/benefits
totalling $80,991.13.
failing to notify WorkCover of the remuneration Fahey was receiving as a
specialist “in First Response and Emergency Procedure
Training” he
knowingly mislead WorkCover to believe he was totally incapacitated for work.
charge was also attacked as duplicitous. The President
“The principles governing duplicity in criminal counts
are reviewed scholarly by Kirby J in
Walsh v. Tattersall
[1996] HCA 26
(1996) 188 CLR
at 104 to 112. The indicia and authorities commonly relied upon to sustain a
single count against the charge of duplicity, notwithstanding
that it may permit
evidence to be adduced of events which, taken individually, could constitute
separate offences are critically
reviewed. None of that avails here. The
difficulty is s. 482(2). The difficulty is well captured in the passage from the
of Moynihan P in
Jones v. WorkCover
[1999] QIC 63
(1999) 162 QGIG 333
President then cited the passage from
“It has to follow that each of the matters
particularised should have been made the subject of a separate charge.
the conduct at particular 1 and the conduct at particular 4 is
recurrent within the meaning of s. 482(2)). The decision in Jones
v. WorkCover,
ibid, is but three years old. In my view it should not be overturned because of
some change in the composition of the
Court. In my view it should be overruled
only if it be shown to be contrary to a subsequent line of authority in superior
given per incuriam, or it be shown that some important principle was not
adverted to, compare
Queensland v. The Commonwealth
[1977] HCA 60
(1977) 139 CLR 585
599 to 600 per Gibbs J. Here the case sought to be made is that the decision was
given per incuriam. Strictly, His Honour did
not overlook any decision on s.
482. The point seems to be that His Honour did not notice that only one offence
was alleged. Reliance
is placed on the decision in
Walsh v. Tattersall
[1996] HCA 26
(1996) 188 CLR 77
R v. Jacobs
[1997] QCA 114
[1998] 1 QdR 96.
Without seeking to be
impertinent,
Walsh v. Tattersall
, op. cit., seems to me to be a case
without a ratio decidendi. R v. Jacobs, op. cit., involved a charge of
“carrying on the
business of unlawfully trafficking in ... dangerous
drugs”. It is in the nature of proving that a defendant has “carried
on the business of unlawfully trafficking in [...] dangerous drugs” that
repetitious transactions over a period of time each
of which may constitute the
offence of trafficking in a dangerous drug will be proved. Particulars of the
case which the Crown seeks
to make may be given, though each transaction
identified might have been made the subject of a separate prosecution. It is
in the offence created that such particulars may be given without
attracting the criticism that the charge is duplicitous. Here,
the indication at
s. 482(2) is exactly the other way. The purpose of the subsection is expressly
to limit the circumstances in which
a series of actions each of which might
itself be made the subject of a charge may be bundled together in a compendious
way to support
one charge of fraud. His Honour did not fail to notice that acts
which may be offences may be used to sustain a single count. His
Honour held
that s. 482(2) ousted that rule.”
respect, it is not clear what the reference is to “overturning”
or what the relevance is of this decision to the matter before me.
concerned a different charge and unique particulars. I note
, the President distinguished that case from other cases
concerning different charges.
[149] There is
no controversy, as far as I can ascertain, that each separate claim
“could” constitute a separate fraud
charge. The issue is whether,
because of s 533 or any exception to the rule against duplicity, those acts can
be grouped into one
charge. In my view
acknowledged that is exactly what s 533 permits, provided the conduct relied
upon is recurrent. Section 533 permits what would
otherwise be duplicity.
respect to principles of statutory interpretation, I note the words of Kirby J
Victorian Workcover Authority v Esso Australia Ltd
[2001] HCA 53
(2001) 207 CLR 520
who cautioned against focussing on judicial exposition
in the task of statutory interpretation. He said:
“[63] [...]
it is important when a task of statutory interpretation is presented, to
recognise the primacy of the duty of the
decision-maker to give effect to the
language of legislature that has enacted the provision in question, so as to
carry into effect
the purpose of the lawmakers, as such purpose emerges from the
provisions enacted.
There is a modern tendency to concentrate on
judicial exposition of legal concepts in preference to analysis of statutory
that contain the applicable law. This tendency should be
[emphasis added]
[151] I accept
the learned President may have felt bound by
but the District Court is not so bound, although it may find decisions
persuasive.
[152] Here, the
respondent states, in line with the reasoning of President Hall, the acts
particularised are duplicitous and are not
of a continuing nature. The
respondent submitted the amended particulars in particular 4 of the Fraud Charge
before the learned Magistrate
were duplicitous because they are distinct acts,
not acts of a continuing nature:
(a) paragraph (a) – concerns completing the Workcover claim;
(b) paragraph (b) – concerns a telephone conversation between the accused
and a representative of the respondent; and
(c) paragraphs (c) – (i) – are particulars of the accused attendance
on different medical practitioners.
respondent contends they are separate and distinct acts and not recurrent.
[154] I disagree
that the acts particularised have to be the same. What they need to be are
(a) of a similar nature;
(b) connected to each by their common purpose; and
(c) that may be regarded as forming part of the same continual criminal
enterprise.
[155] There is
no doubt that all the particularised acts were required to be performed in order
to obtain benefits or in an attempt
to obtain the benefit. They are inextricably
linked together by that common goal. Further, while the word
was not used, there is clear reference to the respondent
obtaining compensation as a result of those acts.
allegation is that the respondent has engaged in continuous course of conduct.
The particularised conduct is all linked
to the same claim for compensation,
said to arise out of the same incident. It is a continuing course of conduct
over a period.
there was a single count of fraud but in that case a return to
calling fraud and a false and misleading statement about employment.
the elements under consideration in
were different, and duplicity
was not argued. Further, the particulars combined allegations of both a return
to calling fraud and
dishonestly obtaining a benefit within a single
President Hall considered that
was authority in
relation to whether a complaint was latently duplicitous and followed it
accordingly. This matter was also a return
to calling and therefore different
element and particulars which should have been separated. There was limited
analysis in
[159] I agree
with the appellant that
are distinguishable and
not determinative.
Relevance of Walsh v Tattersall
[160] There
was no consideration of the indicia referred to by Kirby J in
by the learned Magistrate. Here, the relevant indicia is the
intention of the accused throughout the conduct.
[161] Walsh v
is regularly cited as an authority for the proposition that the
rule against duplicity precludes the prosecution alleging two or
offences in a single charge on an indictment. As referred to above, Kirby J
outlined the principles governing duplicity in criminal
counts. His Honour noted
that where the rule against duplicitous charges has been breached, it does not
oblige the court, coming
to that conclusion, to dismiss the charge. Rather, the
proper course, where the defect is latent and the particulars do not remove
may be for the court to permit an
[162] The injury
was reported to the insurer by the respondent. The respondent reported that the
injury was sustained at work. The
prosecution alleges that this was the
beginning of the dishonest conduct. As a result of this conduct the defendant
obtained compensation
to which she was not entitled.
respondent submitted that the authorities of
directly relevant and should be followed. I have already addressed this
prosecution submits the offence is not bad for duplicity because it relies on a
continued course of conduct.
Consideration
matter has some similarities to that in
Walsh v Tattersall
v Fedcheshen
[1995] SASC 5216
(1995) 65 SASR 156
(referred to in
Walsh v Tattersall
) in that the prosecution relies on
“a course of conduct constituting a false pretence of incapacity, as a
result of which the
appellant received a number of payments under the
the course of conduct involved allegations of 59 specific instances of
presentation of medical certificates for the purpose of obtaining
benefits under
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
could each have been separately charged.
[166] It is
important to note here that the legislation under consideration in
did not contain an equivalent provision to section 533(2) of the
contrast to the legislation under consideration in
Walsh v Tattersall
section 533 is a broader statement of fraud. It is not limited to a singular
Walsh v Tattersall
the relevant section provided:
person who —
(a) obtains by dishonest means any payment or other benefit under
(b) dishonestly claims to be entitled to a payment or
other benefit under this Act; or
(c) dishonestly makes a statement in relation to a claim under this Act knowing
the statement to be false or misleading, is guilty
of an offence.
Penalty: $10,000 or imprisonment for one year.
[168] Section
533(2) of the WCR Act also provides for where the conduct constituting the
offence of fraud is recurrent. This section
was not present in
[169] Section
533(2) provides a specific exception to the general rule in the circumstances
prescribed therein.
[170] For these
Walsh v Tattersall
is distinguishable on its facts, although it
is leading authority on the principle of duplicity and its application
Were the charges latently duplicitous because they rely on the
same facts particularised in relating to the false and misleading information
Appellants Submissions
appellant submits:
(a) It is entitled on the offences of fraud and attempted fraud to lead evidence
that the defendant repeated the lie about the cause
of her injury on multiple
occasions as evidence that her dishonest intention did not change over the
course of the statutory and
common law claims.
(b) The offences charged contain different elements. Once factual findings are
made, if those facts establish guilt under more than
one of the charges,
consideration would then be given as to whether any additional punishment ought
to be given in relation to the
offences of providing false and misleading
information. The appellant says this is analogous to offences of drug
trafficking or torture
or stalking.
(c) The offences of fraud and attempted fraud in this case are not duplicitous
with the offences of false or misleading information
as those other offences
were referred to within the original complaints only to provide the defendant
with information about how
the prosecution was intending to prove that the
defendant acted dishonestly.
Respondent’s Submissions
relation to count 1 of the Holland Park Complaint, the appellant particularised
the respondent’s acts as follows:
(a) Filling out a written claim which contained false or misleading information.
(b) Making false and misleading statements to Kim Jamieson (WorkCover Claims
Representative), Dr Alvin Lim (General Practitioner),
Matthew Watkinson
(Chiropractor), Dr Ian Cheung (Orthopaedic Surgeon), Dr Nick Chiang
(Rehabilitation and Pain Medicine Specialist),
Daniel O’Connor
(Physiotherapist), Tabitha Sluce (Chiropractor) and Dr Leo Zeller (Orthopaedic
(c) Filling out intake paperwork for Dr Zeller which contained false and
misleading information.
originally drafted, count 1 was comprised of separate and distinct acts that
themselves constituted contraventions of section
534 of the WCR Act for
providing “false or misleading information or documents.”
Accordingly, the appellant charged the
respondent with contraventions of section
534 for these acts of proving false and misleading information or documents. The
charge 1 did nothing to change this.
[174] Accordingly,
the acts particularised under count 1 of fraud are not recurrent and bad for
latently duplicity.
relation to count 4 of the Caboolture Complaint, the appellant particularises
the respondent’s act as follows:
(a) Making false and misleading statements to Dr Don Todman (Neurologist) and Dr
Trevor Lotz (Consultant Psychiatrist).
(b) Giving a written statement on 29 June 2022 and statutory declaration on 28
August 2023.
[176] As for
count 1 of the Holland Park Complaint, the acts above are separate and distinct
acts that themselves constitute a separate
offence of contravening section 534
of the WCR Act.
[177] Accordingly,
count 4 of attempted fraud is bad for latent duplicity.
Consideration
the argument seems to be that because the factual particulars relied upon to
establish the elements of the Fraud Charges
are the same as those for the false
and misleading charges, that it involves duplicity.
[179] However,
substantially similar facts can be relied upon to found alternative legal
dishonesty is maintained over the period and although the particulars may
change, the lie (that she is injured and it occurred
in the workplace) is the
same, albeit told to different people (i.e. doctors and the appellant).
[181] Even if
the conduct was not recurrent (as required by section 533(2) of the WCR Act)
because the acts were strictly (and narrowly)
considered distinct and separate,
in my view, it is not duplicitous.
[182] Here, it
would be artificial, in my view, to treat each independent visit to a medical
practitioner as a separate offence. The
offence of fraud can only arise when the
benefit is received. All of the visits are particularised as resulting in the
benefit obtained.
It demonstrates an ongoing course of conduct.
[183] The rule
against duplicity should not be used in a way which results in the frustration
of the due administration of justice.
Rixon v Thompson
[2008] VSC 232
(2008) 185 A Crim R 517
the many good reasons for the existence of the rule against duplicity, it must
not be allowed to frustrate the due
administration of justice. Technical
objections to the way in which a charge has been formulated may, depending on
the circumstances,
have merit; or they may not. The touchstone against
which technical objections are to be assessed is that of fairness, and –
to the extent that fairness is not impaired – of efficiency.”
the learned Magistrate err in determining the charge of fraud was not recurrent
in the terms of section 533 and therefore
was bad for latent duplicity?
[185] Did the
learned Magistrate err in determining the charge of attempted fraud was bad for
latent duplicity? Yes.
[186] Kirby J
made it clear in
Walsh v Tattersall
that strict adherence to the rule
against duplicity should continue “
save for statutory warrant
for the exceptional cases of
continuing offences or facts so closely related
that they amount to the one activity
, separate offences should be the
subject of separate charges” [emphasis
[187] In my
view, this matter falls within those articulated exceptions. First, there is the
statutory warrant provided for in s 533(2)
of the WCR Act, and second, or
further, the facts and particulars are so closely related, they amount to the
one activity.
decision of the learned Magistrate should be set aside. I will hear the parties
as to whether the Fraud Charge and Attempted
Fraud Charge should proceed to be
determined on the amended complaints and the proposed orders.
appellant further seeks costs pursuant to section 226 of the Justices Act.
[190] I will
hear the parties further as to costs.
Fraud Charges - Particulars
Charge one on the Holland Park Complaint (Fraud
06/10/2020 and 14/01/2022 at Moorooka or elsewhere in the Holland Park Division
of the Magistrates Court District in the State
of Queensland, Lorraine Maxwell,
defrauded an insurer, namely WorkCover Queensland, in contravention of section
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Particulars
or about 6 October 2020, the defendant made a claim for workers’
compensation under the WCRA to WorkCover Queensland (the
insurer) for a back
injury she claimed was caused by lifting heavy boxes and fans at work on 2
October 2020.
8 October 2020, the defendant’s claim for compensation was accepted and
the insurer commenced paying her compensation, backdated
to 6 October 2020,
which continued until 14 January 2022.
defendant was not entitled to workers’ compensation because the injury to
her back did not occur at work.
a) On 6 October 2020, the defendant filled out a written claim form stating
words to the effect that she had injured her back lifting
heavy boxes, lifting
and pulling heavy fans, and lifting and pulling boxes onto pallets;
b) On 8 October 2020, the defendant had a telephone conversation with WorkCover
Claims Representative Kim Jamieson and told Ms Jamieson
words to the effect
October 2020 the defendant hurt her back at work working in different sections
drilling, lifting and pulling boxes that were
too heavy for her, hammering
stainless steel drums and other tasks;
ii. The boxes of fans were about 20-30 kilograms;
ii. The defendant had no pre-existing injury
6 October 2020, the defendant attended on general practitioner Dr Alvin Lim and
told him words to the effect that she had strained
her back from heavy and
repeated lifting of boxes from different tables at work;
d) On 5 November 2020, the defendant attended on chiropractor Matthew Watkinson
and told him words to the effect that she had hurt
her herself after lifting and
dragging heavy boxes at work;
e) On 1 April 2021, the defendant attended on orthopaedic surgeon Dr Ian Cheung
and told him words to the effect that she sustained
a workplace injury on 2
October 2020 pulling an industrial fan from under a shelf and lifting a lot of
f) On or about 29 July 2021, the defendant attended on rehabilitation and pain
medicine specialist Dr Nick Chiang and told him words
to the effect that she
injured her back on 2 October 2020 attempting to lift and drag a heavy fan
underneath a shelf at work;
g) On 8 September 2021, the defendant attended on physiotherapist Daniel
O’Connor and told him words to the effect that she
sustained a lifting
injury at work on 2 October 2020, lifting a boxed fan which weighed
approximately 20 kilograms;
h) On 20 September 2021, the defendant attended on chiropractor Tabitha. Sluce
and told her words to the effect that she had hurt
her back at work in the
lumbar region lifting a heavy fan which caused a prolapsed disc and pulled
December 2021, the defendant attended on orthopaedic surgeon Dr Leo Zeller and
told him words to the effect that:
i. She had no prior
problems with her back;—
injured her back moving fans onto pallets which were 15-20 kilograms;
defendant’s dishonesty deprived the insurer of the opportunity to properly
assess and manage her claim, including determining
whether to accept liability,
pay compensation, and/or fund treatment.
a result of her dishonesty, the defendant received compensation from the insurer
to which she was not entitled.
Charge four on the Caboolture Complaint (Attempted Fraud
Between 06/03/2022 and 26/03/2024 at Caboolture or
elsewhere in the Caboolture Magistrates Court District in the State of
Queensland,
Lorraine Maxwell attempted to defraud an insurer, namely WorkCover
Queensland in contravention of
section 533
Workers’ Compensation
and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Particulars
or about 6 October 2020, the defendant made a claim for workers’
compensation under the WCRA to WorkCover Queensland (the
insurer) for a back
injury she claimed was caused by lifting heavy boxes and fans at work on 2
October 2020.
8 October 2020, the defendant’s claim for compensation was accepted and
the insurer commenced paying her compensation, backdated
to 6 October 2020,
which continued until 14 January 2022.
7 March 2022 the defendant signed a Notice of Claim for damages (
commence a common law claim for damages in relation to her alleged work-related
4) The NOC was served on the insurer on 10 March 2022.
the NOC, the defendant claimed damages for an injury to her back that did not
occur at work.
a) On 9 December 2021, the defendant attended a consultation with Dr Don Todman,
neurologist, and told him words to the effect that:
was involved in a work accident on 2 October 2020 involving moving industrial
fans from under a shelf;
ii. The fans weighed between 15 and 20 kg.
b) On 29 March 2022, the defendant attended a consultation with Dr Trevor Lotz
and told him words to the effect that she had hurt
her back at work moving heavy
industrial fans from under a shelf onto pallets;
c) On 29 June 2022, the defendant signed a written statement to the effect
had reviewed CCTV footage of the day she alleged the injury occurred and she had
been taken to a back area away from her normal
work area to empty shelves of
exhaust fans onto pallets which weighed 18.5-20 kilograms;
ii. It was moving the heavy fans which caused her back injury.
d) On 28 August 2023, the defendant signed a statutory declaration including
that her workplace injury did not occur in view of the
closed-circuit television
cameras in the workplace.
At first instance, after
finding the charges should be struck out, the Magistrate permitted the charges
to be amended and then reconsidered.
The amended charges were again struck
Garget-Bennett
[2010] QCA 231
[2013] 1 Qd R
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Queensland Police Service
[2017] QCA 255
[2018] 2 Qd R 612
Examples and exceptions to the
definition of injury are provided for in
section 32(2)
Workers’ Compensation
and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Johnson v Miller
(1937) 59 CLR 467
; PPP v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 110
(2010) 27 VR 68
[1996] HCA 26
(1996) 188 CLR 77
, per Kirby
S v The Queen
(1989) 168 CLR 266
Mark Lucraft (ed),
Archbold 2025
(Thomson Reuters, 2025) ch 1, part V,
section 1-235.
Walsh v Tattersall
[1996] HCA 26
[1996] HCA 26
(1996) 188 CLR 77
, 108; citing
(1994) 74 A Crim R
McDonald v Higgins
[2013] WASC 61
(2013) 227 A Crim R 130
[2013] WASC 61
(2013) 227 A Crim R 130
[1996] HCA 26
(1996) 188 CLR 77
[1996] HCA 26
(1996) 188 CLR 77
, 108; also see Edelman
J’s summary of matters relevant to an assessment in
[2013] WASC 61
(2013) 227 A Crim R 130
[1996] HCA 26
(1996) 188 CLR 77
Mirko Bagaric,
(Thomson Reuters, 9th ed 2022) p 673
[2022] QCA 103
(2022) 307 A Crim R 296
, at [118]. See
(Qld) s 567.
Cohen v Macefield Pty Ltd
[2010] QCA 95
See Hannes v Director
of Public Prosecutions (Cth) (No 2)
[2006] NSWCCA 373
; (2006)165 A Crim R
[1996] HCA 26
(1996) 188 CLR
(1999) 110 A Crim R 198
[2010] VSCA 110
(2010) 27 VR 68
(Redlich and
Neave JA agreeing at
Tobacco and Other Smoking Products Act 1998
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Merriman
[1973] AC 584
, 593; cited in
Biddle v Dimmock
[1992] QCA 265.
s 43(1)(c).
Explanatory Note,
Workcover Queensland Bill 1996
For example, see the
Civil Liability Act 2003
(Qld): “An Act to reform the law of civil
liability for negligent acts, and for other
of Public Prosecutions v Merriman
[1973] AC 584
See WCR Act s
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Merriman
[1973] AC 584
which was followed in
(1987) 45 SASR
at 475-476 and referred to in
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467
at 490, per Dixon J, discussed
Stanton v Abernathy
(1990) 19 NSWLR
at 670. See also
(1994) 74 A Crim
[1996] HCA 26
(1996) 188 CLR 77
R v Leivers and
[1998] QCA 99
[1999] 1 Qd R
Rixon v Thompson
[2008] VSC 232
(2008) 185 A Crim R 517
[1996] HCA 26
(1996) 188 CLR 77
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (5.09 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter