URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLPT/2009/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Wherry [2009] QLPT 22 (7 September 2009)
Legal Services Commissioner v Wherry [2009] QLPT 22 (7 September 2009)
LEGAL PRACTICE TRIBUNAL
Legal Services Commissioner v Wherry
[2009] LPT 22
LEGAL SERVICES
COMMISSIONER
(applicant)
BARRETT ANTHONY
(respondent)
981 of 2009
Legal Practice Tribunal
PROCEEDING:
Discipline Application
DELIVERED ON:
7 September 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
7 September 2009
PRACTITIONER PANEL MEMBER:
LAY PANEL MEMBER:
Dr M Steinberg
Tribunal recommends that the practitioner’s name be removed from the local
respondent to pay the applicant’s costs of and incidental to the
discipline application to be assessed as if such proceedings
were an action
commenced in the Supreme Court.
CATCHWORDS:
Profession – Lawyers – Complaints and discipline –
Disciplinary proceedings – Queensland – Proceedings
in tribunals
– Costs – Standing of Legal Services Commissioner to apply for costs
on complainant’s behalf –
Order for complainant’s costs where
no appearance
Legal Profession Act
Accounts Act
B I McMillan for the applicant
No appearance for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Services Commission for the applicant
No appearance for the
LEGAL PRACTICE
[2009] LPT 22
DR M STEINBERG
No 981 of 2009
SERVICES COMMISSIONER
BARRETT ANTHONY WHERRY
..DATE 07/09/2009
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by the Legal Services
Commissioner for disciplinary orders pursuant to section 456
Legal Profession Act 2007
against Barrett Anthony
Wherry, a solicitor.
Mr Wherry was convicted in the Magistrates Court at
Charters Towers on the 21st of February 2007 of the offence of
forging a document with intent to defraud. The document which
Mr Wherry forged was an authority regarding costs purporting
to be signed but not in fact signed by his client Ms Joanne
Mr Wherry had been engaged by Ms Bennett in respect of a
workers' compensation claim and had entered into a client
agreement with her in 1998. He acted in the matter over some
four years on a speculative basis. The matter settled in
mid-2002 for some $385,000 and after payment of amounts due to
the Health Insurance Commission and Centrelink, $291,000
approximately was paid into the solicitor's trust account in
August of that year.
The solicitor made two payments to his general account from
that trust account. The first was a payment of nearly
$77,000, on the same day the money was received. The second
was a payment of nearly $15,000, made in late November 2002 after payment
of $200,000 to his client. That exhausted the funds. Neither
of those payments
was supported by an authority from the client. Making them amounted to a breach
Trust Accounts Act
which required the
not to make any payment out without such an
In February the following year the solicitor made an attempt
to recover fees from the client of over $108,000, no doubt
giving allowance to the amounts already withdrawn. Ms Bennett
engaged other solicitors to act on her behalf and a bill was
demanded. In July 2003 the solicitor wrote to those
solicitors enclosing a number of documents, one of which was a
purported trust account authority dated 8th of August 2002 and
purportedly signed by Ms Bennett. That document was a forgery
made by the solicitor.
There is no evidence before the Tribunal of precisely why the
solicitor brought the forgery into being. It appears to have
been used to try to persuade the solicitors and, as was found
subsequently when the respondent pleaded guilty in the
Magistrates Court, also the Law Society that there was a trust
account authority in existence. It has not been shown that
the respondent was not entitled to the $91,000-odd in respect
of fees. Indeed, there has been no attempt to identify the
amount to which he was entitled and the matter has proceeded
on the assumption that he may well have been entitled to at
least the amount which he withdrew.
The charge is specified and limited to the fact that he was convicted of
an offence involving dishonesty. It is clear from the transcript
proceedings in the Magistrates Court and from the reasons for judgment of the
then Chief Magistrate that the dishonesty in
question in
Magistrates Court was misleading the new solicitors for
Ms Bennett and the Law Society. It may also fairly be said, I
think, that it is dishonest, and this may be another way of
saying the same thing, to forge a document in an attempt to
evade a prosecution or criticism for a breach of
Trust Accounts Act
The solicitor has not appeared in this Tribunal. A short
while ago the Tribunal made an order for substituted service
on him on the material, it having proved difficult to effect
service in the ordinary way. The material before the Tribunal
today demonstrates quite clearly that the solicitor has become
aware of the proceedings and he has had abundant time to place
any material before the Tribunal which might relate either to
the substance of the charge or to the issue of sanction. He
has chosen not to do so.
In the last day or so his wife has sent a letter to the
Commissioner and requested that the contents of the letter be
placed before the Tribunal. Mr McMillan on behalf of the
Commissioner has very properly done so. The letter asserts
that the respondent has suffered ill health and seems to
suggest that there is no immediate prospect of his recovering.
It does not in terms seek an adjournment and there is
certainly nothing in it which, in my judgment, would warrant
the granting of an adjournment in the circumstances of the
case. I did not receive it into evidence but, rather, have
had it marked for identification.
There is little that can be
said in relation to the proof of
the offence. The certificate of conviction is before the
Tribunal. The reasons for judgment and the transcript of
argument are before the Tribunal. I see no basis upon which
any other conclusion could be reached than that the respondent
is guilty of professional misconduct. I am advised by those
with me that they are of a like view.
As regards the order which the Tribunal should make the
requirement for honesty and integrity in a solicitor has been
restated many times by many Tribunals throughout Australia and
in the Courts. In the present case the solicitor not only
forged a document but continued to urge its genuineness even
after the matter was challenged. He subsequently demonstrated
genuine remorse in pleading guilty in the Magistrates Court
but that does not mean that the Tribunal can feel the level of
confidence which is necessary in order to ensure that the
public is protected against dishonest practitioners. He has
not come before the Tribunal or put material before it which
would provide a basis for any confidence that, despite his
remorse, the public can adequately be protected if he is
permitted to continue in practice.
I accept the Commissioner's submission that the appropriate
order in the present case is one recommending that the
respondent be removed from the local roll.
The applicant also gave notice that there would be
application for costs on behalf of Ms Bennett. An
has been put before the Tribunal exhibiting a letter from
Kingston & Stanton Solicitors acting for Ms Bennett. It
appears to relate to events that occurred in 2003 and
subsequently but it is quite unclear whether it directly
relates to matters the subject of the charge. It is a tax
invoice setting out attendances, correspondence and
professional conduct for which the solicitors have charged
Ms Bennett.
The Commissioner has not made an application himself for an
order that costs of Ms Bennett be paid. In that regard it
seems to me that the Commissioner was probably acting
correctly as he does not have any express provision in the Act
which gives him standing to apply for such an order, and it
seems he does not hold any written authority from Ms Bennett
to seek such an order on her behalf. I say nothing as to
whether he could seek such an order if he did hold such an
authority. That is one difficulty with regard to the
proposition that an order should be made for Ms Bennett's
The Commissioner has very properly and helpfully drawn the
Tribunal's attention to the provisions of section 462(1) which
mandates the Tribunal making an order requiring a person whom
it has found guilty to pay costs, including the costs of the
Commissioner and the complainant, unless exceptional
circumstances itself. It almost goes without saying that the
Commissioner will have costs incurred in any
proceedings
before the Tribunal. It does not go without saying that
complainant will incur costs in proceedings before a
Tribunal. Indeed, in most cases one would expect that a
complainant would not incur legal costs in relation to the
matter before the Tribunal.
It seems to me that one should not construe section 462(1) as
requiring the Tribunal to make an order for a person to pay
the costs of a complainant when there is no suggestion that
any such costs have been incurred.
There are cases where it will ordinarily be likely that a
complainant has incurred costs. Section 643 of the Act deals
with parties to proceedings and provides that a complainant is
entitled to appear at the hearing in relation to those aspects
of the hearing that relate to a request by the complainant for
a compensation order and if the Tribunal grants leave other
aspects of the hearing.
In the present case the complainant did not apply for a
compensation order and there is no evidence that the
complainant has suffered any loss which could be the
subject of compensation, nor has she sought leave to become a
party to the proceedings. A complainant who is not a party to
the proceedings might conceivably incur costs which could be
recovered under section 462 but as presently advised, I cannot
imagine how. It seems to me that, prima facie, the costs
which are referred to in that section are going to be costs
which have been incurred of and incidental to the
proceedings.
The costs in the present case which the complainant has
incurred were incurred, it appears, over a period of years
prior to the happening of the event which is the subject of
the Tribunal proceedings - that is, prior to the conviction of
the solicitor for an offence of dishonesty. Indeed, what I
was told from the Bar table suggests that the original
complaint was one of overcharging. It could hardly have been
a complaint indicating the conviction since that was many
years in the future at the time that complaint was made. It
therefore seems that even if Ms Bennett became a party to the
proceedings, it is unlikely that any of the costs which she
has incurred could be identified as being costs of and
incidental to the proceedings.
It does not seem to me that
costs of making a complaint would
necessarily or even ordinarily fall within the notion of costs
of and incidental to proceedings. However, they may do so.
There can be no doubt that costs of proceedings can include
costs of preparation right from the time of taking or giving
first instructions. That is a question which depends on the facts of the
case and it is unnecessary for me to say more about it at
this time. In the
present case, it is not shown that such costs have been incurred. I therefore
think it not appropriate to make
any order for costs of the complainant and in
the end, counsel for the Commissioner conceded that this would not be an
appropriate
case for so doing.
To make sure that Ms Bennett was not
proceeding on a different
basis, or on an assumption that her interests would somehow be
looked after differently, the Tribunal adjourned and allowed
the legal representatives for the Commissioner to contact
Ms Bennett to ensure that she did not wish to make any
application to be joined, or to argue for costs, and the
Tribunal has been assured that such contact was made and there
is no such wish.
The order of the Tribunal is: that it is recommended that the
name of Barrett Anthony Wherry be removed from the local roll
and that Mr Wherry pay the costs of the Commissioner of and
incidental to the disciplinary proceedings, to be assessed as
if such proceedings were an action commenced in the Supreme
Does that form of order satisfy?
MR McMILLAN: Yes, that's suitable, your Honour.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (71.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter