URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2025/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rochedale Development Partners v Brisbane City Council [2025] QPEC 16 (23 June 2025)
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT COURT
Development Partners v Brisbane City Council
[2025] QPEC 16
ROCHEDALE DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS
(Appellant)
BRISBANE CITY COUNCIL
(Respondent)
Planning and Environment
PROCEEDING:
Appeal against infrastructure charges notice
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning and Environment Court, Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
23 June 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
13 June 2025
McDonnell DCJ
The Appeal is dismissed
CATCHWORDS:
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT – APPEAL – APPEAL
INFRASTRUCTURE CHARGES NOTICE – where the appellant was issued an amended
infrastructure charges notice – where
the appellant seeks a recalculation
of the amount of the establishment cost of the trunk infrastructure under
section 137
Planning Act 2016
– where the appellant appeals against
the amended infrastructure charges notice – where the valuer was required
with the valuation methodology in
section 25(2)(a)
of the Charges
Resolution – whether the valuer made an error in applying the methodology
– whether the respondent made
an error by deciding to give the amended
infrastructure charges notice
Brewarrana Pty Ltd v Commissioner for Highways (No 1)
(1973) 32 LGRA
Douglas Construction & Engineering Pty Ltd v Logan City Council
[2023] QPEC 28
Jakel Pty Ltd & Ors v Brisbane City Council & Anor
LEGISLATION:
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
Planning Act 2016
, Schedule 1, Table 1, Item 4
SOLICITORS:
L Walker for the Appellant
M Batty KC and R Yuen for the
HWL Ebsworth for the Appellant
City Legal for the
Introduction
[1] This is an
appeal against an Amended Infrastructure Charges Notice issued by the respondent
on 26 November 2024 relating to the
land at 32 Farley Road, Rochedale, which is
more particularly described as Lot 2 on RP59061 (Land).
appellant alleges there is non-compliance with the infrastructure charges
resolution resulting in an error in the establishment
cost for the land
infrastructure (trunk park) items (Land Establishment Cost) stated in the
Amended Infrastructure Charges Notice.
The respondent says there has been
compliance. For the reasons that follow, I am not satisfied that the appellant
has established
there is an error.
The nature of the appeal
[3] Schedule 1,
Table 1, Item 4 of the
Planning Act 2016
(Qld) (Planning Act)
“An appeal may be made against an infrastructure
charges notice on 1 or more of the following grounds–
(a) the notice involved an error relating to–
(iii) an offset or refund ...”.
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
(PECA) provides that
“Subject to any relevant enabling Act, an appeal to the P&E Court is
by way of hearing anew”.
[5] As observed
by Kefford DCJ
Douglas Construction & Engineering Pty Ltd v Logan City
[2023] QPEC 28
“In this case, the nature
of the appeal is to be construed in the context that the right of appeal is
limited. The “enabling
Act”, ie, the
Planning Act 2016
judicial power to examine the infrastructure charges notice to ascertain whether
the alleged error has been established.
The appeal is not a hearing anew, or
appeal de novo, in the sense that the Court hears the matter afresh on fresh
material and may
overturn the decision appealed from regardless of error.
Rather, the focus of the appeal is whether the infrastructure charges notice
involves a legal, factual or discretionary error.”
respectfully refer to and adopt the approach of Kefford DCJ.
[7] It is for
the appellant to establish that this appeal should be upheld:
[8] Future trunk
infrastructure is planned over the Land. Pursuant to the Local Government
Infrastructure Plan (LGIP) of the Brisbane
City Plan 2014, the dedication
(a) ROC-A2-011 – Land acquisition for a district recreation park
(1.315ha); and
(b) ROC-A5-001 – Land acquisition for a district sports park (0.285ha).
[9] The Land was
purchased by Rochedale Development Partners (32 Farley Rd) Pty Ltd on 6 July
2023 for $5.65 million, pursuant to
a “put and call” option
agreement dated 27 September 2021. The price of the sale was agreed in or about
The total area of the
Land is approximately 33,738m
[10] On 16 May
2022, the appellant made a development application for a preliminary approval
for a material change of use, including
a variation request, for Caretakers
Accommodation, Multiple Dwelling, Residential Care Facility, Retirement Facility
and Utility
Installation, and a development permit for Reconfiguring a Lot (1
into 2 lots, and a new road) (Development Application) on the
Development Application was approved by the respondent by way of negotiated
decision notice dated 12 September 2023. The
approval included a condition
requiring the dedication of 1.6ha of the Land for park purposes. A negotiated
infrastructure charge
notice (Negotiated ICN), was issued on the same date which
provided for a total refund of $1,522,717.93, including:
(a) $188,650.00 for the land for ROC-A5-001; and
(b) $935,438.40 for the land for ROC-A2-011.
February 2024, the appellant gave the respondent a notice requesting the
respondent recalculate Land Establishment Cost
under the Negotiated ICN pursuant
section 137
Planning Act
and the recalculation process set out under
the Brisbane Infrastructure Charges Resolution (No. 12) 2023 (Charges Resolution
(being the version in force at the relevant time) (Recalculation
Application). The request was supported by a valuation report prepared
Lister of Savills Valuations Pty Ltd and a report by Wolter Consulting Group
determining the highest and best use of the Land.
Savills assessed the market
value of the land proposed for the park dedication to be $6,000,000 (excluding
respondent determined that the appellant’s highest and best use advice was
acceptable.
Savills’ valuation did not rely upon the sale of the Land as a comparable
sale. On 4 June 2024, Savills provided an
addendum to their valuation report
addressing the sale of the Land. Savills advised that the valuer considered the
sale to be of
limited relevance at the date of valuation primarily due to the
fact that the price was agreed approximately 12 months earlier than
the relevant
date of valuation and there had been strong market movement between those dates.
Recalculation Application and supporting material were referred to the
respondent’s internal valuer for assessment.
The respondent notified the
appellant of an amended valuation for the Land Establishment Cost of $3.6m on 23
July 2024. The appellant
provided a second addendum to the Savill’s
valuation report, dated 3 September 2024. The respondent’s amended
was rejected by the appellant. The respondent was requested to refer
the Recalculation Application to an independent valuer for
assessment.
respondent referred the Recalculation Application and supporting material to an
independent valuer, Horrigan Kamitsis Valuers,
to provide an independent
valuation of the Land Establishment Cost. Mr Kamitsis was the valuer.
[17] By report
dated 25 October 2024, Horrigan Kamitsis Valuers assessed the Land Establishment
Cost to be $4,015,000 (excluding GST).
The report is stated to be undertaken in
accordance with
of the Charges Resolution
November 2024, Mr Clapham (the delegate of the respondent) determined that the
Horrigan Kamitsis Valuers valuation report had
followed the correct methodology for determining the proposed market cost for
valuation under the Brisbane Infrastructure Charges Resolution (No. 13)
2024 (Charges Resolution v13) (being the version in force
at the relevant time)
and be adopted. On 26 November 2024, the respondent gave the appellant an
amended infrastructure charges notice
(Amended ICN) pursuant to
section 27(9)
the Charges Resolution v13, which provides for a total refund amount of
$4,865,437.19, including Land Establishment Cost of:
(a) $795,650.11 for ROC-A5-001; and
(b) $3,671,157.55 for ROC-A2-011.
[19] There is no
material difference or change in the recalculation process for land between
Charges Resolution v12 and Charges Resolution
The issues in
[20] The issues
to be determined by the Court were identified in the order of Judge Williamson
KC made 20 May 2025. The issues narrowed
for the hearing.
questions to be determined are:
(a) whether:
(i) the respondent’s decision to give the amended infrastructure charges
notice pursuant to
Planning Act
failed to comply with
of the Charges Resolution v13;
(ii) if the answer to (a)(i) is yes, then whether the non-compliance resulted in
an error in relation to the establishment cost for
the land infrastructure items
stated in the Amended infrastructure charges notice;
(b) if the answer to (a) is yes, whether the matter should be:
(i) returned to the respondent to recalculate the establishment cost for the
land infrastructure items in accordance with the method
under the Brisbane
Infrastructure Charges Resolution, with any appropriate directions; or
(ii) determined by the Court by way of hearing anew.
appellant alleges that the Council made a legal error in the Amended ICN
relating to an offset or refund. The appellant
says the respondent, by its
delegate Mr Clapham, was required to adopt the valuation or determine there is
an error in Mr Kamitsis’
and in doing this that Mr
Clapham erred in finding that Mr Kamitsis’ valuation complied with the
requirements of
of the Charges Resolution
Further, the appellant says
the error by Mr Kamitsis was the failure to undertake the valuation “as if
the required land had
never been identified” and “disregarding any
change in the value (e.g. through development opportunities) caused, or
contributed to, by the identification of the required land in the local
government infrastructure plan” as required by
of the Charges
Resolution v13.
Legal Framework
Section 137
Planning Act
sets out the process for seeking a recalculation of the
amount of the establishment cost of the trunk infrastructure stated in an
infrastructure charges notice where the applicant does not agree with the amount
of the establishment cost.
Section 137
Planning Act
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a development approval requires the applicant to provide trunk
infrastructure; and
(b) the local government has given the applicant an infrastructure charges
notice that includes information about an offset or refund
under this part
relating to the establishment cost of the trunk infrastructure; and
(c) the applicant does not agree with the amount of the establishment cost.
(2) The applicant may, by notice given to the local government, require the
local government to use the method under the relevant
charges resolution to
recalculate the establishment cost.
(3) a notice under subsection (2) must be given to the local government before
the levied charge under the infrastructure charges
notice becomes payable under
section 122.
(4) by notice given to the applicant, the local government must amend the
infrastructure charges notice.
(5) the amended infrastructure charges notice must adopt the method to work out
the establishment cost.
the Charges Resolution v13 states matters relevant for the working out of an
offset or refund.
of the Charges Resolution v13 provides:
Current market value
(1) The establishment cost for required land may be recalculated by the
local government at the request of the applicant by using
the current market
value of the required land determined by using the before and after method of
valuation prescribed in
in accordance with this
section 27.
Applicant’s submission of current market value
(2) The applicant is to give to the local government the following:
(a) a notice in the prescribed form requesting the recalculation of the
establishment cost for the required land which is accompanied
by the following
documents prepared in accordance with
section 25:
(i) a valuation of the required land undertaken by an independent valuation
applicant’s valuation
(ii) a report prepared by an appropriately qualified town planner regarding the
highest and best use of the original land and the
remaining land on which the
applicant’s valuation is based (
applicant’s highest and best
(b) the prescribed fee.
Local government’s determination of current market value
(3) Within 20 business days after the notice and accompanying documents
under subsection (2) are received by the local government:
(a) the local government is to refer the applicant’s valuation to its
registered valuer to:
(i) assess whether the applicant’s valuation is consistent with the
current market value;
(ii) assess whether the applicant’s valuation is correctly determined
using the before and after method of valuation prescribed
Note—The local government may request additional information from
the applicant in order to undertake the assessment.
(b) if the registered valuer’s determination is that the
applicant’s valuation is not consistent with the current market
is not correctly determined using the before and after method of valuation
prescribed in
then the registered valuer must:
(i) provide the reasons for the registered valuer’s determination; and
(ii) either:
(A) provide a valuation using the before and after method of valuation
amended valuation
(B) recommend that the valuation be referred to an independent valuer.
(4) The local government is to decide whether to:
(a) accept the applicant’s valuation; or
(b) propose an amended valuation based on subsection (3)(b)(ii)(A); or
(c) refer the valuation to an independent valuer based on subsection
(3)(b)(ii)(B).
(5) If the local government accepts the applicant’s valuation, it is
(a) give written notice to the applicant stating that it has agreed to the
applicant’s valuation (
accepted valuation
(b) index the establishment cost for the required land using the CPI from the
date of the accepted valuation to the date stated
in the amended infrastructure
charges notice; and
(c) issue an amended infrastructure charges notice to the applicant stating the
establishment cost for the required land.
Amended valuation
(6) If the local government proposes an amended valuation, it is to give a
written notice to the applicant stating:
(a) that it rejects the applicant’s valuation and give reasons for doing
(b) the proposed amended valuation.
(7) Within 20 business days of receipt of the local government’s
written notice proposing the amended valuation under subsection
applicant must give written notice to the local government that it:
(a) accepts the amended valuation; or
(b) rejects the amended valuation and its reasons for doing so.
(8) If the applicant accepts the amended valuation, the local government
(a) index the establishment cost for the required land using the CPI from the
date of the amended valuation to the date stated in
the amended infrastructure
charges notice; and
(b) give an amended infrastructure charges notice to the applicant stating the
establishment cost of the required land.
(9) If the applicant rejects the amended valuation, then within 20 business
days after receipt of a notice under subsection (7)(b),
the local government is
to refer the applicant’s valuation to an independent valuation expert
nominated by the local government
from its list of certified practising valuers
as per subsection (11).
Independent valuation
(10) The local government may not refer the applicant’s valuation to
an independent valuation expert if the applicant has not
paid to the local
government the prescribed fee under subsection (2)(b) including the costs of the
independent valuation expert nominated
by the local government and the town
planner engaged by the local government.
(11) If the local government refers the applicant’s valuation to an
independent valuation expert nominated by the local government
from its list of
certified practising valuers, the local government is to:
(a) give written notice to the applicant that it rejects the applicant’s
valuation and give reasons for doing so;
(b) give written notice to the applicant stating that it has referred the
applicant’s valuation to an independent valuation
(c) give the following to the independent valuation expert:
(i) the applicant’s valuation and the applicant’s highest and best
use advice;
(ii) the highest and best use advice prepared by an appropriately qualified town
planner engaged by the local government regarding
the highest and best use of
the original land and the remaining land if the local government does not accept
the applicant’s
highest and best use advice;
(iii) the valuation of the required land, if the local government used the
before and after method of valuation prescribed in
for the initial
calculation of the establishment cost for the required land and considers that
it is relevant to the independent
valuation expert’s assessment.
(12) Within 20 business days after the independent valuation expert has been
given the information under subsection (11)(c) (or a
longer period as extended
by the local government in subsection (13)(a)), the independent valuation expert
local government’s valuer’s
determination
(a) provide the independent valuation expert’s determination in relation
to the matters stated in subsection (3)(a); and
(b) if the independent valuation expert’s determination is that the
applicant’s valuation is not consistent with the
current market value or
is not correctly determined using the before and after method of valuation
prescribed in
section 25:
(i) provide the reasons for the independent valuation expert’s
determination; and
(ii) provide a valuation using the before and after method of valuation stated
section 25.
(13) If the local government’s valuer’s determination is not
provided in accordance with the time prescribed in subsection
(12), the local
government is to do one of the following:
(a) extend the time for providing the local government’s valuer’s
determination stated in subsection (12), in consultation
with the applicant;
(b) refer the applicant’s valuation to another independent valuation
expert nominated by the local government from its list
of certified practising
valuers and repeat the process stated in subsections (11)(b) and (c) as soon as
reasonably practicable.
(14) If the local government forms a reasonable opinion that there is an
error in the local government’s valuer’s determination,
government is to within 15 business days after its receipt of the local
government’s valuer’s determination
under subsection (12):
(a) give written notice to the applicant stating:
(i) the error in the local government’s valuer’s determination;
(ii) that the local government is to repeat the process stated in subsections
(11)(b) and (c); and
(b) within 10 business days after the date of a notice under subsection (a) is
given to the applicant, refer the applicant’s
valuation to another
independent valuation expert nominated by the local government from its list of
certified practising valuers
and repeat the process stated in subsections
(11)(b) and (c).
(15) Within 10 business days after its receipt of the relevant subsequent
local government’s valuer’s determination, subject
to subsection
(14), the local government is to give written notice to the applicant stating
that it adopts the applicable local government’s
determination
revised local government’s valuation
(16) If the local government adopts the revised local government’s
valuation, the local government is to:
(a) index the establishment cost for the required land using the CPI from the
date of the revised local government’s valuation
to the date stated in the
amended infrastructure charges notice; and
(b) issue an amended infrastructure charges notice to the applicant stating the
establishment cost for the required land.”
of the Charges Resolution v13 prescribes the before and after method of
valuation for determining the current market value of the
required land and
current market value
required land is to be determined by using the before and after method of
valuation by:
(a) firstly, determining the value
(original land value)
original land of which the required land forms part
before the required land is transferred to the local government;
Note—Where the required land is identified in the local government
infrastructure plan, the original land is to be valued:
required land had never been identified;
identifying
and considering all relevant constraints;
disregarding
any change in the value (e.g. through development opportunities) caused, or
contributed to, by the identification of
the required land in the local
government infrastructure plan; and
on the basis
of the highest and best use of the original
Note—Where the required land is not identified in
the local government infrastructure plan, the original land is to be
identifying
and considering all relevant constraints; and
on the basis
of the highest and best use of the original land.
(b) secondly, determining the value
(remaining land value)
land that is not to be transferred to the local government
Note—The remaining land is to be valued:
identifying
and considering all relevant constraints; and
on the basis
of the highest and best use of the remaining land.
(c) thirdly, subtracting the remaining land value from the original land value.
(3) The before and after method of valuation is to be undertaken in
accordance with the following requirements:
(a) the valuation is to be carried out to determine the current market value
that would have applied on the day that is:
(i) where the required land is identified in the local government
infrastructure plan—the day on which the development application,
the subject of a condition requiring the required land to be provided, first
became properly made...”
expression “required land” is defined in Schedule 1 of the Charges
Resolution v13, by reference to
section 24(1).
satisfied that the notes are part of the Charges Resolution v13.
Section 14(4)
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(Qld) states that a note is part of
the Act, and I am satisfied this is applied to the Charges Resolution v13
through the
Statutory Instruments Act 1992
compliance with
of the Charges Resolution v13?
ascertain whether there was compliance with
of the Charges Resolution
v13 it is necessary to examine what Mr Kamitsis and Mr Clapham did.
[29] Mr Kamitsis
states he prepared his valuation report in accordance with
of the Charges
Resolution v12, using the before and after methodology. Mr Kamitsis lists the
sales he considered in undertaking
He relied upon six
sales including the sale of the Land and the sale of adjoining land located at
323 Rochedale Road.
[30] Despite Mr
Kamitsis saying in his report that he ignored “any trunk
requirements” in analysing the sales, the appellant
says that it is clear
he did not do so. In support of this the appellant said that Mr Kamitsis failed
to mention the fact of the
trunk park dedication applicable to the Land when
analysing the sale, in circumstances where the sale was undertaken with the
of the trunk requirement. I was invited by the appellant to draw an
that because Mr Kamitsis
explained the adjustment applied to 323 Rochedale Road and does not explain it
for the subject sale, that
Mr Kamitsis has not made the adjustment. For these
reasons, I also have regard to Mr Kamitsis’ evidence.
analysing the six sales, Mr Kamitsis says that he ignored any trunk
requirements. He specifically says in the report that:
sales investigated, sale rates for similarly zoned development sites range from
$167/m² to $508/m² ($/m²
of site area) depending on attributes
such as location, land size, topography, improvements and potential development
ignoring any trunk requirements
.” (emphasis added).
Rochedale Road is subject to a trunk park requirement. Having sighted a copy of
the Infrastructure Agreement which capped
the infrastructure offset at $4.1m, Mr
Kamitsis analysed the sale making an adjustment in recognition of the maximum
offset pursuant
to the Infrastructure
Mr Kamitsis
acknowledged that he adjusted the 323 Rochedale Road sale taking into account
that a purchaser buying the site would
be aware of the infrastructure agreement
and the requirement to dedicate the park and would adjust their purchase price
accordingly.
analysing the sale of the Land, Mr Kamitsis took into account that the price was
agreed 12 months before the contract
was aware of the requirements of part of the Land
for trunk park. However, he did not make an adjustment to take account of it
he did not consider it appropriate, consistent with his
when there is no
approval and no infrastructure agreement, as was the situation at the time of
the sale of the
[34] By way of
elucidation Mr Kamitsis said:
“My analysis of the sale was
based on the total area of the subject land without any deduction for the area
required for the
park. That is, as if the land required for the park had never
been identified or
[35] In his
report he said:
“I acknowledge that the sale of the subject
land (sale 1) was sold via a put and call agreement, making the negotiation
12 months prior to the relevant date. This earlier negotiation is no
reason to disregard the sale, and I acknowledge some allowance
ought to be made
for market growth as indicated by the general tone of the evidence. Care should
be taken not to compare the subject
land to sales in superior areas of Rochedale
closer to amenities and facilities. These sales are clearly superior.
Similarly, sale
3, the adjoining sale, had a far higher development density
approval at the time of sale with IA in place. Sale 4 is a sale to the
adjoining owner and subsequently obtained approval for industrial
[36] That Mr
Kamitsis valued the Land in the before scenario as if the required land had
never been identified in the LGIP is evident
because he assumed that the whole
of the Land was developable.
apparent from
above that Mr
Kamitsis formed the view that in the circumstances of the sale, the LGIP
designation did not change the value of the
Land as reflected by the price paid
for the Land. Accordingly, no adjustment was required to reflect the change in
value caused,
or contributed to, by the identification of the required land in
the LGIP. This is an appropriate judgement for a valuer to make
and means that
the valuation by Mr Kamitsis was undertaken consistently with the requirements
, and in particular the third dot point.
of the Charges Resolution v13 requires the original land to be valued
before the required land is transferred to the local government,
as if the trunk
park on the land had never been identified and disregarding any change in the
value caused by or contributed to by
the identification of the land in the LGIP.
That is what Mr Kamitsis has done.
analysing the sales, Mr Kamitsis clearly states he considered each site’s
different attributes and ignored “any
trunk requirements”, as
required by
of the Charges Resolution
The valuation undertaken
by Mr Kamitsis is not formulated based on just one sale. Nor did he simply rely
upon the comparable sales.
Rather, he applied his skill and judgment to
critically analyse the sales, before using them in the process of valuing the
He explained his approach to the analysis of the sales, including the
sale of the Land, and the professional judgement he exercised
in analysing the
six sales, consistent with his experience
Analysis of the sales and
adjustments made as a result of that analysis are matters for expert
This is not
demonstrative of an error by Mr Kamitsis.
[40] Turning
then to Mr Clapham’s actions. Mr Clapham determined that the Horrigan
Kamitsis valuation had been undertaken following
the correct methodology and
accordingly adopted the
In evidence, he
elucidated, saying he “determined that, amongst other things, the
valuation report accorded with
of the BICR and that no error had been
made”, the “valuation was undertaken as if the whole of the subject
land was developable
in the before case” and “ignored the park
identified or required from the subject
appellant was critical of Mr Clapham because he did not specifically deal with
the third dot point in
of the Charges Resolution v13 when
articulating his determination. Mr Clapham was not required to give reasons for
his determination.
There are circumstances which require the giving of reasons
under the Charges Resolution v13 (eg
but this is not one of them. The
articulation of his determination focused on
of the Charges
Resolution v13, rather than the individual elements identified in the notes to
the provision. Mr Clapham said he
relied upon Mr Kamitsis’ report in
forming his views about compliance with the provision, and in particular the
third dot point
in the notes.
Mr Kamitsis clearly says in his report that he ignored trunk requirements, so it
is open for Mr Clapham to determine that the valuation
methodology was
[42] Mr Clapham
adopted the Horrigan Kamitsis Valuers’ valuation report, having determined
that the valuation was undertaken
in accordance with
of the Charges
Resolution v13. In arriving at this conclusion, he relied, as he was entitled
to, on the report of Mr Kamitsis.
Having determined that the correct
methodology had been followed, it was appropriate for Mr Clapham to then adopt
the valuation,
as he did. For these reasons, I am not persuaded that the
appellant has established that Mr Clapham erred.
[43] In the
circumstances, it is not necessary for me to address questions (a)(ii) and (b)
in paragraph
appellant has failed to discharge the onus. The appeal is
First CEO Certificate CD6-7, p
Notice of Appeal, CD1,
CEO Certificate, CD7, p330,
Charges Resolution v13
T1-13 to 14 and T1-25.
For a discussion on the
meaning of ‘statutory instrument’, see
Jakel Pty Ltd & Ors v
Brisbane City Council & Anor
[2018] QPEC 21
, [65]-[68].
CEO Certificate CD7, p351.
CEO Certificate, CD7,
T1-29, l 1-14.
CEO Certificate, CD7, p343.
T1-31, l 10-36.
T1-29, l 41-47.
Affidavit of Chris Kamitsis
affirmed 28.05.2025, CD11, [17].
CEO Certificate, CD7,
CEO Certificate, CD7,
Brewarrana Pty Ltd v
Commissioner for Highways (No 1)
(1973) 32 LGRA 170
CEO Certificate, CD7,
Affidavit of Paul Alexander
Clapham sworn 28.05.2025, CD10, [22].
T1-35, l 46-47.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (324 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter