URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2014/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Glencore Coal Queensland Pty Ltd & Ors v Keys & Ors [2014] QLAC 2 (7 May 2014)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Glencore Coal Queensland Pty Ltd & Ors v Keys & Ors
GLENCORE COAL QUEENSLAND PTY LTD
ACN 098 156 702
Xstrata Coal Queensland Pty Ltd)
(first appellant)
SUMISHO COAL AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
ACN 061 524
(second appellant)
ICRA WANDOAN PTY LTD
ACN 106 260 619
(third appellant)
COWAN WILLIAM KEYS AND HELEN MCINTYRE KEYS
(first respondents)
SKY GROVE PTY LTD
(second respondent)
JOHN GERARD ERBACHER
(third respondent)
THOMAS WILLIAM EDMONDS AND JANICE ANN
(fourth respondents)
Land Court Nos. MRA092-11 and EPA093-11, MRA098-11 and EPA099-11, MRA105-11
and EPA106-11
Land Appeal Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
Appeal from the Land Court of Queensland
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
6 September 2013
Peter Lyons J
WL Cochrane, Member of the Land
WA Isdale, Member of the Land Court
The appeal is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
ENERGY AND RESOURCES – MINERALS – MINING FOR MINERALS –
COMPENSATION – where the Land Court determined compensation
respondents as a condition precedent to the grant of mining leases over their
properties – where the appellants are
mining companies and submit that the
Land Court erred in adopting the approach of applying sales evidence in a
“generous and
not niggardly spirit” used in
Wills v Minerva Coal
Pty Ltd [No 2]
(1998) 19 QLCR 297
in assessing the amount of compensation to
be awarded to the respondents – where the appellants argue that in
the court was faced with a depressed property market and an
uncertain date for payment of compensation and that this was not a comparable
case – whether the Land Court erred by taking the approach identified in
ENERGY AND RESOURCES – MINERALS – COURTS OR TRIBUNALS
EXERCISING JURISDICTION IN MINING MATTERS – QUEENSLAND –
REVIEW – nature of appeal to Land Appeal Court for a determination of
compensation – where the appellants submit
that the Land Appeal Court must
give the judgment which ought to have been given at first instance –
whether, in the circumstances,
the Land Appeal Court is in as good a position as
the Land Court to reach conclusions about the value of land
REAL PROPERTY – VALUATION OF LAND – METHODS OF VALUATION
– COMPARABLE SALES – GENERALLY – where the
expert valuer for
the respondents treated the sale of two properties as comparable sales in
assessing the value of the respondents’
properties – where the
expert valuer for the appellants rejected that the properties were comparable
– where the first
property was bought by a resource company and was not
publicly marketed for sale – where the appellants submitted that the
second property was superior to the respondents’ properties because it had
better water access, was very well improved, and
included a sum for plant and
equipment – whether the Land Court erred in its consideration of these
properties in assessing
the value of the respondents’ properties
REAL PROPERTY – VALUATION OF LAND – ENCUMBRANCES AND
RESTRICTIONS – GENERALLY – where some parcels of the
respondents’ lands were not intended to be subject to the mining leases
– where the Land Court determined that the only
way the balance lands
could be offered for sale was by offering the whole of the land for sale,
subject to the mining leases, adversely
impacting the balance lands –
whether the Land Court erred in determining the value of the balance lands
Mineral Resources Act
Chief Executive, Department of Natural Resources and Mines v Kent Street
[2009] QCA 399
Commissioner of Succession Duties (SA) v Executor Trustee and Agency Co
of South Australia Ltd
(1947) 74 CLR 358
[1947] HCA 10
Emerald Quarry Industries Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Highways (South
(1979) 142 CLR 351
[1979] HCA 17
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v St Helen's Farm (ACT) Pty Ltd
(1981) 146 CLR 336
[1981] HCA 4
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
Lacey v Attorney-General (Qld)
(2011) 242 CLR 573
Wills v Minerva Coal Pty Ltd [No 2]
(1998) 19 QLCR 297
D G Clothier QC, with S J Webster, for the appellants
R G Bain QC, with D A Skenner, for the respondents
SOLICITORS:
Allens for the appellants
Alroe and O’Sullivan Solicitors for the respondents
[1] This is an appeal against determinations by the Land Court of
compensation under
Mineral Resources Act 1989
[2] The determinations relate to five rural properties
located generally to the north west of Wandoan. Avon View is owned by Mr and
Mrs Keys. Another of the properties, Langowan, is owned by Sky Grove Pty Ltd,
a company associated with the Keys family. These
two properties are operated in
conjunction with one another and with some other properties. Mr Erbacher owns
two of the properties
which are the subject of these proceedings, Tamara and
East Lynne. The fifth property is Turraden, owned by Mr and Mrs
[3] The appellants are mining
companies. They made applications for the grant of mining leases over the
properties, though some parts
of them (balance lands) were not to be the subject
of the leases. On 27 March 2012, the Land Court gave a decision recommending
the grant of the mining leases, subject to
. It was necessary to determine
compensation before the mining leases could be
. Hence the proceedings in the Land
Court, which have led to this appeal.
[4] The matters for which compensation
may be awarded, and relevant considerations, are identified in s 281 of the MR
Act. The manner
in which the proceedings were conducted in the Land Court and
on this appeal make it unnecessary to refer to these provisions in
[5] It was common ground between the parties that the appropriate
valuation methodology for the determination of compensation was
the "before and
after" methodology
. It was also common ground
that compensation should be assessed on the basis that the land which is to be
the subject of the leases
[6] The appellants called Mr
Tim Cavanagh to give valuation evidence on their behalf. Valuation evidence for
the respondents was
given by Mr Peter Jinks. The Land Court did not accept the
ultimate conclusions of either of these valuers, though evidence of some
importance from Mr Jinks was accepted in preference to that of Mr
[7] The appellants made submissions about the nature of the appeal,
and the circumstances in which this Court could interfere with
findings made in
the Land Court. They also submitted that the Land Court erred in relying on
sales evidence from Mr Jinks relating
to the sale of two properties, Gledswood
and Woodroyd, which played a significant role in the determinations of
compensation. It
was also submitted that the Land Court erred by approaching
the sales evidence in a "generous not niggardly spirit", an approach
Wills v Minerva Coal Pty Ltd [No 2]
submitted that Mr Cavanagh's valuations should have been adopted. It was also
submitted that the Land Court erred in not
accepting Mr Cavanagh's valuations of
the balance lands. The respondents' submissions, broadly speaking, controverted
the submissions
of the appellants.
Appeal to Land Appeal Court
appeal is heard by s 282 of the MR Act, which is as follows:
282 Appeal against Land
Court’s determination upon
compensation
(1) A party aggrieved by a determination of the Land Court made under section
281 may, within 20 business days of the date of that
determination or within
such further period as the Land Appeal Court, on the application of that party
in that behalf prior to the
lodgement of the appeal, considers appropriate in
any particular circumstances, appeal against the determination to the Land
(2) The appeal shall be instituted by, within the time and in the manner
prescribed—
(a) lodging in the Land Court, written notice of appeal which shall include
the grounds of appeal; and
(b) serving copies of the notice of appeal on the chief executive and each
other party.
(3) The Land Appeal Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine an
appeal under this section.
(4) In deciding an appeal, the Land Appeal Court must consider the things
relevant to the appeal that the Land Court was required
to consider when making
the decision appealed against.
(5) Upon hearing an appeal under subsection (1) the Land Appeal Court
(a) vary the determination of the Land Court in such way as it thinks just;
(b) disallow the appeal and confirm the determination of the Land Court;
and may make such order as to costs of the appeal as it thinks fit.
(6) The Land Appeal Court shall not admit further evidence upon an appeal
from a determination of the Land Court under subsection
(1) unless—
(a) it is satisfied that admission of the evidence is necessary to avoid
grave injustice and there is sufficient reason that the evidence
previously adduced; or
(b) the appellant and respondent agree to its admission.
(7) The determination of the Land Appeal Court on appeal shall be final and
conclusive."
[9] The appellants submitted in chief that this Court must give the judgment
which ought to have been given at first instance, after
making its own
assessment of the evidence and giving its own conclusions as to law and facts,
with due deference to the advantages
enjoyed by the Land Court. It was
submitted that, since the Land Court judgment did not prefer or reject valuation
evidence on the
basis of the demeanour of either witness, this Court was in as
good a position as the Land Court to determine the appropriate conclusions
draw from the evidence, relying on a passage from Fox v
. It was submitted, relying on passages
from the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Chief Executive, Department of
Natural Resources
and Mines v Kent Street Pty
, that this Court is generally in as good a
position to form its own views about sales evidence and valuation, as the Land
It was submitted that this Court is obliged to conduct a rehearing on
the record, both in relation to errors of fact and errors
of law, and that it is
obliged to give the judgment which, in its opinion, should have been given at
first instance.
[10] In their oral submissions, the appellants made it plain
that they do not submit that the appeal could succeed unless error was
the judgment of the Land Court. It would be difficult for them to take a
different position, in view of the decision of
the High Court in Lacey v
Attorney-General (Qld)
[11] In reliance on
Emerald Quarry Industries Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Highways (South
and Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v St Helen's Farm (ACT) Pty Ltd
the respondents submitted that a determination of valuation was in the nature of
a discretionary judgment, which would only be overturned
on the basis of the
principles relating to an appeal against such a judgment; and the
appellants’ submissions did not recognise
these principles.
Kent Street, it was suggested that there may be tension between the provisions
Land Court Act 2000
(Qld) (LC Act), and the restraint typically
adopted by an appellate court, when reviewing a finding of a court at first
That tension was not ultimately resolved. Nevertheless it did not
deny that there are likely to be cases in which a court at first
instance will
enjoy advantages not available to an appellate
. Nor did it displace the traditional
approach to the determination of an appeal in relation to a valuation, by
reference to the
principles relating to appeals against discretionary
. Kent Street was an unusual
case. At first instance, the Land Court had determined the value of land by
reference to another determination
of value by that court. The earlier
valuation was overturned by this Court on appeal, after the determination by the
in Kent Street. Moreover, the legislation had changed. In those
circumstances, it was inevitable that this Court had to form its
own view about
the value of the land; and the Court of Appeal in Kent Street recognised the
appropriateness of its doing so.
[13] While there will be cases where this
Court may be in as good a position as the Land Court to reach conclusions about
of fact, including the value of land, there will inevitably be other
cases where the Land Court, having observed the valuers giving
evidence, will
enjoy advantages not available to this Court. Thus, whether or not a sale is
sufficiently comparable to the property
to be valued, to provide useful evidence
is a matter of expert opinion, which may not be capable of an exact "exposition
of reasoning"
. The adjustments which may
have to be made to the value of a property as shown by its sale, in order to
reach a conclusion about
the value of another property, will involve judgments,
which sometimes can be "nothing more than the best guess that can be
. In determining whether to accept or
reject a valuer's evidence of this nature, an exposition of judicial reasoning
to explaining
findings of fact is "inherently an incomplete statement of the
impression which was made upon [the judge] by the primary
. There will inevitably be cases
where a court at first instance, in choosing between the conflicting evidence of
experts, is influenced
by matters of
. In such cases it is still
necessary to recognise the advantages enjoyed by the Land Court.
Gledswood sale
[14] This was a sale which Mr Jinks treated as a comparable
sale, but was rejected by Mr Cavanagh. As mentioned, it was relied upon
Land Court's determination of value.
[15] For the appellants, it was
submitted that Mr Cavanagh's evidence that this sale should not be relied upon
should have been accepted.
Mr Cavanagh expressed the view that Gledswood was
not sold at market value, because it had not been publicly marketed for sale;
and Mr Cavanagh was aware that the purchaser had been "actively paying premiums
in the market at the moment", which led him to believe
the premium was paid for
that property
. In addition he gave
evidence based on an analysis of sales in the Taroom/Wandoan area since 2006,
that the sale of Gledswood was
"out of line with the broader
. He had not inspected Gledswood,
but had reviewed aerial photography and soil
[16] In dealing with this
sale, the starting position adopted in the Land Court was that a sale should not
be disregarded simply because
it was a sale to a resource company; and
accordingly it did not automatically follow that the sale price exceeded the
market value
of the property
. However it
was recognised that the sale might not reflect market value, and accordingly
should be treated with some care
no error in this approach.
[17] It was orally submitted for the appellants
that Mr Jinks did not say that the price paid for Gledswood reflected market
However, that was the clear implication of his reports. It was one of
six sales which he identified as providing the basis of his
valuation, where he
set out details relevant to the utilisation of this sale, without
qualification
. He subsequently compared
these properties with the properties to be
. In cross-examination it was
suggested to him that it was not appropriate for him to have regard to this sale
for the purpose of
determining market value, which he rejected by saying it was
an agreed sale between parties
was suggested to him that it was incorrect to use the sale of Gledswood as a
comparable sale, he answered that in his opinion
there was nothing wrong with
. The clear implication of this
evidence, and indeed of the questions, was that Mr Jinks regarded the sale of
Gledswood as reflecting
its market value.
[18] The principal line of attack
in cross-examination, and a proposition advanced on this appeal, was that
reliance should not have
been placed on the Gledswood sale because it was a sale
to a resource company, QGC, who had approached the vendor to purchase the
property, and who, on Mr Cavanagh’s evidence, was known to pay a premium
above market value. However Mr Jinks gave evidence
that he knew of three
instances on which QGC had offered to buy properties at below market
; and of circumstances which might
suggest it was less likely to pay a price above market value for land, than a
mining company would
[19] It was
submitted for the appellants that Mr Jinks was content to disregard the
particular circumstances surrounding the sale
of Gledswood, and not to
investigate them, contrary to normal valuation practices. The circumstances
which, as seen from the appellants'
case, were potentially relevant, were the
motivation of a purchaser, and whether that had led it to pay a price in excess
value. Mr Jinks' evidence was that, in his experience, a purchaser
was unlikely to provide the information
That evidence was not challenged. Although Mr Cavanagh commented on this sale,
he did not make enquiries of the purchaser, relying
simply on the sale price and
his belief as to market value
circumstances, the fact that Mr Jinks did not make enquiries of QGC does not
provide a substantial basis for rejecting his
evidence in relation to the sale
of Gledswood.
[20] It was submitted that Mr Jinks’ evidence should not
have been accepted, because his view of the market was affected by
his reliance
on the sale of Kerang, rejected by the Land Court; a comparison of his
descriptions of Woodroyd and Nalgar and their
sale prices showed that the price
paid for Gledswood was out of line; and that Mr Jinks’ acceptance of the
Gledswood sale was
based on mining sales to Xstrata. It was submitted that Mr
Cavanagh’s opinion that the sale of Gledswood was out of line should
been accepted, because it was based on his analysis of a number of other
[21] It is clear that Mr Jinks had regard to a number of other sales,
not just Kerang. No evidence was identified which showed that
acceptance of the sale of Gledswood was in any significant way dependant on his
acceptance that the sale of Kerang
reflected market value. The submission that
Mr Jinks’ acceptance of Gledswood was dependent on the mining sales is
that evidence related to his acceptance of Kerang. Indeed, Mr Jinks
made it plain that in determining market value, he was not using
. He was not cross-examined with a
view to demonstrating, by reference to his descriptions, that the sale price for
Gledswood was
inconsistent with the sale prices for Woodroyd and Nalgar. Such
descriptions are necessarily relatively brief, and, without more,
do not provide
a reliable basis for the submission.
[22] The evidence of Mr Jinks that the
sale of Gledswood reflected market value involved a matter of professional
judgment by him.
Although Mr Cavanagh expressed a different view by reference
to a schedule of other sales, his approach inevitably involved professional
judgments relating to circumstances of those sales to the sale of Gledswood.
While it would have been open to the Land Court to
accept the evidence of Mr
Cavanagh, rather than that of Mr Jinks, it does not follow that error was
demonstrated because the evidence
of Mr Jinks was in those circumstances
accepted. Particularly is that so when the Land Court relied on the fact that
Mr Cavanagh
had not inspected Gledswood
[23] It was submitted that the Land Court erred in concluding that the sale
of Gledswood reflected market value, because it fell "within
the range of market
. It was pointed out that, on a rate
per hectare, the sale of Gledswood reflected a higher price than any of the
other sales referred
to, excluding Kerang, the reliability of which was rejected
by the Land Court. The submission fails to recognise that the Land Court
not make a finding that the rate per hectare was within the range of rates
reflected by the other sales; rather, it was, in effect,
a finding the sale
represented market value for that property, bearing in mind its features and the
circumstances of the sale.
[24] In the appellants’ oral submissions,
there was a suggestion that Mr Jinks did not give evidence that the properties
be valued were superior to Gledswood
That is incorrect. In his comparison between the sale properties and those to
be valued, he identified them as superior to Gledswood
in all of the respects to
which he referred
. His view that they were
superior is also implicit in the rates he applied for the
valuations.
[25] Some of the submissions for the appellants identified
potential difficulties with the evidence of Mr Jinks, and the use of Gledswood,
but they do not demonstrate that the Land Court erred in relying on the sale of
this property.
[26] Accordingly, it has not been shown that the Land Court
erred in relying on the sale of Gledswood, for the purpose of determining
compensation.
[27] In the appellants’ written outline, it
was submitted that there was not a proper evidential foundation for concluding
each of the properties the subject of the determinations was superior to
Woodroyd. It was submitted that the Land Court overlooked
the fact that Mr
Jinks compared the sale of this property with East Lynne and Tamara, on the
incorrect assumption that the operation
of these two properties as an
aggregation was their highest and best use. It was submitted that the Land
Court did not have proper
regard to the fact that Woodroyd had comparable or
superior water access to that available for the properties the subject of the
determinations. It was also submitted that the Land Court failed to take into
account the fact that Woodroyd was very well improved.
It was submitted that
the Land Court wrongly declined to have regard to Mr Cavanagh's approach of
analysing the value of improvements,
and comparing properties on a "treated,
fenced and watered" (TFW) basis. It was also submitted that the Land Court
erred in not
taking into account the fact that the sale of Woodroyd included a
sum of $100,000 for plant and equipment.
[28] It should be noted that a
substantial premise of the appellants’ submissions relating to the Land
Court’s reliance
on Woodroyd was the proposition that Gledswood should not
have been relied upon
. That proposition
has been rejected in these reasons.
[29] Mr Cavanagh did not deal with
Woodroyd in his primary reports. In his response report, he gave evidence that
his investigation
into the sale of Woodroyd "indicates that approximately
$100,000 of plant and equipment was included in the
. Mr Jinks gave evidence that the
advertisement of the sale made no reference to plant; nor was plant mentioned in
his discussions
with the losing bidder two days after the
. The evidence raised some doubt about
whether the sale price included plant and equipment. The issue was not
disregarded by the
state of the evidence, the Land Court decided to give the benefit of the doubt
to the respondents
. It was not submitted
that to do so was, itself, an error; nor would it be an error to do so. That is
sufficient to dispose of
the submission. However it might be noted that the
written submissions for the appellants did not recognise that Mr Cavanagh
his allowance for plant and equipment resulting in only a "slightly
different figure" from that relied on by Mr
. On an improved basis, Mr Cavanagh's
analysis provided a rate per hectare of $2,743; while that of Mr Jinks provided
a rate of $2,793.15.
Woodroyd was but one of four sales relied on by the Land
Court for determining value. It is by no means clear that a different
to this issue would have affected the Land Court’s decision.
the circumstances, the Land Court did not err in allowance for plant and
equipment, in relation to the sale of Woodroyd.
[31] It was orally submitted
for the appellants that Mr Jinks did not "land on" a view about the
comparability of Woodroyd to the
properties the subject of the proceedings; and
accordingly did not provide a basis for concluding that he considered them to be
Nor did he justify the uplift in rates applied to those
properties.
[32] It is at least implicit in the rates adopted by Mr Jinks
that he considered the properties to be superior to Woodroyd. While
were substantially influenced by the Kerang sale, they were the result of his
consideration of a panel of sales, including
Woodroyd. Had he considered the
properties to be comparable or inferior to Woodroyd, it is to be expected that
he would have adopted
rates much closer to the rate derived from the sale of
[33] Nor can it be demonstrated that the differences in Mr
Jinks’ descriptions could not justify the higher rates applied by
Court. For example, for East Lynne and Tamara, he recorded that improved
pastures were well established on all of the land
used for grazing, which was
approximately 50% of the total area; whereas on Woodroyd, some 70 hectares
(approximately 3.5%) had some
form of improved pasture. The properties were
contoured, not suggested by the description of Woodroyd. The balance area, save
shade lines and watercourses, was currently used for cultivation, with a
greater area subject to cultivation in the past. Of the
currently cultivated
area, 75% was described as having top quality soils with a gentle slope. The
description of Woodroyd does not
suggest that it has similar quality soils, or
(proportionately) similar capacity for
cultivation
. Similarly for Turraden, Mr
Jinks’ description indicated extensive improved pastures, with the
majority of the property capable
of cultivation, and the presence of some
. Langowan and Avon View were
described as having in the past been contoured and cultivated in the eastern
part. There were well
established improved pastures, the properties being used
for fattening. As part of a larger aggregation, Mr Jinks described these
properties as benefitting from “the synergies of
. When Mr Jinks’
descriptions, and his views of the superiority of the properties to Woodroyd are
considered, it cannot be
said that the Land Court has been shown to be in error
in its determinations of value.
[34] The submissions of the appellants
criticised the adoption of Mr Jinks’ evidence relating to Woodroyd,
because he did not
"enter upon Woodroyd to inspect
. On Mr Jinks' evidence he travelled on
roads "up the middle of (Woodroyd)"; which he considered to be sufficient to
form an opinion
cross-examination referred to by the appellants does not suggest that in taking
this approach, Mr Jinks would not be able to
get a reliable appreciation of the
quality of the country.
[35] The Land Court made specific reference to the
comparison by Mr Jinks of the water access of Woodroyd to the water access
to the properties to be valued
Specific reference was also made to the evidence relating to the water access
available to the properties to be valued
While the submissions for the appellants assert that the Land Court did not
recognise the comparability of water access between
Woodroyd and the other
properties, they do not demonstrate this assertion to be correct. As has been
mentioned, reference was made
in the reasons for judgment of the Land Court to
the evidence relating to water access both for Woodroyd and for the properties
be valued, and to Mr Jinks’ evidence about the comparability of water
access. In those circumstances it is unlikely that this
evidence was not taken
into account when the Land Court determined the rates to be applied.
Accordingly, the appellants have failed
to make good their
submission.
[36] Similarly with respect to the improvements on Woodroyd, the
Land Court noted the evidence relating to
. The Land Court also noted the
evidence relating to the structures on the properties to be
. Again, the submission is not made
[37] In the course of the appellants’ oral submissions relating to
a comparison of the water access available to the five properties,
Woodroyd, it was submitted that the Land Court did not fairly characterise Mr
Cavanagh’s consideration of the water
access available to the
. In his primary reports, Mr
Cavanagh had in fact made reference to the availability of water to the
properties. It might be observed
that Mr Jinks gave evidence that the
properties were “totally securely watered” and “extremely well
and reliably
“totally, reliably and cheaply watered” with “excellent
; and “reliably
watered” and “extremely well
, reflected in the Land
Court’s acceptance of the “superior water supply” available to
the properties. In cross-examination
Mr Cavanagh said he had reflected this in
. The Land Court, however, noted
that in his reports, when describing the properties, he made no reference to the
water supply.
It was not submitted that this was incorrect. The relevant
passages appear to be those where the use of the land is
. Notwithstanding Mr
Cavanagh’s evidence in cross-examination, it was open to the Land Court to
come to the view which it reached.
It should be borne in mind that the finding
related to the weight Mr Cavanagh gave to the availability of water, not to
he took it into account at all. Bearing in mind the advantages
available to it but not to this Court, it cannot be said it was in
[38] It was submitted for the appellants that the Land Court member
wrongly declined to have regard to Mr Cavanagh's approach of analysing
disregarding improvements; that is, deriving a rate of a TFW basis. Though made
in the course of submissions relating to
Woodroyd, if the submission were good,
it would appear to be a submission relevant to the use by the Land Court of all
of the sales
evidence. The difficulty with the submission is that Mr Cavanagh
himself acknowledged that it was common practice in rural valuation
sales on a fully improved basis
evidence has been identified to suggest that in the present case, it would not
be a proper approach to valuation to analyse
sales of properties including their
improvements. In those circumstances, it cannot be said that the Land Court
erred by having
regard to rates which reflect the improved condition of the
properties which were the subject of the sales evidence. The submissions
the appellants did not seek to demonstrate that, had regard been had to an
analysis of sales on a TFW basis, the Land Court would
have come to a different
conclusion. Accordingly, no error has been shown in the approach taken by Land
[39] It was submitted that in relation to two of the properties, East
Lynne and Tamara, the Land Court overlooked the fact that Mr
Jinks' comparison
with Woodroyd was based on an assumption that the highest and best use of the
two properties was as an aggregation,
an assumption rejected by the Land Court.
Many of the points of comparison are unlikely to be affected if the properties
separately, rather than as an aggregation. One consequence,
specifically taken into account by the Land Court when determining the
hectare to be applied to East Lynne and Tamara, was that, as an aggregation, it
would have an enhanced capacity for
diversification
. The appellants have not
demonstrated that the Land Court failed to recognise that the sales evidence,
including that derived from
the sale of Woodroyd, was to be applied to the
properties separately; nor have the appellants demonstrated that the Land Court
[40] The appellants have accordingly failed to demonstrate
the Land Court erred in the treatment of the sale of Woodroyd.
The "generous"
[41] It was submitted that the Land Court erred in adopting the
approach of applying the sales evidence in a "generous and not niggardly
spirit", used in Wills
. It was said that,
in that case, the court was faced with an arguably depressed property market,
where there was a prospect the
market might improve; and the date on which
compensation would be paid was not certain; whereas in the present case, the
suggests, if anything, the opposite of a depressed market. It was also
submitted that Wills was decided prior to the introduction
of s 283B of the MR
Act, which would make the adoption of the approach inappropriate.
Wills, the combination of two factors, the depressed market, and the uncertainty
as to when compensation might be paid and
a replacement property might be
sought, led the learned member to adopt the
. The obvious justification for
the approach is the potential movement in market prices before compensation is
paid. That justification
does not depend upon the existence of a depressed
market. Moreover, the approach is consistent with the “liberal
approach referred to by Dixon J in Commissioner of Succession
Duties (SA) v Executor Trustee and Agency Co of South Australia
. In principle, and subject to a
consideration of the effect of s 283B of the MR Act, the approach might be
adopted without error.
[43] As the submissions for the respondents point out,
it is a condition of the application of s 283B of the MR Act that there has
"a material change in circumstances for the mining lease". An example is given
in the section, namely, the adoption of a different
mining method, which changes
the impact of mining operations under the lease. While the example cannot limit
the meaning of the
expression used in s 283B(1), that expression is to be read
with the example
. The explanatory
memorandum for the amending legislation which introduced s 283A and s 283B
identified "operational change" as the
circumstance of which would make an
adjustment to compensation appropriate
These considerations suggest the section is not made applicable simply because
of a change in market value over time. Once the
condition is satisfied,
questions of then current market value become
; but that does not assist in
identifying the proper construction of the provision which makes the section
applicable.
[44] The circumstances in which s 283B might be applicable were
not fully argued in this Court. Nor is it necessary in this case
to determine
its scope. It is sufficient to note that there is real reason to doubt that it
would become available, simply because
of a movement in the market for land
between the date of the determination, and the date when compensation is
[45] In oral submissions, the appellants submitted that in some cases,
the approach taken in Wills may be appropriate for the assessment
compensation under s 281 of the MR Act, but this was not such a case, there
being no “legitimate ambiguities” which
would make it
. The appellants drew attention
to only one occasion on which the Land Court made reference to this
. It was to the adoption of a rate
per hectare to be applied to the valuation of Avon View and Langowan. There is
inevitably an
element of judgment in determining such a rate. It cannot be said
that this is a context in which the approach can not be applied.
[46] In the
circumstances, the Land Court member did not err by taking the approach
identified in Wills.
Balance lands
[47] Some parts of the parcels of land
of the respondents are not intended to be the subject of a mining lease. Those
areas are areas
which are restricted land, as that expression is defined in the
MR Act; and land occupied by water pipelines, together with land
metres laterally of the pipelines
balance lands accordingly are a series of somewhat irregular corridors of land,
together with occasional isolated parcels of
. They are generally to be surrounded
by lands intended to be the subject of mining leases.
[48] Mr Cavanagh valued
the balance lands first by applying his per hectare rate, on a TFW basis, with a
substantial discount, and
his valuation of structures also substantially
discounted; and, as a check, for each of the five properties, treating the
lands as a rural home
[49] Mr Jinks was not prepared to
attribute any value to the balance lands because of the effect of the mining
leases and mining activities,
and the absence of separate title.
Land Court concluded that the only way the balance lands could be offered for
sale, was by offering the whole of the land
for sale, subject to the mining
leases. That was not the way that Mr Cavanagh had valued the
. It was also noted that there was no
evidence as to whether the balance lands could be subdivided from the parent
parcels, or whether
it would be economically viable to do
. The Land Court took the view that "it
would be difficult to overstate the lack of amenity ... in the after situation"
as a consequence
of the mining leases, which were for very large open cut coal
. Accordingly the Land Court rejected
Mr Cavanagh's evidence; but considered that the balance lands were likely to
retain some nominal
value, assessed at $20,000 for each of the five
properties.
[51] For the appellant it was submitted that the Land Court
erred, because Mr Cavanagh had valued the balance land for each property
basis the property was to be sold as a whole. Reliance was placed on a passage
of cross-examination where Mr Cavanagh was
asked how he thought the land might
be sold, given the state of the titles. His answer was, in substance, that the
whole of each
property would be sold, encumbered by the mining
[52] It remains correct to say
that that is not the way that Mr Cavanagh carried out his valuation. His
primary method was to consider
the area of the balance lands, and to apply the
discounting factors, as has been previously mentioned. More significantly, the
Court considered that the discounts applied by Mr Cavanagh did not "provide
a realistic reflection of the deterrent effect" of the
mining leases on the mind
of a prudent purchaser
. That reason for
rejecting Mr Cavanagh's valuations of the balance lands was independent of the
adverse comment regarding his method
of valuation.
[53] The appellants have
accordingly not demonstrated that the Land Court erred in determining the value
of the balance lands.
[54] The appeal should be
The appeal is dismissed.
WL COCHRANE
MEMBER OF THE LAND COURT
MEMBER OF THE LAND COURT
See generally the reasons for judgment of the Land Court at first instance
[2013] QLC 34
Xstrata Coal Queensland Pty Ltd v Friends of the Earth-Brisbane Co-Op Ltd
[2012] QLC 013.
See s 279 of the
RJ at [10].
RJ at [10].
(1998) 19 QLCR 297
), 339-340.
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2009] QCA 399
Kent Street
) at [39], [171], [216], [217].
[2011] HCA 10
(2011) 242 CLR 573
, especially at [58].
[1979] HCA 17
(1979) 142 CLR 351.
[1981] HCA 4
See the passage from
Fox v Percy
at [25] cited in
Kent Street
[213]; see also
Kent Street
Commissioner for ACT Revenue v Rosnet Pty Ltd
(1994) 94 ATC 4424 at
4430; cited in Jacobs
Law of Compulsory Land Acquisition
(Law Book Co,
) at [19.450].
Per Hope JA
Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
, 434, cited in Jacobs at [19.105].
v Medeva Plc
[1996] UKHL 18
[1997] RPC 1
, 45 as cited by Kirby J in
Aktiebolaget Hassle
v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 59
(2002) 194 ALR 485
, 510 at [ 97]; in turn referred to
Guest v Nominal Defendant
[2006] NSWCA 77
, itself cited in
Freckleton and Selby,
Expert Evidence
(Lawbook Co,
ed, 2013) (
Expert Evidence
) at [4.0.80].
Trustee v Commonwealth
(unreported, NSWCA, Kirby P, Mahoney and Clarke JJA,
20 December 1995) per Mahoney JA; cited in
Expert Evidence
Appeal Book Vol 1
) p 34, lines 35-39.
Appeal Book
RJ at [59].
See for example 2 AB pp 360-361.
example 2 AB p 362.
lines 17-18.
1 AB pp 82-83.
1 AB p 87, lines 5-10.
lines 15-16; see also 1 AB p 33, lines 1-35.
1 AB p 69, lines 25-38.
RJ at [69].
A reference to RJ [69].
See the transcript of the hearing of this appeal (
) 1-7, lines 35-41.
Although the reference is to Woodroyd, in context the submission appears to be
intended to refer to Gledswood.
2 AB pp 362,
See, for example, T 1-36, lines 13-14; T 1-32, line 29.
2 AB p 402.
lines 20-36.
See 2 AB pp 352, 361.
Appellants’ submissions, p 8, para 22(a)(i).
lines 33-55.
RJ at [42], [78], [194], [229].
RJ at [18],
[27], [31], [32], [82], [174], [190], [220], [227].
RJ at [41].
RJ at [18],
[27], [174], [221].
T 1-40, line 30, referring to RJ at [82].
and Tamara, 2 AB pp 352, 354.
Turraden, 2
AB pp 369, 372.
Langowan and
Avon View, 2 AB pp 385, 387.
lines 55-56.
153-155; 220-222; 2 AB pp 267-268; 317-318.
See, for example, 2 AB p 273.
RJ at [200]-[201].
[1947] HCA 10
(1947) 74 CLR
Acts Interpretation Act
Referred to
Re Benney v Vella
[2003] QLRT 80
283B(3), s 281(3) and 281(4)(a).
T 1-43, lines 33-34.
See 1 AB p 191.
See 1 AB pp
200, 247; 2 AB pp 297, 344.
1 AB pp 179-181, 237-239; 2 AB pp 286-288, 333-335.
RJ at [106].
RJ at [108].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (200 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter