URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLPT/2009/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:45:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Bevan [2009] QLPT 25 (5 November 2009)
Legal Services Commissioner v Bevan [2009] QLPT 25 (5 November 2009)
LEGAL PRACTICE TRIBUNAL
Legal Services Commissioner v Bevan
[2009] LPT 25
LEGAL SERVICES
COMMISSIONER
(applicant)
PETER CURTISS
(respondent)
BS 982 of 2009
Legal Practice Tribunal
PROCEEDING:
Discipline Application
DELIVERED ON:
5 November 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
26 August 2009
Mr K Horsley and Dr S Dann, assisting
The respondent must pay a penalty of $2000
CATCHWORDS:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – MISCONDUCT, UNFITNESS AND
DISCIPLINE – DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS – Statutory
proceedings
– Queensland – where respondent solicitor acted for purchaser of
residential property – where contract
of sale subject to purchaser
obtaining finance by specified date – where no notification to vendors by
finance date that finance
approved and vendors terminated contract – where
respondent admitted that he had failed to maintain reasonable standards of
competence and diligence by failing to request an extension for finance approval
– whether purchaser had informed the respondent
before finance date that
finance was approved – whether respondent’s file note of his
conversation with purchaser on
the finance date was a truthful record –
whether applicant discharged the onus of proof in relation to the charges that
on proving that purchaser had informed the respondent that finance was
approved and that the respondent’s file note of conversation
purchaser on the finance date was a truthful record
Legal Profession Act
Legal Services Commissioner v Madden
[2008] QCA 301
[2009] 1 Qd R 149
B I McMillan for the applicant
P J Davis SC for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Services Commission for the applicant
Brian Bartley &
Associates for the respondent
[1] MULLINS J: The complainant engaged the respondent to act on her behalf in
the purchase of a house property at Mount Low for
$261,000 under a contract in
the 5th edition of the standard form approved by the REIQ and the Queensland Law
Society (QLS). The
contract which was dated 3 October 2006 provided for a
payment of deposit of $30,000 (which was paid by the complainant) and was
subject to the complainant obtaining sufficient finance to complete the contract
and the finance date was shown as 16 October 2006.
The inspection date was also
specified as 16 October 2006. The settlement date was specified as 27 October
[2] As there was no notification to the vendors on 16 October 2006 that
finance had been approved, the vendors terminated the contract
on 18 October
2006. On 19 October 2006 the complainant terminated the respondent’s
instructions.
[3] At the outset the complainant had paid the respondent $800
on account of anticipated costs and outlays for the conveyance. She
allegations of gross incompetence and professional negligence against the
respondent and requested a refund of the sum of $800.
[4] On 30 October
2006 the respondent sent the complainant a tax invoice for work carried out by
his firm which was for professional
fees of $550 and disbursements of $354.99.
After allowing for the moneys held in trust, the respondent sought payment of
the balance
of $104.99.
[5] On 15 November 2006 the complainant made a
complaint to the applicant about the respondent’s conduct in acting on her
in relation to the purchase and, relevantly, that the respondent failed
to follow instructions. The complaint form was accompanied
by a nine page type
written statement prepared by the complainant herself. Part of her complaint
was directed at the fees and outlays
charged by the respondent.
applicant referred the investigation of the complaint to the QLS. The QLS
provided a copy of the complainant’s complaint
to the respondent under
cover of a letter dated 30 January 2007 and requested an explanation of the
respondent as to the communications
between himself and any other party relating
to provision of finance pursuant to the contract entered into by the
complainant. The
respondent’s letter to the QLS in response was dated 1
March 2007.
The charges
[7] The application, as originally filed,
contained five charges. Charges 4 and 5 relating to the respondent’s
professional
fees for the conveyance were discontinued at the commencement of
the hearing. Charge 3, which is an alternative to charges 1 and
2, is admitted
by the respondent. Charge 3 alleges that between 3 and 18 October 2006 the
respondent failed to maintain reasonable
standards of competence and diligence
in the conduct of a conveyancing matter on behalf of the complainant in that he
failed within
an appropriate time to seek an extension of time for finance
approval or take other steps to protect the complainant’s
[8] Charge 1 is in the following terms:
3 and 18 October 2006 the respondent failed to maintain reasonable standards of
competence and diligence in the conduct
of a conveyancing matter on behalf of
[the client] in that he failed to advise the vendor, on behalf of the client,
that she had
received satisfactory finance satisfying a condition of the
contract for sale.”
[9] The charge is particularised. The respondent admits particulars 1.1 to 1.4
and 1.7 to 1.8. The respondent denies particulars
1.5 and 1.6:
“1.5. On either 12 or 13 October 2006, the
client verbally advised the respondent by telephone that she had received
satisfactory to her as required by the contract.
1.6. On 16 October 2006 the client rang the respondent and asked if he
needed copies of loan documents confirming her finance
approval. The
respondent indicated that he did not need them that day and she should sign
the loan contract and return it to
the financier.”
[10] Charge 2 is in the following terms:
“In a letter dated 1 March 2007 the respondent
dishonestly, or in the alternative, recklessly made misleading statements to
Queensland Law Society in the course of an investigation concerning a complaint
[11] This charge is also particularised. The applicant relies upon particulars
1.1 to 1.8 in relation to charge 2. The respondent
admits particulars 2.2 to
2.4. In relation to particular 2.5, the respondent admits that he gave a
response by letter dated 1 March
2007 to the QLS in relation to the
complainant’s complaint and admits enclosing with that reply a copy of the
file note of
the respondent’s telephone conversation with the complainant
on 16 October 2006. The nub of the allegations against the respondent
respect of charge 2 is contained in particulars 2.6 to 2.8. In summary, the
applicant repeats the allegations contained in particulars
1.5 and 1.6 and
relies on them to allege that statements made in the respondent’s file
note dated 16 October 2006 and in the
respondent’s letter dated 1 March
2007 (that relied on the respondent’s file note dated 16 October 2006)
were false and
misleading on the basis of the following matters set out in
particular 2.8:
“a. The respondent had been advised by the
client on 12 or 13 October 2006 that she had received the sought finance
and had been so advised by Members Equity.
b. On 16 October 2006 the client asked the respondent if he needed to see
the papers confirming her finance approval and he
had declined.
c. The client did not tell the respondent in a telephone conversation on
the afternoon of 16 October 2006 that she had not
received advice about
finance approval.”
[12] There is a significant difference between the position of the complainant
and the position of the respondent concerning the
conversations between them in
the period of 12 to 16 October 2006. The critical issue that is common to
charges 1 and 2 is whether
between 12 and 16 October 2006 the complainant
advised the respondent that she had received finance approval.
[13] For the
purpose of the hearing, there was affidavit evidence from both the complainant
and the respondent and each was cross-examined.
The original file of the
respondent for the complainant’s conveyance was exhibit 2.
the conveyance
[14] In order to put the evidence of the complainant and the
respondent in context, I will set out a chronology of the course of the
conveyance taken primarily from the complainant’s file.
[15] The file
was opened on 4 October 2006 when the respondent received a facsimile from the
real estate agent forwarding a copy of
the signed contract. The original signed
contract was received by the respondent on 5 October 2006. On that date the
sent a letter to the complainant acknowledging the receipt of the
contract and her instructions. The complainant had paid for and
obtained in
early October 2006 a standard property report in relating to the property from
Authentic Building Reports. The report
is incorrectly dated 4/01/06. There is
a copy of the report on the respondent’s file. The report noted as a
significant matter
requiring attention “Please check with council for the
permits and finds for the house floor plans/ two sheds/ unfinished areas.”
In his letter dated 5 October 2006 the respondent referred to the report in the
following terms:
confirm your instructions that your Building Inspection reveals that there are
recently, uncompleted additions to the residence
which include a additional
lounge area and garages and you wish us to arrange an urgent Council Physical
Inspection to ensure that
the buildings on the property have been inspected and
approved by the Council. We will advise you regarding this as soon as the
has been completed and we have the report.”
[16] The respondent sent a facsimile letter to Thuringowa City Council Planning
Department on 6 October 2006 requesting copies of
all permits, approvals and
certificates issued with respect to the subject property and made reference to
the authorisation from
the complainant being sent separately by email. The
complainant sent the email to the Council in the terms dictated to her by the
respondent.
[17] On 10 October 2006 the respondent sent a letter to the
vendors’ solicitors itemising the issues raised by the building
report and requesting the vendors’ comments in relation to those matters.
The letter also advised of the request
made of the Council to provide all
certificates relating to the permits for building work and advising that Council
advice had been
given that approvals granted for removal of dwelling (in 1989),
construction of garden shed (in 1991) and carport (in 1995) were
unfinalised and
requesting advice when final approvals would be sought in relation to those
permits. The respondent sent a copy
of this letter to the complainant.
[18] By letter dated 12 October 2006 the respondent advised the complainant
of the details of the building permits obtained from the
Council and that no
final approval had been issued in respect of those permits. The letter
requested urgent instructions in relation
to those matters, because of the
pending expiry of the building inspection date of 16 October 2006. A telephone
message from the
complainant to the respondent was placed on the file. The
message was dated 12 October 2006 at 10:50am and noted “been crossed
– needs to talk to you.”
[19] On 12 October 2006 the respondent
sent a letter to the vendors’ solicitors advising the details obtained
from the Council
in respect of the permits for the building work on the property
and requesting whether the vendors would agree to do the work to
final approvals to be issued.
[20] By facsimile letter dated sent on 13
October 2006 at 8:23am, the vendors’ solicitors advised the respondent
that the vendors
were not willing to attend to any work or to obtain final
approvals for permits issued by the Council in respect of the property,
basis that the complainant understood from the outset that the sale of the
property was on an “as is” basis.
[21] The respondent made a
handwritten diary note for an attendance on the complainant on 13 October 2006
at 11am. In the course
of that attendance the respondent had the complainant
sign a prepared sheet of conveyancing instructions to which was attached a
of the registered plan for the subject property. The relevant lot was shaded
and the complainant initialled across the shaded
lot. The instructions included
a statement that the complainant did not require a Council building inspection
to be carried out
and statements relating to the identification of the subject
land on the plan and that the complainant had satisfied herself as to
fences and did not require a survey of the land to be undertaken.
[22] The respondent sent a facsimile letter to the vendors’ solicitors
on 16 October 2006 at 10:45am advising that the complainant
accepted that the
vendors were not obliged to obtain the necessary final approvals for building
work carried out on the property,
but noted that the contract stated that an
approved safety switch for the general purpose socket outlet is installed in the
but the building report revealed there was no such safety switch
installed, and that the complainant required the vendors to install
[23] The file contains a type written diary note of the respondent
setting out the contents of a telephone call he recorded that he
had with the
complainant at about 4:45pm on 16 October 2006.
[24] On 17 October 2006 the
respondent received from Members Equity a copy of the letter sent by Members
Equity to the complainant
on 12 October 2006. One of the respondent’s
employees, Ms Burns, received a telephone call from the real estate agent on 17
October 2006 requesting that the respondent send by facsimile to the agent the
loan contract that he had received from Members Equity.
That facsimile was sent
by the respondent. On the same day solicitors Biggs & Biggs who were acting
for the credit provider
Perpetual Limited (which was to provide the loan
arranged by Members Equity) sent a facsimile to the respondent attaching a copy
of the letter which they had sent to the complainant dated 17 October 2006.
[25] By facsimile sent on 18 October 2006, the vendors’ solicitors
advised that the vendors terminated the contract pursuant
to standard condition
3.3 on the basis that the complainant had not advised in relation to the finance
that was due on 16 October
[26] The respondent had discussions with
the vendors’ solicitors in an attempt to reinstate the contract, but those
discussions
were unsuccessful.
Evidence of the
complainant
[27] The complainant was a first time home buyer in relation to
this purchase. She had obtained finance pre-approval through Members
before she entered into the contract, but applied for approval of finance upon
entering into the contract for that transaction.
She also organised and paid
for the building inspection report.
[28] The complainant acknowledged in
paragraph 9 of the written statement that accompanied her complaint that she
sent the email that
the respondent had requested her to send to the Council, as
she was aware there had been extensions to the house on the property
was also a garden shed and a colourbond garage which she wanted to check were
Council approved. She dealt with her conversation
with her finance
representative at paragraph 10 of this statement:
fast approaching, I left two messages for my
local finance representative, Sarah Callison to call me so I could get a
progress report.
She returned my call on Wednesday
or Thursday 12
She said she was in Brisbane attending a conference and apologised for not
calling me sooner. She said that all of the
finance contracts etc. had been
drawn up and had already been put in that days express post, that I would
receive them the next day
or the day after at the latest.”
[29] The complainant dealt with the making of an appointment with the respondent
for 13 October 2006 after the respondent had telephoned
her on 12 October 2006
to inform her that he had the plans and permits from the Council and none of the
permits had final approvals.
She did not say in this statement that she said
anything to the respondent about the information given to her by her finance
representative.
In paragraph 13 of her statement the complainant set out the
information that she said she conveyed to the respondent about her finance
during her meeting with him on 13 October 2006:
“13. I informed him that my finance
representative from Members Equity (ME) had phoned me from Brisbane two
– Wednesday 11
– to tell me
that finance had been confirmed approved and the paperwork was being
posted to me.”
[30] The complainant produced a list of telephone calls made from her home
telephone that showed on 16 October 2006 at 10:29am a
call was made from her
list of calls did not show
the length of the call.
complainant’s affidavit filed on 29 July 2009 set out the relevant
telephone and personal conversations she said she
had with the respondent as
“6. I recall speaking
with my local finance representative, Sarah Callison, by telephone on Wednesday
11 October 2006. During
that conversation, she told me that the finance had
been approved and that contracts were being drawn up and would be put in
post ‘either today or tomorrow’ so that I should receive
them in the next day or so.
7. On Thursday 12 October 2006, Mr Bevan telephoned me at work. He was
ringing about plans and permits he had received from the Council.
In the course
of that conversation, I mentioned my discussions with Sarah Callison and that
the finance documents were on the way.
He said to let him know when they
arrived. He then said that he needed to see me as a matter to urgency to discuss
the Council documents.
He then put me though to his secretary to make an
appointment. I then spoke with his secretary and she said that Mr Bevan had time
the next morning, Friday, because a conference or some other commitment had been
cancelled. I made an appointment to see him in person
at 11 a.m. the next day,
Friday 13 October 2006. I made the appointment for 11am because I was working
that day at the prison and
that was the most convenient time.
8. On Friday 13 October 2006 I attended Mr Bevan's office and met with him
as arranged. In the course of that meeting we discussed
the council documents
and other things unrelated to my matter. I again told Mr Bevan about my
conversation with Sarah Callison on
11 October 2006, that finance had been
approved through Members Equity and I was waiting for the documents to come in
9. When I arrived home from work that night, the documents from Members
Equity confirming finance approval were there.
10. On the morning of Monday 16 October 2006 (the finance date) my son came
to visit. He had a number of things to do in town and
I was going with him.
Before we left the house I telephoned Mr Bevan at about 10.30am. I rang
specifically to tell him that the finance
documents had arrived. I told him that
and asked if he needed me to bring them in to him.
11. He said that providing I was satisfied with the terms, I should just
sign the documents and post them off. He said it was not
necessary for him to
see them unless there was something I needed him to explain to me. As I did not
see any need to have him explain
anything, I signed the documents while I was
still at home and posted them to Members Equity when we went into town later
12. I did not speak to Mr Bevan again on Monday 16 October 2006.”
[32] It was unfortunate there was no attempt in this affidavit to set out the
conversations that took place between the complainant
and the respondent on 12,
13 and 16 October 2006 to the extent that the complainant recalled them, rather
than summarising the effect
of each of them. It became apparent during the
cross-examination of the complainant that what is attributed in paragraphs 7, 8
10 of her affidavit as the information that she conveyed to the respondent
on each occasion may not reflect the content of what was
actually conveyed.
[33] In her oral evidence, the complainant stated what she had told the
respondent about finance approval at the time that she retained
Transcript 1-9):
“I told him when I
first engaged him that I had finance pre-approval, that it was guaranteed, and
that we just needed –
I didn't understand how it all worked, and that it
was going to take those couple of weeks to actually get all the paperwork itself
drawn up, and I checked with Sarah Callison, who was my representative at the
time, and she reassured me, time and again, finance
was there, it's just a case
of getting the paperwork done.”
[34] It was difficult in the cross-examination of the complainant for Mr Davis
SC to elicit her recollection of the course of the
conversation that she had
with the respondent on each occasion. In relation to her telephone conversation
with the respondent on
12 October 2006, the complainant stated that she could
recall saying to the respondent that “Sarah Callison had finally called
back” and said that she told the respondent (at Transcript 1-25):
“She finally got back to me and said that all
the paperwork has been prepared and it should be either in today’s post
tomorrow’s post, and it was being sent by overnight courier
[35] When the complainant was asked to recall the exact words that she used when
talking to the respondent at her meeting with him
on 13 October 2006, she stated
(at Transcript 1-26):
“It wouldn’t be exact words, but I said
to him that the paperwork hadn’t arrived when I got home from work last
night, so hopefully it will be there tonight, or, ‘It should be there
tonight. She said it was coming by Next Day Delivery’.”
[36] When pressed as to whether the complainant explained to the respondent what
the paperwork was, the complainant said that she
would have said “loan
papers”, but then conceded that she could not recall what she actually
said to him. The complainant
further elaborated about this meeting (at
Transcript 1-26):
“... we were discussing the loans contracts,
and when I tell him that the paperwork is being prepared and has been promised
to me, you know, sort of overnight, either that night or the following day,
whenever the paperwork was completed, that it was an
understanding that he knows
that I’m talking about the finance money, the loan moneys
contracts.”
[37] The complainant conceded that she told the respondent that there were
documents coming from Members Equity, she may not have
used the words
“loan documents” and stated (at Transcript 1-26):
“And as I just said, I would have assumed that
it’s to be understood that as we were talking about the finance moneys,
you know, the contracts, that I don’t have to spell out each individual
word: ‘The paperwork is on its way. The documents
are on their
[38] The complainant confirmed that she did not know exactly what words she may
have used in the conversions she had with the respondent
the period 12 to 16 October 2006 and stated (at Transcript 1-28):
“Well, as we’re talking about the
finance and everything, then, yeah, I would assume that he would know that if I
the word “documents” or “paperwork”, that he knows
what I’m talking about.”
[39] During the course of her evidence the complainant tended to minimise the
importance of the investigations conducted on her behalf
by the respondent in
respect of the building permits and approvals for the subject property and to
give prominence to the conversations
between them where she said she conveyed
information about her finance approval. She did concede (at Transcript 1-12),
that she was concerned that the garage and rumpus room were not liable
to be demolished, because the extension that created the rumpus
room was the
main reason that she wanted the property. She did state that her concerns about
approval were allayed at her meeting
with the respondent on 13 October 2006,
when he explained that the permits followed the property, and not the person who
them. The complainant also conceded (at Transcript 1-15) that she did
not know about the lack of building approvals when she signed
[40] The complainant confirmed in her evidence that on 16 October
2006 she signed the documents that she had received in the mail
from Members
Equity on the evening of 13 October 2006 and that she knew that “there was
some more paperwork coming” (at
Transcript 1-30). The complainant was
adamant that the only telephone call she had with the respondent on 16 October
2006 was on
the morning of that day and not in the afternoon. She stated (at
Transcript 1-32):
“I told him that the
loan papers had arrived and does he need me to bring them in. He replied,
“No, unless there’s
something that you need for me to explain, if
you’re happy with the conditions, terms and conditions, you can just send
– sign them and send them off”, which I did.”
[41] When the complainant was cross-examined on the respondent’s version
of the telephone call which he said occurred on the
afternoon of 16 October
2006, the following exchanges occurred (at Transcript 1-33):
“And he asked whether you had received any
advice and you said you hadn’t?- - I said I had not received that actual
So, on the 16
you’re telling him effectively
that the loan contract still hasn’t arrived?- - That’s right. It
Other evidence relied on by the applicant
[42] The applicant relied on the
affidavit of Mr Craig Smiley filed on 29 July 2009. Mr Smiley is the Manager,
Investigations employed
by the QLS who undertook investigations on behalf of the
QLS and the Legal Services Commission in respect of the complaint of the
complainant against the respondent. On 1 August 2007 Mr Smiley attended the
Brisbane office of Members Equity and perused the file
relating to the
complainant’s application for finance. Paragraph 12 of Mr Smiley’s
affidavit states:
“12. From my perusal
of the Members Equity file I ascertained the following information which I
recorded in a file note
dated 8 August 2007 and placed on the investigation
(a) The offer of acceptance was made well before 12 October 2006.
(b) A formal detailed offer was sent on 12 October 2006 and the offer
was accepted on that day.
(c) Acceptance of the offer was signed that day.
(d) It does not say when it was received, however, it is also clear
from the file that the application for finance was made
on 5 October
(e) Further, it appears from the file that Members Equity instructed
Biggs & Biggs to prepare mortgage documentation
ion on 13 October 2006
and this documentation was sent to [the complainant] on 17 October
[43] If it was truly relevant to the applicant’s case against the
respondent, the applicant should have obtained a copy of
Members Equity file,
instead of relying on the secondary evidence of Mr Smiley as to the contents of
the file. Mr Smiley was not
required for cross-examination. It is patent,
however, that the information that was recorded in his file note and set out in
12 of his affidavit is deficient and, in some respects, does not even
accord with the unchallenged evidence of the complainant.
It is unclear to what
communication Mr Smiley was referring in sub-paragraph (a) when he used the
description “offer of acceptance”.
The written offer from Members
Equity was dated and sent on 12 October 2006 and it is not clear whether the
acceptance on 12 October
2006 that is referred to in sub-paragraph (b) was
written or oral. In fact, the written offer dated 12 October 2006 required a
acceptance. The statement in sub-paragraph (c) that acceptance of the
offer was signed on 12 October 2006 is inconsistent with the
receipt by the
complainant of the letter from Members Equity late on 13 October 2006 and the
complainant’s evidence that she
signed the document on 16 October 2006.
(The respondent’s solicitor, Mr Bartley, made enquiries of Members Equity
2009 as to the whereabouts of its file relating to the complainant,
but was unable to verify that it remained in existence or locate
Evidence of the respondent
[44] In evaluating the respondent’s
evidence, it is relevant to take into account the orderly manner in which the
kept the file relating to the complainant’s purchase and the
attention that was given by the respondent to that transaction
that is reflected
by the timely searches and inquiries undertaken by the respondent in respect of
the subject property and the letters,
telephone calls and attendances between
the respondent and the complainant.
[45] The respondent said (at Transcript
1-49) the complainant had contacted the respondent about her purchase, before he
the file, and told him that she had received a building inspection
report. The respondent said that the complainant was concerned
noted on the building inspection report, but he did not make a file note in
respect of that conversation, because
the file had not been opened. Paragraph 2
of the respondent’s letter to the complainant dated 5 October 2006
confirmed the
complainant’s instructions about the building inspection.
To illustrate the respondent’s response to the concern that
he said the
complainant showed about the contents of the building inspection report, he
explained (at Transcript 1-55) that he went
to the Council himself to pick up a
copy of the building approvals.
[46] The respondent’s position, as
set out in paragraph 3 of his affidavit filed on 11 August 2009, is that the
first advice
that he received that finance had been approved was on 17 October
2006 when he received a facsimile from the solicitors acting for
complainant’s financier. He stated in paragraph 3 that prior to the
receipt of that facsimile, he had not received advice
from the complainant or
from the financier or its solicitors that finance had been approved. In
paragraph 4 of his affidavit, the
respondent expressly denied that the
complainant told him that finance had been approved on 12, 13 or 16 October
2006. The respondent
maintained that position in the evidence given at the
hearing. He stated (at Transcript 1-55) that the complainant did not tell
that she got the “paperwork” or that finance had been approved.
[47] The respondent’s handwritten diary note for his conference with
the complainant on 13 October 2006 shows that he discussed
the position in
relation to the lack of final building approvals and recorded the
complainant’s specific instruction that she
wished to proceed with the
purchase, notwithstanding that there were no final approvals or no partial final
approvals. The diary
note set out information conveyed in relation to duty on
the contract, and referred to the safety switch and dividing fences. In
relation to the funds for the purchase, the diary note recorded the name of the
complainant’s bank, Members Equity, and noted
“applied for
$231,000.00” and a reference to the amount of the First Home Owner’s
Grant of $7,000, showing total
funds of $238,000.
[48] By reference
to the diary note, the respondent was able to give comprehensive evidence of the
explanation and advice that he
had given to the respondent about the matters
noted on the file note. He confirmed (at Transcript 1-41) that at no stage
that interview was there any indication from the complainant that she had
actually received any finance approval or was waiting on
any paperwork, other
then loan approval.
[49] The respondent conceded that he could not recall
whether the complainant did call him about 10:30am on 16 October 2006, but could
recall that he had spoken to her that afternoon. When cross-examined by Mr
McMillan of counsel on the complainant’s version
of her telephone call in
the morning of 16 October 2006 to the respondent, the respondent denied (at
Transcript 1-43) that the complainant
had informed him that she had received
documents from Members Equity and asked him whether he needed to see them before
them and told her that if she was happy, she could sign them and send
them off. The respondent stated that he would never have told
her to sign them
and send them off, as it was not his practice.
[50] The respondent was
cross-examined on the different form in which his file note for his telephone
conversation with the complainant
on 16 October 2006 took compared to the other
file notes in the file. The respondent explained (at Transcript 1-52 to 1-53)
he scribbled notes on a scrap piece of paper as he spoke to the complainant
and he then dictated a more detailed file note in the
following terms on 16
October 2006 for Ms Burns to type:
the unapproved building items on the
property. I stressed to her that unless the owner was prepared to rectify and
get final certificates
of approval on the buildings, it being owner/builder type
work, it would be my suggestion and advice that there may well be problems
getting finance approval (i.e. appropriate valuation by the incoming Mortgagee -
as is a normal condition of finance approval).
I told her that even at this late stage, we have not received confirmation of
finance approval. I asked her whether she had received
any advice and she said
she hadn't. I asked her whether she could provide a contact number and she said
she couldn't at that time,
but she would ring back the next day with a number.
Bearing in mind the difficulties with the owner/builder issues, I could not
recommend her waiving finance approval at this time as she would may be stuck
with a failure to provide finance and a loss of the
deposit of $30,000.00. She
was little concerned about that aspect and I told her as soon as we got finance
approval letter, or otherwise,
we would advise the Vendor.
She told me to advise the other party that she accepted that the Vendor was
not obliged to get the necessary building approvals on
the property but that she
wanted to push the Vendor for the installation of the safety switch, as she had
‘given given given’
and the Vendor had not given one iota. She had
been prepared to enter into a licence agreement to allow the Vendor to leave all
plant and equipment on the property, but thought that he should give
somewhere, so we were to inform the Vendor's Solicitors that
she wanted him to
insert the appropriate safety switch. I advised her that if the Vendor failed to
agree with this, she should get
a quote for the installation of a safety switch
and we could possibly hold that back on settlement (with approval of the
She was happy with that.”
[51] The respondent conceded that his normal practice would have been to obtain
instructions from his client to seek an extension
of the finance date where
finance approval was due and he had not received instructions from his client
that approval had been obtained.
The respondent confirmed (at Transcript 1-54)
that in the course of the telephone conversation he had with the complainant on
afternoon of 16 October 2006, she told him that she did not have finance
approval. The respondent stated (at Transcript 1-55) that
if the complainant
had told him on the morning of 16 October 2006 that she had finance approval, he
would have done a file note and
told the vendors’ solicitors that she had
got finance.
[52] The respondent’s first written communication with
the complainant after the contract had been terminated was his letter
October 2006. In paragraph 3 of that letter, he stated:
“On the afternoon of
October 2006 we had still not received finance
approval from either yourself or from the eventual financier, Members Equity Pty
through Perpetual Limited, even though it is normal for the financier to
advise us that a loan approval has been granted, by facsimile.”
[53] After the respondent had sent the complainant his account for $904.99, the
complainant sent the respondent a letter dated 3
November 2006 which was not
received by the respondent until re-sent by facsimile by the complainant on 13
December 2006. The complainant
requested a full breakdown of the professional
costs of $550. The respondent sent his file to Northern Costing to draw an
account of solicitor and own client costs for the file. The draft
itemised account prepared by Northern Costing was sent on 17 December
a query about the length of the telephone call made to P Ferguson on 17 October
2006. When the respondent checked the
file, he found there was no diary note of
the telephone call to Pat Ferguson. The respondent then spoke to Ms Burns who
that call and told her that she should type up a file note of her
conversation with Pat Ferguson. The resulting file note that was
created was
dated 17 October 2006 and showed Ms Burns’ initials as the author. That
file note was typed in the same Word document
to which Ms Burns had saved the
respondent’s file note dated 16 October 2006. The draft itemised account
prepared by Northern
Costing did not include the telephone call of 16 October
2006, but that was included in the itemised account that was sent out to
complainant on 22 December 2006.
Other evidence relied on by the
[54] The respondent relied on the affidavit from Mr Marcus Vogel,
system engineer, that was filed by leave at the hearing. On 14
August 2009 Mr
Vogel examined a computer document file created in Word relating to this
conveyance which was stored on a workstation
at the respondent’s office.
The file comprised two file notes dated 16 and 17 October 2006.
[55] On the
basis of his examination of the computer document, Mr Vogel was able to say that
the file was transferred on 13 August
2008 to the computer which he examined at
the respondent’s office, but because the file was not created on that
computer, it
was not possible for him to determine when the document was first
created. Mr Vogel was able to say that the file was last modified
December 2006 at 9:29:58am.
[56] Mr Vogel was able to say that the
computer’s operating system records the last modification date in a way
which, once set,
cannot be altered, so that he is able to say that the file
could not have been altered between 21 December 2006 and the date on which
was transferred to the current computer workstation on 13 August 2008 and that
it could not have been modified since that transfer.
[57] The respondent
confirmed that in August 2008 he replaced the computer workstation which Ms
Burns had used when she was employed
at the firm with a new workstation as part
of the routine upgrade of his firm’s computer equipment and that all
existing data
recorded on Ms Burns’ workstation was transferred across to
the new workstation which is the workstation that was examined
[58] The computer record that the relevant file was last modified on
21 December 2006 is consistent with the creation of the file
note dated 17
October 2006 on that date.
[59] The respondent also relied on character
evidence provided by other legal practitioners that attest to his honesty and
professionalism
to show his good character and support the submission that it
was unlikely that he committed the dishonest or reckless act that is
the applicant in relation to charge 2.
Legislative framework
[60] Although the discipline application was commenced under
Legal Profession Act 2007
(the Act), the charges against the respondent relate
to events that occurred prior to the commencement of the Act.
Section 423
the Act applies chapter 4 of the Act (concerned with complaints and discipline)
to the conduct of a practitioner in the jurisdiction
by or after the
commencement of that provision.
[61] The conduct of this conveyance and
the respondent’s letter to the QLS of 1 March 2007 took place while the
Legal Profession Act 2004
was in force. The terms “unsatisfactory
professional conduct” and “professional misconduct” were
in that Act in the same way as they are defined in the Act.
onus of proof is on the applicant. The standard of proof is the balance of
probabilities, but the degree of satisfaction
required varies according to the
consequences for the practitioner of finding the allegation to be true:
Has the applicant proved that the complainant informed the
respondent on or before 16 October 2006 that her finance was
[63] As the outlines of the evidence of the complainant and the
respondent and the other evidence relied on respectively to support
the evidence
of the complainant and the respondent set out above illustrate, there are
discrepancies within the version of events
given by the complainant, within the
version of events given by the respondent and between their respective versions.
[64] The complainant’s original written statement and her oral
evidence showed antipathy towards the complainant. She made
a number of
unfounded allegations in her original statement, speculating on the reasons for
the respondent’s conduct in failing
to inform the vendors’
solicitors that the complainant had finance approval. She stated “He may
have decided he was
interested in the property- I did praise it highly- and
wanted to sabotage this sale to me so he could put in an offer.” She
prepared to maintain that suggestion (and others) in the course of her oral
evidence (at Transcript 1-13).
[65] There were a number of aspects of the
complainant’s evidence that were difficult to accept. Her disavowal
during the course
of her oral evidence of concern about the building approvals
for the subject property was unconvincing and inconsistent with the
she had commissioned and paid for the building inspection report as soon as she
had signed the contract, she was aware
of the searches and inquiries that
respondent was making on her behalf with the Council and she was interested in
the results of
those searches and inquires at the time. There was a lack of
precision and confusion in her evidence that made it difficult to decide
was the actual content of the statements that she made to the respondent about
the progress of her application for finance.
[66] The difficulties with the
respondent’s evidence were not as significant. The early part of the
respondent’s file
reflected the concern by the respondent about
ascertaining the position in relation to the building permits and approvals that
initiated by the content of the building inspection report obtained by the
complainant. That was supported by the steps that the
respondent took to obtain
the relevant plans and permits and information about approvals from the Council
in a timely way.
[67] The course of the conveyance file itself reinforced
the importance at the time the contract remained on foot to both the respondent
and the complainant of sorting out the position in relation to the building
permits and approvals.
[68] It is significant that the respondent’s
handwritten note for the lengthy appointment that he had with the complainant on
13 October 2006 did not record advice from the complainant that she had finance
approval, but did record that she had “applied
for” the sum of
$231,000. That is consistent with the fact that the complainant was still
waiting at that stage to receive
the formal letter of offer of finance from
Members Equity.
[69] It is difficult to reconcile the evidence given by each
of the complainant and the respondent about the conversation they had
October 2006. What became apparent, however, when the complainant was giving
her oral evidence was that she was awaiting further
paperwork from Members
Equity on 16 October 2006 and that she could not state with any reliable
precision the content of what she
conveyed to the complainant about her finance
approval. There were a number of variations in the versions given by her during
course of her oral evidence. It may be that the complainant thought that
she was conveying to the respondent that she had finance
approval, but I am not
satisfied that the applicant can show that whatever was said by the complainant
in the various conversations
she had with the respondent between 12 and 16
October 2006 was reasonably understood by the respondent at the time as an
instruction
from the complainant that she had obtained finance
[70] I accept the respondent’s evidence that he dictated the
file note of 16 October 2006 soon after that conversation occurred
and on that
same day and that it recorded what he understood to be the effect of the
conversation. I infer that the file note was
not printed out until after the
draft itemised account had been prepared by Northern Costing.
[71] If the
respondent had been informed by the complainant on 16 October 2006 that she had
obtained finance approval, consistent
with his usual practice it is likely he
would have made a file note to that effect and would have sent a letter to the
same effect
to the vendors’ solicitors.
Has the applicant proved that
the respondent’s file note of 16 October 2006 was not a truthful record of
the telephone conversation
recorded in it?
[72] Although it was put to the
respondent in cross-examination that he fabricated the file note of 16 October
2006, the case of the
applicant was that the complainant did not tell the
respondent in a telephone conversation on the afternoon of 16 October 2006 that
she had not received advice about finance approval and that, to the extent that
the file note of 16 October 2006 recorded otherwise,
it was untruthful.
[73] Implicit in the applicant’s case about the respondent’s
file note dated 16 October 2006 is an allegation of dishonesty.
The additional
evidence of good character that the respondent obtained from his referees
confirmed the favourable view of the respondent’s
honesty that I formed,
when observing him giving his oral evidence and on further considering his
evidence in conjunction with his
original file and the other evidence in this
[74] Despite the discrepancies that were relied on by the applicant
in relation to this file note of 16 October 2006, consistent with
my conclusion
that the applicant has not proved that the complainant informed the respondent
on or before 16 October 2006 that her
finance was approved, I am also not
satisfied that the applicant has proved that the respondent’s file note of
16 October 2006
was not a truthful record of the telephone conversation as
understood by the respondent.
Conclusion in relation to charges 1 and
[75] It follows that the applicant has been unable to prove charges 1 and 2
against the respondent.
[76] The respondent acknowledged in his
affidavit filed on 11 August 2009 that, in the circumstances in which he had not
instructions from the complainant about finance approval by 16 October
2006, he should have requested an extension for such approval
from the vendors
and that his failure to do so constituted a failure to maintain reasonable
standards of competence and diligence.
His explanation was that at the relevant
time he was still focused upon various problems identified in the building
inspection report
and that, in retrospect, it appeared that he formed the view
from his dealings with the vendors’ solicitor that late notification
finance approval would not be a problem, but there was no basis for such view,
as events showed.
[77] It was common ground between the applicant and the
respondent that the conduct the subject of charge 3 was unsatisfactory
professional
conduct and I so find.
[78] On the question of penalty, the
relevant considerations are the need to protect the public and the maintenance
of proper standards
of the profession, rather then punishment: Legal Services
Commissioner v Madden
[2008] QCA 301
[2009] 1 Qd R 149
, 186 [122].
[79] The possible
penalties that were canvassed in submissions were a public reprimand and/or a
small fine. In addition, the applicant
submitted that a compensation order that
would refund to the complainant the amount she paid to the respondent that was
against professional fees ($445.01) could also be considered. In view
of the evidence that the vendors were unlikely to extend the
finance approval
date, the compensation order is not appropriate.
[80] Having regard to the
extremely positive references provided from other practitioners in support of
the respondent and the fact
that the conduct of which he was found guilty in
relation to charge 3 was in the nature of an oversight which he admitted when he
provided his formal response to this application, the order that should be made
in respect of the respondent’s unsatisfactory
professional conduct is that
the respondent must pay a penalty of $2000.
[81] The parties are invited to
make submissions on the issue of the costs of the application.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (137 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter