URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIRC/2025/292.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:40:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Smith v State of Queensland (Queensland Health) [2025] QIRC 292 (30 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Smith v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2025] QIRC
Smith, Karen
(Appellant)
Queensland (Queensland Health)
(Respondent)
PSA/2025/79
PROCEEDING:
Public Sector Appeal – Conversion Decision
DELIVERED ON:
30 October 2025
McLennan IC
On the papers
That pursuant to s 562C(1)(c) of the
Industrial Relations Act
appeal is allowed;
decision that Mrs Smith not have her employment converted to permanent is set
aside and another decision is substituted; and
Smith's fixed term temporary employment status as a Nurse Grade 7 be converted
to permanent employment.
CATCHWORDS:
LEGISLATION
INSTRUMENTS:
PUBLIC SECTOR – EMPLOYEES AND SERVANTS
OF THE CROWN GENERALLY – temporary employment – where respondent
not to convert the appellant's employment to permanent under the
Public Sector Act 2022
– whether there is a continuing
need for the appellant to be employed in the same role or a role which is
substantially the
same - consideration of genuine operational requirements
– where decision was not fair and reasonable
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Public Sector Act 2022
Statutory Instruments Act 1992
Directive 02/23: Review of
non-permanent employment
cl 1, cl 4, cl 5, cl 7, cl 13
04/23: Appeals
Directive 08/17: Temporary employment
Borean v State of Queensland (Queensland
[2021] QIRC 295
Goodall v State of Queensland
Court of Queensland, Dalton J, 10 October 2018)
Holcombe v State of
Queensland (Department of Housing and Public Works)
[2020] QIRC
IW v City of Perth
[1997] HCA 30
(1997) 191 CLR 1
Katae v State
of Queensland & Anor
[2018] QSC 225
Morison v State of
Queensland (Department of Child Safety, Youth and Women)
[2020] QIRC
Page v John Thompson and Lesley Dwyer, As Chief Executive Officer,
West Moreton Hospital and Health Service
Stephens v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2022] QIRC
Smith v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2025] QIRC
Victims Compensation Fund Corporation v Brown
(2003) 201 ALR
Zhao v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2022] QIRC
Reasons for Decision
[1] Mrs Karen
Smith ('Appellant') has been employed by State of Queensland, Queensland Health
('Respondent') at Mackay Hospital and
Health Service ('MHHS') as a fixed term
temporary employee at the Nurse Grade 7 classification since 27 December 2021 at
[2] Mrs Smith's
temporary contract in the role of Clinical Nurse Consultant (CNC), Research and
Teletrial Coordinator, Mackay Base
Hospital, MHHS (NRG7) was extended several
times between 27 December 2021 and 29 December 2024 – a three-year
First conversion decision
November 2024, Ms Ngaire Buchanan (Interim Executive Director, People and
Culture, MHHS) decided not to convert Ms Smith's
temporary employment to
permanent ('the first conversion decision').
[4] Mrs Smith
filed an appeal against the first conversion decision on 10 December 2024
(PSA/2024/198), shortly before the expiry
of her temporary contract on 29
December 2024.
[5] I note Mrs
Smith was employed on a further temporary contract from 30 December 2024 until 7
December 2025, to "backfill a Nurse
Grade 7 in Nursing and Productivity
Services...to build your exposure to the management components required at that
[6] Industrial
Commissioner Pidgeon issued her decision in
v State of Queensland (Queensland
on 14 March
2025. Pidgeon IC found the first conversion decision was not fair and
reasonable because the Respondent failed to properly
address the criteria of
"continuing need".
ordered the first conversion decision to be set aside and a fresh review
Second conversion decision
[7] The fresh
review ordered by Pidgeon IC was conducted by Ms Peta-Maree France (Executive
Director, People and Culture, MHHS).
[8] On 11 April
2025, Ms France ('the Delegate') decided not to convert Mrs Smith's temporary
employment to permanent ('the second
conversion decision')
was a "non-recurrent position" funded by an external
organisation.
"Nurse Grade 7 position CNC Research and Teletrial (NRG7) was
unfunded..."
organisational structure has been
reconsidered.
position no longer exists as the position ceased on 29 December
CNC Research and Teletrial (NRG7) was designed short term to build clinical
trial capability. The changing service model...required
a Nurse Unit Manager
and not a Clinical Nurse Consultant
is "no organisational need for the CNC Research and Teletrial position ongoing,
and the Nurse Unit Manager responsibilities
are not the same or substantially
the same as the temporary CNC Research and Teletrial (NRG7)
responsibilities."
[9] With respect
to the mandatory consideration of "a role that is substantially the same",
Ms France's decision stated:
In addition, there are not substantially the same or similar as roles that
you are suitable for across the Health Service. I understand
from the Executive
Director Nursing and Midwifery that you do not have transferable skills required
at the Nurse Grade 7 Nurse Unit
Manager level with management including human
resource and fiscal
management.
[10] Ms France
further noted that Mrs Smith had been extended in another temporary contract to
"backfill" at Nurse Grade 7 level for
the period from 30 December 2024 to 7
December 2025, as "arranged by the Executive Director Nursing and Midwifery to
build your exposure
to the management components required at that
[11] Mrs Smith
filed an appeal against the second conversion decision on 2 May 2025
(PSA/2025/79).
[12] The subject
of this appeal is the second conversion decision, made by Ms France on
11 April 2025.
The Decision
Public Sector Act 2022
(Qld) (PS Act) provides that an
appeal may be made against "a conversion decision", defined as a decision not to
convert the employment
of a public sector employee to a permanent
[14] Section
133(a) of the PS Act prescribes that "the public sector employee the subject of
the decision" may appeal "for a conversion
[15] For those
reasons, I am satisfied the decision made is able to be appealed by the
[16] The right
to appeal the Delegate's decision is not disputed between the
Timeframe for appeal
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld) (the IR Act) requires
that an appeal be lodged within 21 days after the day the decision appealed
against is given.
effective date of the decision was 11 April 2025.
accordance with s 564(3) of the IR Act, the Appellant filed the Appeal Notice on
2 May 2025. Mrs Smith appointed her union
– QNMU – to be her
agent in this matter.
[20] There is no
dispute between the parties that the appeal was filed in time.
What decisions can the Commission make?
[21] Pursuant to
s 562C(1) of the IR Act, in deciding a public service appeal, the Commission may
determine to either:
the decision appealed against;
set the decision
aside and return the matter to the decision maker with a copy of the decision on
appeal and any directions considered
appropriate; or
set the decision
aside and substitute another decision.
Appeal principles
[22] Section
562B(2) and (3) of the IR Act provides that the appeal is decided by reviewing
the decision appealed against "to decide
whether the decision appealed against
was fair and reasonable".
[23] The appeal
is not conducted by way of
re-hearing,
but rather involves
a review of the decision arrived at by the Respondent and the associated
decision-making process.
[24] Findings
made by the Respondent, which are reasonably open to it, should not be disturbed
issue for my determination is whether the decision not to convert the
Appellant's employment status to permanent was fair
and reasonable in the
circumstances.
Relevant provisions of the PS Act, Directive 02/23 and Directive 04/23
[26] Sections
114 and 115 of the PS Act relevantly provides:
executive must make decision on employee’s request
(1) This section applies if a public sector employee makes a request under
section 113.
(2) The employee’s chief executive must decide the request within 28 days
after receiving the request.
(3) The employee’s chief executive may decide to offer to convert the
employee’s employment to a permanent basis only
(a) the employee’s chief executive considers—
(i) there is a continuing need for someone to be employed in the
employee’s role, or a role that is substantially the same
employee’s role; and
(ii) the employee is suitable to perform the role; and
(b) any requirements of an industrial instrument are complied with in relation
to the decision.
(4) If the matters in subsection (3) are satisfied, the employee’s
chief executive must decide to offer to convert the employee’s
to a permanent basis, unless it is not viable or appropriate to do so having
regard to the genuine operational requirements
of the public sector entity.
(5) If the employee’s chief executive decides not to offer to convert
the employee’s employment to a permanent basis,
the chief executive must
give the employee a notice stating—
(a) the reasons for the decision; and
(b) the total period for which the employee has been continuously employed under
section 113(3) in the public sector entity; and
(c) how many times the employee’s employment on a non-permanent basis has
been extended.
(6) Subsection (5)(c) does not apply in relation to employment on a casual
(7) If the employee’s chief executive does not make the decision within
the period required under subsection (2), the chief
executive is taken to have
decided not to offer to convert the employee’s employment to a permanent
basis and to continue the
employee’s employment according to the terms of
the employee’s existing employment.
(8) The commissioner must make a directive about the making of a decision
under this section.
(9) In this section—
suitable, in relation to an employee performing a role, has the meaning given
under a directive.
[27] Section 81
of the PS Act relevantly provides:
81 Basis of employment—generally on permanent basis
(1) Employment of a public sector employee is on a permanent basis unless
the employee is employed on a non-permanent basis under
this Act or another Act
that enables the person to be employed on a non-permanent basis, including, for
(a) on a temporary basis for a fixed term; or
(b) on a casual basis.
(2) However, a public sector employee may be employed under this Act or
another Act on a non-permanent basis only if employment of
the employee on a
permanent basis is not viable or appropriate.
(3) Without limiting subsection (2), employment of a public sector
employee on a permanent basis may not be viable or appropriate
if the employment
is for any of the following purposes—
(a) in relation to employment on a temporary basis for a fixed
(i) to fill a temporary vacancy arising because a person is absent for
a known period; or
Examples of
absence for a known period—
approved leave (including parental leave), a secondment
(ii) to perform work for a particular project or purpose that has a
known end date; or
employment for a set period as part of a training program or placement
(iii) to fill a position for which funding is unlikely or unknown;
employment relating to performing work for which funding is subject to change
or is not expected to be renewed
(iv) to fill a short-term vacancy before a person is employed on a
permanent basis; or
(v) to perform work necessary to meet an unexpected short-term increase
in workload;
an unexpected increase in workload for disaster management and recovery
(4) Without limiting subsection (3)(a), employment of a person on a
permanent basis may be viable or appropriate if a person is required
employed for a purpose mentioned in subsection (3)(a) on a frequent or
regular basis.
an ongoing requirement to backfill multiple absences because of approved
leave (including parental leave) or secondments
02/23 Review of non-permanent employment
(Directive 02/23) relevantly provides:
Public Sector Act 2022
(Act) establishes employment on a
permanent basis is the default basis of employment in the Queensland public
1.2 This directive supports and supplements the provisions of the Act
with respect to the review of non-permanent employment.
1.3 This directive sets out procedures for reviews and requirements for
decisions in the context of reviewing a non-permanent
employment status.
4.1 Chief executives are responsible for making decisions on
review of non-permanent employment, under chapter 3, part 9, division
4.2 Chief executives are required to act in a way that is compatible with
the main purpose of the Act and how the main purpose is
achieved, including fair
treatment of public sector employees and maximising employment security and
permanency of employment.
4.3 Under section 81 of the Act, employment of a public sector employee is
generally on a permanent basis unless it is not viable
or appropriate.
4.4 Employment on a permanent basis may not be viable or appropriate if the
employment is for any of the reasons provided for at
section 81(3) of the Act.
Interpretation
of directions
5.1 The Act sets out employee entitlements and
chief executive responsibilities under chapter 3, part 9, division 1.
5.2 The Appendix identifies and summarises the relevant sections of the Act,
to assist public sector employees and decision makers
in understanding the
legislative framework.
5.3 A decision maker, when considering a review of an employee’s
non-permanent employment status, must make a decision by applying
the relevant
sections of the Act.
5.4 These directions:
(a) provide for the meaning of suitable
(b) provide for the matters a chief executive must consider in deciding
the hours of work to be offered in converting an employee’s
under section 115(1)(b)
(c) provide for the circumstances in which a person may appeal against
the decision about the hours of work offered in converting
the employee’s
employment under section 115(1)(b)
(d) establish procedural requirements for conducting a review and making
a decision under sections 114, 115, and 116 of the Act
(e) should be read in conjunction with the relevant section/s of the
5.5 The requirements set out in these directions are binding and must be
7. Employer obligation to undertake a review of non-permanent
7.1 A public sector employee who is eligible (or approaching eligibility)
for a review of their employment status under section 115
of the Act may notify
the employee’s chief executive of their requirement to commence a review
under section 115 of the Act,
and that the employee would like to be converted
to permanent employment.
7.2 The notification provided for in clause 7.1 may be made by the employee
or the employee’s representative, provided it is
not more than three
months before the review must be undertaken, in accordance with section of 115
of the Act.
7.3 An entity must set out information on its intranet, or in another way
that is accessible to employees, about how to notify under
clause 7.1.
7.4 Where an employee does not notify their entity in accordance with clause
7.1, the chief executive is still required to undertake
the review in accordance
with section 115 of the Act.
7.5 When a chief executive starts a review of an employee’s employment
status under section 115 of the Act, the chief executive
must notify the
7.6 The notification must be in writing and include:
(a) the name and contact details of the entity contact for the
(b) the date by which the decision must be made
(c) that the employee or their representative may choose to provide a
written submission for consideration during the review
(d) that if the chief executive does not make a decision within the
required period, the chief executive is taken to have decided
not to offer to
convert the employee’s employment to a permanent basis
(e) information about any relevant appeal right and timeframe for
13. Obligations when a decision is made not to offer to convert an
employee’s employment to a
permanent basis and to continue the
employee’s employment according to the terms of the employee’s
existing employment
13.1 Any notice provided to the employee must comply with
section 27B
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(a) set out the findings on material questions of fact, and
(b) refer to the evidence or other material on which those findings
were based.
13.2 Any notice provided to the employee must include information about
any relevant appeal rights available to the employee.
13.3 Where the chief executive decides under section 114 or 115 of the Act
not to offer to convert the employee’s employment
to a permanent basis
because the person was not suitable to perform the role, any notice provided to
the employee must also include
information about an employee’s right to
request an additional review under section 116 of the Act in the event the
considers they have become suitable to perform the role.
04/23: Appeals
(Directive 04/23) relevantly provides:
6. Conversion decision appeal
6.1 Section 131(1)(a) of the Act provides that a conversion decision may be
6.2 Section 129 of the Act provides for the definition of conversion
decision (noting that the meaning is limited to specific types
of decisions made
under the relevant sections of the Act).
6.3 Who may appeal a conversion decision under section 133 of the Act: (a)
the public sector employee the subject of the decision.
6.4 Decisions that cannot be appealed as a conversion decision, as provided
for under section 132 of the Act:
(a) a decision under section 114 not to convert the employment of a public
sector employee to a permanent basis
(b) a decision under section 120 not to appoint a public sector employee to
a position at a higher classification level, if the
employee has been acting at,
or seconded to, the higher classification level for less than two years.
Directives are statutory instruments within the meaning of
Statutory Instruments Act 1992
Statutory Instruments Act 1992
(Qld) provides that certain
provisions of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
statutory instruments. One of those is
which provides
that in the
interpretation of a provision of an Act, the interpretation that will best
achieve the purpose of the Act is to be preferred
to any other interpretation.
Schedule 1 to the
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(Qld) provides that
'purpose', for an act, includes policy objective.
Submissions
accordance with the Directions Order issued in this matter, the parties filed
written submissions.
[33] Pursuant to
s 451(1) of the IR Act, no hearing was conducted in deciding this appeal. The
matter was decided on the papers.
Appeal Grounds and the parties' submissions
[34] Mrs Smith's
appeal grounds and submissions are as follows:
consideration of "continuing need"
respect to the first appeal ground, Mrs Smith stated:
a) Having been ordered to conduct a fresh review by Pidgeon IC, the Respondent
still did not properly consider the "continuing need"
b) The Delegate decided there was no "continuing need" for the CNC Research and
Teletrial (NRG7) role because:
It was "designed
short term to build clinical trial capability";
The "changing
service model...required a Nurse Unit Manager and not a Clinical Nurse
Consultant role";
"Consideration
of the organisational structure identified there was a need to strengthen the
leadership and a full time Nurse Unit
Manager (Nurse Grade 7) position was
responsibilities of the new NUM role created "are not the same or substantially
the same as the temporary CNC Research and Teletrial
(NRG7) responsibilities."
That is because the NUM role includes: line management responsibilities; human
resources; budget management;
payroll; and
the Delegate explained why there was a need for a full time NUM, that is not the
same as explaining why there is not a continuing
need for the CNC
d) The Research and Teletrial Unit expanded in the relevant period. Two extra
Clinical Nurse roles were added in 2024 (in addition
to the existing one) and a
NUM was employed in January 2025. That demonstrates a continuing need for the
CNC role, but was not considered
e) There was a continuing need for the CNC role because it "delivered services
that are not delivered by either the NUM (Nurse Grade
7) or the Clinical Nurse
(Nurse Grade 6) in the Research and Teletrial
f) Mrs Smith addressed to the "continuing need" criteria in the 4 November 2024
review request as follows, however the Delegate's
decision "failed to explain
why those matters did not demonstrate a continuing need for the CNC role,
particularly in the context
of an expanding Research and Teletrial
...there is a continuing need for someone to be employed in my role or a
substantially similar role to ensure specific clinical nurse
consultations
continue and to guarantee the provision of clinical trials within [MHHS]. My
role is fundamental to ensure the ongoing
implementation and compliance with the
National Safety and Quality Health Service (NSQHS) Standards, including the
National Clinical
Trials Governance Framework (NCTGF), clinical incident
management, advanced practice clinical expertise to support staff conducting
clinical trials within the MHHS and development and review of applicable
policies and procedures. Without my continued appointment
to this role, there
will be an absence in the management of NSQHS Standards and the specific actions
required for clinical trials
respect to the first appeal ground, the Respondent stated:
a) "...the role was temporary...The requirement for a continuing need for the
position was no longer required in the service model
of Research and
Innovation..."
b) The CNC "position" was "temporarily funded and there is no ongoing continuing
need for the position to be filled due to genuine
operational requirements as
the temporary position relied on external funding to the Health Service. It no
longer exists and the
non-recurrent position ceased on 24 December 2024...The
Health Service can demonstrate there is no continuing need" as the CNC role
"not required and does not
2024, the purpose and funding of the unit was reviewed. A different
organisational structure was determined by the Director of
Medical Services,
Research and Innovation at MHHS, that did not include a CNC (Nurse Grade 7)
role. The organisational structure
of the unit "consists of 3 Clinical Nurses
at the Nurse Grade 6 level, a Nurse Unit Manager and
Pharmacist."
d) "The purpose of the Research and Innovation Unit within Mackay Hospital and
Health Service is collaboration with external partner
for academic, clinical
trials and governance."
e) While the CNC role was initially advertised for a 6-month
Mrs Smith remained in
the role until 30 December 2024.
f) The Executive Director People and Culture determined "that there is not
continuing need for the position to be filled. It is
the Health Services
responsibility to determine the positions and classification of the positions
required to deliver health services
to ensure resources of the public sector
health system are used effectively and efficiently as outlined in the
and Health Boards Act 2011
g) "The Health Service decision is in line with Public Sector Directive 03/23
not to convert Ms Smith permanently to a position that
does not exist nor does
the Health Service have an organisational requirement for a Clinical Nurse
Consultant (Nurse Grade 7), Research
and Teletrial with Research and
Innovation."
h) Since the Delegate's decision was issued, Mrs Smith's temporary part-time
contract as a Nurse Grade 7 was extended to 7 December
2025. Mrs Smith is
working "with James Cook University based at the Mater Private Hospital in
Mackay" as arranged and agreed with
the Executive Director Nursing and
Midwifery, MHHS.
are not substantially same or similar as roles that you are suitable for across
the Health Service. I understand from the
Executive Director Nursing &
Midwifery that do not have transferable skills required at the Nurse Grade 7
level with management
including human resources and fiscal
management."
j) "there were no permanent Nurse Grade 7 vacancies substantially the same or
similar to role Ms Smith had previously
performed."
2. Non-compliance with
Interpretation Act
(Qld) 1954 (AI Act) because the conversion refusal decision
contained no evidence or other material to support the finding that there
"no organisational need for the CNC Research and Teletrial role"
respect to the second appeal ground, Mrs Smith stated:
a) "The Decision provides no evidence or other material on which the finding
that there was '...no organisational need for the CNC
Research and Teletrial
ongoing', was based."
b) "The Respondent has also not provided any
evidence or other material
as to NUM and CN roles in the...Unit are permanently funded yet the CNC role is
respect to the second appeal ground, the Respondent stated:
a) "The Health Service can demonstrate there is no continuing need...[for] the
[CNC] position is not required and does not
b) The organisational structure was reconsidered. It was decided that a NUM was
required, rather than a CNC. The Respondent submitted
Having regard to the classification structure in the...[Award] and the work
value associated with the duties that are required to
be undertaken in the unit,
it has been determined that there is not requirement for...[CNC] level duties to
be undertaken. The functions
previously undertaken in relation to clinical
trials and the future / ongoing needs of the unit mean that some of the
functions have
a work value that appropriately sit at the Clinical Nurse Grade 6
level, and then to ensure appropriate management of those nurses
a...[NUM] was
required. The functions of the former Clinical Nurse Consultant Teletrial role
has a different focus with aspects
of led by the Nurse Unit Manager (Nurse Grade
7) and Nurturing Director (Nurse Grade 11) Research Support
3. Non-current funding status is
irrelevant.
respect to the third appeal ground, Mrs Smith stated:
a) The Delegate noted that the CNC role "was temporary as the funding was
provided short term by an external body to the Health Service.
The position no
longer exists as the position ceased on 29 December 2024."
b) The Delegate did not provide any "further analysis or evidence as to why it
is not viable or appropriate for it to source the
funding for the position from
elsewhere or to create and fund a permanent position for the employee's
employment to be converted
permanent."
IC had earlier observed that "whether there is a continuing need for Ms Smith to
be employed in the role is a different question
to whether there is continuing
or recurrent funding for Ms Smith's role." The Commission held
I would further note that if it is found that an employee is suitable for the
role and that there is a continuing need for someone
to perform the role, it is
not sufficient to simply state that there is no recurrent funding for a position
and therefore it is not
viable or appropriate for conversion to occur. A
budgeted vacancy or recurrent funding is not a requirement for conversion to
The Respondent needs to provide further analysis or evidence as to why
it is not viable or appropriate for the Respondent to source
the funding for the
position from elsewhere or to create and fund a permanent position for the
employee's employment to be converted
to permanent. The Respondent might also
provide further specifics or evidence to support its contention that the funding
continue or that the trial is coming to an
respect to the third appeal ground, the Respondent stated:
a) The Research and Innovation Unit within MHHS "relies on revenue raising and
own source funding."
b) The external funding provider is Queensland Regional Clinical Trial
Coordination Centre (QRCC).
QRCC provided non-recurrent funding to support the CNC
Decision criteria
required to decide this appeal by assessing whether or not the decision appealed
against is fair and reasonable. This involves
a review of the decision-making
process utilised and the decision arrived at.
[42] Section
114(3) of the PS Act contain the mandatory decision criteria for temporary
employment conversions to permanent. The
decision maker
there is a continuing need for someone to be employed in the role,
role that is substantially the same;
whether the
employee is suitable to perform the role; and
whether there
are any requirements of an industrial instrument that need to be complied with,
in relation to making the decision.
[43] Section
114(4) of the PS Act states (emphasis added):
If the matters in subsection (3) are satisfied, the employee's chief
executive must decide to offer to convert the employee's employment
permanent basis,
unless it is not viable or appropriate to do so having
regard to the genuine operational requirements of the public sector
[44] In making
the conversion decision, s 115(3)(b) provides that the chief executive must also
"have regard to the reasons for each
decision previously made, or taken to have
been made, under this section or section 114 in relation to the employee during
the employee's
period of continuous employment."
[45] The parties
do not dispute that Mrs Smith is suitable to perform the role.
Compliance with an industrial instrument
[46] The parties
do not submit that there are any requirements of an industrial instrument that
need to be complied with, in relation
to making the decision.
Reasons for any decision previously made or deemed
[47] The PS Act
prescribes that the chief executive must have regard to the reasons for each
decision previously made, or deemed to
have been made, in relation to the
employee during their period of continuous employment. Neither party have
raised that as a matter
in contention here.
Consideration
[55] My decision firstly turns on the question of whether there is a
continuing need for Mrs Smith to be employed in the role, or
a role that is
substantially the same.
[56] I will then go on to consider whether there are any genuine operational
requirements that would make her conversion to permanent
employment "not viable
or appropriate".
[57] There are two potential pathways to conversion. The first pathway is the
Appellant's current role. The second pathway is an alternative
role which is
substantially the same.
Whether there is a continuing need for the person to be employed in the
role - or a role which is substantially the same
continuing need
for someone to be
employed in the employee's
[59] The PS Act
mandates that the Delegate considers this precise question.
is that of 'Clinical Nurse Consultant' (Nurse Grade 7) with the
Research Support Unit, Mackay.
[61] The HHS's
considerations of the
'continuing need' for the role
– and the Appellant's involvement in it – are both required. They
are not one and the
same. Circumstances may exist where the role is continuing,
but the person's involvement in it is not. In that sense, it is important
interpret the provisions holistically but also pay appropriate attention to the
particular separate elements of the clause.
[62] The real
controversy between the parties is whether (or not) there is a continuing need
for "someone" to be employed in
of 'Clinical Nurse Consultant'
(Nurse Grade 7) with the Research Support Unit, Mackay.
[63] In my view,
a continuing need for someone to be employed in
The Respondent's submissions are persuasive on that particular limb. The
role Mrs Smith formerly occupied no longer exists –
it ceased on 24
December 2024. That is because the organisational structure was reconsidered
and differently determined, such that
further roles were added and the CNC role
since replaced with a NUM. While the duties and responsibilities of the CNC
role (as expressed
in the role description) are certainly different to that of
the other roles now contained in the new structure, it is nonetheless
the HHS to decide to provide a different service – in turn supported by a
different mix of roles, that it considered
better suited to that different
[64] I will now
turn to consideration of the second pathway to permanent conversion of
"substantially the same" roles.
continuing need
for the Appellant
to be employed in a
role which is substantially the same?
[65] The PS Act
mandates that the Delegate considers this precise question.
prescribed definition of 'the same role' in the (Pre–Amendment) Directive
08/17 was deliberately broad and captured
"...a role which has the same or
substantially the same capability requirements...or a role with a generic role
description involving
I note that no
definition of 'the same role' is provided in the (now amended) Directive 02/23,
however in the absence of the term
being otherwise contemporaneously defined I
will rely on the definition in the (Pre–Amendment) Directive
v State of Queensland &
Crow J considered the
definition of "same role" in the (Pre–Amendment) Directive 08/17. His
Honour noted that the legislation
was remedial, and went on to
... through the expansive definition of "same role" in s 14 of Directive
08/17, "same role" may be interpreted to be quite different
roles, as long as
the roles have substantially the same capability requirements.
entirely foreseeable that a requirement may be worded slightly differently
between role descriptions, while still maintaining
the same or substantially the
same capability requirements. It is the substance of the requirement, rather
than merely the form,
that is critical here.
relevant that s 114(3)(a)(i) requires consideration of both the employee's role,
and a role that is substantially the same
(i.e. a 'Clinical Nurse Consultant'
(Nurse Grade 7) working within MHHS).
[70] Following
the decision of Pidgeon IC in the first appeal, the HHS's correspondence to Mrs
Smith conveying the second conversion
demonstrated adequate regard to this mandatory criteria. To the extent that
this mandatory limb is referred to at all, the Delegate's
decision only briefly
stated that "there are not substantially same or similar as roles that you are
suitable for across the Health
Service. I understand from the Executive
Director Nursing & Midwifery that do not have transferable skills required
at the Nurse
Grade 7 level with management including human resources and fiscal
management."
The Delegate's
assertion that Mrs Smith does not have the "transferable skills" to be placed
into a NUM role does not address the
specific legislative requirement of "a role
substantially the same" – that is, a CNC (Nurse Grade 7) working within
Respondent further submitted that "there were no permanent Nurse Grade 7
vacancies substantially the same or similar to role
Ms Smith had previously
performed."
The Delegate erred
in only considering permanent roles that were vacant. A budgeted vacancy is not
required in order for a conversion
to occur. Pidgeon IC made that clear in her
earlier Decision,
Commission has found in numerous other appeals of this kind.
v State of Queensland (Queensland
Pidgeon IC decided
to convert Ms Zhao's temporary employment to permanent, concluding
I accept that Ms Zhao cannot be employed in the particular position she is
currently backfilling as it has a substantive position
holder with a right to
undertook a review of other positions,
it did not find an existing vacancy to
offer Ms Zhao. However, an existing vacancy is not a requirement to enable
conversion. In
this case, having established, based on her employment history,
that there is a continuing need for Ms Zhao to perform the role,
substantially the same, and in the absence of genuine operational requirements
precluding appointment on tenure, Ms Zhao's
temporary employment should be
converted to permanent.
[73] As Dwyer IC
observed in
Stephens v State of Queensland (Queensland
MSHHS's decision
was found not to be fair and reasonable because of its inattention to the
mandatory consideration of "a role that
is substantially the same". He
...the decision maker has failed to comply with a mandatory requirement to
include findings and evidence on material findings of fact
with respect to what
efforts were undertaken to locate and consider roles that might be substantially
the same, and why roles considered
(if any) were excluded.
...the decision provides no information as to the extent, quality or
genuineness of the efforts made to find a substantially similar
role. That is
not to say that proper efforts were not made, but simply that there is no
information about those efforts that would
allow Ms Stephens to evaluate whether
she had been treated fairly.
[74] Dwyer IC
elaborated that the decision maker should:
...give consideration to any substantially similar roles that are available
at the time of the fresh review. If a permanent role
cannot be found for Ms
Stephens, I expect that any decision issued will set out the details of the
efforts to identify substantially
similar roles and (if applicable) why any
identified were excluded.
[75] I have
carefully considered each of those earlier Commission decisions and adopt the
reasoning of Pidgeon IC and Dwyer IC here.
[76] While I
have not accepted Mrs Smith's contention that there is a "continuing need" for
someone to be employed in the CNC role
(Nurse Grade 7), Research and Teletrial,
I do accept her argument that the Respondent was not compliant with s 27B of the
because the conversion refusal decision contained no evidence or other
material to support the Delegate's conclusion that there was
no continuing need
for Mrs Smith to be employed in a "role that is substantially the same as the
employee's role." The scant reference
to the mandatory second limb contained
within the Delegate's decision does not fulfil the requirement, nor has the
Respondent's submissions
provided any elaborated consideration of the
[77] For those
reasons, I will convert Mrs Smith's employment to permanent, in "a role that is
substantially the same" as the CNC
(Nurse Grade 7) Research and Teletrial role
Genuine operational requirements
relevant provision is found at s 114(4) of the PS Act. When the other criteria
are met, the chief executive must decide
to convert an employee to permanent
"unless it is not viable or appropriate to do so having regard to the genuine
operational requirements
of the public sector entity."
[79] 'Operational
requirements' are not defined in the PS Act, so the term must be given its
ordinary meaning. Where some uncertainty
exists in interpreting the words of a
legislative instrument, a variety of statutory interpretation rules
relevant rule of statutory interpretation is the principle of 'beneficial
legislation'. Legislative instruments which are
remedial in character, namely
intended to correct wrongs, are described as 'beneficial legislation'. That
principle has been applied
to equal opportunity legislation. In
IW v City of
it was held that such
remedial materials are:
to be given "a fair, large and liberal" interpretation rather than one which
is "literal or
technical".
[81] Deputy
President Merrell considered 'genuine operational requirements' in
State of Queensland (Department of Child Safety, Youth and Women)
Honour's explanation is also useful here (emphasis added):
The phrase 'genuine operational requirements of the department' is
not defined in the PS Act or in the Directive.
As a consequence, that
phrase must take its meaning from the words used in it and the context in which
it appears in the PS Act;
and consideration of the context includes surrounding
provisions, what may be drawn from other aspects of the instrument, the
as a whole and it extends to what the instrument seeks to remedy.
The same considerations apply to the construction of the same
phrase in cl
6.2(a) of the Directive.
The adjective 'genuine' relevantly means '...being truly such; real;
authentic.' The phrase 'operational requirements of the department'
obviously a broad term that permits a consideration of many matters depending
upon the particular circumstances of the department
at a particular
[82] Deputy
President Merrell's comprehensive exploration of the notion of genuine
operational requirements in
is regularly cited in decisions of
the Commission. It is relevant though that the
decision was
Different legislative provisions, different
Directives and different mandatory
decision criteria are applied in higher classification matters. There is a
particular nuance
to the context of Deputy President Merrell's consideration of
whether or not there was an 'authentic need' to appoint
higher classification level having regard to the effective, efficient and
appropriate management of the public resources of
the department because –
as I found first in
Holcombe v State of Queensland (Department of Housing and
Public Works),
and later in
Borean v State of Queensland (Queensland Health
– the employer does
not need two people in one
temporary employment conversion appeals are different – here it is not
, but rather to a
[84] Giving due
consideration to the object, scope and purpose of the relevant legislative
materials, any genuine operational requirements
preventing conversion to
permanency must not be trivial. Whenever a temporary employee is converted to
permanency, there will commonly
be managerial inconveniences and difficulties.
'Genuine' operational requirements must go beyond those.
[85] If the
inconveniences inherent to most if not all permanency conversions were
sufficient to constitute genuine operational requirements,
there would be few or
no conversions. That interpretation would defeat the purpose of Directive 02/23
and the review.
[86] In my view,
a 'reasonable' genuine operational reason is one which is sufficiently
substantial as to warrant overcoming the government's
commitment to limiting
temporary employment where possible.
[87] The HHS's
submissions provided that the genuine operational reasons to deny conversion was
effectively that the CNC (Nurse Grade
7) Research and Teletrial role had ceased
and was subject of non-recurrent funding from an external body. However, I have
not converted
Mrs Smith on the basis that there is a "continuing need" for her
to be employed in the role – but instead, I have converted
her to a role
that is "substantially the same" for which a budgeted vacancy is not
[88] MHHS has
not provided evidence to support the contention that converting Mrs Smith's
employment to permanent would compromise
the effective, efficient and
appropriate management of the public resources of the HHS. Rather, it appears
that course would also
most prudently guard the HHS's investment in Mrs Smith's
skill development and clinical expertise. In fact, it would certainly support,
not detract from, the effective, efficient and appropriate management of the
public resources.
[89] Considering
Mrs Smith's lengthy temporary employment history with MHHS, I am persuaded that
there is an authentic need for her
to continue in a role that is substantially
the same. There are no genuine operational requirements that would make Mrs
conversion to permanent employment "not viable or
appropriate".
[90] I do not
accept that funding is an impediment that would reasonably prevent the
conversion of Mrs Smith to permanency. The reality
is that Mrs Smith has been
working in the
for a lengthy period. During this time, she has been
engaged on successive fixed term temporary contracts. Mrs Smith has clearly
been paid for all those years of her work with the HHS already. What particular
wages line item in the budget her wages come from
is not so significant a matter
as to circumvent the government's commitment to maximising permanent
employment.
interpretation that I have applied here does not frustrate the intent of
government policy as articulated in the purpose
and principles of the Directive;
specifically to establish employment on tenure as the default basis of
employment in the Queensland
public service.
[92] On the
material before me, I have found that there is a continuing need for Mrs Smith
to be permanently employed in a role that
is "substantially the same".
Importantly, a "role" is different to a "position". The Respondent has rather
conflated those terms,
appearing to use the words almost interchangeably.
[93] As I have
disturbed the Respondent's contention that the reasons relied on for refusing
conversion were "genuine operational
reasons", the appropriate order is that Mrs
Smith's employment now be converted to permanent.
[94] In addition
to the explanation I have provided above regarding the default position and
matters contained in the PS Act, there
is also no requirement for there to first
be a budgeted 'vacancy' to be converted into.
[95] It follows
that there are no genuine operational reasons that would otherwise prevent the
Mrs Smith from being converted to permanent
employment.
[96] In arriving
at this conclusion, I am conscious that the PS Act and Directive are purposed
with encouraging and maximising security
of public sector employment. That
purpose is furthered by the undertaking of careful reviews of factual
circumstances in the context
of the relevant criteria prescribed in the
Directive and legislation. Those efforts allow for the achievement of its
[97] I order
accordingly.
That pursuant to
s 562C(1)(c)
Industrial Relations Act
appeal is allowed;
decision that Ms Smith not have her employment converted to permanent is set
aside and another decision is substituted; and
Smith's fixed term temporary employment status as a Nurse Grade 7 be converted
to permanent employment.
Correspondence from Ms Peta-Maree France (Executive
Director, People and Culture, MHHS) to Ms Karen Smith dated 11 April 2025,
[2025] QIRC
Public Sector Act
s 115(3)(a).
Correspondence from Ms Peta-Maree France (Executive Director, People and
Culture, MHHS) to Ms Karen Smith dated 11 April 2025,
Public Sector Act
Goodall v State of Queensland
(Supreme Court of Queensland, Dalton J, 10
October 2018), 5;
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Page v John
Thompson and Lesley Dwyer, As Chief Executive Officer, West Moreton Hospital and
Health Service
[2014] QSC 252
, [60]-[61];
Industrial Relations Act
Katae v State of
Queensland & Anor
[2018] QSC 225
Appeal Notice filed 2
May 2025, Schedule One, 1-2.
Appeal Notice
filed 2 May 2025, Schedule One,
Appellant's submissions
filed 16 May 2025,
Appeal Notice
filed 2 May 2025, Schedule One, [10]; Appellant's submissions filed 16 May 2025,
Appellant's
submissions filed 16 May 2025,
Respondent's submissions filed 30 May 2025,
Appeal Notice filed 2
May 2025, Schedule One, 2-3.
Appellant's
submissions filed 16 May 2025,
Respondent's
submissions filed 30 May 2025,
Respondent's
submissions filed 30 May 2025,
Appeal Notice filed 2
May 2025, Schedule One,
Smith v State of
Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2025] QIRC 071
Respondent's
submissions filed 30 May 2025,
Directive 08/17
Temporary employment
Respondent's
submissions filed 30 May 2025,
[2022] QIRC
[2022] QIRC
Victims Compensation Fund Corporation v Brown
(2003) 201 ALR 260
[1997] HCA 30
1997) 191 CLR
[2020] QIRC
[2020] QIRC
[2021] QIRC 295.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (572 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter