URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/142.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Byfield v Crane [2025] QDC 142 (10 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Byfield v Crane
[2025] QDC 142
CAROL ANNE BYFIELD
(Applicant)
JAMES CLAPHAM CRANE
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
10 October 2025 (
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
10 October 2025
Porter KC DCJ
be further provision made for Carol Anne Byfield from the estate of Hazel June
Cousens in the amount of $75,000.00, inclusive
James Jonsson and Matthew Jarvis Mullen the trustees appointed by Justice Henry
of the Supreme Court on 23 August 2024, on
a statutory trust for sale for 78
Swan Street Gordonvale, pay from funds that they hold for the estate of Hazel
Cousens as a co-owner
of that property to Carol Anne Byfield by way of discharge
of the order for provision made in order 1.
APPEARANCES:
The applicant appeared in person.
No appearance by the respondent.
applicant seeks further provision from the estate of her mother under s. 41(1)
Succession Act 1981
(Qld). For the reasons that, follow I order further
provision be made in the amount of $75,000.
Cousens died on the 26th of November 2021, leaving five children, James, Mark,
Carol, Patrick and Susan. At the time of her
death, she had a modest estate.
It comprised the house she lived in with her partner, Mr Purss. She and Mr
Purss owned the house
as tenants in common in equal shares. There was a small
mortgage amount, her share of which was covered by cash held by her. Ms
left a will made 20 August 2015.
to this case, that will left her property for the benefit of Mr Purss while he
lived, in broad terms, and then the residuary
of her estate being represented by
her interest in the property to her son, James. It also made James and Mr Purss
the executors.
Mr Purss died within a couple of months of Ms Cousens.
Accordingly, James was the sole beneficiary and executor of the estate.
9 of Ms Cousens will stated, “I have made no provision in my will for my
children”, and then she listed her
four children other than James,
“as I have no meaningful relationship with them, despite my repeated
attempts to contact them
over the years”. Those statements are not
admissible as truth to their contents but are admissible in these kinds of
proceedings,
to provide evidence of the reasoning of the testator in making
their order. The gravamen of that statement is challenged by the
applicant, Ms
Carol Byfield, and in evidence from her sister.
23 August 2023, the applicant, Ms Byfield, commenced an application for further
provision from her mother’s estate. That
originating application and its
supporting affidavit was served on solicitors acting for the respondent, the
applicant’s brother,
James, the executor under the will. At that time, it
appears uncontentious that James was in occupation of the house, certainly
was given as his address. The firm acting for him was catchily named The Will
the 20th of May 2022, The Will & All sent a letter on instructions which
contained the will, the death certificate and a schedule
of assets and
liabilities. As I have said that schedule indicated that, as a matter of
substance, the value of the estate was about
$157,000, being the value of a
half-share in the house once state liabilities as at the date of death were
might have been that that share was worth a little more than indicated in the
schedule. The property sold in 2024 for $476,000,
which ought to have given
shares in the estates of a good deal more than $157,000 for the two joint
owners. However, the estimate
is probably a good one for present purposes
because, as we will see, the trustees had to pay considerable amounts of costs
and for the sale, such that the net sale proceeds turned out to be about
$168,000 for each of the joint owners, not so far from the
$157,000 estimated at
I said, the originating application and supporting affidavit was served on The
Will & All on the 25th of September 2022. There
was no suggestion that they
did not communicate the application to their client or that the originating
application and supporting
affidavit were not effectively served. It would be
an odd thing, indeed, for solicitors acting for an executor who had been
of a potential family provision claim not to be able to accept service.
the 23rd of September 2022, draft directions were provided by solicitors acting
for Ms Byfield. There was no response. On the
12th of October 2022, The Will
& All communicated that they were no longer acting. Very little other
detail was provided, and
Ms Byfield’s solicitors were referred to Mr Crane
personally at 78 Swan Street Gordonvale. On the 6th of January 2023, a draft
directions order, the originating application and material were served on Mr
Crane, again, to that address by Ms Byfield’s
solicitors, and during 2023,
they tried to progress the family provision application with Mr Crane with no
success. In late 2023,
they came to believe that a firm called WGC Lawyers were
acting for the estate, but if that is what they thought, it seems to have
misunderstanding. WGC Lawyers were acting for the executor of Mr Purss’
estate and sought probate of his will.
May 2024, Monaco Solicitors again sent a letter to Mr Crane asking that the
relevant proceeds of sale, should the property be sold,
be placed into trust,
and that was delivered to his residence on the 20th of May. Relevantly, that
letter threatened to seek an
order from the court preserving the funds of the
estate. They got no response. In the meantime, the executor of Mr Purss’
estate was acting with more diligence. She obtained probate of the will of Mr
Purss and, on the 23rd of August 2024, obtained, as
applicant with Mr Crane as
personal representative of the estate of Ms Cousens as respondent, an order
Property Law Act 1974
(Qld), for a trust for
Jonnson and Mr Mullen who are, I assume, partners or directors of Grant Thornton
in Cairns were appointed as statutory trustees.
His Honour’s order is
before the court. The trustees, then, moved to sell the property. I was
assisted in knowing what happened
with the estate after that by Ms Laura
McMillan is a solicitor who works for O’Connor Law in Cairns.
O’Connor Law are the solicitors for the statutory trustees.
She acted on
their instructions for a good part of the last year apart from a period when she
was on maternity leave. But she had
access to her firm’s file.
McMillan gave oral evidence. She was able to provide evidence about some
important events and circumstances relating to the trusts
for sale. She was
asked about an email from Mr Carey, a director of O’Connor law, to Ms
Byfield from about 19 August 2025.
That document contained an extract from what
Ms McMillan was able to confirm was an extract of the accounts for the trust
the trustees. It shows that the property was sold for $476,000, that
there were 130,000 dollars-odd worth of property related costs
with net proceeds
for each of the joint owners of $168,000.
remained the amount available for the Purss estate. Neither Ms Byfield nor, to
her knowledge, any of her family are beneficiaries
in that estate. More
relevant and unfortunate is the position in respect of Ms Hazel Cousens share.
It was substantially reduced
by $74,000, being costs to evict Mr Crane. There
is evidence that he continued to live in the house for some time after the death
of his mother, at least at 2024. Ms McMillan was able to fill in the gaps as
she had acted in or been involved in or had direct
knowledge of the proceedings
to evict Mr Crane, which she described as difficult.
also referred to an order made in the trusts for sale proceedings where the
claim for possession was understandably brought by
the statutory trustees in
which Justice Henry ordered the costs of those proceedings to be paid from the
estate of Ms Cousens. When
I say, “The estate of Ms Cousens,” I
should say to be paid from her entitlement under the trusts for sale, of course,
because the statutory trustees are not dealing with the estate issues. As a
matter of substance, though, those costs being charged
against Ms Cousens share
meant that the estate itself was reduced by $74,000.
McMillan took instructions and reported on behalf of the trustees that the net
minimum sum that was available, allowing for future
costs and so on, was
McMillan also said that she, as a solicitor acting for the statutory trustees,
had no success at all in the months since the sale
occurred in getting any
response from Mr Crane about payment of the net sum due to Ms Cousens and,
therefore, to the estate and,
indeed, gave evidence that, to her knowledge,
neither the statutory trustees nor her firm had any idea where Mr Crane was.
appears he is living at 29 Bathurst Drive, Bentley, where he was served
with the application for these orders by post.
December 2024, Monaco Solicitors ceased acting for Ms Byfield and she began
acting for herself. In the middle of 2025, she tried
to have her matter brought
on for hearing. She did that by filing an application for family provision.
July and September, there was various mentions as she endeavoured to bring this
application to the attention of Mr Crane in
a way that was satisfactory to the
court. Ultimately, he was able to be served with an application for service and
then notice of
this application was able to be given at that address by post on
the 1st of October 2025. In my view, there has been sufficient
notice of this
application.
history of the application, even ignoring evidence from Ms Byfield about her
brother’s behaviour, demonstrates that Mr Crane
has not discharged any of
the duties of an executor of an estate the subject of a family provision
application. Even though this
is a small estate and even though, as I infer, Mr
Crane has mental health and other problems of his own, as an executor, he had
in relation to the application and they have not been complied with. He
has not cooperated in the conduct of the proceedings at
all. Rather, to the
contrary, as an executor, he had a duty separate from his own personal interest,
to preserve the assets pending
the determination of this application, and to
deal with the assets in a way that was in the interests of the administration,
those of the family provision applicant.
I appreciate that he is probably a person of very little means himself, to
continue to live rent-free in the house and not properly
maintain it was a
breach of that duty. He managed to, it seems, live there rent-free for at least
three years, which is a benefit
that he has received from the estate.
was his behaviour requiring litigation to obtain possession of the house. One
can well understand high emotions would fly about
the matter, but in the end, as
a matter of law, he was not entitled to be in possession of the property rent
free, unless and until,
at the very least, this application was dealt with, and
the interests of Mr Purss had been addressed. What he did instead was force
litigation for his removal, in breach of his duty as an executor, in a way that
has cost the estate $74,000.
assessing whether adequate provision has been made for the proper maintenance
and support of Ms Byfield, I need to consider whether
that jurisdictional
question is made out at the date of death. The value of the assets of the
estate at the date of death was probably
more like $200,000. Ms Byfield’s
position, then and now, has not much changed. She is 65 and has been on
disability support
since 2017, or around there, which is a modest sum. She is
single and lives alone in a rental property. She has four children and
stepchildren over 18. She has almost no resources of any substance, other than
$11,000 in superannuation. She has several
psychiatric and physical health
has three siblings other than James. One of those siblings has filed an
affidavit in support of her application; the other two,
she says, are aware of
the application. In any event, after the matter being on foot for years, no
attempt to make a claim has been
advanced by either of them.
Byfield had a difficult childhood and young adulthood, when she became pregnant
quite early. She had a difficult relationship
with her initial partner. There
was the relationship with her mother, that she says was a reasonably close one,
albeit, with periods
of conflict.
gives evidence that her mother and Mr Purss separated in 2016, and that around
that time, she did have a falling out with her
mother, which was reconciled
subsequently. She gives evidence that her brother was quite domineering in her
mother’s life.
In circumstances where he has not engaged or put on any
evidence, it is difficult to make findings about those sorts of matters
confidence.
tells us that there can be very different perspectives about relationships with
elderly parents between siblings, and it
is not unknown for elderly parents to
tell different things to different children about the others. There is an
affidavit from Ms
Byfield’s sister, Susan, in which she describes abusive
and greedy behaviour of her brother, James, at the time her mother
Byfield’s position has got, it seems, worse, not better, in the last few
years. She is suffering from unstable accommodation,
as, sadly, so many people
are these days. I am willing to act on the basis that both she and her brother,
James had a good deal
of financial need. Given that her other siblings have not
engaged in his process, I do not take their positions into account.
covered the issues of relationship and need. I have not forgotten the
observations in the will; however, again, experience tells
us that those kinds
of observations can be of a passing nature and relevant to a particular event,
and in any event, Ms Byfield’s
need is such that her mother failed in her
duty to make adequate provision for her proper maintenance and support by
leaving her
nothing under her will, notwithstanding the modesty of her
mother’s estate.
question is what provision to make. As I have said, there is only $75,000 in
the estate, represented by the minimum net amount
to which the estate is
entitled on the sale of the property in the way I have described.
Notwithstanding his misconduct as an executor,
I might have been inclined to
leave some part of those funds for Mr James Crane, but it is difficult to do so
in circumstances where
he caused such loss to the estate and had the benefit of
living in the estate house for three years. There may also be costs which
Byfield needs to address from Monacos, although that issue is a matter for her
to take up with them. But to my mind, adequate
provision for a proper
maintenance of support required at least $50,000 to be paid to Ms Byfield as the
only competing interest.
There will or may be costs. There is an estimate of
those at $25,000 in the original affidavit.
the best I can, I intend to order that there be further provision made for Carol
Anne Byfield from the estate of Hazel Jane
Cousens in the amount of $75,000. I
also order that Anthony James Jonsson and Matthew Jarvis Mullen, the trustees
appointed by Justice
Henry of the Supreme Court on 23 August 2024 on the
statutory trust for sale for 78 Swan Street, Gordonvale, pay from funds they
hold for the estate of Hazel Cousens as a co-owner of that property to Carol
Anne Byfield by way of discharge of the order for provision
made in order 1.
want to say a little bit about that form of order. The trustees were appointed
by the Supreme Court. They are officers of that
court with duties to that
court. In the absence of proceedings before this court, this court would not
have jurisdiction to make
any order relevant to their trust. However, s. 69 of
District Court Act 1967
(Qld) provides ancillary jurisdiction for
this court for the purposes of carrying out its primary jurisdiction conferred
68. This court’s jurisdiction includes making orders for
further provision under section 41(1) of up to $750,000.
69 should not be read narrowly. The purpose of it is to confer jurisdiction of
this court on this court to ensure this court
can exercise all the powers and
authorities of the Supreme Court, including the powers and authorities conferred
on that court by
an Act, for the purposes of exercising the jurisdiction
conferred by this part. As I said, that should not be read down or construed
where I am dealing with a situation in which an executor has, whether from
ignorance of the law or otherwise, utterly failed
in carrying out his duty as an
executor under the statute in respect of this proceeding, I have deep concern
that if I do not provide
clear instructions for the trustees that there may be
pointless and wasteful disputation between the executor and the trustees about
compliance with this order, which at a minimum might require the trustees to
seek a direction under
Trusts Act 1973
(Qld) to be able
to pay on this order.
my mind, it is for the purpose of ensuring that the exercise of this
I exercise the
power of the Supreme Court would have to give such a direction to the statutory
trustees, and that is the reason I
do so. The statutory trustees were given
notice of the proposed order by email by my Associate, and their solicitor
communicated
to my Associate they agreed to the order. When that is confirmed
in writing, the two emails will be made an exhibit in this proceeding.
order I have made is that further provision be made for Ms Byfield for $75,000
inclusive of costs and that those funds be paid
direct from the statutory
trustees to Ms Byfield.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (104 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter