URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCATA/2025/93.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Todd v Lennon-Muscat & Anor [2025] QCATA 93 (21 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Todd v Lennon-Muscat & Anor
[2025] QCATA 93
MARK JAMES TODD
(applicant/appellant)
PAUL LENNON-MUSCAT
(respondent)
CHRISTOPHER HICKMAN
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
ORIGINATING APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
DELIVERED ON:
21 October 2025
HEARING DATE:
On the papers
DECISION OF:
Senior Member Brown
to appeal is granted;
appeal is allowed;
decision of the Tribunal dated 28 August 2023 is varied as follows:
Order 1 is set aside and in lieu thereof it is ordered
that Paul Lennon-Muscat must pay Mark James Todd the sum of $39,761.77 within
days of the date of this decision.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES –
RIGHT OF APPEAL – WHEN APPEAL LIES – ERROR OF LAW
– GENERALLY – question of law – whether tribunal erred in
assessing appellant’s entitlement
to damages – original claim
against second respondent dismissed on basis of no contractual relationship and
no duty of care
owed – where tribunal found second respondent had not
received payment directly from appellant and whether this precluded order
repayment in circumstances where second respondent not licenced to undertake
building work – errors of fact – claim
for rectification work
confined to cost of removal of defective work – error in interpretation of
Queensland Building and Construction Commission Act 1991
– appeal on question of mixed law and fact – rehearing
CONTRACTS – BUILDING, ENGINEERING AND RELATED CONTRACTS –
PERFORMANCE OF WORK – GENERAL – appellant paid first
respondent to
perform building work – appellant subsequently became aware respondents
were unlicenced to perform building work
Queensland Building and
Construction Commission Act 1991
(Qld) – first respondent refused to
repay deposit – appellant claimed against each respondent for repayment of
paid, rectification and costs – claim against first respondent
allowed – claim against second respondent dismissed
Civil Liability
Queensland Building and Construction
Commission Act
Queensland Building and
Construction Commission Regulation 2018
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Cachia v Grech
[2009] NSWCA 232
Queensland Building Services Authority
[2013] QCA 391
Properties Pty Ltd v Delmoss Pty Ltd
[1986] 2 Qd R 388
Anor v Mt Cotton Constructions Pty Ltd
[2018] QCATA 196
Harrison and
Anor v Meehan
[2016] QCATA 197
Harrison v Meehan
James v Tottman (No.2)
[2022] QCATA 10
[1999] 1 Qd R 173
McIver Bulk Liquid Haulage Pty Ltd v
Fruehauf Australia Pty Ltd
[1989] 2 Qd R 577
M.Todd v Muscat &
Hasan Construction Pty Ltd & Ors
[2023] QCAT 332
QUYD Pty Ltd v Marvass Pty Ltd
[2008] QCA 257
[2009] 1 Qd R 41
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
This matter was heard and determined on the papers pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Respondents:
Self-represented
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an appeal from a decision about a building dispute.
proceeding below was commenced by the appellant naming Muscat & Hasan
Construction Pty Ltd as first respondent, Paul Lennon-Muscat
respondent and Christopher Hickman as third respondent. In these reasons I will
refer to each of the respondents below
as the first, second and third
respondents noting that the first respondent is a no longer a party in these
appeal proceedings.
applicant said below that:
(a) The appellant required concreting work to be undertaken at his residence;
(b) The second respondent, who was a director of the first respondent, attended
at the appellant’s residence and subsequently
provided a quote dated 1
July 2021 to undertake concreting work at the appellant’s residence for a
price of $33,107.00;
(c) On 2 July 2021 the appellant paid to the second respondent an amount of
$11,587.45;
(d) On 14 July 2021 the appellant paid to the second respondent an amount of
$11,587.45;
(e) At various times, the second and third respondents attended at the
appellant’s residence and undertook building work;
(f) On or about 22 July 2021 the appellant became aware that none of the
respondents held a licence issued by the Queensland Building
and Construction
Commission (‘QBCC’) to undertake building work;
(g) On 22 July 2021 the appellant advised the second respondent that he had
become aware of the unlicensed status of the respondents;
(h) The respondents did not return to the residence after 22 July 2021;
(i) Despite requests to do so the second respondent failed or refused to repay
to the appellant any part of the monies he had received
from the appellant;
(j) The appellant subsequently engaged an engineer to assess and advise on the
work undertaken by the respondents;
(k) The opinion of the engineer was that the work undertaken by the respondents
was defective and required rectification;
(l) The appellant claimed against each of the respondents $36,825.87 being
repayment of the monies paid by the appellant and rectification
and associated
[4] The matter
proceeded to hearing on 12 July 2023. The appellant and third respondent
appeared at the hearing. There was no appearance
by the first and second
respondents.
[5] Evidence was
given by the appellant and the third respondent. On 28 August 2023 the Tribunal
ordered that the first and second
respondents pay to the appellant $18,647.47.
The appellant’s claim against the third respondent was
appellant appeals the decision on two grounds:
(a) Ground 1 - the Tribunal erred in dismissing the claim against the third
respondent;
(b) Ground 2 - the Tribunal erred in assessing the entitlement of the appellant
to recover from the respondents.
[7] A party to a
proceeding may appeal to the appeal tribunal against a decision of the tribunal
in the proceeding.
required if the appeal involves a question of fact or mixed law and
The principles to be applied
in considering whether leave to appeal should be granted are:
(a) Is there a reasonably arguable case of error in the primary
(b) Is there a reasonable prospect that the applicant will obtain substantive
(c) Is leave necessary to correct a substantial injustice to the applicant
caused by some error?
(d) Is there a question of general importance upon which further argument, and a
decision of the appellate court or tribunal, would
be to the public
[8] If leave to
appeal is granted, in deciding the appeal on a question of law the Appeal
Tribunal may confirm or amend the decision,
set aside the decision and
substitute its own decision or set aside the decision and remit the matter to
the tribunal for reconsideration.
The Appeal Tribunal may set aside the decision and substitute its own decision
only if this results in the disposition of the appeal
entirely in the
appellant’s favour.
on a question of fact or mixed law and fact must be conducted by way of
The Appeal Tribunal
may confirm or amend the decision, set aside the decision and substitute its own
decision or set aside the decision
and remit the matter to the tribunal for
reconsideration.
Consideration
Tribunal made a number of findings relevant to the third respondent:
(a) The third respondent had no financial connection with the first and second
respondents;
(b) The third respondent worked as a labourer under the supervision of the
second respondent;
(c) The third respondent was paid $1,200 by the second respondent for his work
as a labourer;
(d) The third respondent received no payment directly from the appellant;
(e) The third respondent was on site for at least three days but not on every
day work was carried out at the appellant’s property
by the second
respondent;
Queensland Building and
Construction Commission Act
(Qld) (‘QBCC Act’) does
not provide a right of recovery for monies paid to an unlicensed person;
(g) For the appellant to succeed against the third respondent, the appellant was
required to establish that he had a contractual
relationship with the third
respondent or that the respondent carried out the work unsatisfactorily,
negligently, or not in accordance
with the plans and specifications;
(h) The appellant’s claim against the third respondent for breach of
contract could not succeed as the parties were never in
a contractual
relationship;
(i) The appellant’s claim against the third respondent for negligence
could not succeed as the third respondent was not at
the site every day of the
build and the appellant had failed to identify the nature of the defective work
undertaken by the third
respondent.
necessary to say a number of things about the conduct of the proceeding below.
[11] Despite
being directed to do so, none of the respondents filed a response to the
originating application. Having said this, it
is relevant to note that the third
respondent did file a statement of evidence.
[12] Directions
were made by the Tribunal on 27 October 2021 that if the respondents failed to
file responses by 22 November 2021
the appellant may be entitled to a final
decision conditional upon the assessment of damages. On 19 November 2021 the
third respondent
filed an application to be removed from the proceeding on the
basis that, inter alia, he had no direct relationship with the appellant
not liable to the appellant. The application, which may be understood as an
application for summary dismissal of the claim
against him, was refused. On 16
August 2022 the Tribunal directed that unless the respondents filed responses by
20 August 2022 the
appellant would be entitled to a final decision. Directions
were made on 3 March 2023 that the matter would proceed to a determination
the papers unless an oral hearing was requested by a party by 17 March 2023. No
such request was made.
appropriate to pause here to consider the effect of the various directions
referred to above. It is clear that, in the
absence of a response being filed by
each of the respondents, the appellant would be entitled to a final decision
against each of
the respondents subject to the assessment of damages. It is also
apparent from the directions that the assessment of damages would
require the
Tribunal to consider the basis upon which the appellant might have an
entitlement to recover damages against each of
the respondents.
[14] The matter
was listed to be determined on the papers. The Tribunal Member constituted to
decide the matter determined that the
matter proceed to a final hearing. The
procedure for the proceeding was at the discretion of the Member. If the Member
that an on papers hearing was not appropriate it was solely within
the Member’s discretion to proceed by way of an oral hearing
there being no unfairness to the parties. No unfairness is asserted by the
appellant says, and it is not contentious, that the third respondent was not the
holder of a QBCC issued licence to undertake
building work. Nor is it
contentious that the third respondent was never paid money by the appellant for
undertaking work at the
appellant’s residence. The finding of fact by the
Tribunal that the third respondent had no financial connection with the first
and second respondents is not appealed. This finding may be understood as
meaning that the third respondent simply worked for the
other respondents. The
finding of fact that the third respondent was paid $1,200 by the second
respondent is not appealed. It seems
clear from the reasons that the learned
member was satisfied this was the only payment received by the third respondent
for undertaking
the subject building work. There was no evidence below to the
[16] Section 42
of the QBCC Act provides:
carrying out of building work
(1) Unless exempt under schedule 1A, a person must not carry out, or undertake
to carry out, building work unless the person holds
a contractor’s licence
of the appropriate class under this Act.
Maximum penalty—
(a) for a first offence—250 penalty units; or
(b) for a second offence—300 penalty units; or
(c) for a third or later offence, or if the building work carried out is tier 1
defective work—350 penalty units or 1 year’s
imprisonment.
(2) An individual who contravenes subsection (1) and is liable to a maximum
penalty of 350 penalty units or 1 year’s imprisonment,
commits a crime.
(3) Subject to subsection (4), a person who carries out building work in
contravention of this section is not entitled to any monetary
consideration for doing so.
(4) A person is not stopped under subsection (3) from claiming reasonable
remuneration for carrying out building work, but only if
(a) is not more than the amount paid by the person in supplying materials and
labour for carrying out the building work; and
(b) does not include allowance for any of the following—
(i) the supply of the person’s own labour;
(ii) the making of a profit by the person for carrying out the building work;
(iii) costs incurred by the person in supplying materials and labour if, in the
circumstances, the costs were not reasonably incurred;
(c) is not more than any amount agreed to, or purportedly agreed to, as the
price for carrying out the building work; and
(d) does not include any amount paid by the person that may fairly be
characterised as being, in substance, an amount paid for the
person’s own
direct or indirect benefit.
& Anor v Mt Cotton Constructions Pty
the QCAT Appeal Tribunal
considered the various authorities dealing with the proper construction, and the
effect, of s 42:
Marshall v Marshall
the Court of Appeal considered the meaning and
effect of s 42 of the (then)
Queensland Building Services Authority Act
1991 (QBSA) (now the QBCC Act). McPherson JA stated that the combined effect of
s 42(1) and s 42(7) of the QBSA was twofold: to
prohibit a person from carrying
out unlicensed building work; and to prohibit a person from undertaking to carry
out unlicensed building
work. His Honour held:
In my opinion, the effect of s.42(3) is to prevent an unlicensed builder, in
proceedings of any kind, from recovering the price or
any part if it payable
under a contract for building work carried out in contravention of the section.
Taken by itself, that might
perhaps not prevent a builder from receiving money
voluntarily paid by the other party. The terms of s. 42(3) are, however, very
wide. A person who carries out work in contravention of s. 42 is “not
entitled” to any “monetary consideration”
for doing so.
According to the ordinary meaning of those words, a person receives a
“monetary consideration” for carrying
out work if he is paid for
...but s.42(3) expressly declares it to be money to which the recipient is
“not entitled”, which can only mean that it
is money to which he has
in law no right or title. If that is so, there is no identifiable basis on which
he can, as against the
person who paid it, claim to keep or retain it or its
equivalent.
McPherson JA referred to the legislative history of
s 42 noting that the section was:
...the third attempt by the legislature to make its meaning clear. On this
occasion it may be credited with having intended to cast
the net as widely as
possible. An unlicensed builder is, as s. 42(3) now provides, not entitled to
any monetary consideration for
carrying out building work. A principal object of
the legislation, both in its original and in its current form, is to prevent
builders from doing certain kinds of building work.
In addressing the question of whether the homeowner was entitled to recover
monies paid to the builder McPherson JA held:
In determining whether or not the mistake of law has that character here, it is,
in my respectful opinion, first of all necessary
to determine whether the effect
of s. 42, and in particular of s. 42(3), is to relieve the plaintiff of any
legal obligation to pay
the price or any part of it. It is only if there was no
such legal obligation that the plaintiff can claim to recover her payment
money paid under a mistake of law. Once that is shown, it may not be necessary
to make the further inquiry whether s. 42(3) also
has the effect of denying the
defendant the right to retain the money so paid. The plaintiff may, on the
authority of
David Securities Pty. Ltd. v. Commonwealth Bank
[1992] HCA 48
be entitled without more to recover the money paid.
But if the payment was made in pursuance not merely of a mistake of law but
under an agreement or transaction that was prohibited
and made an offence by
statute, then the plaintiff needs to go the further length of establishing that
the statutory prohibition
does not preclude her from recovering what she has
If the defendant was not entitled to any monetary consideration for carrying out
building work in contravention of s. 42, then, as
I would interpret s. 42(3), he
is not entitled to retain the payment made to him for doing it. Because the
prohibition in s. 42 was
enacted for the benefit of a class of persons of whom
the plaintiff is one, she is entitled to recover the payment she made to the
was the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Zullo Enterprises Pty Ltd
. In Sutton, McPherson JA held:
But, since the undertaking to do and the carrying out of the building work are
both prohibited by s.42(1), it is difficult to see
why the expression
“monetary consideration for” doing the work should not receive a
correspondingly wide meaning preventing
recovery of restitutionary compensation
for the prohibited work.
Pincus JA noted the significance in s 42(1) of the prohibition
upon the doing of the relevant work and that it was principally that
prohibition
which suggested that the result in
Pavey v Matthews
necessarily govern the construction of s 42(3) of the QBSA. In addressing
whether a claim in quantum meruit fell within
the meaning of
‘consideration’ in s 42(3), Pincus JA held:
...I do not accept that the principle, of which the leading example is
, permitting such a claim to be made where a contract is
unenforceable for want of formality should be extended to include also instances
in which a statute prohibits both the contract and the doing of the work.
The most recent consideration of s 42 by the Court of Appeal is the decision in
Cook's Construction Pty Ltd v SFS 007.298.633 Pty Ltd
trading as Stork Food Systems Australasia Pty Ltd)
. In the period between
the decisions in
, s 42 of the QBCC Act was
amended to provide as follows:
(3) Subject to subsection (4), a person who carries out building work in
contravention of this section is not entitled to any monetary
consideration for doing so.
(4) A person is not stopped under subsection (3) from claiming reasonable
remuneration for carrying out building work, but only
if the amount claimed
(a) is not more than the amount paid by the person in supplying materials and
labour for carrying out the building work; and
(b) does not include allowance for any of the following–
(i) the supply of the person’s own labour;
(ii) the making of a profit by the person for carrying out the building work;
(iii) costs incurred by the person in supplying materials and labour if, in
the circumstances, the costs were not reasonably incurred;
(c) is not more than any amount agreed to, or purportedly agreed to, as the
price for carrying out the building work;
(d) does not include any amount paid by the person that may fairly be
characterised as being, in substance, an amount paid for
the person’s own
direct or indirect benefit.
Cook’s Construction
Keane JA held in relation to the operation
of s 42(1) of the QBCC Act:
Section 42(1) renders illegal the making and performance of a contract for
building work by an unlicensed builder. It is the conduct
of the builder which
is struck at. The provision is plainly intended to operate for the benefit of
the other party to the building
It is clear from the terms of s 42(3) and s 42(4) that neither provision
purports to create a right of action to recover money in
any person. Rather,
each subsection is concerned to regulate a cause of action for payment which is
assumed to have arisen, either
under contract or under the principles of the
common law which permit claims for payment for work done at the request of
These common law claims have been variously described as claims for
quantum meruit or in quasi-contract or to prevent unjust enrichment.
Section 42(3) is, in terms, concerned to sterilise any claim which might
otherwise be made under a contract or under the common law
by an unregistered
builder. Section 42(4) is concerned to impose limitations upon the right of
action at common law which it preserves
against the sterilising effect of s
42(3). Without s 42(4), the entitlement of an unregistered builder to payment
which would, apart
from the Act, arise upon the performance of work by the
builder, would be defeated by s 42(1) and s 42(3)
Keane JA found that it was only to the extent that a claim for reasonable
remuneration was made out by the builder in conformity
with s 42(4) that the
operative effect of s 42(3) upon the rights and liabilities of the parties was
As to the operative effect of s 42, Keane JA held:
Section 42 of the Act exhibits a clear intention to render illegal both the
making and the performance of a contract by an unlicensed
builder in so far as
building work is concerned. Section 42(3) makes it clear that the consequence of
a contravention of s 42(1)
by an unlicensed builder is that the builder is
unable to recover payment for unlicensed building work. Those consequences
the recovery of payments made to the builder by the other party to a
contract for unlicensed building work.
In considering the question of whether and to what extent there was any
limitation placed upon a payer’s right of recovery,
Keane JA held:
...to insist upon a more extensive limitation upon the payer's right of
recovery, for example, one based on its inability to make
restitutio in integrum
– whether in money or money's worth – is to introduce a
qualification upon the payer's right of
recovery which is consequential upon the
operation of s 42(3). That qualification urged by the appellant cannot be
accepted: its
acceptance would defeat the operation of s 42(3). (footnotes
[18] The learned
member correctly found that s 42 does not in express terms create a right of
recovery of payments made to an unlicensed
person. As the authorities to which I
have referred make clear, that entitlement arises by operation of the
prohibition on an unlicensed
person receiving payment for undertaking building
mischief at which s 42 is directed is unlicensed persons entering into
agreements for the performance of building work, undertaking
building work and
receiving payment for undertaking building work. As McPherson JA stated in
Marshall v Marshall
unlicensed person receives payment for undertaken building work there is no
identifiable basis on which he can,
as against the person who paid it
claim to keep or retain it or its equivalent. The words underlined are
significant for present purposes. The third respondent was
not paid by the
appellant. He was paid by the first or second respondent. The appellant can only
recover payments
made to unlicensed persons. He cannot recover
payments made to the third respondent because he did not pay any money to the
respondent. On the other hand, the appellant has an entitlement to recover
payments made to the first and second respondent on the
basis that these were
payments made directly by the appellant.
[20] The learned
member did not err in not finding the third respondent was obliged to repay to
the appellant any amount paid to him
by the second respondent or any amount paid
by the appellant to the first and/or second respondents.
appellant says the Tribunal erred in assessing his entitlement to damages. There
are three issues relevant to this ground
(a) The basis of the appellant’s claim for damages against the
respondents;
(b) The findings of the learned member relevant to (a);
(c) The approach of the learned member to the assessment of damages.
[22] In the
original building dispute application the appellant claimed against all
respondents restitution of $23,174.90 and rectification
or completion of
defective work in the amount of $13,650.97.
[23] The powers
of the tribunal to resolve a building dispute include ordering rectification or
completion of defective or incomplete
Rectification or
completion work can only be ordered against a party to a proceeding and only in
circumstances where the party is
the holder of a QBCC issued building licence.
Here, none of the respondents was licenced. Accordingly, rectification was not
the Tribunal could have made. It seems that what the appellant was in
fact seeking was an award of damages for the cost of rectification
identified in the report by the engineer.
[24] Nowhere in
the appellant’s material below is the claim clearly expressed as one for
damages for breach of contract or damages
for breach of duty. Clearly however
the appellant’s entitlement to damages could only arise in circumstances
where he was able
to establish breach by the respondents, whether breach of
contract or breach of duty.
[25] The learned
member found that a contract for the performance of domestic building work was
entered into by the appellant and
respondent.
The learned member
found that the work undertaken by the first and second respondents was
The learned member
found that the work undertaken by the first and second respondents had not been
undertaken in an appropriate and
skilful way and with reasonable
The learned member found
that rectification work was required in respect of the defective work in
accordance with the engineer’s
The learned member
found that the second respondent was a director of, the secretary of, and sole
shareholder in the first respondent
and was responsible for the work undertaken
at the appellant’s
The learned member
found that the cost of rectification was $13,650.97 and that the appellant was
entitled to recover this amount
from the first and second respondents. These
findings are not appealed.
[26] While no
specific finding of breach of contract was made by the learned member it is
readily apparent from the reasons that the
learned member’s finding that
the appellant was entitled to recover the cost of rectification work flowed from
a breach of
the contract. Noting the finding by the learned member that the
parties to the contract were the appellant and the first respondent,
unclear from the reasons as to the basis upon which the second respondent was
found to be liable to the appellant. There was
no finding that the second
respondent was a party to the contract. No finding was made that the second
respondent owed to the appellant
a duty of care or that the duty was breached.
These matters are not raised by the appellant in this appeal.
[27] The claim
in the proceeding below against the third respondent was not articulated in any
way separately or differently to the
claims against the first and second
respondents. Given the finding by the learned member that the third respondent
was not a party
to the contract, the appellant’s claim against the third
respondent could only have been one for breach of duty. The learned
member found
that a claim by the appellant against the third respondent for negligence could
not succeed on two bases: firstly, the
third respondent only worked on site for
three days and not every day of the build; secondly, the appellant had failed to
the defective work carried out by the third
respondent.
These findings are
not appealed. It may be accepted from the foregoing that the learned member was
satisfied the third respondent
did not owe the appellant a duty of care. The
appellant does not raise as an appeal ground error by the learned member in this
[28] The learned
member said the following in relation to the assessment of damages:
Notwithstanding the operation of s 42 of the QBCC Act, the claim for the refund
of the $23,174,90 must be rejected because the payment
of the rectification
costs of $13,650.97 would return Todd to the position of having a properly
erected driveway. The refund of $23,174.90
as well as payment of the
rectification costs of $13,650.97 would unjustly enrich Todd. Therefore, the
claim for the refund of $23,174.90
appellant says that the proposed work would have restored the appellant to the
position he would have been in had the building
work not been undertaken by the
respondents. This submission may be accepted. The evidence before the Tribunal
below was that the
claim for the cost of rectification work was confined to the
cost of the removal of the defective work in accordance with the opinion
engineer. The claim did not extend to the cost of constructing a new driveway.
The learned member erred in making a finding
contrary to the evidence. This was
an error of fact.
[30] The learned
member also erred in rejecting the claim by the appellant for the refund of the
monies paid by the appellant to the
first and/or second respondents. As has been
explained earlier in these reasons, s 42 of the QBCC Act is clear in its terms.
absence of a claim by an unlicensed person pursuant to s 42(4), the
person may not retain any money received for carrying out building
appellant was entitled to recover the amount of $23,174.00 paid to the second
respondent. The learned member erred in construing
the effect of s 42 of the
QBCC Act. This was an error of mixed law and fact.
Conclusion of
grounds of appeal
[31] It follows
from the foregoing that leave to appeal should be granted.
appeal on a question of fact or mixed law and fact must be decided by way of
I now proceed to
decide the appeal in accordance with s 147 of the QCAT Act. In
Harrison and
Anor v Meehan
Appeal Tribunal explained what is required when rehearing a matter:
[20] ... Appeals by way of rehearing involve a new determination of the rights
and liabilities of the parties, rather than a mere
correction of the errors in
the determination of the Tribunal below.
[21] An appeal by way of rehearing under s 147 of the QCAT Act is not a
rehearing de novo. The Appeal Tribunal must make its own
determination on the
material before the Tribunal below (supplemented, if necessary by additional
evidence if permitted under s 147(2))
with due respect for the findings of fact
of the primary Tribunal, and due consideration of the advantages enjoyed by
[22] In rehearing the matter we have adopted the learned member’s primary
findings of fact other than where those findings
have been challenged in these
appeals or where there is some doubt as to the findings made. We have otherwise
formed our own views
on the evidence consistently with the principles applicable
in appeals by way of rehearing on the record of proceedings before a
correctness of this approach was affirmed by the Court of
[34] I have
addressed in these reasons the grounds of appeal raised by the appellant. It is
unnecessary for me to traverse those matters
again in rehearing the matter.
Accordingly, I confine my further consideration to the assessment of the
appellant’s claim for
[35] As earlier
noted, the first respondent is not a party in this appeal having been removed as
a respondent by order of the Appeal
Tribunal made 17 February 2025. The first
respondent was in fact deregistered before the decision below was handed down.
Accordingly,
there was no basis upon which orders could have been made against
the first respondent although it should be observed that the deregistration
the first respondent was not known to the appellant until after the commencement
of the appeal.
Claim against Paul Lennon-Muscat for recovery of
monies paid for performing unlicenced building work
[36] The learned
member’s finding that the appellant paid to the second respondent
$23,174.90 is not appealed. The second respondent
was not licensed at the time
he received the payment or when the work was undertaken, nor has the second
respondent made a claim
for reasonable remuneration under s 42(4) of the QBCC
Act. Accordingly, the appellant is entitled to recover the amount of $23,174.90
from the second respondent.
Claim against Christopher Hickman
for recovery of monies paid for performing unlicenced building work
[37] The third
respondent received no payment from the appellant. Such monies as the third
respondent received for undertaking the
building work were paid to him by the
first and/or second respondents. For the reasons I have earlier set out, on a
proper construction
of s 42 of the QBCC Act and the various authorities to which
I have referred, there can be no order for the repayment of monies received
the third respondent from the first and/or second
respondents.
Claim against Paul Lennon-Muscat for damages for
breach of contract and/or breach of duty
appellant has confined his claim for damages to the cost of removal of the
defective work undertaken by the respondents.
The finding below that the
rectification work was necessary and reasonable is not appealed. It was not
contentious below that the
second respondent was the guiding hand of the first
respondent. He was the director, secretary and shareholder of the first
respondent.
I am satisfied, on the evidence below, that the second respondent
utilised the first respondent as a vehicle to undertake his business
building contractor. I am satisfied that the second respondent held himself out
as, and conducted himself in a manner consistent
with being, a qualified and
competent building contractor.
[39] The finding
below that the parties to the contract were the appellant and the first
respondent is not appealed. The second respondent
was not a party to the
contract. It is therefore necessary to consider whether the appellant has an
entitlement to damages as against
the second respondent independent of contract.
[40] For the
reasons I have expressed, on the evidence below, I am satisfied that the
relationship between the appellant and the second
respondent was characterised by an assumption of responsibility by the second
and known reliance by the appellant and falls within one of the
special categories of cases in which a duty of care is
I am satisfied that the
second respondent owed to the appellant a duty to undertake the building works
in an appropriate and skilful
way with reasonable care and skill and free from
provisions of the
Civil Liability Act 2003
(Qld) (‘CLA’) fall to be considered. I am satisfied that there was a
risk that if the second respondent failed to undertake
the building work in an
appropriate and skilful way, free from defects, the appellant would suffer harm
in being required to have
the defective work rectified. I am satisfied the risk
was not insignificant and that a person in the position of the second respondent
would have taken appropriate precautions in ensuring that the work was
undertaken free from defects.
am satisfied that the harm the appellant may suffer was serious and there was no
undue burden imposed upon the second respondent
associated with taking
precautions to avoid the risk of harm – the second respondent was simply
required to undertake the work
in a competent
I am satisfied that but
for the breach of duty by the second respondent the defects resulting from the
performance of the building
work would not have been apparent and the appellant
would not have suffered loss in being required to expend monies in rectifying
the defects.
The defects were
the direct result of the way in which the second respondent undertook the
building work.
satisfied that the second respondent breached the duty of care he owed to the
appellant. I am satisfied that the appellant
is entitled to recover the cost of
the rectification work from the second respondent.
against Christopher Hickman for damages for breach of contract and/or breach of
[43] On the
evidence below and the uncontested findings of fact I find that the third
respondent was not a party to the contract for
the performance of the building
work. Nor am I satisfied that the relationship between the appellant and the
third respondent was
characterised by an assumption of responsibility by the
third respondent and known reliance by the appellant. I am not satisfied
the relationship between the appellant and the third respondent falls within one
of the special categories of cases in which
a duty of care is owed. Nor am I
satisfied on the evidence below that the relationship between the appellant and
the third respondent
was such that there was reliance or vulnerability on the
part of the appellant. I make this finding based on the following: there
evidence that the third respondent was nominated by the appellant to undertake
the work; there was no close relationship between
the appellant and the third
respondent; the work undertaken by the third respondent resulted not from any
direct dealings with the
appellant but was rather undertaken at the direction of
the second respondent; the work of the third respondent was not of a particular
skilled or technical nature. In conclusion I am not satisfied that the third
respondent owed to the appellant a duty of care in undertaking
the building
Assessment of damages
[44] In refusing
to order the repayment to the appellant of the monies he paid to the second
respondent, the learned member said that
if the amount was ordered to be repaid
and in addition the appellant was awarded rectification costs, the appellant
would as a result
be unjustly enriched. In my view, the learned member erred in
so finding.
v Tottman (No. 2)
Tribunal considered the application of s 42 of the QBCC Act in the context of a
claim for damages for defective building
work. At first instance, the building
owner had been awarded a refund of the money paid to an unlicensed builder in
addition to damages
for the cost of rectification work. Judicial Member McGill
[4] In the Application for leave to appeal or appeal filed by the appellant on
31 July 2020 he raised a number of matters. The first
was that, under the
decision of the Member, the respondent received a “windfall” and was
“unjustly enriched”.
This was the same argument addressed to the
Court of Appeal in
Cook’s Construction Pty Ltd v SFS 007 298 633 Pty
[2009] QCA 75
, and rejected by that Court, on the basis that that was
the result of the operation of legislation put in place specifically to deter
people from undertaking building work unless they held the relevant licence
under the Act. The adverse effects of that prohibition
are mitigated by the
operation of s 42(4) of the Act, which provides a limited form of relief in
respect of unlicenced work, but
the Court held that it was a matter for the
builder to claim and prove the amount recoverable under s 42(4), which that
builder had
[5] In that respect, the appellant is in the same position. He did not pursue a
claim under s 42(4), which should have been pursued
by filing a
Counter-application under the Rules. That could have been formulated as a
conditional application, advanced if he were
found to be the party to the
contract, which he disputed. Had he done so, he may have been able to recover
some of the cost of materials
supplied to the site. He told me he spent more
than the $11,000 paid to him on materials, and a number of invoices were
to an affidavit by him which the member did consider. On the
respondent’s case, some of those materials were defective; for
the soil under the turf, which was said to have been contaminated by nut grass.
This is the answer to the second point,
and also to the sixth point, raised by
the appellant in the Application for leave to appeal and appeal, that no
consideration was
given by the Member to the cost of materials supplied.
(footnotes omitted)
[46] An order
for the repayment of monies received by an unlicensed person is not an award of
damages. It is the consequence of the
statutory prohibition on a person
receiving payment for undertaking building work when the person is not licensed.
As Judicial Member
McGill SC observed, the effect of the statutory prohibition
is mitigated by s 42(4) which entitles an unlicensed person to claim
– and limited – remuneration for carrying out building work. The
assessment of damages on the other hand flows
from, as the case may be, breach
of contract or breach of duty.
[47] It follows
from the foregoing analysis that the appellant is entitled to recover from the
second respondent $23,174.90 being
the repayment of the monies paid by the
appellant to the second respondent and $13,650.97 being the cost of
rectification work. These
amounts total $36,825.87.
[48] The learned
member awarded interest on the damages awarded for rectification costs. The
evidence below was that the rectification
work was undertaken in September 2021.
The Tribunal may award damages, and interest on the damages at the date, and
calculated in
the way, prescribed under a regulation. By
Queensland Building and Construction Commission
Regulation 2018
(Qld), interest is payable on the amount of damages awarded:
(a) if the parties have entered into a contract, at the rate provided
contract; or (b) at the rate agreed between the parties; or (c) otherwise, at
the rate of 10%. By
of the regulation interest is payable on and from
the day after the day the amount became payable until and including the day the
amount is paid. Damages do not become payable until awarded by the Tribunal.
decision below was handed down on 28 August 2023. It is appropriate that the
final orders reflect that interest is payable
at the rate of 10% on the amount
awarded of $13,650.97 from 28 August 2023. Interest accrues at the rate of $3.74
per day. Interest
to the date of this decision totals $2,935.90.
Tribunal below awarded the appellant costs in the amount of $3,876.50. Leave is
required to appeal a costs
There has been no
application for leave to appeal the costs order below.
[51] The final
assessment of the appellant’s entitlement to recover against Paul Lennon-
Recovery of monies paid by the appellant $23,174.90
Cost of rectification work $13,650.97
Interest $ 2,935.90
Total $39,761.77
Final orders
make the following orders:
(a) Leave to appeal is granted;
(b) The appeal is allowed;
(c) The decision of the Tribunal dated 28 August 2023 is varied as follows:
Order 1 is set aside and in lieu thereof it is ordered that Paul
Lennon-Muscat must pay Mark James Todd the sum of $39,761.77 within
the date of this decision.
M.Todd v Muscat & Hasan Construction Pty Ltd
[2023] QCAT 332.
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act
Ibid, s 142(3)(b).
QUYD Pty Ltd v Marvass Pty Ltd
[2008] QCA 257
[2009] 1 Qd R
Cachia v Grech
[2009] NSWCA 232
2009), [13].
QUYD Pty Ltd v Marvass Pty
[2008] QCA 257
[2009] 1 Qd R 41.
Glenwood Properties Pty Ltd v Delmoss Pty
[1986] 2 Qd R 388
McIver Bulk
Liquid Haulage Pty Ltd v Fruehauf Australia Pty Ltd
[1989] 2 Qd R 577
QCAT Act, s 146.
Ericson v Queensland Building Services
[2013] QCA 391.
QCAT Act, s 147(2).
QCAT Act, s 147(3).
[2018] QCATA 196.
[1999] 1 Qd R 173.
QBCC Act, s 77(3)(g).
Reasons [6] and [7].
Reasons [11].
Reasons [13].
Reasons [14].
Reasons [35].
Reasons [18].
QCAT Act, s 147(2).
[2016] QCATA 197.
Harrison v Meehan
[2017] QCA 315.
Chau’s & Sons
Pty Ltd t/as Holiday Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Qld v Karam
CLA, s 9(1).
CLA, s 9(2).
CLA, s 11(1)(a).
CLA, s 11(1)(b).
[2022] QCATA 10.
QCAT Act, s
142(3)(a)(iii).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (265 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter