URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Aurizon Property Pty Ltd v The Chief Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads [2023] QLAC 1 (13 December 2023)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF
Aurizon Property Pty Ltd v The Chief Executive, Department of Transport
and Main Roads
[2023] QLAC 1
Aurizon Property Pty Ltd
ACN 145 991 724
(appellant)
The Chief Executive, Department of Transport and Main
(respondent)
Land Court No AQL054-20
Land Appeal Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
Appeal from the Land Court of Queensland
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
13 December 2023
DELIVERED AT:
10 and 11 October 2023
WA Isdale, Member of the Land Court
Coker DCJ, Acting Member of the Land Court
operation of the decision of the Land Court in this matter,
Aurizon Property
Pty Ltd v Chief Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads
, decided on 9 December 2022, is suspended.
matter is remitted to the Land Court to act according to law with a hearing
before another Member.
question of costs is to be decided by the Court on the papers without any
parties are to file and exchange written submissions by 4:00pm on Wednesday, 31
January 2024, not to exceed two (2) pages.
CATCHWORDS:
REAL PROPERTY – COMPULSORY ACQUISTION OF LAND – PROCEEDINGS FOR
COMPENSATION – QUEENSLAND – APPEAL TO LAND
APPEAL COURT –
whether the Court failed to give adequate reasons – whether the Court
failed to identify and decide central
issues to the case – whether the
Court acted upon the wrong principle
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL
– GENERAL PRINCIPLES – WHERE FINDINGS BASED ON CREDIBILITY OF
WITNESSES – GENERALLY
– where the expert witness’s credit is
central to the case – whether the witness gave false evidence –
the credibility of the witness was not expressed in the reasons –
whether the Court made an appealable error
Acquisition of Land Act
Aurizon Property Pty Ltd v Chief Executive, Department of Transport and
[2022] QLC 22
Australian Provincial Assurance Association
Ltd v Commissioner of Land Tax
[1942] ALR 156
Beydoun v Valuer-General
[2018] QLAC 1
[2018] 39 QLCR 34
Boland v Yates Property Corporation Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 64
(1999) 74 ALJR 209
Chief Executive, Department of Natural Resources
and Mines v Kent Street Pty Ltd
[2009] QCA 399
(2009) 171 LGERA 365
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2009] QCA 66
[2009] 2 Qd R
Eumundi Group Hotels Pty Ltd v Valuer-General
[2021] QLAC
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Intertherm Pty
Ltd v The Crown
(1978) 5 QLCR 21
Maurici v Chief Commissioner of State
(2003) 212 CLR 111
Townsville City Council v Chief Executive,
Department of Main Roads
[2005] QCA 226
[2006] 1 Qd R 77
Turner v Minister of
Public Instruction
[1956] HCA 7
(1956) 95 CLR 245
Yates Property Corporation Pty
Ltd (in liquidation) v Darling Harbour Authority
(1991) 24 NSWLR 156
APPEARANCES:
Mr DR Gore KC, with Mr JJ Ware (instructed by Corrs Chambers Westgarth) for
the appellant
Mr RJ Anderson KC (instructed by Clayton Utz) for the respondent
Introduction
[1] In 2014, the respondent resumed a 30-metre-wide strip of
land running the 950 metre length of the northern boundary of the land
the appellant at Wulguru, south of Townsville. At the time of the resumption,
the appellant was the registered owner of
174.5 hectares of land. The area
resumed was 2.875 hectares. However, because of hydrological considerations, it
was agreed that
pre-resumption the maximum developable area was 90.3 hectares
and post-resumption 78.5 hectares with the consequential reduction
maximum developable area of 11.8 hectares. The appellant applied to the Land
Court for compensation assessed under
Acquisition of Land Act
. The parties agreed disturbance costs of $200,000 (inclusive of interest)
requiring the Court below to otherwise assess compensation
on the date when the
compensation claim principally concerned the injurious affection caused to the
appellant’s remaining land and there
was substantial agreement between the
parties with the result that the only experts called to the give oral evidence
were civil engineers
and valuers. The issues concerning the civil engineering
experts were discrete, but there was a “threshold” difference
between the parties upon the valuation methodology so that:
“... the critical issue between the parties,
was the appropriate methodology to value the acquired land, either the direct
(Mr Lyons) or the hypothetical development method (Mr Crawford). Mr
Lyons’ undertaking involved a sub-issue, namely whether
reliance upon
parcels of land sold in Townsville for residential development are appropriate
to utilise in the direct comparison
methodology. Had the hypothetical
development method been preferred, disagreement as to the appropriate inputs to
be utilised loomed
[3] The appellant’s expert valuer, Mr Crawford, expressed
the opinion that the primary method of valuation should be the hypothetical
development approach, looking at what the land would have been capable of being
used for compared to what it could be used for after
the resumption. This is an
acceptable method of valuation in a compensation case such as the
Mr Crawford
was of the opinion that suitable comparable sales did not exist, so he selected
this method.
[4] Mr Lyons, the expert valuer called for the respondent, was
of a different opinion to Mr Crawford, using sales in the Townsville
area which,
in his opinion, were comparable, although in different zoning for development
and use purposes.
[5] The valuers disagreed on the fundamental question of
what method to use to arrive at an assessment of compensation.
comparable sales method (advocated by Mr Lyons) has its adherents and for sound
superiority of sales evidence when valuing land is illustrated by the words of
then President Trickett in the Land Court
Fairfax v Department of Natural
Resources and Mines
“The principles for determining of the “market value” of
land were established by the High Court in
Spencer v The Commonwealth
(1907) 5 CLR 418. In that case, the High Court found that the value of land is
determined by the price that a willing but not over-anxious
buyer would pay to a
willing but not over-anxious seller, both of whom are aware of all the
circumstances which might affect the
value of the land, either advantageously or
prejudicially, including its situation, character, quality, proximity to
conveniences
or inconveniences, its surrounding facilities, the then present
demand for land and the likelihood of a rise or fall in the value
property. (See Griffith CJ at 432 and Isaacs J at 411).
It has been well established that the unimproved value of land is ascertained
by reference to prices that have been paid for similar
parcels of land. In
Waterhouse v The Valuer-General
(1927) 8 LGR (NSW) 137
at 139, Pike J
‘Land in my opinion differs in no way from any other commodity. It
certainly is more difficult to ascertain the market value
of it but – as
with other commodities – the best way to ascertain the market value is by
finding what lands comparable
to the subject land were bringing in the market on
the relevant date – and that is evidenced by
But it is desirable that the comparison be of like with like.
The sales must be truly
comparable.
Intertherm Pty Ltd v The Crown
“It is a primary rule of valuation that like should be compared with
like and this applies in so far as all relevant factors,
including the zoning, a
concern. The rule is recognised by the Land Appeal Court in Amoco Australia Pty
Ltd v The Crown (SL30455).
... At page 16 of the judgment it was stated
“it is difficult to compare land situated in different zones. It is
to avoid such comparison, if possible.”
In this case it will be recalled that Mr Lyons drew upon sales
of differently zoned land (residential) in valuing the subject land.
hypothetical development method suggested by Mr Crawford is a recognised method
of valuation, finding authoritative support
in the High
It is recognised that this method has a particular utility in the absence of
reliable comparable sales evidence and the site is vacant
or not developed to
its highest and best use.
discussion of cases above is not novel nor controversial. Both methods of
valuation find support in cases of high authority.
Both methods can be of more
or less utility, depending upon the circumstances and the availability of
[9] This conclusion of which valuer is to be preferred has
significant consequences for calculation of the compensation payable to
appellant. The Land Court, accepting the opinion and therefore the methodology
employed by Mr Lyons, determined compensation
in the sum of
$2,450,000.
[10] The appellant, dissatisfied with this, has appealed to this
Court and submits that the evidence of Mr Crawford should be accepted.
would result, it submits, in compensation being determined in the sum of
$6,500,000, of which $5,900,000 is attributable to
the hypothetical development
calculation. Alternatively, if the Court applies the comparable sales method,
the one used by Mr Crawford,
it should assess the base compensation at or
between $4,200,000 and $5,600,000. The base compensation is arrived at by the
the hypothetical development valuation method. The difference is
accounted for by the value of the land taken, disturbance costs
The Grounds of
[11] The hearing in the Court below (including inspections and
submissions) took four days and compensation was determined in the
$2,450,000.
appellant has appealed the decision. The grounds of appeal
1. The learned Member erred in
a. treating the 3 residential
sales as comparable sales for the purposes of an industrial site, and in failing
to decide the Appellant’s
contention, that, as a matter of principle,
those sales could not be treated as comparable;
b. failing to decide the
Appellant’s contention that the Respondent’s valuer, Mr Lyons, could
not be relied upon, because,
in the course of his evidence, he had demonstrated
dishonesty or a reckless disregard for the truth, and because he was a very
inexperienced
expert witness;
c. disregarding the earlier valuation opinions
of Mr Lyons, as recorded without objection in the valuation JER, about the sales
Ridge Street, Roseneath, Charlton and Yatala, and the application of those
opinions to the subject site;
d. failing to decide that the sale for an
industrial purpose at Ridge Street, Roseneath, identified, by a significant
amount, the
lowest value that could be applied to the subject
e. incorrectly describing a contention of the Appellant that Mr
Lyons’ overall assessment of compensation was incapable of being
when looking at the increased cost of developing the balance area in the
post-resumption scenario as being based on estimates
made by the
Appellant’s civil engineer, when the true position was that the contention
was based on 8 scenarios that were primarily
based on agreed facts and evidence
that emanated from the Respondent’s consultants (Mr Lyons, Mr Caleo
– the valuer first
retained by the Respondent – and the
Respondent’s civil engineer);
f. taking into account the evidence of Mr
Lyons that the cost of developing the estate in the post-resumption scenario was
in the before-resumption scenario, in circumstances where that
evidence was explained by the significant loss in area in the post-resumption
scenario caused by the resumption;
g. failing to decide that the hypothetical
development method was the appropriate valuation method to apply, in view
i. the absence of comparable sales evidence;
ii. the large amount of
agreed inputs into the method;
iii. the consistency of inputs into the method
which arises when using the before and after method of valuation;
respect to the application of the hypothetical development
i. concluding that the profit and risk factor is a product of the IRR
ii. failing to conclude that Mr Crawford’s profit and risk
factor of 20% in both the before and after scenarios was
appropriate;
iii. failing to conclude that the land was ripe for
development;
iv. taking into account a post resumption fact, namely, that the
balance of the subdivision was not completed at the time of the
v. deciding that Mr Crawford’s sales rate was overly
optimistic;
vi. concluding that the Respondent’s submission that the
vast range of outcomes (from around $16.5M to $6.5M) serve to illustrate
significant difficulties associated with reliance on such a method was relevant
and weighed against the adoption of the method
in this case;
vii. concluding
that Estate Master is a program used to prepare a Residual Land Value Assessment
to check the value arrived at using
a comparable sales method;
viii. deciding
that in the application of the Estate Master program by Mr Lyons appropriate
account was taken of the sales rate (in
circumstances where Mr Lyons conceded
that was not the case, and that his concession would make a big impact on the
numbers generated
by his use of that program);
i. deciding that, in relation
to the hydromulch issue and the intersection cost issue, Mr Crawford had applied
the figures provided
by the Appellant’s civil engineer, Mr Gould,
directly, when the true position was that Mr Crawford had used Mr Gould’s
figures as an input to the model that he was using for the hypothetical
development method, and the model produced the result used
j. failing to apply the liberal estimate principle so as to resolve
matters in favour of the Appellant, when the evidence was insufficiently
uncertain, ambiguous or unresolved to permit the application of that principle,
or otherwise where its application was warranted.
2. In view of the errors in
para 1, the learned Member erred:
a. in law, in treating residential sales as
comparable sales for the purposes of an industrial site;
b. in law, in
failing to decide central questions in the hearing (namely, those identified in
the grounds in sub-paras 1(a)-(d), above);
c. in law, in failing to give
adequate reasons for his decision (namely, reasons relating to the grounds
identified in sub-paras 1(a)-(d),
d. in law, in failing to adopt the
hypothetical development method;
e. in law, in failing to apply the liberal
estimate principle;
f. in failing to apply the hypothetical development
method in accordance with the evidence of Mr Crawford;
g. in failing to
decide that the correct assessment of compensation was $6,500,000.
[12] Prominent among the grounds of appeal are those that
complain that the reasons for certain important findings were inadequate.
grounds were agitated before us at the hearing of the appeal, but it is
convenient to consider the complaints of the inadequacy
of reasons first.
Essentially, the appellant submitted that the reasons in (broadly speaking)
three respects were inadequate and
in each case it involved an issue fundamental
to the assessment and determination of compensation. The issues
(a) The failure to give reasons for the acceptance of Mr
Lyons notwithstanding an attack upon both his credit and his inexperience
expert witness;
(b) The failure to give reasons for the acceptance of Mr
Lyons valuation based on comparable sales;
(c) The failure to give reasons
for the rejection of Mr Crawford’s valuation based on a hypothetical
development method.
[13] For the reasons given in what follows, the appeal must
succeed and the orders made in the Land Court must be set aside. Notwithstanding
the submissions and urging of the appellant that this Court should assess the
compensation, the proper course in the particular circumstances
proceeding to be remitted to the Land Court for a hearing before and
determination of compensation by a different Member.
In that hearing, the
determination of compensation should be based upon the evidence tendered and
relied upon by the parties at that
challenge to the credit of Mr Lyons
[14] At the hearing below, there was a sustained attack upon
the credibility of Mr Lyons. This is demonstrated by the outline of submissions
relied upon by the appellant at the hearing
“177. There are some conventional credibility issues that have arisen
in this hearing. It is convenient to deal first with the
2 valuers, given that
there [sic] evidence is at the core.
178. Regrettably, Mr Lyons exhibited the traits of a witness whose evidence
treated with particular caution
a serious question about his honesty arose
in connection
with exhibit 74, his typed record of his interview with Kent Burbidge from the
Maidment Group on 6 October 2022. The
mere production of this document arose in
suspicious circumstances. It was not provided to Aurizon or the Court until
9:12am on Tuesday,
25 October 2022, which was day 3 of the hearing, after Mr
Lyons was sworn in as a witness on day 2. Aurizon noted at the start of
that it was “
particularly troubling
” that documents 74, 75
and 76 had “
arrived overnight
But matters only got worse from there
. The tender of exhibit 74
came after the following exchange with Mr Anderson KC:
181. It can be seen that when asked the specific question when he typed the
note, Mr Lyons unequivocally told this Court that he typed
the note on 6 October
2022. He confirmed that in the following exchange at the start of his cross
examination after the document
had been tendered:
It was then established that that evidence (which had been given
twice) was incorrect
, by the documents that became exhibit 80, which were
tendered after the following exchange:
There is no innocent explanation for the giving by Mr Lyons of the
incorrect evidence
deliberate falsehood
, or it was evidence given with reckless disregard for
Regrettably, the former is the more likely explanation of the
. His attempt to justify the inconsistency on the basis that he
must have misunderstood Mr Anderson
” itself lacks
credibility. Mr Anderson’s question was crystal clear, and so too was Mr
Lyon’s response. Further
inconsistency then arose in relation to the
handwritten notes; in his evidence in chief, he said: “
” I’ve destroyed the handwritten notes, but once the truth
came out, he became dogmatic that he had destroyed them.
184. These are multiple conventional signs of a witness whose evidence should
be treated with great caution. The content of exhibit
74 is not at the heart of
the case, but the credibility of Mr Lyons is.
If he is prepared to be
flirtatious with the truth about a side issue
, his evidence about a central
issue should be treated with great caution.
185. But there are many other reasons why the Court should treat Mr
Lyons’ evidence with great caution.
He is plainly an inexperienced
, having only given evidence once before in this Court, nearly 30
years ago. In that 30 year period, there have been many changes
in all Courts in
the country in relation to the giving of evidence by expert witnesses, with the
guiding theme being that the expert’s
overriding duty is to the Court, and
not to be an advocate. In this Court, that development in the law is reflected
Land Court Rules 2022
, which also picks up Schedule 1C
It is obvious from his overall performance in this case
that Mr Lyons has not kept pace with these changes in relation to the giving
expert evidence
186. Some illustrations of his
failure to understand his duty
already been given above, in connection with his changes of position in relation
to the Charlton and Yatala sales, and in relation
to the production of his
supplementary report (ex.27), and his shift of position on Roseneath, and his
inconsistent positions in
relation to the use of post-resumption facts. His
shifts of position consistently favoured the Department. He was unaware of the
term “model litigant”. He never volunteered that the advance which
the Department had paid to Aurizon was based upon
a report by an experienced
valuer who had applied a value of $150,000/ha to the developable lands, it being
immaterial, insofar as
credibility issues are concerned, that that earlier
report ultimately assessed compensation by reference to the cost of placing
In a case where the valuers giving evidence are so far apart, there was an
onus on Mr Lyons to bring it to the attention of the Court
that his predecessor
had valued the developable lands at nearly double the value that Mr Lyons puts
on the developable lands.
Mr Lyons also shifted position
in relation to the highest and
best use issue, both within the JER itself, and in his supplementary report. His
explanations for
his shifts of position were unsatisfactory.
188. There were various
occasions in cross examination when Mr Lyons was
not directly responsive to a question
, and he had to be pulled up by the
cross examiner, and there was a distinct tendency in all of his evidence to be
an advocate for
his client, rather than a witness assisting the
(citations omitted) (emphasis added)
[15] The only occasion when the Member, in the course of his
reasons, discussed the credibility issues was in paragraph [9] where
“The credibility of both valuers was to a
greater or lesser extent challenged during the hearing. In the end I accept that
valuers were firm in their views, perhaps a little inflexible, but not
disingenuous.”
[16] The Member did not address in a reasoned way the
criticisms of Mr Lyons made by the appellant in the hearing below. This has
ramifications when considering his reasons for accepting Mr Lyons’
valuation opinion and rejecting those of Mr Crawford.
The acceptance of Mr Lyons’ methodology and
rejection of Mr Crawford’s
[17] The Member foreshadowed his findings early in his
“[42] The evidence which is canvassed later in
these reasons lead me to favour the view of Mr Lyons in this
Thereafter, the reasons contained numerous findings largely
accepting the methodology of Mr Lyons and rejecting Mr
Crawford’s.
findings at [143] and [144] form part of the reasons for rejecting the
methodology of Mr Crawford:
“[143] In my view, Mr Crawford’s sales
rate is overly optimistic. I accept the submission that there is no evidence to
support the assertion that the supply of new industrial land of lots greater
than 2 ha will generate demand.
[144] The evidence of Mr Lyons, who has 27 years of valuation experience in
the Townsville area, was that there was limited demand
for lots of greater than
2 ha, and that that limited demand has to date been met by amalgamating parcels
in other industrial subdivisions.
I accept the respondent’s analysis of
absorption rates that in the 5 years prior to the resumption date there only 8
lots greater
than 2 ha taken up in the Townsville
[19] They are found at the heart of the Member’s
consideration “Conclusions on Methodology”, which commences at
and concludes at [160] and [161]:
“[160] I note the issues raised by Mr Crawford
concerning Mr Lyons analysis of englobo residential sales and that some of those
issues may be valid, however my decision goes to the reliability of the method
in this case and the application of the method I consider
the more reliable.
[161] There is no question that the residential sites are different to the
subject site. In the circumstances however, despite the
shortcomings, I am of
the view that the comparable sales approach is the more reliable
methodology.”
[20] In fairness to the Member, below a reading of his reasons
demonstrates that he methodically addressed the points of fact and
law agitated
by the parties in support of their rival contentions concerning the valuation of
the compensation. Without expressing
any view upon the criticisms made by the
appellant in support of the appeal, so far as it concerns discreet issues of
valuation (fact
and law) agitated by the parties, it must be acknowledged that
the Member was at pains to address the rival contentions systematically.
Further, as the pages from his reasons quoted
demonstrate,
he was at pains
to explain why, in the case
of numerous issues, he preferred the opinion of Mr Lyons to that of Mr Crawford.
But in this context,
his reasons do not address why, in respect of the issues
agitated, he preferred Mr Lyons’ opinion notwithstanding the attack
his credit and his inexperience as an expert witness.
A review of some of the cases
[21] A failure by a Court to give reasons is a serious failing
resulting in an error of law. In Yates Property Corporation Pty Ltd
liquidation) v Darling Harbour
““The giving of proper reasons for decision has been seen to be
“an incident of the judicial process”.
Housing Commission of New
South Wales v Tatmar Pastoral Co
(at 386) per Mahoney JA, approved by Gibbs
Public Service Board (NSW) v Osmond
(1986) 159 CLR 656
Accordingly judicial officers have a duty to give proper reasons, and a failure
to perform this duty constitutes an error
Pettitt v Dunkley
Compliance with the requirements of natural justice is also an incident of
the judicial process: see
Commissioner of Police v Tanos
[1958] HCA 6
(1958) 98 CLR
at 396. Denial of natural justice to a litigant has also been held to be an
error of law: see
Escobar v Spindaleri
(1986) 7 NSWLR 51
at 57, 59, 60;
Sullivan v Department of Transport
[1978] FCA 48
(1978) 20 ALR 323
(S) v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1982] FCA 141
(1982) 65 FLR 127
News Corporation Ltd v National Companies and Securities Commission
(1984) 5 FCR 88
at 95, 122.
The duty of a judicial officer to hear and determine a claim made in judicial
proceedings conducted before that officer is also an
incident of the judicial
process. Since breaches of the duty to give proper reasons and to observe
procedural fairness involve errors
of law, there seems every reason to hold that
a breach of the duty to hear and determine a claim made in judicial proceedings
gives rise to such an
[22] The principles outlined by Handley JA are well established
and there are many authorities to similar effect in the context of
Tribunals from whom an appeal may lie. In Drew v Makita (Australia) Pty
Muir JA (with
whom Holmes JA and Daubney J agreed) said:
“[57] A court from which an appeal lies must state adequate reasons for
its decision. The failure to give sufficient reasons
constitutes an error of
[58] The rationale for the requirement that courts give reasons for their
decisions provides some guidance as to the extent of the
reasons required. The
requirement has been explained, variously, as necessary: to avoid leaving the
losing party with “a justifiable
sense of grievance” through not
knowing or understanding why that party lost; to facilitate or not frustrate a
right of appeal;
as an attribute or incident of the judicial process; to afford
natural justice or procedural fairness; to provide “the foundation
acceptability of the decision by the parties and the public” and to
further “judicial accountability”.
[59] The extent to which a trial judge must expose his or her reasoning for
the conclusions reached will depend on the nature of the
determination and “the function to be served by the giving of
reasons”. For that reason, what is required
has been expressed in a
variety of ways. For example, in
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd,
Mahoney JA said:
“...And, in my opinion, it will ordinarily be sufficient if – to
adapt the formula used in a different part of the law
... by his reasons the
judge apprises the parties of the broad outline and constituent facts of the
reasoning on which he has acted.”
[60] McHugh JA’s view was that reasons sufficient to meet the above
requirements do not need to be lengthy or elaborate but
necessary that the essential ground or grounds upon which the decision rests
should be articulated”.
Strbak v Newton
, Samuels JA said:
“... What is necessary, it seems to me, is a basic explanation of the
fundamental reasons which led the judge to his conclusion.
There is no
requirement, however, that reasons must incorporate an extended intellectual
dissertation upon the chain of reasoning
which authorises the judgment which is
[62] Woodward J, in
Ansett Transport Industries (Operations) Pty Ltd v
, said that the decision maker:
“... should set out his understanding of the relevant law, any findings
of fact on which his conclusions depend (especially
if those facts have been in
dispute), and the reasoning processes which led him to those
conclusions.”
[63] Meagher JA in
Beale v Government Insurance Office Of NSW
these propositions:
“... there are three fundamental elements of a statement of reasons,
which it is useful to consider. First, a judge should refer
to relevant
evidence. There is no need to refer to the relevant evidence in detail,
especially in circumstances where it is clear
that the evidence has been
considered. However, where certain evidence is important or critical to the
proper determination of the
matter and it is not referred to by the trial judge,
an appellate court may infer that the trial judge overlooked the evidence or
failed to give consideration to it:
North Sydney Council v Ligon 302 Pty Ltd
(1995) 87 LGERA 435.
Where conflicting evidence of a significant nature is
given, the existence of both sets of evidence should be referred to.
Secondly, a judge should set out any material findings of fact and any
conclusions or ultimate findings of fact reached. The obvious
extension of the
principle in
North Sydney Council
is that, where findings of fact are not
referred to, an appellate court may infer that the trial judge considered that
be immaterial. Where one set of evidence is accepted over a
conflicting set of significant evidence, the trial judge should set out
findings as to how he comes to accept the one over the other. But that is not to
say that a judge must make explicit findings
on each disputed piece of evidence,
especially if the inference as to what is found is appropriately clear:
Selvanayagam v University of the West Indies
[1983] 1 WLR 585
All ER 824. Further, it may not be necessary to make findings on every argument
or destroy every submission, particularly
where the arguments advanced are
numerous and of varying significance:
Rajski v Bainton
(Court of Appeal,
6 September 1991, unreported).
Thirdly, a judge should provide reasons for making the relevant findings of
fact (and conclusions) and reasons in applying the law
to the facts found. Those
reasons or the process of reasoning should be understandable and preferably
logical as well.”
[64] Whilst, in my respectful opinion, it would be inconsistent with
authority to apply the three “fundamental elements”
rigidly, and I
do not understand his Honour to be suggesting otherwise, they provide useful
guidance for a determination of the sufficiency
of reasons in the general run of
[65] The following remarks of Henry LJ in
Flannery v Halifax Estate
Agencies Ltd
relating to expert evidence were referred to with approval in
the reasons of Ipp JA in
Wiki v Atlantis Relocations (NSW) Pty Ltd
“It is not a useful task to attempt to make absolute rules as to the
requirement for the judge to give reasons. This is because
issues are so
infinitely various. For instance, when the court, in a case without documents
depending on eye-witness accounts is
faced with two irreconcilable accounts,
there may be little to say other than that the witnesses for one side were more
... But with expert evidence, it should usually be possible to be more
explicit in giving reasons: see Bingham LJ in
Eckersley v Binnie
‘In resolving conflicts of expert evidence, the judge remains the
judge; he is not obliged to accept evidence simply because
it comes from an
illustrious source; he can take account of demonstrated partisanship and lack of
objectivity. But, save where an
expert is guilty of a deliberate attempt to
mislead (as happens only very rarely), a coherent reasoned opinion expressed by
qualified expert should be the subject of a coherent reasoned
rebuttal, unless it can be discounted for other good reasons
“... [w]here the dispute involves something in the nature of an
intellectual exchange, with reasons and analysis advanced on
either side, the
judge must enter into the issues canvassed before him and explain why he prefers
one case over the other
[23] In submissions before us, Mr Anderson KC for the
respondent submitted that it was clear from the reasons for judgment that the
Member preferred the evidence by Mr Lyons to that of Mr Crawford. That may be
accepted from a reading of the reasons, and in particular
the paragraphs quoted
and referred to above. But the reasons do not explain why those findings were
made in light of the attack on
Mr Lyons’ credit and experience as an
expert witness.
[24] It will be recalled that the criticisms of Mr Lyons were
not limited to an isolated credit issue of little consequence that can
brushed off. The attack on Mr Lyons’ credit was extensive and wide
ranging. His credit and honesty were impugned and his
conduct as an expert
witness was the subject of extensive
submissions.
It was a criticism of his veracity as a witness and experience as an expert
witness. It was submitted that he was unaware of his
obligations to the Court as
an expert. With respect to the Member, his reasons do not explain how he arrived
at the conclusion expressed
in [9] of his reasons and how the conclusions
asserted concerning methodology issues were reached in face of the credit issues
by the appellant.
matters lead us to conclude that the reasons do not address matters raised by
the appellant that go to the heart of the
proceedings. In failing to provide
reasons for the acceptance of Mr Lyons, notwithstanding the attack on his credit
and experience,
the reasons fail to demonstrate how the conclusion to reject the
evidence of Mr Crawford in favour of that of Mr Lyons was reached.
The parties
are entitled to know from the reasons if the Member had in mind the
“credit issues” when considering the
competing opinion evidence
concerning methodology and valuation. Further, they are entitled to know what
effect or weight was given
to these matters and if not much or any significance,
[26] In that way we conclude that the reasons by the Member are
insufficient.
[27] Earlier,
we foreshadowed orders that the appeal should succeed and the matter be remitted
to be decided by a different Member. The inadequacy
of the reasons effectively
leaves the question of the reliability of Mr Lyons, as an expert witness,
unresolved. It infects the findings
made about the valuation methodology and the
questions arising that are fundamental to the resolution of the compensation
We are not unmindful that the statutory framework considered by Keane JA
in Townsville City Council v Chief Executive, Department
empowers this Court to, in an
appropriate case, substitute its own findings when error is
by utilising the expertise of the
specialist Members.
But the circumstances
here prevent such a course. There is no foundation for a starting point of
proven acceptable evidence. A question
such as the credit or reliability of such
an important witness cannot be resolved on the papers, it requires a rehearing
experts are allowed to give evidence. Mindful as we are not to place
too much faith in the interpretation of
it remains the case that an
appellate court has limitations which:
“limitations include the disadvantage that the appellate court has when
compared with the trial judge in respect of the evaluation
of witnesses’
credibility and of the ‘‘feeling’’ of a case which an
appellate court, reading the transcript,
cannot always fully
[28] In light of our conclusions, it is not necessary to
address the other grounds of appeal and complaints made by the appellant
the decision appealed from. We are persuaded that the appeal should succeed and
the matter reheard. Those other grounds are
better addressed in the context of
the evidence and findings at the rehearing. Further, most complaints, if not
all, have to be considered
in light of the findings made about whose opinion
should be preferred.
[29] In the circumstances, the rehearing should be
before a different Member of the Court.
operation of the decision of the Land Court in this matter,
Aurizon Property
Pty Ltd v Chief Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads
, decided on 9 December 2022, is suspended.
matter is remitted to the Land Court to act according to law with a hearing
before another Member.
question of costs is to be decided by the Court on the papers without any
parties are to file and exchange written submissions by 4:00pm on Wednesday, 31
January 2024, not to exceed two (2) pages.
Acquisition of Land Act
Respondent’s Outline of
Submissions, [2] (‘RO’).
Boland v Yates Property
Corporation Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 64
(1999) 74 ALJR 209.
Beydoun v Valuer-General
[2018] QLAC 1
[2018] 39 QLCR 34
, [19] (emphasis in original).
Maurici v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
(2003) 212 CLR 111
(1978) 5 QLCR 21
Australian Provincial
Assurance Association Ltd v Commissioner of Land Tax
[1942] ALR 156
Turner v Minister of Public Instruction
[1956] HCA 7
(1956) 95 CLR 245
Boland v Yates Property Corporation Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 64
(1999) 74 ALJR 209
[286]-[288].
Affecting Valuation of Land in Australia
(The Federation Press, 6th ed,
2020) 225-228.
Aurizon Property Pty Ltd v
Chief Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads
[2022] QLC 22
(Reasons for judgment in the Land Court, ‘RJ’).
Notice of Appeal,
Appeal Record Book, p 2732
(n 9), [9].
(n 9), [42].
See for example,
(n 9), [61], [73], [143], [144], [160], [161], [167], [168] and [169].
[143]-[144].
Ibid, [160]-[161].
See [17]-[19] above.
Albeit sometimes somewhat
(1991) 24 NSWLR 156.
Ibid, [186].
[2009] QCA 66
[2009] 2 Qd R 219.
Drew v Makita
(Australia) Pty Ltd
[2009] QCA 66
[2009] 2 Qd R 219
, [57]-[65].
Though it should be
acknowledged that some of the issues the subject of complaints were of little
consequence for the assessment
of compensation. For example, the controversy
concerning Exhibit 79 was not central to the case or valuation but was a stark
of the credit issues.
See [15] above.
See [13] above.
[2005] QCA 226
[2006] 1 Qd R 77
Chief Executive,
Department of Natural Resources and Mines v Kent Street Pty Ltd
[2009] QCA 399
, [39], [216].
This occurs not
infrequently, see for example, in another statutory regime
Eumundi Group
Hotels Pty Ltd v Valuer-General
[2021] QLAC 2.
Fox v Percy
214 CLR 118.
Ibid, [23] per Gleeson CJ,
Gummow and Kirby JJ.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (225 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter