URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/204.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
York Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Tomkins Commercial & Industrial Builders Pty Ltd [2025] QCA 204 (24 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
York Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Tomkins Commercial & Industrial
Builders Pty Ltd
[2025] QCA 204
YORK PROPERTY HOLDINGS PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR YORK PROPERTY
ABN 94 831 587 168
(applicant)
COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL BUILDERS PTY LTD
ABN 98 061 732 778
respondent)
RICHARD ATKIN (ADJUDICATOR NO. J1182971)
respondent/ not a party to the application)
THE ADJUDICATION
(third respondent/ not a party to the application)
EBSWORTH LAWYERS
ABN 37 246 549 189
(fourth respondent)
Appeal No 4789 of 2025
SC No 14068 of 2024
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Miscellaneous Application – Civil
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane –
[2025] QSC 261 (Crowley
DELIVERED ON:
24 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
24 October 2025
The application is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – PROCEDURE – QUEENSLAND – OTHER
MATTERS – where the applicant agreed that the first
respondent would carry
out works for the construction of an apartment building at Main Beach –
where the parties agreed the
applicant would pay a sum to the fourth respondent
to be held in an escrow account and to be disbursed by the fourth respondent on
terms set out in an escrow deed agreed to by the applicant and the first and
fourth respondents – where the fourth respondent
may disburse payments
from the escrow account to the first respondent within ten business days of the
first respondent making a written
request for payment accompanied by a relevant
document, such as a court judgment or order – where the first respondent
orders from the primary judge on 17 October 2025 that require a sum to
be paid by the applicant to the first respondent pursuant
to an adjudication
decision made under the
Building Industry Fairness (Security of Payment) Act
) on 22 September 2025 – where the
applicant is also obliged to pay the first respondent interest on that sum
the first respondent made a written request for payment to the
fourth respondent on 17 October 2025 following the delivery of the
judge’s reasons – where the applicant has filed a notice of
appeal against the decision of the primary judge
– where the applicant
seeks interim relief from the orders of the primary judge pending the outcome of
the appeal, such that
the fourth respondent would be restrained from paying the
sum to the first respondent and the first respondent would be prevented
enforcing its contractual and statutory rights with respect to the adjudication
decision and the primary judge’s orders
– whether the Court should
grant the applicant injunctive relief pending the determination of the appeal to
restrain the fourth
respondent from disbursing the sum requested by the first
respondent, and to restrain the first respondent from taking steps to enforce
the decision of the primary judge
Building Industry Fairness (Security of Payment) Act 2017
BRB Modular Pty Ltd v AXW Constructions Pty Ltd (No 2)
, considered
Karam Group Pty Ltd v Earthmoving Contractors
(2021) 7 QR 164
[2021] QSC 10
RJ Neller Building
Pty Ltd v Ainsworth
[2009] 1 Qd R 390;
, considered
M A Ambrose KC, with T W Ambrose, for the applicant
D S Piggot KC, with
J E Menzies, for the first respondent
No appearance for the fourth
SOLICITORS:
Holding Redlich Lawyers for the applicant
Thompson Geer for the first
No appearance for the fourth respondent
[1] BRADLEY
The appellant (
) and the first respondent (
agreed that Tomkins would carry out works for the construction of an apartment
building at Main Beach (called “Midwater”)
and York would pay
Tomkins for that work. They estimated the contract price as $128,300,000.
parties also agreed that York would pay $25 million to HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
) to be held in an interest-bearing 24-hour call
and to be disbursed by HWLE on terms set out in a separate
made by York, Tomkins and HWLE. By the escrow deed, HWLE must disburse
payments from the escrow account to Tomkins within ten business
days of Tomkins
making a written request for payment accompanied by a copy of any of four
relevant groups of documents: a payment
schedule and statutory declaration; a
payment claim and statutory declaration; an adjudication decision; or a court
judgment or order.
HWLE is to pay Tomkins the unpaid amount identified in the
payment schedule, payment claim, adjudication decision, judgment or order.
[3] If HWLE
disburses an amount from the escrow account, then the escrow deed requires York
to pay an equivalent amount to HWLE within
five business days, for HWLE to
deposit into the escrow account to “replenish” or
“top-up” the balance to
$25 million.
The present
circumstances
October 2025, Tomkins obtained orders (the
PC32 orders
) from the Court,
the effect of which is that $4,764,178.27 or $5,240,596.10 (the
is payable by York to Tomkins pursuant to an adjudication decision made on 22
September 2024 (the
Atkin decision
) under the
Building Industry
Fairness (Security of Payment) Act 2017
obliged to pay Tomkins interest on the PC32 sum, calculated at 14.39% per annum.
This interest may be up to $1 million,
if calculated from 18 June 2024, less if
calculated from 17 October 2025.
[5] York seeks
orders that would prevent HWLE from paying Tomkins the PC32 sum and any
interest, in accordance with the escrow deed,
and orders that would prevent
Tomkins from enforcing its contractual and statutory rights with respect to the
Atkin decision and
the PC32 orders. The orders sought would operate until the
determination of York’s appeal against the PC32 orders, which was
21 October 2025.
Is there a serious question to be
October 2025, when the PC32 orders were made, Crowley J published reasons. The
reasons indicate a clear basis for the PC32
[7] His Honour
found that the adjudicator did not make a finding that Tomkins’ work on
the façade of the building was
defective, only that York had concerns
that it might be. His Honour found there was no evidence of the estimated cost
of rectifying
any defect in Tomkins’ work. There was only the amount
previously assessed as the sum York must pay Tomkins for that work.
concluded the adjudicator’s decision to reduce the amount payable by York
to Tomkins by that sum, as if it were
an estimate of the cost of rectifying any
defective work, was illogical and incoherent. These findings led his Honour to
that the adjudicator had failed to consider the matters he was required
to consider under
of the BIFA.
[8] York has
filed a notice of appeal setting out five grounds on which it challenges the
PC32 orders. In short, York’s appeal
proceeds on these bases:
(a) that his Honour’s conclusion – that the adjudicator did not
consider the matters he was required to consider under
particular the payment schedule, and all the submissions made by York, including
attached relevant documents – was in error
because it was possible the
adjudicator had considered the matters and took the view of them that he should
value Tomkins’
work in the manner he did and that there was evidence of an
estimate of the cost of rectifying the supposed defective work;
(b) that his Honour’s finding – that the adjudicator only made a
conditional finding as to defective work – was
in error because the
adjudicator impliedly found that Tomkins’ work on the façade of the
building was defective;
(c) that his Honour’s finding – that there was no foundation for the
adjudicator to find the estimated cost of rectifying
Tomkins’ work was
$4,764,178.27 – was in error because York’s supervisor had submitted
that this figure was the
estimated cost of rectifying the work;
(d) that his Honour’s conclusion – that it was illogical and
incoherent for the adjudicator to decide that the value
of the façade
work was $6,802,706.65 and then value the estimated cost of rectifying
Tomkins’ work on the façade
at $4,764,178.27 – was in error
because $4,764,178.27 was the value of the deduction York had proposed in the
payment schedule
and the material submitted under
of the BIFA; and
(e) that his Honour’s conclusion – that the adjudicator’s
valuation of the estimated cost of rectifying the façade
material before the adjudicator and so
any error by the adjudicator in
undertaking the valuation was within jurisdiction.
[9] As presently
articulated, to succeed in the appeal, York must persuade the Court of the
correctness of all five of its grounds.
If York fails on any of these grounds,
the appeal would be dismissed.
[10] For Tomkins
it was submitted that there was not a serious question to be tried as to
York’s grounds of appeal. I would
not go so far.
preliminary assessment of the strength of York’s case is that it is a weak
one and that its prospects of success appear
poor. It requires this Court to
accept York’s contention that the adjudicator impliedly made certain
findings (which differ
from the adjudicator’s express findings) because
the implied findings were necessary to sustain the adjudicator’s final
decision. It also requires this Court to find error in his Honour’s
conclusion that it was illogical and incoherent for the
adjudicator to value or
estimate the cost of rectifying possible defects in the façade by
adopting the amount previously assessed
as payable by York to Tomkins for
completing 49.22% of the work involved in constructing the façade, when
the adjudicator
had decided the value of the façade work was
$6,802,706.65.
Where does the balance of convenience lie?
[12] For York it
was submitted that “there is a basis to conclude that there is a real risk
of non-repayment by Tomkins should
the adjudicated amount be paid over to
it.” I reject that submission. This “basis” is
“the possible inability
of Tomkins to meet its liabilities”. This
is less than mere speculation.
[13] York relied
on a reduction in the category of Tomkins’ QBCC licence between 2021 and
2025. In 2021, Tomkins had a category
7 licence, which permitted it to earn
over $240 million in revenue for construction work. In 2023 and 2024,
Tomkins’ licence
was category 3, which permitted it to earn up to $240
million in revenue for construction work. In 2025, Tomkins’ licence
category 5, which permits it to earn up to $120 million in revenue for
construction work.
[14] Tomkins
entered into the contract with York to build Midwater for an estimated
$128 million on 12 August 2021. On 10 September
2024, York notified
Tomkins that it was terminating the contract for Midwater and allocating the
remaining work to another or other
builders. Although there is some dispute
between the parties about the effect of this notice, it offers an obvious
explanation for
Tomkins having a higher category QBCC licence in 2021, when it
took on the Midwater project, and a lower category licence in 2025,
ceased performing work on Midwater in 2024.
[15] Over that
period, another licenced builder, Tomkins Commercial & Industrial Builders
Qld Pty Ltd (
Tomkins Qld
) has increased its QBCC licence category from
category 2 in 2021, which permitted it to earn up to $800,000 in revenue for
undertaking
construction work, to category 3 in 2023, which permitted it to earn
up to $12 million in revenue for construction work, to category
6 in 2024 and
2025, which permitted it to earn up to $120 million in revenue for construction
[16] York also
relied on searches that revealed that in 2022, Tomkins opened one project trust
account for a head contract for construction
work valued at $10 million or more.
In 2023, Tomkins opened seven such project trust accounts, the last on
20 December 2023. It
opened no such accounts in 2024 or 2025. The
and two in 2025.
[17] For York,
it was submitted that this information indicates that Tomkins “has not won
any new work in Queensland for which
the contract sum is $10 million or
more” since December 2023, and that Tomkins Qld has registered three new
project trust accounts
over the past two years.
[18] York also
relied on evidence that Tomkins is in litigation with three other parties.
Brisbane Pre-Cast Pty Ltd, a sub-contractor
with two disputed notices of
subcontractor’s charges against Tomkins, has claimed about $1.7 million
for damages for breach
of contract. Tomkins has counterclaimed for about $2.1
million. 17 Mile Rocks Road Pty Ltd, a principal, is claiming about $1
in restitution, damages and liquidated damages. Tomkins has filed a
defence. Young Plumbing & Excavation Pty Ltd, likely a
sub-contractor, is
claiming about $132,000 for work. Tomkins has counterclaimed for about
[19] None of
this evidence permits the Court to conclude, as York submits, that “there
is a real risk” that Tomkins will
not repay any amount due to it
under the PC32 orders, in the event that York succeeds in its appeal. The
absence of registration
of a new project trust account since 20 December 2023
and the lower licence category may indicate a reduced risk of non-repayment,
Tomkins is not taking on additional exposure to other liabilities or to larger
projects. The disputes between Tomkins and two
sub-contractors and one
principal raise no particular concern.
[20] Tomkins has
not engaged in tactics to delay the determination of the respective rights and
liabilities of the parties. It has
done nothing to increase York’s
exposure to a greater risk of it becoming insolvent. The evidence does not
establish that
Tomkins has restructured its business or financial affairs to
increase a risk that it will not be able to meet its liabilities to
the appeal is decided.
[21] There is no
risk that Tomkins will be unable to repay any amount due following the outcome
of York’s appeal, save for the
usual risk faced by every non-residential
principal under the BIFA scheme.
[22] As Counsel
for York identified, Tomkins does not contend that it will suffer any specific
loss or damage if restraining orders
are made. Rather, Tomkins says it will be
prejudiced by not having the use in the ordinary course of its business of the
to it, and interest. It would be “held out” of more than
$6 million, which it first claimed in May 2024, and which is
owed to it for work
performed prior to that date.
[23] Tomkins
also relies on other surrounding circumstances to make its case for prejudice.
It submits that the cumulative effect
of the orders sought, together with orders
York has sought and obtained over the past year, will materially prejudice it,
in mind that all these amounts relate to progress payments which provide
cash flow, “the lifeblood of the construction industry”.
[24] Including
the amounts due following the PC32 orders, York owes Tomkins about
$32 million. The $26 million balance of this amount
(a) $12,736,532.22 (the
) pursuant to an adjudication decision
made on 14 February 2025 (the
Lenz decision
) under the BIFA about a
payment claim Tomkins served on York on 29 August 2024, as adjusted by orders
made by Treston J on 18 March
PC35 orders
), and interest
of about $2 million, calculated at 14.40% per annum from 19 September 2024
to 22 October 2025; and
(b) $10,008,572.66 (the
) pursuant to an adjudication decision
made on 8 April 2025 (
PC36 decision
) under the BIFA, about a payment
claim Tomkins served 16 October 2024 and interest of about $1.4 million,
calculated at 14.41% per
annum from 6 November 2024 to 22 October 2025.
[25] Tomkins has
been unable to enforce its contractual and statutory rights to be paid the
$12,736,532.22 PC35 sum because:
(a) On 18 February 2025, upon York giving the usual undertaking as to damages,
the Court restrained HWLE from disbursing any payment
from the escrow amount in
relation to a request based on the Lenz decision and restrained Tomkins from
taking certain steps under
the BIFA or the escrow deed in respect of or relying
on the Lenz decision, pending York’s application to review the Lenz
(b) On 18 March 2025, after the PC35 orders were made, York giving the usual
undertaking as to damages, the Court extended the above
restraining orders until
25 March 2025;
(c) On 25 March 2025, upon York giving the usual undertaking as to damages and
undertaking to pay the PC35 sum into Court, this Court
restrained HWLE from
disbursing any payment from the escrow amount in relation to a request based on
the Lenz decision or the PC35
orders and restrained Tomkins from taking certain
steps under the BIFA or the escrow deed in respect of or relying on the Lenz
or the PC35 orders, pending York’s appeal against the PC35
(d) On 21 May 2025, this Court heard York’s appeal against the PC35
orders, and reserved its decision; and
(e) The decision remains reserved.
[26] Tomkins has
been unable to enforce its contractual and statutory rights to be paid the
$10,008,572.66 PC36 sum, because:
(a) On 2 May 2025, upon York giving the usual undertaking as to damages, and
amongst other undertakings, irrevocably undertaking
to permit payment from the
escrow amount of any damages assessed by the Court as payable as a result of the
usual undertaking, and
undertaking not to take any adverse steps against the
escrow amount pending the determination of York’s application to review
the Atkin decision, the Court restrained HWLE from disbursing any payment from
the escrow account in relation to a request based
on the Atkin decision and
restrained Tomkins from taking certain steps under the BIFA or the escrow deed
in respect of or relying
on the Atkin decision, until trial of York’s
application to review the Atkin decision or further order;
(b) On 30 May 2025, York’s application to review the Atkin decision was
adjourned part heard to 4 August 2025, and the Court
extended the above
restraining orders until 4 August 2025;
(c) On 4 August 2025, the Court completed the hearing of York’s
application to review the Atkin decision, reserved its decision,
and extended
the above restraining orders until further order; and
(d) The decision remains reserved.
[27] Today, York
seeks restraining orders against HWLE and Tomkins in similar terms to those made
in respect of the other decisions
and orders, that would operate to prevent HWLE
from paying Tomkins the PC32 sum in accordance with the escrow deed and prevent
from enforcing its contractual and statutory rights with respect to
Atkin decision and the PC32 orders. The orders sought would
operate until the
determination of York’s appeal against the PC32 orders.
surrounding circumstances are relevant to an assessment of the prejudice that
Tomkins would suffer if the orders sought
by York were to be made.
[29] They are
also relevant to the risk faced by York. York will only be “at
risk” of being unable to recover the amount
it owes Tomkins under the PC32
orders if York succeeds in every one of its applications and appeals against
decisions and orders
in Tomkins’ favour. If it fails on any of those
challenges, subject to any further appeal, it will have to pay Tomkins more
$10 million. If it succeeds in the appeal against the PC32 orders, it might
seek to set off the amount it will have paid Tomkins
against the much larger sum
it will have to pay Tomkins for either of the other claims.
[30] The Court
may take notice that the interruption of a builder’s cashflow may cause
financial failure before the builder’s
rights can be finally determined by
the Court. Tomkins’ right to be paid the present amount arises under the
adjudication process
provided for in the
BIFA. The policy behind the
predecessor of that statutory scheme was considered by Keane JA in
Neller Building Pty Ltd v Ainsworth
[2009] 1 Qd R 390 at [39] – [42].
His Honour explained that the legislation:
“[S]eeks to
preserve the cash flow to a builder notwithstanding the risk that the builder
might ultimately be required to refund
the cash in circumstances where the
builder’s financial failure, and inability to repay, could be expected to
eventuate. Accordingly,
the risk that a builder might not be able to
refund moneys ultimately found to be due to a non-residential owner after a
action by the owner must, I think, be regarded as a risk which,
as a matter of policy in the commercial context in which the [act]
applies, the
legislature has, prima facie at least, assigned to the owner.”
[31] The risk
that a building contractor might not be able to refund monies ultimately found
to be due to a principal after a successful
civil action is a risk which
Payne JA explained in
Martinus Rail Pty Ltd v QUBE RE Services (No. 2)
[2025] NSWCA 49
– [297] and [300] – [303], is
allocated to the principal under the similar statutory scheme in that State.
a heavy burden on a party who seeks injunctive relief or a stay pending
the outcome of proceedings on the basis that a payment may
become unrecoverable
due to the possible or even likely insolvency of the payee at a later date.
Considerable caution should attend
the grant of such an injunction or a stay, as
to do so may detract from the primary purpose of the Act.
A “significant doubt”
future is insufficient to award a stay in light of the evident policy of the
[32] The policy
Parliament enacted in the BIFA characterises the nature of Tomkins’ right
to pursue the recovery of the sum
due to it. So, in assessing the balance of
convenience, it is appropriate to consider that granting an injunction would
deny Tomkins
a right of the nature described by Keane JA in
[33] In addition
to the statutory regime, here the relevant parties agreed by the escrow deed
that Tomkins was entitled to be paid
from the escrow account on presentation of
an adjudication decision or a court order. In this way, the contractual
arrangements
also reflected the risk allocation applied by the statute. The
orders sought by York, while not excluded by the escrow deed, would
effect of varying the risk allocation the parties had agreed.
[34] In the
present context, Tomkins is entitled to be paid not simply because an
adjudicator has made a decision, but also because
the Court has determined that
Tomkins is so entitled, having reviewed the adjudicator’s decision with
the assistance of leading
counsel for the parties over two days, and after
reserving the matter for consideration.
completeness, I note that there may be insufficient time presently available in
the Court’s calendar to list York’s
appeal for hearing this calendar
considerations weigh heavily against making the orders sought by York. In
addition, the prospects of York succeeding in
the appeal are not such as to
alter the balance of convenience. In short, York has not shown sufficient
likelihood of success to
justify denying Tomkins its right under statute and
under the escrow deed and causing the practical consequences likely to flow from
the order York
BRB Modular Pty Ltd v AXW
Constructions Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2015] QSC 222 (Bond
Karam Group Pty Ltd
v Earthmoving Contractors Pty Ltd
(2021) 7 QR 164
at [172] (Brown J).
These are the revised reasons
of Bradley JA for the decision made on 24 October 2025.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (203 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter