URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/206.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Tang [2025] QCA 206 (28 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Legal Services Commissioner v Tang
[2025] QCA 206
LEGAL SERVICES
COMMISSIONER
(appellant)
(respondent)
Appeal No 1920 of 2025
QCAT No 154 of 2023
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
General Civil Appeal
ORIGINATING COURT:
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal –
[2025] QCAT 82
Member Peter Lyons KC)
DELIVERED ON:
28 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
12 September 2025
Boddice and Brown JJA and Bleby AJA
appeal is allowed.
1, 2 and 3 of the decision of the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
dated 8 April 2025 are set aside.
name of the respondent is to be removed from the local roll of persons admitted
to the legal profession in Queensland.
respondent is to pay the appellant’s costs of and incidental to the
proceedings in the Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal to be assessed
on the standard basis, on the Supreme Court scale under the
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) in the manner that the costs would be assessed if
the matter were determined in the Supreme Court of Queensland.
party is to bear its own costs of the appeal.
CATCHWORDS:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS – QUEENSLAND –
where the respondent was a first-year employed solicitor – where the
respondent, throughout the course of his
employment, fraudulently transferred
$10,000 of a client’s funds from his employer’s account into his own
bank account
– where the transfer included the respondent executing an
authority, forging a client’s signature, creating a false file
preparing and electronic funds transfer request, and sending an email to the
purchaser advising the funds had been paid to
the client – where the
respondent initially lied to his supervisor when questioned about the funds and
admitted to having engaged
in the conduct after being questioned again –
where the respondent reported his conduct to the appellant and the Queensland
Law Society – where the appellant commenced disciplinary proceedings
against the respondent – where the Queensland Civil
and Administrative
Tribunal found the respondent’s conduct constituted professional
misconduct – where the Tribunal ordered
the respondent would be publicly
reprimanded, would not be granted a local practicing certificate before 1
September 2025, and the
respondent’s next application for a practicing
certificate would require a contemporaneous report of a psychologist or
psychiatrist
– whether the Tribunal applied the wrong legal test in
exercising its discretion under
Legal Profession Act 2007
(Qld) – whether the Tribunal erred in not recommending that the
respondent’s name be removed from the local roll of persons
admitted into
the legal profession in Queensland
Criminal Code
(Qld), s 408C, s 488
Legal Profession
Attorney-General v Bax
[1999] 2 Qd R 9
Attorney-General of the State of Queensland v Legal
Services Commissioner; Legal Services Commissioner v Shand
P J McCafferty KC for the appellant
C A DoRozario (
SOLICITORS:
Legal Services Commission for the appellant
Potts Lawyers for the
[1] BODDICE
I agree with Bleby AJA.
I agree with Bleby AJA.
This is an appeal from the Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2007
(‘the Act’). The grounds of appeal are relatively lengthy and
heavily particularised. The ultimate issue arising is
whether the Tribunal
erred in not recommending that the respondent’s name be removed from the
local roll of persons admitted
to the legal profession in Queensland pursuant to
of the Act. The particularised complaints include that the
Tribunal applied the wrong legal test in exercising the discretion under
and that, in any event, its refusal to make an order recommending
that the respondent’s name be removed from the local roll
was unreasonable
or plainly unjust.
[4] On 12 August
2022, the respondent, an employed first-year solicitor, fraudulently transferred
$10,000 of a client’s funds
from his employer’s trust account to his
own bank account. The money comprised surplus funds held following the
of a sale of real property owned by the client. In addition to
making the transfer, the respondent:
prepared an
authority authorising the transfer of funds to his own account;
client’s signature on the authority;
created a file
note falsely recording his own bank account as belonging to the client;
prepared an
electronic funds transfer request for the transfer of the funds from the trust
account to his own account; and
sent an email to
the purchaser’s representatives advising that the balance of the funds had
been paid to the client.
[5] On 16 August
2022, the client told the respondent’s employer that it had not received
the funds. On 17 August 2022, the
respondent’s supervisor questioned the
respondent about the matter. The respondent made up a false story, the effect
was to blame another person for impersonating the client. On the same
day, the respondent attempted to have the funds returned.
He sent a letter of
authorisation to the bank authorising it to “reject/reverse a payment
made” into his account. The
evidence did not identify whether he did this
before or after his supervisor’s questioning. He attempted a similar
the following day. By then, the accounts had been frozen.
[6] On 18 August
2022, the supervisor questioned the respondent again. The respondent ultimately
admitted to having engaged in fraudulent
conduct. The employer summarily
dismissed him.
[7] On 23 August
2022, the respondent, by his solicitors, reported his conduct to the
Commissioner and the Queensland Law Society.
He advised that he wished to
surrender his practising certificate immediately.
[8] On 6 May
2023, police charged the respondent with fraud, contrary to ss 408C(1)(b),
(2)(b) and (c) of the
Criminal Code
, forgery, contrary to
s 488(1)(a) of the
Criminal Code
and uttering a forged document,
contrary to s 488(1)(b) of the
Criminal Code
. On 8 December 2023,
following pleas of guilty, a magistrate sentenced the respondent to nine
months’ imprisonment on each
offence with release on parole after three
months. The respondent appealed against this sentence. On 19 January 2024, he
was released
on bail pending appeal after spending 43 days in custody. On
16 February 2024, a judge of the District Court allowed the appeal.
judge resentenced the respondent to nine months’ imprisonment on each
count, suspending the balance of the sentence following
the 43 days’
imprisonment already
proceedings in the Tribunal
[9] The Tribunal
determined the Commissioner’s disciplinary application following the
conclusion of the criminal appeal. The
Commissioner alleged, and the respondent
did not contest, that the respondent’s actions constituted professional
misconduct.
The Tribunal found it to be
The real issue before the
Tribunal was the appropriate sanction.
Tribunal received a Statement of Agreed Facts. The appellant further relied on
an affidavit of David John Edwards, an investigator
appointed pursuant to
s 575 of the Act. The respondent relied on an affidavit of himself and an
affidavit of his solicitor, Craig
Allan DoRozario. The respondent’s
affidavit exhibited, among other things, reports from Mr Hai Truong,
psychologist, Dr Fai
Sayed, counsellor and psychotherapist and Dr Jacqui Yoxall,
psychologist.
Tribunal further received written submissions from each of the appellant and
respondent and supplementary submissions from
[12] Notwithstanding
the seriousness of the matter, the Tribunal determined the application ‘on
the papers’, that is,
without any oral hearing. The recorded hearing date
was 6 August 2024. The Tribunal made orders and delivered its reasons on
April 2025.
Tribunal made the following substantive orders:
respondent is publicly reprimanded for his misconduct the subject of the
discipline application.
local practising certificate is not to be granted to the respondent before 1
September 2025.
respondent’s next application for a practising certificate is to be
accompanied by a contemporaneous report of a psychologist
or psychiatrist
regarding his mental state, discussed in the reasons for this decision, and
expressing an opinion on the likelihood
that the respondent would again engage
in the conduct for which he is publicly reprimanded.
[14] Following
its characterisation of the respondent’s conduct, the Tribunal gave
considerable attention to the evidence of
the respondent’s psychological
It surveyed the
respondent’s evidence
then addressed at length the parties’ submissions. It canvassed relevant
authority at some length before turning to consider
the exercise of the
discretion.
Tribunal approached the discretion, at the appellant’s invitation, as
comprising two relevant questions. It identified
the first as being whether the
practitioner is probably permanently unfit to practise. It identified the
second as being whether
the respondent is a fit and proper person to engage in
legal practice at the time of the
Tribunal drew the first of these tests from the statement by Young CJ in Eq in
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v
that an order striking off
the roll ‘should only be made when the probability is that the solicitor
is permanently unfit to
It referred to
the application of this test in this
It explained that
the effect of the two tests was that a finding of unfitness to practise at the
date of the hearing did not necessarily
require an order removing the
practitioner’s name from the roll. A panel might find a practitioner
presently unfit to practise,
but consider that after a period of time they will
once again be fit to practise, in which case suspension for that period would
the appropriate order.
Tribunal also referred, in this regard, to the decision of McMurdo JA in
Legal Services Commissioner v
to which it will be
necessary to return. It characterised the approach arising out of these
authorities in the following
In each case,
though unstated, the approach taken appears to reflect an application of the
presumption of continuity. In each, serious
misconduct by the practitioner was
identified, indicating unfitness to practise; and that unfitness was presumed to
continue. In
the present case, a significant element of the applicant’s
argument is that the unfitness of the respondent to engage in legal
demonstrated at the time of his misconduct shows a flawed character, and that
this unfitness is likely to continue.
Tribunal developed an exposition of this presumption of continuity and its
effect on the burden of proof, which it drew from
the decision of Campbell JA in
Stanoevski v Council of the Law Society of New South
It is not necessary
to trace that exposition here. The Tribunal found that taken in isolation, the
respondent’s conduct would
support a finding that the respondent was not
then a fit and proper person to hold a practising
certificate.
It then turned to
whether the applicant was ‘probably permanently unfit’ to hold a
practising certificate.
doing so, it canvassed a series of considerations that may be described as
matters subjective to the respondent. It is necessary
to set out the relevant
paragraphs in their
misconduct involved some level of sophistication, in that it required an
understanding of the employer’s systems for protecting
trust funds from
misappropriation; and the devising of a means to defeat those protections.
Nevertheless, it must have been obvious
to the respondent that the client would
quickly become aware that the funds had been paid out, but not to the client,
and accordingly
prompt detection of the misappropriation was likely to occur.
That consideration, and the respondent’s mental state at the
time, raise
some question about whether the respondent truly intended to profit personally
from his misconduct. They raise some
doubt about whether the respondent’s
conduct was truly reflective of his character.
The respondent quickly recognised his wrongdoing. He made early admissions
to the applicant and the QLS, and surrendered his practising
certificate. He
sought treatment to deal with the causes of his conduct, and has engaged in that
treatment over a substantial period
of time. There is evidence from health care
professionals that the respondent has shown some commitment to that treatment,
engaged in it with some success, though this success was not complete at
the time of their reports.
Mr Truong has given evidence that the respondent has engaged in treatment
which has given him “a greater understanding of internal
processes that
lead to the criminal offence in 2022” and had “made significant
progress in managing and addressing his
symptoms”. Dr Yoxall
considered that the respondent had “addressed, through treatment, not only
the factors that contributed
to his offending, but other compulsive and
addictive behaviours that he previously used to cope with his emotions”.
and Dr Seyed, considered that he needed further treatment. The tenor of
their reports, as well as the respondent’s own evidence
suggest this is
likely to have occurred. In particular, the respondent appeared to have
recognised the benefits he has received
from treatment, and to be committed to
continuing with it.
There is also the respondent’s relative youth – the conduct
occurred shortly before his twenty-sixth birthday. He is
otherwise of good
character, without previous misconduct. He has been co-operative in these
proceedings. The factors (identified
) which weigh most heavily
against him are that his conduct was dishonest, with some level of
sophistication; and it occurred in the
course of legal practice. However, they
are not decisive. As the respondent’s submissions show, a number of other
identified in that case weigh in the respondent’s favour.
Weighing these considerations up, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the
probability is that the respondent is permanently unfit to
a practising certificate. There is some doubt that the misconduct is truly
reflective of the respondent’s character.
In any event, his early
recognition that his conduct was wrong and his actions taken to rectify it, his
efforts to identify and
address his mental state which may have contributed to
the misconduct, the salutary effect of time in prison, his general good
and his youth and inexperience, provide reason to think there is a
good prospect that his rehabilitation has been, or is close to
successful. Limited weight might be given to the desirability of encouraging
practitioners to engage in rehabilitation, but
this factor, as a separate
factor, is far from decisive.
It follows that an order should not be made recommending the removal of the
respondent’s name from the roll of practitioners.
[19] For reasons
which I develop below, to characterise the task of the Tribunal as involving two
separate tests is problematic.
Both parties acceded to the Tribunal taking such
an approach. However, the ‘probably permanent unfit’ test is best
as a significant consideration in the exercise of the discretion
pursuant to s 456(2) of the Act, rather than as a separate test.
necessary to turn to the statutory regime and the approach taken to its
application.
The legislative regime, the discretion and the
‘probably permanent unfit test’
[20] Section 30
of the Act sets out eligibility for admission to the legal profession.
Section 31(1) then provides that a person
for admission
only if the person is a fit and proper person to be admitted. Pursuant to
s 31(2), in deciding if a person is a fit
and proper person to be admitted,
the Supreme Court must consider each of the suitability matters in relation to
the person, to the
extent that a suitability matter is appropriate, as well as
other matters that the Court considers relevant. ‘Suitability
matters’ are defined in s 9.
[21] ‘Professional
misconduct’ is defined in s 419. That concept is tied directly to
the concept of being fit and proper
to engage in legal practice:
of professional misconduct
(1) Professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, if
the conduct involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or keep a
reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, whether happening in connection
with the practice of law or happening otherwise
than in connection with the
practice of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and
proper person to engage in legal practice.
(2) For finding that an Australian legal practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice as mentioned in subsection
(1), regard may be
had to the suitability matters that would be considered if the practitioner were
an applicant for admission to
the legal profession under this Act or for the
grant or renewal of a local practising certificate.
[22] As noted
earlier, there was no dispute that the respondent’s conduct amounted to
professional misconduct.
[23] Section
456(1) confers on the Tribunal a discretion consequent on a finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct:
of tribunal about an Australian legal
practitioner
(1) If, after the tribunal has completed
a hearing of a discipline application in relation to a complaint or an
investigation matter
against an Australian legal practitioner, the tribunal is
satisfied that the practitioner has engaged in unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct, the tribunal may make any order as it thinks
fit, including any 1 or more of the orders stated
in this section.
[24] Section
456(2) provides that the Tribunal may make one or more of various identified
orders. These include an order recommending
that a practitioner’s name be
removed from the local roll (s 456(2)(a)) and an order suspending the
practitioner’s local
practising certificate (s 456(2)(b)). The possible
orders extend further, for example, to an order publicly reprimanding the
practitioner
(s 456(2)(e)).
Services Commissioner v
characterised the discretion in
discretion conferred by s 456 is a broad one and, as noted by the Tribunal,
not subject to any express constraint. It is to be
exercised for the purposes
which are established by the authorities. It is well established that the
purpose is not to punish the
respondent, but to protect the public.
[26] His Honour
then expanded upon this
protection of the public, of course, is a purpose also served by an order which
affects an existing or future practising certificate.
By an order affecting a
practising certificate, the public is immediately protected from the risks to
which those who would encounter
an unfit person would be exposed.
However the removal of the name of an unfit practitioner from the Roll serves
the interests of the public in more extensive ways.
Attorney-General v
Pincus JA said
that the remedies of suspension or striking off are for the protection of the
public and of the profession’s
standing and that further, there is also a
deterrent element. And in
De Pardo v Legal Practitioners Complaints
French J (as he
then was and with whom the other Members of the Full Federal Court agreed) said
“[The protection of the public] extends beyond protection against
further default by the particular practitioner to protection
against similar
defaults by other practitioners.”
The reference by Pincus JA in
to the protection of the
profession’s standing is important. The community needs to have
confidence that only fit and proper
persons are able to practise as lawyers and
if that standing, and thereby that confidence, is diminished, the effectiveness
legal profession, in the service of clients, the courts, and the public
is prejudiced. The Court’s Roll of practitioners is
an endorsement of the
fitness of those who are enrolled.
paragraphs encapsulate well-understood principles. Maintenance of public
confidence in the profession is a critical element
of maintaining public
confidence in the courts and the administration of justice. The community and
the courts must be able to rely
upon the honesty and integrity of
practitioners.
observation that the purpose is to protect the public and not punish a
respondent has important ramifications. The personal
circumstances of a
practitioner may well excite sympathy. They will be relevant to an assessment
of what the protective purposes
of the Act require in a given case. However,
they do not simply operate as mitigating factors as might be invoked in a
setting. What might provide cause to ameliorate a punitive response in
another context may well, within the protective statutory
framework presently
under consideration, warrant a conclusion that, for example, a practitioner is
medically unfit to practise.
[29] It is in
this context that McMurdo JA explained the role of an assessment that
a practitioner is ‘probably permanently
Consequently,
the respondent’s disavowal of any intention to engage in legal practice
was not the end of the matter. If he
was not a fit and proper person to engage
in legal practice, all of the purposes which I have described required that
his name be
removed from the Roll, absent something which indicated that he was
likely to become a person who was fit to be a legal practitioner.
In this way, the test of probable permanent unfitness is, as the
Attorney-General submits, a way of identifying that the character
practitioner is so indelibly marked by the misconduct that he cannot be regarded
as a fit and proper person to be upon the
[30] Understood
in this way, the ‘probably permanently unfit’ test is not a separate
test to be imposed when considering
whether a practitioner’s name should
be removed from the roll. It is a matter that informs the exercise of the
conferred by s 456(2) to make various orders directed towards
protection of the public and maintenance of confidence in the profession.
[31] To treat
the ‘probably permanently unfit’ test as a separate test risks
encouraging a standalone assessment of various
factors personal to the
practitioner separately from the protective concerns of the Act. For the
reasons discussed below, there
is some indication that this is what occurred in
the present case. As the appellant acknowledged, both parties encouraged the
to approach this question as a separate test. It is helpful to
understand how the cases have dealt with the question of ‘probably
permanently unfit’, to explain its origin and purpose, but also to explain
why it should not be seen as a separate test.
‘probably permanently unfit test’ originated in the case law as a
description of a status implicitly imposed
on a practitioner after they had
been struck off the roll and brought to account on an application for
readmission.
concerned an
application for admission as a solicitor where there were questions about his
fitness and propriety for admission.
In the High Court, the plurality
decisions cited refer to cases where a solicitor who had been on the roll was
struck off the roll. When such a person applies
for reinstatement he is in a
more disadvantageous position than an original applicant because he must
displace the decision as to
probable permanent unfitness which was the basis of
his removal...
[33] Then in
Ex parte Evatt; Re NSW Bar
Association
the High Court
had ordered that a practitioner’s name be removed from the Roll of
Barristers. On the practitioner’s
subsequent application to be
re-admitted, the New South Wales Court of Appeal said:
This Court is
bound to regard the findings and reasons of the High Court as conclusive... The
issue for determination is whether
the applicant is now a fit and proper person
to be admitted to the Bar. It must be assumed that prior to the order
disbarring him
he had shown by his conduct that he was not a fit and proper
person to be a barrister, and
the judicial determination that his name be
removed from the roll carried with it an expression of some degree of
probability that
he would be permanently unfit
. It does not by any means
follow that disbarment was necessarily intended to be permanent, but the burden
on the applicant to prove
that there has been such a change in him as to convert
him from an unfit person to a fit person in the relatively short space of
which has elapsed... This onus is a heavy one.
The applicant must
displace the decision as to probable permanent unfitness
and the power to
reinstate should be exercised with the greatest caution and only upon solid and
substantial grounds...
(Emphasis added.)
[34] The New
South Wales Court of Appeal first appears to have considered probable permanent
unfitness as a criterion for removal
from the roll, as opposed to
a conclusion to be displaced on an application for readmission, in
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v
In joining in an
order that a practitioner’s name be removed from the roll, McHugh JA
referred to the possibility of the practitioner
being restored to the roll and
... Latham CJ, Dixon and Williams JJ pointed out (at 422) that
when a person, who has been struck off the Roll, ‘applies for
reinstatement he is in a more disadvantageous position than an original
applicant because he must displace the decision as to probable,
unfitness which was the basis of his removal’. Nothing in the evidence in
the present case provides any ground for
supposing that the presumption of
permanent unfitness for practice is not applicable to the Opponent. ...
order for the involuntary removal of the name of a practitioner from the Roll of
solicitors is made only because the probability
is that the solicitor is
permanently unfit to practise
. Unless the Court is persuaded that the
probability exists, the proper order to make will usually be one of suspension
or fine instead
of removal.
(Emphasis added.)
[35] The New
South Wales Court of Appeal unanimously adopted the statement emphasised in the
above quote in
Supreme Court Prothonotary (NSW) v
This Court first appears
to have accepted it as correct in
Watts v Legal Services
Commissioner
[36] It is one
thing to trace the articulation of this test and adoption in service of the
discretion in disciplinary proceedings.
It is another to treat it as a
standalone test. In
, Gotterson JA
Conformably
with r 766(1) of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
, it falls to this
Court to exercise the discretion under
In doing so, all relevant
matters need to be taken into account. Public protection is a guiding
consideration.
I accept, as correct, the proposition in
to which I have referred.
That is to say, an order removing a practitioner’s name from the roll
should only be made when the
probability is that the practitioner is permanently
unfit to practice.
I would also accept that, at the times when the offending conduct occurred,
the appellant failed to exhibit the reliability and integrity
in handling trust
moneys required of him. That conduct would have rendered him unfit to practice
at that point. However, that is
not to [sic] determinative of whether he is now
permanently unfit to practice.
With the benefit of Dr Madsen’s unchallenged opinion that a risk of
re-offending is very low and having regard to the factors
listed by him as
justifying it, including the appellant’s developed resiliency, his
capacity to cope under pressure, and evidence
of his functioning effectively and
making good decisions, I am not prepared to conclude that the appellant is now
permanently unfit
to practice. I am fortified in this approach by his
subsequent conduct in admitting his guilt, repaying moneys when it was
appropriate
to do so, and withdrawing from legal practice since 2010. These are
all relevant matters for consideration.
[37] In these
passages, Gotterson JA located the question of probable permanent unfitness as a
relevant matter to be taken into account
in the discretion, albeit one that
effectively operated as a threshold for removal from the roll. His Honour
contrasted the facts
of that case with those in
Legal Services Commissioner v
a solicitor had engaged in numerous transactions transferring moneys from
the firm’s trust account to pay its general
expenses. This occurred 10
years after having been found guilty of similar professional misconduct.
[38] While the
appellant did not challenge the correctness of
, it can be seen how
the approach in that case to the question of probable permanent unfitness may
have encouraged the parties and
the Tribunal in this case to treat that question
as a separate, standalone test. So treating it risks, however, focusing on
subjective to the practitioner, separately from the protective purposes
of the Act.
[39] For this
reason, I respectfully prefer the approach that this Court articulated in
, set out above. I do not think it materially states any different
test from that articulated in
, but I think, with respect, that the
form of its expression in
promotes consideration of the question of
probable permanent unfitness in its necessary context. To repeat the relevant
was not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice, all of the purposes
which I have described
that his name be removed from the Roll,
absent something which indicated that he was likely to become a person who
was fit to be a legal practitioner.
(Emphasis added.)
[40] The same
approach has been taken elsewhere to the comparable discretion to remove
a practitioner from the roll, albeit with different
nomenclature. In
The Law Society of South Australia v
Doyle CJ of the
Supreme Court of South Australia explained that the issue was whether, in view
of the admitted conduct, the practitioner
was fit to remain a member of the
profession:
conduct demonstrates that he is not, in my opinion the ordinary course must be
an order that his name be removed from the Roll,
even if something less would be
an adequate punishment for him or even if something less is likely to ensure
that he would not be
able to practise as a practitioner.
In saying this, I do not say that considerations of the practitioner’s
personal circumstances, and consideration of extenuating
circumstances, are to
be put to one side entirely. I merely emphasise the point that the court acts
in the public interest and not
with a view to punishment of the
practitioner.
The Court also has to consider the maintenance of public confidence in the
profession, and must ensure that only those who have observed
the required
standards are permitted to remain members of the legal profession.
[41] In applying
these considerations, Doyle CJ said:
In reaching a conclusion as to
the order that should be made, I take account of my conclusion, expressed
earlier, that the practitioner
has been guilty of unprofessional conduct over a
substantial period of time. Although no one item of conduct may amount to
unprofessional
conduct, the sustained neglect of the clients’ affairs is
significant. I cannot say that the conduct that is not attributable
depression would itself, if it stood alone, warrant removing the name of the
practitioner from the Roll. But the depression
to which some of the conduct is
attributable itself indicates that the practitioner is not presently fit to
and that there is no reason to think that that condition will be of
short duration
In combination, the lack of any excuse for part of the conduct, and the fact
that the explanation for the balance is a condition that
makes the practitioner
medically unfit to practise,
and likely to remain so for some time
opinion lead to the conclusion that the practitioner’s name should be
removed from the Roll.
(Emphasis added.)
[42] In this
manner, Doyle CJ brought to account what is in this jurisdiction described as
the ‘probably permanent unfit test’
as a consideration in service of
the public interest considerations informing the disciplinary process. I draw
on this authority
as an example only, one that is consistent with and
illustrates the approach of this Court in
in avoiding the risks
associated with expressing the question of probable permanent unfitness as a
separate test.
[43] Engaging in
the question of probable permanent unfitness in this way also reflects the
approach of this Court prior to the articulation
of that test in so many words.
Barristers’ Board v
Thomas JA, with
whom McMurdo P and White J agreed, explained the importance of the
consideration by reference to the purposes of
the legislation and availability
of less onerous
off is of course reserved for the very serious cases where the character and
conduct of the practitioner is seen to be inconsistent
with the privileges of
further practice. Suspension is a less serious result, firstly because a
limited period is specified and
secondly because the right to resume practice is
then preserved without any further onus upon the practitioner to prove that he
she is now a fit and proper person to practice.
“The proper use of suspension is, in my opinion, for those cases in
which a legal practitioner has fallen below the high standards
to be expected of
such a practitioner, but not in such a way as to indicate that he lacks the
qualities of character and trustworthiness
which are the necessary attributes of
a person entrusted with the responsibilities of a legal
practitioner”.
[44] Consistently
with this, I would regard the question of probable permanent unfitness as a
significant matter that informs the
appropriate sanction to be imposed in the
exercise of the discretion. It is to be determined with close regard to the
purposes of the legislation. In many cases, having regard to those
purposes, the nature of the professional misconduct will itself
be sufficient to
warrant a conclusion, absent some countervailing indicator, in respect of which
an evidential onus necessarily falls
on the practitioner, that the practitioner
is probably permanently unfit to practise. This will often be so in cases of
that strike at the heart of the protective purposes of the Act and
demonstrate a character fundamentally at odds with that required
practitioner.
[45] I have set
out the operative parts of the Tribunal’s substantive consideration,
above. It is clear that the Tribunal approached
the question of probable
permanent unfitness as a standalone test, as the parties encouraged it to do.
The paragraphs, quoted in
full earlier, in which it had regard to this question
are concerned with the respondent’s personal circumstances, both at the
time of the misconduct and since. The appellant submitted, with some force,
that this consideration focused on matters personal
to the respondent and did
not relate them to the protective purposes of the Act.
[46] At the
outset of its consideration, the Tribunal posed the question whether the
respondent was a fit and proper person to hold
practising certificate
As the appellant submitted, that was not the correct test. However, even if
that were to be regarded as a slip, the discussion
which followed did not refer
to the need to maintain the integrity of the profession or, as has been
described on occasion, the need
to maintain public confidence in the profession.
The discussion focused on matters subjective to the respondent.
[47] By way of
example, while the Tribunal relied expressly on the respondent’s youth, it
did not explain how that matter informed
its consideration. Public confidence
in the profession is not served by a mere expectation that a practitioner will
mature from
a tendency to dishonest behaviour as they become older.
circumstances here were of calculated dishonesty, followed up by a careful
obscuring of the activity, and then blaming someone
Attorney-General v Bax
McPherson JA explained that the false assertion by a solicitor at a
creditors’ meeting about when a document was
conveys a very poor image of the honesty and integrity of solicitors and so
tends to bring the whole profession and its standards
into disrepute. It cannot
in my opinion be excused by resorting to the explanation that the solicitor in
this appeal was young and,
it was said, inexperienced. In a matter like this,
and perhaps in most others, basic honesty is not a quality that is ordinarily
acquired through experience, or by lengthy practice of trying one’s best
to be honest.
[49] In the
present case, the practitioner was 26, quite old enough to be expected to have a
mature and reflective approach to such
a base consideration as honesty in
professional dealings as a legal practitioner.
example illustrates the failure of the Tribunal to relate its consideration of
the respondent’s personal circumstances
to the protective objects served
by the Act. A failure to mention a consideration expressly is not
necessarily indicative of a failure
to take it into account. However, had the
Tribunal given proper consideration to the need to maintain the integrity of the
profession,
it is difficult to see how it could have maintained its
incorporation of the respondent’s youth as a mitigating factor in the
that it did, in the circumstances of the respondent’s conduct.
treatment illustrates, in my view, that the Tribunal did not sufficiently relate
its consideration of the respondent’s
personal circumstances to the
purposes required to be served in its approach to the discretion. Rather, it
tends to suggest that
the Tribunal approached the respondent’s personal
circumstances as factors capable of mitigating a punishment to be
Tribunal expressed some doubt that the misconduct was ‘truly
reflective’ of the respondent’s character.
In this regard, it
relied heavily on the psychologists’ reports. I consider these
further, below. However even here, the
Tribunal concluded that various matters
personal to the respondent ‘provide reason to think that there is a good
prospect that
his rehabilitation has been, or is close to being,
successful’. Stripped back, this does not rise above a statement of
possibility
expression of satisfaction that notwithstanding the acts of dishonesty,
circumstances are such that allowing the practitioner to remain on the roll will
maintain the integrity of the profession and
public confidence in it.
[53] In any
event, for the reasons appearing below in my consideration of the fresh exercise
of the discretion, I do not consider
that the evidence provides a reasonable
basis for this conclusion.
[54] I would
uphold the appellant’s complaint, expressed in Grounds 1(b)(iv) and (v) of
the Notice of Appeal, that the Tribunal
failed to take into account properly the
interests of protecting the good standing of the profession and of the local
roll as the
Supreme Court’s endorsement of the fitness of those who appear
[55] The failure
of process that the appellant has established is sufficient to conclude that the
Tribunal erred in the exercise of
its discretion. The Tribunal’s decision
is liable to be set aside unless this Court would come to the same conclusion in
exercise of the discretion afresh.
Re-exercising the
[56] I have
described the respondent’s dishonest course of conduct earlier. To adopt
the approach endorsed in
, I would hold that the purposes of
community protection and maintenance of the integrity of the legal profession
would require the
respondent’s name to be removed from the roll, unless
there has been any change such that the respondent is, or is likely to
a person who is fit to be a legal practitioner. That is the function of
the question of probable permanent unfitness. It
is necessary to consider the
conduct in its entirety and in all of the circumstances pertinent at the time of
the hearing.
[57] The conduct
did not just involve preparing an electronic funds transfer request to transfer
the money to the respondent’s
own account. It extended to preparing the
transfer authority, forging the client’s signature, creating a false file
sending an email to the purchaser advising that the funds had been paid
to the client. The respondent then lied to his employer
sought to blame another person. This was a calculated and stepped-out course of
respondent filed a lengthy affidavit, in which he offered an explanation for the
circumstances of the conduct and his psychological
state of mind. He offered an
‘explanation and reflection’ about his conduct. He has continued to
consult a psychologist,
Mr Truong, who he said has helped him ‘to
understand and confront the factors contributing to my actions’. As to
During this period of reflection and self-discovery,
I confronted several personal challenges that had, in part, contributed to my
conduct. These included depression, a previously undisclosed and unknown sexual
addiction, dissatisfaction with myself, my life,
my relationship, my work, as
well as disillusionment with my career path. While I was at all times generally
aware of these issues,
I had pushed them to the back of my mind and tried to
pretend they didn’t exist.
respondent explained the process of being found out, and his deep sense of
embarrassment and shame. He described his efforts
to return the money. He gave
an account of the criminal charges that then followed. He exhibited to his
affidavit a report of Mr
Truong, as well as a report of a counsellor, Dr
Seyed and the report of a forensic psychologist, Dr Yoxall, which was
prepared at
the time of his sentencing. The respondent’s affidavit
expresses his ‘deepest regret’ for his actions, makes an
apology and
expresses that he is ‘genuinely remorseful for any harm or distress my
actions have caused and the shadow that
my conduct has cast on the legal
profession generally’.
application being determined on the papers, the respondent was not
cross-examined on his affidavit. In any event, the respondent’s
expressions of remorse and regret have limited probative value. His own account
of the difficulties confronting him at the time
do not give cause to think other
than that he is probably permanently unfit to practise. As to the impact of his
psychological conditions
and what has occurred since in that regard, it is
necessary to consider the reports of the practitioners.
Truong’s report is dated 27 July 2023, that is, over a year before the
hearing. Mr Truong gave a provisional diagnosis
of Adjustment Disorder
with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct. He explained that the
respondent had engaged well with therapy
and had ‘made significant
progress in managing and addressing his symptoms’. He expressed the
opinion that the respondent
was remorseful and motivated to change. He
I recommend that Mr Tang continues to engage in
psychological intervention on a minimum monthly basis for the next 6 months to
the strategies learned in intervention thus far and to ensure that
appropriate self-management around his conduct is in place and
implemented for
his future endeavours.
[62] On its
face, this report goes no higher than saying that the respondent was engaging
well. It does not suggest that the respondent’s
conditions and risks had
abated or that the respondent had relevantly substantially changed.
[63] Dr Fai
Seyed’s report is dated 31 July 2023, again, over a year before the
hearing. Dr Seyed wrote that the respondent:
...has been
assessed and diagnosed with sexual addiction, or compulsive sexual behaviours,
which includes uncontrollable compulsive
behaviours in numerous facets of daily
life. As a result, this condition may consist of compulsive stealing, deceptive
behaviours,
and taking professional risks while minimising or disregarding the
severe repercussions. [The respondent] is receiving specialised
therapy and
requires additional evaluations for any other potential mental health
He has so far revealed needing support for poor emotional control, anxiety
management issues, severe outbursts of anger, and relational
and occupational
dysfunctions in the few sessions he has had. [The respondent] has participated
in both collective sessions (with
his partner) and individual sessions since
April 2023 (6 sessions in total). However, he will need extensive and
continuous therapeutic
support to create appropriate changes in his attitudes
and behavioural patterns moving ahead.
[64] Far from
suggesting that the respondent has substantially changed, this report indicates
that at the time of writing, the factors
that contributed to the
respondent’s dishonest conduct would require considerably more attention
before he could be said to
have achieved the necessary changes in his behaviour
and attitudes.
[65] Finally,
the report of Dr Yoxall, prepared for sentencing, is dated 5 October 2023. This
report was based on a single videoconference.
The offending occurred in the context of what appears to
have been undiagnosed depression. Mr Tang has completed university
qualifications
in courses that he didn’t particularly enjoy, in order to
please his parents and fulfil a role he thought he needed to in order
successful and accepted. He then obtained a job that he didn’t enjoy...
The interaction of destructive compulsive behaviours
and depression led to an
escalation of both and a feeling of hopelessness. The offending was not
motivated by financial need or
greed. The offending was impulsive and
opportunistic and the motivation was relief of distress by achievement of
feelings of excitement
from ‘doing something wrong’. In my view,
his depression at the time of the offending would have impaired his judgement
and reduced his inhibition.
Mr Tang was shocked and ashamed of his own offending. It was not
sophisticated and was not carefully planned. His offending was
detected. He paid back the money taken and apologized.
opinion is difficult to reconcile with that of Dr Seyed. Further, to say that
the offending was impulsive and opportunistic
does not reflect the calculated
nature of the steps that the respondent took. In any event, Dr Yoxall
considered:
In my opinion Mr Tang requires ongoing psychological
intervention – for at least another 6 to 12 months to ensure sustained
change. He will continue to engage in psychological treatment as required.
[67] Again, even
if the doubts as to the factual premise on which Dr Yoxall based her opinion are
put to one side, this report also
indicates that at the time of writing, the
respondent had a long way to go in addressing the factors that caused him to act
[68] As the
appellant submitted, the respondent’s serious dishonest course of conduct,
which included lying to fellow practitioners,
struck at the heart of the trust
which the community must be able to place in the legal profession. It marked
the respondent’s
character as dishonest. The efforts of the professionals
to explain the roots of that dishonest character, what is required to overcome
it and the respondent’s steps to that end go only so far. They do not
suggest that success is in sight or that the respondent’s
character has
changed. To the contrary, they strongly suggest that the respondent remains
burdened with the difficulties said to
sit behind his behaviour, notwithstanding
his stated desire to change. There was nothing of persuasive value before the
to show that the position was now
[69] In my view,
the only reasonable conclusion available on the materials is that the respondent
is not a fit and proper person to
engage in legal practice. The evidence before
the Tribunal strongly supports the conclusion, having regard to the conduct the
engaged in and what has transpired since, that he is probably
permanently unfit to practise the profession of the law. That is,
nothing to suggest that the position has substantially changed since the conduct
such that there can be any assurance that
the respondent’s name being on
the roll is consistent with maintaining the integrity of the profession and
meeting the protective
objects of the Act.
[70] The parties
were agreed on the costs orders that should be made depending on the outcome of
the appeal. I would order as follows:
appeal is allowed.
1, 2 and 3 of the decision of the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
dated 8 April 2025 are set aside.
name of the respondent is to be removed from the local roll of persons admitted
to the legal profession in Queensland.
respondent is to pay the appellant’s costs of and incidental to the
proceedings in the Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal to be assessed
on the standard basis, on the Supreme Court scale under the
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) in the manner that the costs would be assessed if
the matter were determined in the Supreme Court of Queensland.
party is to bear its own costs of the
Tang v Commissioner of
[2024] QDC 28.
Legal Services Commissioner
[2025] QCAT 82
Legal Services Commissioner
[2025] QCAT 82
Legal Services Commissioner
[2025] QCAT 82
Legal Services Commissioner
[2025] QCAT 82
[2003] NSWCA 320.
Prothonotary of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales v P
[2003] NSWCA 320
Watts v Legal Services
Commissioner
[2016] QCA 224
; [36]; cited at
Legal Services
Commissioner v Tang
[2025] QCAT 82
Legal Services Commissioner
[2025] QCAT 82
Legal Services Commissioner v
Madden (No 2)
[2008] QCA 301
[132]-[133] (Holmes CJ);
Stanoevski v
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2008] NSWCA 93
(Campbell JA).
[2018] QCA 66
Legal Services
Commissioner v Tang
[2025] QCAT 82
[2008] NSWCA 93
Legal Services
Commissioner v Tang
[2025] QCAT 82
Legal Services
Commissioner v Tang
[2025] QCAT 82
Legal Services
Commissioner v Tang
[2025] QCAT 82
[2018] QCA 66.
Legal Services
Commissioner v Shand
[2018] QCA 66
(McMurdo JA, Morrison JA and
Brown J agreeing).
Legal Services
Commissioner v Shand
[2018] QCA 66
(McMurdo JA, Morrison JA and
Brown J agreeing).
[1998] QCA 89
[1999] 2 Qd R 9
[2000] FCA 335
[2000] FCA 335
(2000) 170 ALR 709
Legal Professional
Conduct Commissioner v Freer
[2024] SASCFC 5
Legal Services
Commissioner v Shand
[2018] QCA 66
(McMurdo JA, Morrison JA and
Brown J agreeing).
[1948] HCA 45
(1948) 77 CLR 403.
Ex parte Lenehan
[1948] HCA 45
(1948) 77 CLR 403
at 442 (Latham CJ, Dixon and Williams JJ).
(1969) 71 SR (NSW) 153.
(NSWCA, 31 July 1987,
unreported).
(NSWCA, 31 July 1987,
unreported) at 8.
[2003] NSWCA 320
(Young CJ in Eq, Meagher and Tobias JJA agreeing).
[2016] QCA 224
(Gotterson JA, Margaret McMurdo P and Morrison JA agreeing).
Watts v Legal Services
Commissioner
[2016] QCA 224
(Gotterson JA, Margaret
McMurdo P and Morrison JA agreeing).
[2012] QCAT 618
Watts v Legal Services Commissioner
[2016] QCA 224
Legal Services
Commissioner v Shand
[2018] QCA 66
(McMurdo JA, Morrison JA and
Brown J agreeing).
(1999) 201 LSJS 456.
The Law Society of South
Australia v Murphy
(1999) 201 LSJS 456
[2000] QCA 253.
Barristers’ Board
v Darveniza
[2000] QCA 253
Re A Practitioner
(1984) 36 SASR 590
at 593 per King CJ.
[1998] QCA 89
[1999] 2 Qd R 9.
Attorney-General v
[1998] QCA 89
[1999] 2 Qd R 9
Legal Services
Commissioner v Shand
[2018] QCA 66
(McMurdo JA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (325 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter