URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/156.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Schlecht v EPM Operations Pty Ltd (No 2) [2025] QDC 156 (28 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Schlecht v EPM Operations Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2025] QDC 156
JOHN JOSEPH SCHLECHT & LOUELLA JANE SCHLECHT AS TRUSTEES OF THE
SCHLECHT SUPER FUND
(Plaintiff)
EPM OPERATIONS PTY LTD ACN 638 154 613 AS TRUSTEE FOR THE EPM
(First Defendant)
MATTHEW CHADWICK
(Second Defendant)
WENDY JANE CHADWICK
(Third Defendant)
BD 3058/2022
DELIVERED ON:
28 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
6-7, 10-14, 24-25 February 2025
Barlow KC, DCJ
for the plaintiffs against the first and second defendants in the sum of
$44,072.82, including interest of $8,724.66.
judgment for the plaintiffs against the first defendant in the sum of
$85,900.18, including interest of $17,252.42.
plaintiffs’ claim against the third defendant be dismissed.
first and second defendants pay the plaintiffs’ costs of the application
filed on 7 August 2025.
first and second defendants otherwise pay 50% of the plaintiffs’ costs of
the proceeding, including any reserved costs.
first defendant otherwise pay a further 20% of the plaintiffs’ costs of
the proceeding, including any reserved costs.
be no order as to the third defendant’s costs of the proceeding.
sum of $8,736.00 be paid to the plaintiffs out of the funds held in trust by
their solicitors, Spire Law, in part payment of the
judgment against the first
defendant and the balance of those funds and of the funds held in trust by the
defendants’ solicitors,
JHK Legal, be paid to the first defendant or at
its direction.
CATCHWORDS:
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
COSTS – COSTS OF PROCEEDING IN WRONG COURT –
BY REFERENCE TO AMOUNT
OR VALUE CLAIMED OR RECOVERED – in a claim brought in the District Court,
the plaintiff’s damages
awarded fell within the Magistrates Court’s
they would have recovered had the action been brought in the Magistrates
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
COSTS – OFFERS OF COMPROMISE, PAYMENTS INTO COURT
AND SETTLEMENTS –
OFFER OF COMPROMISE OR OFFER TO SETTLE OR CONSENT TO JUDGMENT PURSUANT TO RULES
– GENERALLY –
the defendants made three offers to settle the
proceeding – whether acceptance of the offers would been more beneficial
the plaintiffs than the ultimate judgments – whether the plaintiffs
should pay the defendants’ costs since the date of
any of the offers
LEGISLATION:
Civil Proceedings Act
Uniform Civil Procedure
, r 150(1)(h), (r), r 159(3), r 681, r 697
Batchelor v Burke
[1981] HCA 30
(1981) 148 CLR 448
Bulsey v State
of Queensland
[2016] QCA 158
Hussey v Page
[1973] Qd R
, considered
Interchase Corporation Ltd v Grosvenor Hill (Queensland)
Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2003] 1 Qd R 26
O’Doherty v McMahon
[1971] VicRp 75
[1971] VR 625
, considered
Pinehurst Nominees Pty Ltd v Coeur de Lion
Investments Pty Ltd
[2015] QSC 122
Principal Properties Pty Ltd
v Broncos Leagues Club Ltd
[2018] QCA 91
, considered
[1966] HCA 24
(1966) 115 CLR 470
Sweeney v Attwood Marshall
[2002] QSC 294
, considered
OTHER MATERIALS:
Law of Costs
(LexisNexis, 5
Quick on Costs
(Thomson Reuters, Westlaw Precision
A Morris KC & I Erskine for the plaintiffs
L Copley for the defendants
SOLICITORS:
Spire Law for the plaintiffs
JHK Legal for the defendants
Introduction
19 August 2025, I delivered reasons for judgment in this
proceeding,
but I adjourned the
proceeding without giving judgment, to enable the parties to provide submissions
on interest, costs and how moneys
held in trust ought be dealt with. I have
since received submissions from both parties on those topics.
reasons for judgment, I determined that the plaintiff should be awarded damages
in the sum of $103,995.92 against the first
defendant (EPM) and $35,348.16
against the second defendant (Mr Chadwick), while EPM’s claim against
the third defendant (Mrs
Chadwick) should be dismissed. The amounts
referred to comprised (as against EPM) a sum of $68,647.76 for unpaid
Works and $35,348.16 for breaches of the lease.
Mr Chadwick is also liable for the latter sum.
[3] These are my
reasons for the final judgment on all issues.
Mrs Schlecht contend that they should be awarded damages at the rate of 2%
per month (or part month) on the Landlord’s
Works component. That rate
derives from clause 2.4 of the lease, which provided:
If the Tenant is late in paying the Landlord any money, the Landlord may charge
the Tenant late payment rent calculated on any late
payments at the rate of two
percent (2%) per month or any part of a month. All late payment rent charged
must be paid on demand.
Mrs Schlecht contend that, as the amount due by EPM for the
Landlord’s Works was a debt due under the lease, clause
2.4 applies and
the court should order interest in accordance with that entitlement.
Mr and Mrs Schlecht issued an invoice to EPM
for its share of the
Landlord’s Works on 30 May 2022 (TB214) and therefore interest should be
awarded from that date to judgment.
Mrs Schlecht also submit that they should be awarded interest at the
contractual rate on the damages for breach of the
lease, apparently contending
that that sum is also a debt due under the lease. That interest should be
awarded for the period from
the assignment of the lease (3 August 2022) to
judgment or from the commencement of the proceeding (14 December 2022) to
A third alternative commencement date they propose is from the date
of expiry of the lease (31 March 2025) to judgment.
[7] Alternatively,
Mr and Mrs Schlecht submit that they should be awarded interest on the
respective sums pursuant to
Civil Proceedings Act
, calculated in accordance with the interest
calculator on the Queensland Courts website, for one of those three
defendants contend that Mr and Mrs Schlecht did not specifically plead
any claim for interest (including the rate of interest
and method of
calculation), as required under
r 150(1)(h) and r 159(3). They should not be awarded any interest on
any part of the principal judgment sum.
defendants alternatively contend that Mr and Mrs Schlecht made no
claim, in their claim or statement of claim, for contractual
interest and it
should not be awarded. Also, I found that the agreement about the
Landlord’s Works was not under the lease
but a separate agreement: RJ
[440]. Therefore the contractual clause does not apply to the sum awarded for
Landlord’s Works.
[10] As for the
claims for breaches of the lease, it is not clear to me that they are payable
under the lease. But in any event,
both as to those claims and as to the claim
for interest on the Landlord’s Works, Mr and Mrs Schlecht did
not claim, nor even
mention, the interest clause under the lease as part of
their claim. They sought only interest pursuant to the
Civil Proceedings
. It is within my discretion under
to have regard to any
contractual rate of interest in exercising my discretion as to the rate and
period of any interest I award.
However, where the contractual clause has not
been the subject of the claim, I do not consider it appropriate to take it into
Therefore I shall not award such interest on either sum.
defendants also contend that the court should not order any interest because
there is no evidence that Mr and Mrs Schlecht
have actually paid any
amounts in the respect of the Landlord’s Works (referring to RJ[131]), nor
that they expended any money
for the make good works. That, however, was part
of their defence to the claim which I dismissed: see RJ[133] and [407]-[414].
The plaintiffs have been kept out of the amounts owed for both the
Landlord’s Works and the breaches of the lease: as to
the first, since
the due date after the invoice was served on the defendants; as to the latter,
from at least the date of assignment
of the lease, by when EPM ought to have
remedied its breaches. One of the purposes of an award of interest is to
compensate the
plaintiff for being kept out of the money represented by the
judgment sum in the period between accrual of the cause of action and
[12] While the
plaintiffs did not comply with
and made no mention of interest
in their principal submissions, that is not unusual. They did refer to interest
as part of the relief
sought in their claim and statement of claim. The
defendants did not seek any particulars of the period or rate claimed, nor seek
to have that part of the relief struck out. That too is not unusual. I do not
consider that it precludes or makes inappropriate
an order for the payment of
pre-judgment interest.
[13] I shall
order that EPM pay interest on the Landlord’s Works component from the due
date for payment which, according to
the invoice, was “Net 30 after
OEM.” There was no evidence as to the meaning of that term. I shall
construe it as meaning
the invoice was payable 30 days after its issue. Thus
the payment was due on 29 June 2022. EPM should pay interest, calculated
accordance with Practice Direction 6 of 2013 and the online calculator, from 30
June 2022 to the date of this judgment.
[14] I shall
also order that EPM and Mr Chadwick pay interest on the amount ordered for
breach of the lease from the date of assignment
of the lease (3 August 2022) to
the date of this judgment. I consider this start date to be appropriate as, at
the least, the breaches
should have been remedied by then.
[15] The results
are that both EPM and Mr Chadwick are liable for the damages for make good
works, including interest of $8,724.66
and EPM is also liable for the
Landlord’s Works debt, including interest in the sum of
$17,252.42.
Costs of the proceeding
[16] Mr and
Mrs Schlecht claim that EPM should pay their costs of the proceeding on the
standard basis, in accordance with the usual
principle that costs follow the
event unless the court orders otherwise: r 681. Mr Chadwick should
pay their costs of the proceeding
limited to the breach of lease issues.
defendants submit that the plaintiffs have had limited success, as:
(a) they originally sought a total of $551,580;
(b) they opened their case as claiming $369,084;
(c) in their final submissions, they claimed only $276,461; and
(d) ultimately they succeeded in recovering only $103,995 – less than 19%
of their original claim.
defendants’ counsel raised a number of issues in seeking to limit the
costs payable to the plaintiffs.
Scale of costs
amount that EPM has recovered falls well within the jurisdiction of the
Magistrates Court. Rule 697 requires that, in such
a case, costs be assessed as
if the proceeding had been in that court unless this court orders otherwise.
The defendants submit
that any costs orders in favour of the plaintiffs should
be on that basis: on the Magistrates Court scale of costs. They submit
there is no reason to order otherwise as the plaintiffs were represented by
highly experienced counsel and solicitors and none
of the claims was outside the
plaintiffs’ claim was well outside the Magistrates Courts’
that is within that
breaches of the lease on the
report of an expert whom they had briefed and who
ultimately gave evidence. A report by the defendants’ expert also
to the plaintiffs’ claims for individual breaches based on that
report. The defendants did not object to any part of that
report until two days
before trial. Many of the objections succeeded at trial. Had they taken those
objections in a timely manner,
the plaintiffs may well have called other expert
evidence and succeeded in recovering a sum greater than the limit of the
Magistrates
Court’s jurisdiction. By leaving their objections until so
late, the defendants were clearly intending to take the plaintiffs
by surprise
and to prejudice their ability to call other evidence to support the conclusions
in that report.
plaintiffs submit that, even though there is no express time for giving notice
of objections to evidence, there is a broad
obligation on parties’
solicitors to give reasonable notice of objections to avoid unfairly surprising
their opponents with
late objections that could prejudice the other
parties’ ability to prepare their evidence and to present their case.
[22] Unfortunately,
I have not been assisted by the citation of principles supported by cases
concerning the exercise of the discretion
under r 697. There have, not
surprisingly, been numerous decisions considering this and similar provisions in
other jurisdictions
in Australia. It serves to summarise the principles and
their application.
[23] The author
Law of Costs
Dal Pont, helpfully identifies -
several factors relevant to determining whether to exercise the discretion to
deny or curb the costs sanction, including
claimed, and the reasons for this;
actually recovered, and the reasons for this;
the difficulty
or otherwise of assessing the likely damages awarded;
the complexity
or otherwise of the case, factually and/or legally;
the nature of
the proceedings in question, and how this impacts, if at all, upon the need to
proceed in the higher or specialist court;
the conduct and
attitude of the litigating parties; and
the importance
of the legal principle involved in the case as a matter of precedent.
[24] As to the
third and fourth of these factors, the author goes
That the litigation raises issues of difficulty does not by itself justify
bringing proceedings in a higher court, and thus a costs
order commensurate with
that court. After all, difficulty surrounds a great deal of law, and lower and
intermediate courts constantly
deal with legal difficulties not greatly
different from those superior court judges face.
rationale for this and equivalent rules was explained long ago (although
considering a somewhat differently worded rule)
The object of the rule is to protect the defendant against the unnecessary
expense of higher costs in a court which is not appropriate
for the case. The
plaintiff, however, is left free to select his court. If he fails, no protection
of the defendant is necessary
because he receives costs applicable in the court
to which he is taken. If he succeeds, the defendant is liable for costs
appropriate
to the court to which he is taken, provided, however, that the
plaintiff obtains more than half of the amount which the lower court
defendant is liable only for costs applicable in the
lower court, in the absence
of a special order.
[26] It will be
noted that, in the rule being considered in that case, a successful plaintiff
was entitled to costs on a lower court’s
plaintiff recovered less than half of the lower court’s jurisdiction.
That proviso is not a feature
of the current Queensland rule: if it were, then
the fact that the judgment exceeds half of the Magistrates Court’s
would mean the rule did not apply. However, in my view the extent
to which a judgment is below the maximum jurisdiction of the lower
relevant factor to the exercise of the discretion.
in considering a similar
rule Williams J accepted a submission by counsel that a plaintiff should elect
the court in which to commence
a proceeding based on a proper evaluation of the
plaintiff’s chances on the questions of liability and damages. What is
from a plaintiff is an honesty of approach. In a later
Ambrose J in effect agreed
with these propositions, although adding that, whatever may be the explanation
for the sum which the plaintiff
received judgment, the recovered judgment in the
case before his Honour could have been recovered in the Magistrates Court. His
Honour ordered costs on the appropriate Magistrates Court scale.
Principal Properties Pty Ltd v Broncos Leagues
the appellant
obtained judgment of $250,000 in a proceeding commenced in the Supreme Court.
McMurdo JA noted that the appellant
was awarded only one third of the
District Court’s jurisdiction. His Honour said:
There was no single correct figure which represented the appellant's loss, but
on the findings which were ultimately made, the appellant
ought not to have
expected to recover a loss of more than that monetary limit. In my view,
r 697 should be applied and the appellant
should have its costs of its
proceeding in the Trial Division, but assessed as if the proceeding had been in
the District Court.
[29] Good reason
will need to be shown by a plaintiff to justify obtaining costs on a higher
scale that that of the lowest court with
amount sought or a judgment in the amount recovered. Generally, in order to
recover costs
on a higher scale, the case should involve some unusual feature or
complexity in the evidence or the assessment of
[30] Here, the
appellants recovered a little over two thirds of the Magistrates Court’s
and through most, if not all, of the
proceeding, they might reasonably have expected, on a proper evaluation of their
prospects on
the questions of liability and damages, to have recovered more than
$150,000. Their reasonable view of the appropriateness of proceeding
court would also be affected by the absence, until very late, of any objection
to their expert’s report, and that in
the context that the proceeding was
on this court’s Commercial List. Furthermore, the issues raised, the
evidence and addresses
took a considerable amount of the court’s time
– a total of nine days of trial.
[31] In my view,
although the proceeding was not overly complicated, it was reasonable for the
plaintiffs to have conducted it in
this court and, having succeeded (even though
for a sum within the jurisdiction of the Magistrates Court), their costs should
be restricted to a Magistrates Court scale.
Offers to settle
parties have informed the court that the defendants made three offers to settle
the proceeding, all of which were inclusive
of interest and costs:
(a) on 25 November 2024 - $125,000;
(b) on 29 January 2025 - $175,000; and
(c) on 20 February 2025 - $250,000.
defendants submit that each of those offers, if accepted, would have resulted in
the plaintiff being better off than they
are under the judgment against them,
taking into account interest and costs on the Magistrates Court scale. The
plaintiffs’
rejection of them, but particularly of the second and third
offers, was unreasonable given the stage at which the proceeding had
This applies especially to the third offer, which was made after a proper
evaluation of the evidence given to that time
would have indicated that the
plaintiffs had not proved substantial amounts of their claim. Therefore, it
would be appropriate for
the court to order that the defendants pay the
plaintiffs’ costs up to the date of one or other offer and thereafter the
pay the defendants’ costs on the indemnity basis, as provided
in r 361(2).
[34] By the time
each of those offers was made, this proceeding had been on foot for two years or
more and clearly the parties had
expended considerable sums in costs. On an
application by the defendants, on 23 October 2024 the trial was adjourned from
2024 to commence on 6 February 2025, so the second offer was made a
week or so before the trial commenced. The third offer was made
plaintiffs had closed their case and Mr Chadwick was under
cross-examination.
defendants submit that the second and third offers, in particular, each allowed
substantial amounts for interest and costs,
taking into account the ultimate
results in the proceeding. Had the plaintiffs accepted either offer, they would
have been better
off than they will be now, even with interest and costs.
[36] Interest on
the principal award against EPM is about $26,000 and, on the principal award
against Mr Chadwick, is about $8,700,
resulting in judgment debts
respectively of about $130,000 and $44,000. That allows for costs of $45,000 in
the offer of $175,000
and $120,000 in the offer of $250,000.
defendants’ problem with each of these offers is that it was for a lump
sum, which did not distinguish between the
amount offered in respect of the
claim and any amounts for interest or costs. That makes it very difficult to
demonstrate that each
offer was more favourable to the plaintiffs than the
ultimate result and that it was unreasonable for the plaintiffs not to accept
the offer. Additionally, there is no evidence before me of a reasonable
estimate of such costs, although it is doubtful that sufficient
was allowed for
costs of a District Court proceeding to the date of each offer.
[38] I am not
satisfied that acceptance of the offers would been more beneficial to the
plaintiffs than the ultimate judgment in their
favour. Therefore, I do not
consider that the offers should affect the usual rule that costs follow the
Two counsel
defendants submit to the effect that the court should direct that the plaintiffs
not be entitled to the costs of being represented
by two counsel. They submit
that the issues were not overly complex in a legal or factual sense, there was
not a large number of
documents to manage and the cross-examination of the
defendants’ witnesses (other than as to credit) was not lengthy.
plaintiffs submit that it was appropriate for two counsel to represent them at
trial, for reasons that I need not traverse.
Whether the plaintiffs should
recover costs for two counsel is a matter for a costs assessor, rather than the
court, to determine
in the first
Matters relevant to
the issue would be well known to such an
The court might only
consider the question in reviewing a decision of a costs assessor.
[41] Therefore I
decline to make an order or finding concerning the engagement of two
Mrs Chadwick’s costs
[42] Mr and
Mrs Schlecht submit that there should be no order as to
Mrs Chadwick’s costs, as her defence was conducted entirely
coincidentally with those of the other defendants; there was substantial factual
and legal overlap with issues on which the plaintiffs
succeeded; and her
attendance and participation were, in any event, as a director and in defence of
EPM and in defence of the claim
against Mr Chadwick. It is unlikely in the
extreme that she has incurred any costs separately from those incurred by EPM
[43] Alternatively,
the plaintiffs submit, any order for costs in favour of Mrs Chadwick should
be confined to costs exclusively and
distinctly referable to the discrete claim
against her.
defendants submit that it is inevitable that the plaintiffs be ordered to pay
Mrs Chadwick’s costs of the claim against
her. The asserted
inevitability appears to arise from the usual rule that costs follow the event.
The claim against her was separate
to the claims against EPM. The order should
be that the plaintiffs pay her costs referable to the claims against her.
[45] While the
plaintiffs failed in their claim against Mrs Chadwick, it is clear that she
would have attended and participated in
the trial whether or not she was joined
as a defendant. The claim against her was the same as the claim against
Mr Chadwick, as
alleged guarantor of EPM’s obligations. It failed
because I found that she was not in fact an “Existing Guarantor”
therefore only guaranteed EPM’s future obligations after she signed a
guarantee as part of the assignment of the lease
to the new tenant. Notably,
that was not a basis on which she defended the claim.
additional or separate facts or law were raised, in the plaintiffs’ claim
against Mrs Chadwick or in her defence, to
those raised in the claims
against EPM and Mr Chadwick. It would be close to impossible to identify
any separate costs incurred
by her to those of the other defendants.
[47] In the
circumstances, I do not consider it appropriate to make any costs order in
favour of Mrs Chadwick. I shall expressly
order that there be no order as
to her costs.
Differing orders between EPM and Mr Chadwick?
plaintiffs submit that costs should follow the event of the plaintiffs having
achieved substantial success against EPM and
Mr Chadwick. They concede,
however, that there should be some differentiation between them, as
Mr Chadwick was found not to be liable
for the cost of the Landlord’s
Works. They submit that EPM should pay their costs of the proceeding and
Mr Chadwick should
pay their costs referable to the issues other than the
Landlord’s Works.
defendants submit that the plaintiffs have had limited success. That limited
success should be reflected in the orders for
costs. As I understood
counsel’s submissions, that description of the plaintiffs’ limited
success applies particularly
to the breach of lease (or make good) claims, in
which they sought a substantially greater sum than they will recover under the
substantial part of the trial concerned the make good part of the
plaintiffs’ claims, but a lot of the evidence at trial
had relevance to
both the Landlord’s Works claim and the make good claims. It is
unnecessary for me to review the daily progress
of the trial to produce an
estimate of the time taken by each claim. The plaintiffs succeeded on the
Landlord’s Works claim
against EPM, even though I reduced it by the amount
of GST claimed by them. They succeeded on five of the six claims concerning
alterations to the premises, although recovering substantially lower amounts
than they had claimed for three of those items. They
succeeded on 12 of the 20
claims for breach of the maintenance obligations, although again for
substantially less than the amounts
they claimed for several of those
defendants’ counsel submitted that the plaintiffs will recover only 8% of
the total amount for the make good items
that they had originally claimed. That
is correct, but the total amount recovered constitutes about 37% of the amount
sought at the conclusion of the trial. While counsel did not
expressly say what effect those facts should have on an award of costs,
relevant to the exercise of my discretion.
important factor, in my view, is that, had a timely objection to the
plaintiffs’ expert’s report been made, they
may well have called
additional evidence and have succeeded in proving additional make good items,
bring judgment up to more than
the Magistrates Court’s jurisdiction.
[53] Taking a
broad brush approach, to reflect the respective success of the parties I
consider it appropriate to order that EPM pay
70% of the plaintiffs’ costs
of the proceeding and that Mr Chadwick pay half their costs of the
proceeding. Of course, under
these orders, the plaintiffs cannot recover more
than a total of 70% of their costs.
Costs thrown away – adjournment of trial
28 October 2024 I adjourned the trial on the application of the defendants and I
ordered that the defendants pay the plaintiffs’
costs thrown away by
reason of the adjournment.
defendants now submit that I should vary that order to limit the
plaintiffs’ costs to the Magistrates Court scale.
[56] As I have
declined to limit the plaintiffs’ costs of the proceeding to the
Magistrates Court scale, it is not appropriate
to vary that order in the manner
propounded.
Application to re-open trial
early August 2025, shortly before I was due to deliver my reasons for judgment,
the defendants indicated that they wished
to apply to re-open the trial and to
adduce further evidence about some of the items claimed by the plaintiffs. In
essence, the
defendants wanted to attempt to demonstrate that the new tenant had
remedied some of the breaches at its own expense, thus reducing
plaintiffs’ loss. I gave the defendants leave to make such an
application, which was filed on 7 August 2025 with a supporting
affidavit. On
18 August 2025, the defendants withdrew their application.
defendants submit that there should be no order as to the costs of their
application, as the plaintiffs did not respond to
the defendants’
solicitors’ proposal to apply to re-open the trial, I found that the
plaintiffs would be given a windfall
if I were to order damages for items that
had been rectified and a number of the items about which further evidence would
given were not allowed by me or the amounts allowed were minimal.
defendants made an application that they abandoned shortly afterwards. There is
no doubt that the plaintiffs would have
incurred costs in considering the
application and preparing for its hearing.
[60] In my view
there is no reason why the plaintiffs ought not have their costs of the
application. However, that liability should
not extend to Mrs Chadwick,
given that she was ultimately successful in her defence.
Appropriate orders for costs
summary, the orders for costs will be that:
(a) EPM and Mr Chadwick pay 50% of the plaintiffs’ costs of the
proceeding;
(b) EPM pay a further 20% of the plaintiffs’ costs of the proceeding;
(c) EPM and Mr Chadwick pay the plaintiffs’ costs of the defendants’
application filed on 7 August 2025; and
(d) there be no order as to Mrs Chadwick’s costs of the proceeding.
Trust monies
part of the arrangements for the assignment of the lease, Mr and
Mrs Schlecht, EPM and their respective solicitors entered
into a deed of
undertaking (TB325).
[63] In its
recitals, the deed recorded to the effect that the lessor had issued certain
identified notices to remedy breach of covenant
to the assignor (EPM), which EPM
disputed. In consideration of the withdrawal of the notices to remedy breach of
covenant (which
I construe to refer to the identified notices), the lessor and
the assignor had agreed to deposit monies into the trust accounts
solicitors “
as security for payment of the amounts claimed by the
Lessor for the alleged breaches of covenant
[64] Under the
operative clauses of the deed, Mr and Mrs Schlecht paid $55,000 (which
they had held as a security bond under the lease)
into the trust account of
their solicitors and EPM paid $95,000 into the trust account of their
solicitors. The solicitors undertook
to hold the monies in their trust accounts
pending receipt of a direction in writing given by or on behalf of the Lessor
and the Assignee [
] or alternatively, an order of a court of competent
by them in trust.
[65] The first
thing to be said is that the reference to the Assignee in that undertaking is
clearly in error. It should have been
to the Assignor and I shall construe it
in that manner.
[66] Since the
trial, the plaintiffs’ solicitors changed from Barclay Beirne to Spire
Law. I am told that the parties to the
deed of undertaking varied the deed
whereby assumed the undertakings given by Barclay Beirne. I assume that the
funds held in trust
by Barclay Beirne are now held in trust by Spire Law.
plaintiffs submit that I should direct the respective solicitors to pay to the
plaintiffs the amount of the judgment in their
favour, with the balance to be
held by Spire Law pending assessment of costs.
defendants submit that the undertakings were given in consideration for the
plaintiffs withdrawing the three notices to remedy
breach issued on 27 and 28
July 2022 and referred to in the deed (only two of which are in evidence). One
of those in evidence (TB303)
related to the costs of the Landlord’s Works,
asserting that the costs were payable under the lease. I have found that the
agreement to pay those costs and EPM’s liability for them was not made
under the lease, but under a separate agreement. Therefore,
the defendants
submit, the plaintiffs did not obtain a resolution in their favour of the
matters the subject of that notice and there
is no basis for the plaintiffs to
be paid any of the funds held in trust for this part of the judgment.
defendants also submit that the other notice in evidence (TB305) set out nine of
the items for which the plaintiffs made
claims in this proceeding, in some of
which they have failed and in others of which they recovered less than the
amount claimed.
They submit that the plaintiffs should only be entitled to
recover from the trust funds the amounts held by me to be due as damages
breach of the items referred to in that notice. Counsel for the defendants
calculated that sum to be $8,736.
[70] Alternatively,
counsel submitted, the only amount that should be paid to the plaintiffs from
the trust funds is the sum of $35,348.16,
comprising the damages I have awarded
for the make good items. The balance should be returned to the defendants.
[71] As I have
recorded above, the deed was expressly recorded as being in consideration of the
withdrawal of the particular notices
to remedy breach and the funds were to be
held as security for payment of the amounts claimed in those notices. The funds
held as security for any other liability that EPM may have had to the
plaintiffs. I agree with the defendants’ submission
that the funds are
not security for items not referred to in the notices, nor for any liability
other than under the lease.
[72] The result
is that I agree with the defendants that the only liability for which the funds
are held in trust is that arising
from the breaches that I have held occurred in
respect of the items listed in the notices. As the notice concerning the
Works claimed that EPM’s failure to pay was a breach of
the lease, which I have found it not to be, the trust funds are not
account of that claim. The amount for which the funds are security is therefore
only the amount calculated by the defendants’
counsel. The deed expressly
provides that the solicitors need not invest the sums held in trust and did not
provide that interest
be paid out of the trust funds on any of the amounts
claimed. There is therefore no basis on which to order that any interest be
paid out of the trust fund.
[73] I shall
therefore order that $8,736 be paid to the plaintiffs out of the funds held in
trust by their solicitors and the balance
of those funds and of the funds held
by the defendants’ solicitors be paid to EPM or at its direction.
Schlecht v EPM Operations
[2015] QDC 105
Batchelor v Burke
[1981] HCA 30
(1981) 148 CLR 448
, per Gibbs CJ at 455
; Interchase Corporation Ltd v
Grosvenor Hill (Queensland) Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2003] 1 Qd R 26
Law of Costs
(LexisNexis,
ed, 2021), [12.15] (citations excluded).
Dal Pont, [12.17].
O’Doherty v McMahon
[1971] VicRp 75
[1971] VR 625
(Menhenitt J, delivering the judgment of the Full Court).
[1973] Qd R 509
, 513-514, 515.
Sweeney v Attwood Marshall
[2002] QSC 294
[2018] QCA 91
, [3]-[6] (McMurdo JA, with whom
Philippides JA and Boddice J agreed).
Bulsey v State of
[2016] QCA 158
Quick on Costs
(Thomson Reuters, Westlaw
Precision Australia), [280.140].
Stanley v Phillips
[1966] HCA 24
(1966) 115 CLR 470
Pinehurst Nominees Pty Ltd v Coeur de
Lion Investments Pty Ltd
[2015] QSC 122
, [16]-[21].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (243 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter