URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/216.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Dyer [2025] QCA 216 (7 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
[2025] QCA 216
DYER, James
(appellant)
CA No 285 of 2024
SC No 328 of 2024
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Appeal against Conviction
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane – Date of Conviction: 11 December 2024
DELIVERED ON:
7 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
23 July 2025
Bowskill CJ, Mullins P and Brown JA
Appeal dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE
– PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES NOT AMOUNTING TO MISCARRIAGE
MISDIRECTION OR NON-DIRECTION – where the appellant was found guilty of
one count of possessing a dangerous drug in
excess of 2 grams (count 1)
(the larger amount) and pleaded guilty to another count of possessing a
dangerous drug in excess of 2
grams (count 2) (the smaller amount) –
where the police found the larger amount within four clip-seal bags under the
passenger seat of the co-accused’s car in which the appellant was in
the front passenger seat and the co-accused was in the
driver’s seat
– where the appellant’s left thumb print was found on the innermost
clip-seal bag – where the
appellant gave evidence and explained at trial
that the co-accused had asked him for clip-seal bags the previous evening and he
them to the co-accused – where the appellant was also found with
the smaller amount on his person – where the appellant
explained at trial
the co-accused had asked him to hold onto the smaller amount as the co-accused
was on bail – where the prosecutor
referred to the appellant’s
explanations as a “concoction” – where the appellant argued on
appeal a miscarriage
of justice was occasioned through the jury not being
directed about the use of evidence that was capable of being viewed by the jury
as evidence of consciousness of guilt – whether there was an error or
irregularity in the trial
Brawn v The King
(2025) 99 ALJR 872
[2025] HCA 20
Edwards v The Queen
(1993) 178 CLR 193
[1993] HCA 63
Zoneff v The Queen
(2000) 200 CLR 234
[2000] HCA 28
S J Hedge for the appellant
R J Marks for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the appellant
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Queensland) for the respondent
[1] BOWSKILL
I agree with Mullins P.
[2] MULLINS
Mr Dyer was convicted after trial before a jury of one count of
possessing a dangerous drug in excess of 2 grams (count 1). He
pleaded guilty
to count 2 on the indictment (which was also possessing a dangerous drug in
excess of 2 grams) at the commencement
of the trial. Mr Dyer appeals
against his conviction on count 1 on the ground that a miscarriage of justice
occurred because the
jury were not directed as to the use they could make of
evidence that was capable of being viewed as evidence of consciousness of
namely the evidence of Mr Dyer that was said by the prosecution to be a
“concoction”. Mr Dyer does not necessarily
contend that a direction
in accordance with
Edwards v The Queen
[1993] HCA 63
(1993) 178 CLR 193
210-211 was required. He contends that the trial judge should have clarified
with the prosecutor the implication of his assertion
that aspects of
Mr Dyer’s evidence were a concoction to determine whether an
direction or a direction in accordance with
Zoneff v The
(2000) 200 CLR 234
at [23]-[24] was required and the jury should have
been directed accordingly.
Circumstances giving rise to count
[3] Mr Dyer and
Mr McTackett were at a car wash around 8 pm on the evening of
19 August 2022 when they were approached by police.
As a result of the
observations the police made of the two men, the police exercised their power to
detain them and search the car.
They found a clip-seal bag underneath the front
passenger seat containing 110.56 grams of substance (the larger bag) which upon
analysis was 70.8 per cent methylamphetamine with a pure weight of 78.23
grams (count 1). Police searched Mr Dyer and found a further
of white crystalline substance in a single clip-seal bag on him (the
smaller bag). The gross weight was 6.78 grams. It
was 70.7 per cent pure
methylamphetamine which was a weight of 4.79 grams (count 2).
[4] Mr Dyer and
Mr McTackett were charged jointly with count 1. During the trial, the trial
judge ordered that Mr McTackett receive
a separate trial. The prosecution case
against Mr Dyer was a circumstantial one based on proof that he was in actual
of the drugs that were the subject of count 1. Mr Dyer’s case
at trial was that there was a reasonable hypothesis consistent
with innocence
that the drugs were exclusively in Mr McTackett’s
possession.
Mr Dyer’s evidence
Dyer’s evidence in chief included the following. Prior to August 2022,
Mr Dyer had known Mr McTackett for about three
months and would score small
amounts of ice or amphetamines off him once or twice a week. Mr Dyer saw Mr
McTackett on 18 August
2022 at the bowls club when Mr Dyer won a sum in the
vicinity of $5,000 on a poker machine. (This win was verified by the bowls
manager’s evidence at the trial.) Mr McTackett asked Mr Dyer to accompany
him when he drove to Townsville. Mr Dyer had
three sons living in Bowen and
wanted to go to Bowen. On the night of 18 August 2022, Mr McTackett dropped Mr
Dyer to his unit where
he resided with his partner and a friend. Mr McTackett
had remained outside doing something in his car before he knocked on the
and asked Mr Dyer for some sandwich bags. Mr Dyer’s partner directed him
to the top of the refrigerator where Mr Dyer
grabbed a pile of sandwich
bags and handed them to Mr McTackett. Mr McTackett left and returned
the next day around lunch time.
Mr McTackett and Mr Dyer left from Mr
Dyer’s unit. When they were at the car wash, Mr Dyer walked across to the
convenience
store and got something to eat and drink. He got back into the car
and was seated in the passenger seat when one police officer
came to his car
door and one went to Mr McTackett’s car door. Mr Dyer was in possession
of the smaller bag of the drug, as
when they were leaving his unit and were
stopped at the lights, Mr McTackett asked him to hang on to that bag. He
said to Mr Dyer
that he was on bail for drugs and, if they were pulled over, he
was likely to be searched. Mr Dyer put the smaller bag down his
Dyer was not aware of the larger bag of drugs under the front passenger seat of
the car. He had not been told about them
by Mr McTackett, they were not
his drugs, and he did not have any interest in them.
Dyer’s evidence in cross-examination included the following. The brand of
clip-seal bags that Mr Dyer handed to Mr McTackett
was Coles. He could not work
out why Mr McTackett had asked him for sandwich bags when it turned out the next
day that there were
two open boxes of clip-seal bags in the glovebox of
Mr McTackett’s car. It was 11 o’clock at night when Mr
asked for the sandwich bags. The cross-examination that was a focus
of the prosecutor’s address to the jury was as
“Sir, I suggest to you this story you’ve told
false?‑‑‑Well, it’s not.
I suggest that you’ve concocted that story to try and explain away your
fingerprint on the clip seal bag holding the drugs?‑‑‑No.
Did you see the scales in the car before the police
arrived?‑‑‑No, I didn’t.
Did you see the other clip seal bags in the car before the police
arrived?‑‑‑No.
The car was pretty filthy when the police arrived, wasn’t
it?‑‑‑Um, I – no, I don’t think so.
Well, it’s just there was a lot of rubbish and litter and stuff,
leftover food containers, things like that in it?‑‑‑I
didn’t think there was a lot. There was – there was, generally, any
other time – like, the other couple of times
I’ve been in his car,
it was – there was shit everywhere. But he’d cleaned it out. Like,
that night when he gave
me the lift from the bowls club back to the flat on
Alamein, he was cleaning the car out then, and then he cleaned it out again the
next morning, and then by the time we got to the – when we got to the car
wash, he was cleaning it again. So I don’t
think it was in too bad a state
at that stage.
How do you know he was cleaning it the next morning?‑‑‑Um,
oh, I don’t know.”
[7] There was
very little cross-examination of Mr Dyer on the explanation for his having the
smaller bag on him. Mr Dyer said in
cross-examination:
asked me to hold onto an amount of drugs, yeah. The only amount – the only
drugs I knew about. And I didn’t
even know about them until he produced
them then.”
[8] There was no
further cross-examination of Mr Dyer on this explanation to the effect that he
was lying about the circumstances
in which he came to have the smaller bag on
Other evidence
[9] The drugs
the subject of count 1 were contained in a series of clip-seal bags. There were
admissions that the bag which contained
the drugs (the last bag) was contained
within another clip-seal bag (the third bag) which was contained within another
bag (the second
bag) which was contained within another bag (the first
[10] Senior
Constable Hogan was the police officer who approached Mr Dyer at the car wash
and located the larger bag. Senior Constable
Hogan also located two boxes of
clip-seal bags in the glovebox and a set of scales. Senior Constable Chapman
was working with Senior
Constable Hogan and was present when Mr Dyer produced
the smaller bag from his pants.
[11] Senior
Constable Sturdy conducted an examination of the clip-seal bags for the purpose
of developing fingerprints. He developed
one latent fingerprint on the exterior
of one of the clip-seal bags. It had a white label on it that said
There was only a fingerprint on one side of the bag and
not the other side.
[12] Sergeant
Borger who had more than 17 years’ experience in fingerprint
identification undertook a comparison of the latent
fingerprint found by Senior
Constable Sturdy with the fingerprints taken of Mr Dyer and Mr McTackett. He
was of the opinion that
the latent fingerprint was of the left thumb of Mr Dyer.
The appearance of the fingerprint did not suggest that was the result of
pressure. In cross-examination, Sergeant Borger explained that not everybody
who comes into contact with an object will leave
a fingerprint. It was not
in issue in the trial that it was Mr Dyer’s fingerprint on one side of the
clip-seal bag.
Dyer’s partner gave evidence which included the following. They had been
in a relationship for about two and one-half
years. Prior to 18 August
2022, she had seen Mr McTackett a couple of times and met him very briefly. He
came to the door of their
asked for some sandwich bags. She told Mr Dyer that the sandwich bags were on
the top of the fridge and she saw him go to get them and hand them over to Mr
Prosecutor’s address to the jury
appellant’s counsel in this Court focused on those parts of the
prosecutor’s address to the jury that suggested
there were two critical
aspects (critical aspects) of Mr Dyer’s evidence that were a
“concoction”, namely that
Mr Dyer handed Coles clip-seal bags to Mr
McTackett late in the evening of 18 August 2022 and that Mr McTackett had
given the smaller
bag to Mr Dyer when they were in the car soon after they left
Mr Dyer’s unit, so that the smaller bag would not be located
by police if
they searched Mr McTackett.
[15] In respect
of the fingerprint, the prosecutor described that as the direct link between
Mr Dyer and the drugs located under the
seat on which he was sitting. He
then stated:
“You’ve heard [Mr Dyer’s] evidence
try and explain the fingerprint, and that is precisely what it was, ladies and
gentlemen. It’s an absurd story. You’re
entitled to reject
prosecutor then emphasised that a defendant’s evidence is no different to
any other witness’ evidence and that
the jury could accept all, some, or
none of a witness’ evidence. The prosecutor then
“And I’d suggest that, by and large, you would
have found him to be an utterly uncredible witness. His story was, at times,
fanciful. It was, at times, completely illogical. When pressed, he added details
that you would find unconvincing. And at least one
point, I’d suggest, he
just straight up told you an untruth, and when pressed on it, just had to accept
that he couldn’t
possibly know the fact he was putting forward.
That was when he was in cross-examination. I was asking him about the state
of the car and he talks about Mr McTackett having been
cleaning the car the
night before – given evidence of that already. He talked about Mr
McTackett cleaning the car at the car
wash, again, that doesn’t seem to be
in dispute really. But between those two things he’s added that Mr
McTackett had
been cleaning the car the morning of the 19
said to him, ‘How could you possibly know that?’ He just said,
“I don’t know.’ He just added a detail
that he couldn’t
possibly have known, that he couldn’t possibly have any personal knowledge
of. When asked how he’d
known that fact, he just said, ‘I
don’t know.’ It’s an utterly unsatisfactory answer, ladies and
but it’s indicative of his credibility.”
The reference to the “untruth” in the first paragraph of the
passage quoted above was therefore to Mr Dyer’s evidence
that Mr McTackett
cleaned his car on the morning of 19 August 2022 in respect of which Mr Dyer
then conceded that he did not know
how he knew Mr McTackett was cleaning the car
the next morning. The prosecutor referred expressly to that
being relevant to Mr Dyer’s credibility.
referring to the scientific evidence adduced at the trial that there was a very
small difference in purity (which may be
no difference at all) between the
methylamphetamine in the larger bag and the methylamphetamine in the smaller
bag, the prosecutor
“So he’s got to provide an
explanation for this too, doesn’t he? That explanation, I’d suggest,
astounding. He says that McTackett asked him to hold onto those drugs
shortly after they left his apartment because McTackett was
worried that if they
got pulled over or the police interacted with them, he’d be searched, but
Mr Dyer wouldn’t. You’ve
heard evidence that Mr McTackett was wanted
on a warrant in relation to serious drug offending. [Mr Dyer] says he told him
prosecutor then made a submission to the jury that related to the critical
“[Mr Dyer’s] version, both in regards to the
fingerprint and why he’s in possession of those drugs on his person,
self-serving fantasy, designed to explain two incontrovertible facts: his
fingerprint on the bag holding the larger amount, and
the possession on his
person of the smaller amount of, again, what I suggest you could be confident is
the same drug. You should
reject his account on both of those matters, and so
far as that, put his version aside and come back to uncontested
The summing up
[19] The trial
judge gave the usual direction in accordance with
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507.
Relevantly, the direction emphasised that the jury did not
have to believe that Mr Dyer was telling the truth before he was entitled
found not guilty and dealt with the possibility that the jury might not accept
Mr Dyer’s evidence “in which case
you would put to one side, but you
must not then jump from deciding not to accept [Mr Dyer’s] evidence to an
automatic conclusion
[20] Immediately
following the
direction, the trial judge gave a direction at the
request of Mr Dyer’s counsel to avoid impermissible reasoning from Mr
plea of guilty to count 2:
“In terms of jumping
to conclusions, I direct you that whilst you can consider the evidence that Mr
Dyer has pleaded guilty
to possession of the methylamphetamine found on his body
as part of the circumstantial evidence in this case against him, you cannot,
part of that circumstantial case, jump to the conclusion that he must be guilty
of the possession of the drugs under the seat,
or that it is more likely than
not that he had possession of the drugs under the seat. To do that would be
entirely unfair and wrong.”
direction was also followed by another direction to explain that the purpose of
Mr Dyer’s giving evidence of using
and sourcing methylamphetamine
from Mr McTackett was relied on by Mr Dyer as evidence of context to show
the relationship between
the two men and that, if the jury accepted this
evidence, it did not make Mr Dyer’s guilt more probable. That direction
with the following warning:
“That evidence is
relevant to the natural background to the charge. It is important not to jump to
the conclusion that because
Mr Dyer has admitted to drug use or sourcing drugs
that he must be guilty of possession of the drugs under the seat or that it is
more likely that he had possession of the drugs under the seat. Again, to do
that would be not only unfair, it would be wrong.”
standard direction was given to the jury that the prosecution had the burden of
proving the guilt of Mr Dyer beyond reasonable
doubt. It was explained to the
jury that, in order to convict, they must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
of each element of
the offence and it was for them to decide whether they were
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the prosecution had proved the
of the offence. The jury was provided with a handout for their deliberations
that set out the charge, the particulars of
the Crown case, the prosecution onus
and standard of proof and the elements of the offence of unlawful possession of
a dangerous
drug which repeated the oral direction that to prove Mr Dyer guilty
of the offence the prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt
each of the
four elements of the charge set out in the handout.
[23] The jury
was given the usual directions about the credibility of witnesses and the
reliability of their evidence and that it
was for the jury to accept or reject
such parts of the evidence as they thought fit, based on whether a witness was
telling the truth
or correctly recalled the facts about which the witness had
summarising the prosecution’s case, the trial judge repeated the
uncontested facts relied on by the prosecution in support
of its circumstantial
“... Mr Dyer’s presence in the vehicle; his
position in the passenger seat where the drugs were located; his fingerprint
the bag directly holding the drug, subject to count 1; [Mr Dyer’s]
possession of the other smaller quantity of drugs, subject
to count 2, on his
person, and that those drugs were similar to the large quantity in both
appearance and purity, and the presence
of the scales and the two open boxes of
clipseal bags in the car.”
[25] The trial
judge then summarised the submissions made in respect of the two critical
aspects and that it was the prosecution’s
submission that Mr Dyer’s
explanation for the fingerprint on the clip-seal bag “was ridiculous and
should be rejected”
and similarly his explanation for his possession of
the smaller bag of methylamphetamine should also be rejected.
[26] The trial
judge referred specifically to the prosecution’s submissions that
Mr Dyer told deliberate lies and that was relevant
to Mr Dyer’s
credibility:
“The Crown submitted that [Mr Dyer’s]
evidence was self-serving and designed to answer two incontrovertible facts
tied him to the drugs. The Crown submitted that [Mr Dyer’s] evidence
lacked detail and was unbelievable and that he told a
deliberate and blatant
falsehood about Mr McTackett cleaning the car in the morning of
, and you would think that that destroys his
credibility.”
Appellant’s propositions implicit in the ground of appeal
following propositions which are essential to establishing the ground of appeal
were put forward by the appellant on the
hearing of the appeal:
was equivocal as to whether the prosecutor was relying on Mr Dyer’s lies
on the two critical aspects as evidence of Mr Dyer’s
consciousness of
guilt that he had committed the offence.
was an obligation on the trial judge to clarify with the prosecutor as to the
prosecution case in respect of the asserted lies
on the critical aspects.
the absence of a direction by the trial judge, there was a risk of impermissible
reasoning by the jury as to consciousness of guilt
on the part of Mr Dyer as
a result of the prosecutor’s assertion that Mr Dyer concocted his
evidence on the critical aspects.
Do these propositions
reflect what occurred at the trial?
critical aspects relate to two of the factual circumstances relied on by the
prosecution in the circumstantial case against
Mr Dyer and do not relate
directly to the commission of the offence.
[29] On this
appeal, the appellant’s counsel relied on the use by the prosecutor of the
word “concocted” when cross-examining
Mr Dyer about his explanation
for his thumbprint on the clip-seal bag and emphasised the use by the prosecutor
in his address to
the jury of the word “concoction” to describe the
false explanation as to how his thumbprint got onto the internal clip-seal
within the larger bag and the word “designed” to apply to Mr
Dyer’s explanations on the two critical aspects.
The Macquarie Dictionary
defines “concoct” as “(verb) 1. To make by combining
ingredients, as in cookery... 2.
to prepare; make up; contrive...”. The
Australian Oxford Dictionary defines the word as “1. Make by mixing
ingredients...
2. Invent (a story, a lie, etc.)”. The use of the word
“concoct” is merely another more colourful way of asserting
lie was told. The use of the word “designed” merely linked
Mr Dyer’s “self-serving fantasy”
to their effect as
explanations for the two critical aspects. There was no cross-examination of Mr
Dyer by the prosecutor to suggest
that he had set out to construct deliberately
and carefully a false account to answer parts of the circumstantial case (which
asserted by the appellant’s counsel on the appeal as the contention
that the prosecutor was pursuing at the trial). In fact,
the focus of the
cross-examination of Mr Dyer at the trial was the “untruth” about
Mr McTackett’s cleaning his
car on the morning of 19 August 2022
which could only ever be relevant to credibility.
appellant submits that the conduct of the prosecution case in his trial was
analogous to that in each of
[2013] QCA 289
[2022] QCA 53
where the appeal succeeded. Both cases are
distinguishable.
, the defendant gave evidence at his trial and was cross-examined on
inconsistent statements that were said to have been made in his
interview with police and it was put to the defendant that his evidence was a
lie. The prosecutor’s submission to
the jury on this aspect is set out at
[27] of the reasons. In short, it was submitted that the evidence he gave
“was a recent
fabrication designed to portray himself in the best possible
light” and it was completely inconsistent with the evidence he
gave to the
police three years ago, and he was a liar. In contrast to Mr Dyer’s
trial, there was no suggestion by the prosecutor
that, if the jury rejected the
defendant’s evidence at the trial, they should put it aside. What the
judge said in summing
up was summarised at [28] of the reasons. Holmes JA (with
whom Morrison JA and Henry J agreed) noted (at [28]) in respect of this
“Turning to the appellant’s evidence and what he
had said in the police interview, his Honour told the jury that they
decide whether what was said on the earlier occasion was inconsistent, because
that was relevant to the appellant’s
credibility. He did not, however,
give the jury any further direction on how to approach evidence which the
prosecution had characterised
[32] Holmes JA
concluded in
(at [35]) that it was implicit in the
prosecutor’s submission that the defendant lied “because he could
not innocently
account for what had happened” and it was not merely a
submission that his credibility was impaired. Holmes JA noted (at [37])
that “the jury was left to consider the prosecutor’s submission
without any adequate guidance as to how they should approach
the specific
divergences between what the appellant said in the interview and what he said in
evidence”. There was therefore
a miscarriage of justice from the lack of
direction as to the use of lies.
, the defendant was tried for one count of rape and two counts of
indecent treatment of a child. Immediately after the incident in
the kitchen in
the house where the complainant resided out of which the second count of
indecent treatment arose, the complainant
went to her mother’s bedroom and
the defendant left the house. The defendant gave evidence and was
cross-examined to the effect
that the reason he left the house after the
complainant went into her mother’s room was because he had touched her.
The defendant
denied touching the complainant and asserted he left the house to
visit his niece who lived down the road. The prosecutor addressed
the jury on
the “convenient timing” of the defendant’s departure from the
house. It was conceded by the prosecution
on the appeal that there was
insufficient evidence to demonstrate a consciousness of guilt arising from the
defendant having left
the house. There was no direction to the jury as to how
they were to use the conduct that occurred immediately after the incident
house. The appeal succeeded on the basis that the nature of the questions asked
by the prosecutor and the statement made
in the address to the jury about the
convenient timing indicated to the jury that the post-offence conduct betrayed
guilt. A miscarriage
occurred because there was no guidance from the trial
judge in the summing up as to how the jury should deal with the suggestion
post-offence consciousness of guilt that arose from the prosecutor’s
conduct of the case.
[34] It was
apparent from the prosecutor’s address to the jury that the prosecutor was
not seeking that the jury use the lies
as evidence of Mr Dyer’s
consciousness of guilt of the offence. In his address to the jury, both
critical aspects were described
as “self-serving fantasy, designed to
explain two incontrovertible facts” which should be rejected and Mr
version put aside and the jury should consider the uncontested
facts. There was no equivocation whatsoever in the prosecutor’s
on the asserted lies on the two critical aspects as affecting only the
credibility of Mr Dyer and therefore there was nothing
that required
clarification by the trial judge with the prosecutor. As observed in
at [17], it is only where there is a risk of confusion or doubt as
to the way in which the prosecution puts it case that the trial
judge should
inquire whether the prosecution contends that lies may constitute evidence of
consciousness of guilt and require the
identification of the lie in issue and
the basis on which the lie is said to be capable of implicating the accused in
the commission
of the offence charged. The prosecutor expressly limited the
reliance on the asserted lies on the critical aspects to the assessment
Dyer’s credibility and the trial judge summed up the prosecution case in
those terms. The appellant has failed to make
out the first and second
propositions that are implicit in his ground of appeal.
[35] As to the
third proposition, there was no risk of misunderstanding on the part of the jury
that if they rejected Mr Dyer’s
explanations on the critical aspects, they
should put his evidence to one side and not jump to an automatic conclusion of
This was expressly covered by the
direction. There was
no risk of impermissible reasoning by the jury, having regard to the manner in
which the prosecution was conducted
at the trial and a consideration of the
summing up as a whole.
[36] The first
step in establishing a miscarriage of justice is that there was an error or
irregularity in the trial:
Brawn v The King
[2025] HCA 20
(2025) 99 ALJR 872
There was no failure to give a direction that resulted in any error or
irregularity in the trial. The appellant has failed at
following order should be made: Appeal dismissed.
I agree with Mullins P.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (212 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter