URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2020/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re WAB [2020] QMHC 3 (10 February 2020)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of WAB
[2020] QMHC 3
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
10 February 2020
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
22 August 2019, 9 October 2019 and 10 December 2019
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr SJ Harden and
Dr JJ Sundin
DETERMINATION:
Adjourn the hearing of this appeal to a date to be fixed
Appellant self-represented
S Robb for the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist
AK Lossberg for Crown
SOLICITORS:
The Office of the Chief Psychiatrist
NOTE: This judgment is published pursuant to
Mental Health
It has been anonymised.
[1] WAB had a prejudicial childhood and was the victim of violent abuse. He had
head injuries as a child and young man. He began
using drugs at around the age
of 13 and had his first admission to a mental health ward after an attempted
hanging at the age of
[2] On 25 October 2013 the Mental Health Court made a Forensic Order inpatient
with no limited community treatment in relation to
WAB. At that time WAB was in
jail and the Forensic Order ought to have been one with full LCT to accommodate
[3] The evidence before this Court in 2013 was that WAB had schizophrenia and
was of unsound mind at the time of the offences which
were before the Court.
[4] The 2013 order has never come to an end; it has been reviewed regularly in
the Mental Health Review Tribunal (MHRT) and confirmed
on those occasions.
Since the Forensic Order was made, WAB has spent only eight months outside an
Authorised Mental Health Service
or a jail. He manages to obtain illegal drugs
both in hospital and in jail. He offends in other ways. He is very difficult
[5] WAB acts for himself. He lodged an appeal on 11 June 2019 against the
decision of the MHRT of 7 June 2019. That was a decision
of the MHRT confirming
a Forensic Order inpatient with very limited leave.
[6] The material before the Court indicated that WAB has an IQ of 68. I must
say that I thought his ability to represent himself
in Court was better than
that very low score would indicate. Nonetheless, there were obvious
difficulties with his representing
[7] The basis for WAB’s contention that the order of the MHRT ought to be
set aside is that he does not in fact have schizophrenia,
but pretended to have
schizophrenia when he was examined for the purpose of the Mental Health Court
proceedings in 2013. He explains
that he had an uncle with schizophrenia and
essentially copied his behaviour to achieve that diagnosis. He says that at the
he thought that pretending to have a mental illness would be an easy way
out of his legal predicament, but now complains that he
has spent nearly six
years detained either in jail or hospital. He now realises that it would have
been easier for him to have served
his time in jail for the offences which came
before the Mental Health Court in 2013 than to be subject to the Forensic Order
this length of time.
[8] One difficulty with WAB’s appeal is that although there was a MHRT
decision of 7 June 2019, it was superseded by another
one on 5 July 2019.
However, as the Tribunal decisions were very similar, that difficulty can be
overcome as treating WAB’s
appeal as one from the decision of 5 July 2019.
[9] Another difficulty which WAB faces is the decision of Flanagan J in
Flanagan J held
that, “a current existing mental illness” was not “a
prerequisite to the confirmation of a forensic
order”. – [35]. The
question whether or not a Forensic Order will be confirmed or discharged depends
, the risk the person poses to the community, and absence
of current illness is only one factor in making that assessment. I do note,
however, that
was a case involving depression which remitted, rather
than a case like this where, if what the defendant now says is true, he did
have schizophrenia, and may not have had any mental illness, at the time this
Court made the Forensic Order in 2013.
[10] It may at first seem unlikely that WAB, particularly considering his
measured IQ, could imitate the signs and symptoms of schizophrenia
so well that
he in effect fooled the two psychiatrists who reported to the Mental Health
Court in the 2013 proceedings, and that
nothing of this subterfuge was detected
by the Assisting Psychiatrists in 2013. However, it seemed to me, and to the
psychiatrists
assisting me on 9 October 2019, and 10 December 2019, that
there might be something in the claim that WAB does not have schizophrenia.
treating doctor, Dr Singh, gives this
information:
“Background history of childhood trauma and
strong history of anti-social behaviour from his adolescence which has appeared
to continue and escalate into the present. Historical documentation of
psychotic symptoms on two occasions have resulted in the
diagnosis of paranoid
schizophrenia and a forensic order. No such observations of any positive or
negative symptoms of psychosis
have been made since 2013, even in the context of
heavy drug use. All observations since the diagnosis in 2013 include symptoms
of poor impulse control, poor empathy, angry outbursts that manifest in physical
violence and crime, suggesting antisocial personality
traits. Appears to have
deficits in executive functioning which could contribute to his antisocial
traits and this has been previously
documented in a 2015 cognitive assessment
which noted an estimated IQ of 68. Highly unlikely that [WAB] has paranoid
schizophrenia.
However, he has been on antipsychotic [medication] while still
an inpatient. The likelihood of him having psychotic episodes in
future cannot be ruled out [if] he continues to use drugs and
[11] Because WAB has been on a hospital ward or in prison for all but eight
months of the last six years, it is unlikely that psychotic
symptoms have
escaped attention. Further, he has managed to use illicit drugs fairly
frequently in jail and in hospital. These
drugs are known to worsen the
symptoms of psychotic illness and, in susceptible individuals, produce
drug-induced psychosis. WAB’s
not exhibiting psychotic symptoms over such
a long period of time, despite drug use, does increase the likelihood that he
have any psychotic illness.
[12] Sensibly the only way to test whether or not WAB does have schizophrenia is
to observe him in a secure hospital environment
where those treating him can be
certain he is not taking illicit drugs and where they can wean him from
antipsychotic medication
in a controlled way to observe whether or not that
leads to the re-emergence of psychotic symptoms – see the advice of my
Psychiatrists on 9 October 2019, tt 1-10. My Assisting Psychiatrists
also advised that WAB’s treatment on the mental health
ward of a normal,
ie, not secure, hospital was well and truly sub-optimal. They noted that
although staff of the hospital which
was recently involved in WAB’s case
had attempted to have him taken to a secure mental health facility, the
particular secure
health facility in the relevant geographical area had refused
a referral.
[13] The strong recommendation of my Assisting Psychiatrists was that WAB should
go to a secure mental health unit so that he could
be rendered free of illicit
drugs, and his antipsychotic medication withdrawn, so that he could be observed.
The hearing of 9 October
2019 concluded on the basis that the Chief
Psychiatrist would liaise with the relevant health authorities to see if that
result could
be brought about (this Court has no power to order such a
[14] When the adjourned hearing in this Court resumed on 10 December 2019, WAB
had been taken from prison to a secure mental health
facility. WAB is being
monitored for illegal drug use and his antipsychotic medication is being
withdrawn. My Assisting Psychiatrists
advised that this is a sensible medical
plan and that WAB ought to remain on a Forensic Order inpatient category with no
leave for three to four months in the secure facility so that his
treating team and an independent doctor can review him so that
some view can be
formed as to whether or not he does in fact suffer from schizophrenia.
[15] It seems to me that where the appellant raises a real issue as to whether
or not he ever had a mental illness this ought to
be investigated.
[16] There is a second matter. The appellant has spent six years on a Forensic
Order. If his treating doctor’s opinion is
correct, WAB has spent years
on mental health wards when he has no illness which can be treated. This is
obviously undesirable both
from the point of view of WAB, and from the point of
view of the health system, which has scarce resources. One main purpose of
Forensic Order is to protect the community. WAB has offended whilst on the
Forensic Order. I think there is little doubt that
he would have offended had
he not been on a Forensic Order. I do not know that it is safe, or of any
assistance, to speculate as
to whether or not his offending would have been
worse had he not been on a Forensic Order.
[17] In short, as to this second point, it does not appear that having WAB on a
Forensic Order since 2013 has been successful from
any party’s point of
view. Hopefully, some better way forward can be found.
[18] It seems to me, and to the psychiatrists who have assisted me with this
matter, that ascertaining whether or not WAB does have,
and ever did have, a
mental illness, and if so, what it was or is, would be a sensible enquiry.
Clarity as to WAB’s mental
condition must assist in determining whether or
not WAB ought to be on a Forensic Order at all and, if he is to be on a Forensic
Order, where he is best placed.
[19] There was some discussion at the hearing of 10 December 2019 as to whether
or not this Court should adjourn the hearing of the
appeal, and so stay seized
of the matter in order to investigate WAB’s mental condition, or deal with
the appeal on the material
which it had before it and hope that the MHRT would
use its powers to investigate WAB’s mental condition with a view to
a better way forward for this man.
[20] In the end I think this Court is better to remain seized of the matter and
undertake those investigations itself. There is
no doubt that this Court has
the power. The appeal from the MHRT is a re-hearing. Because the MHRT
effectively ignored the issue
not sufficient material before this Court to deal with that issue unless reports
are commissioned. There has apparently never been any attempt to confront these
diagnostic issues by the MHRT.
am also not aware that the MHRT has taken any steps to confront the other major
issues in having this man remain on a Forensic
Order: it does not appear to be
doing him any good; his treating doctor does not believe he has a mental
illness, yet he is detained
on a hospital ward; secure facilities have refused
him admission notwithstanding this is a preferable option, and lastly, but not
least, WAB continues to offend on the Forensic Order. In my view it is not
enough that the MHRT continues to confirm the Forensic
Order every six months
without having regard to the long-term situation its orders are creating.
[21] There is a further problem in that the MHRT has seemingly not understood
the interaction between a Forensic Order inpatient
and the Corrective Services
system. This has meant that WAB has been incarcerated in jail whilst on a
Forensic Order inpatient.
[22] For all these reasons it seems to me that it is desirable that the appeal
remain undetermined in this Court until this Court
is able to obtain an
independent review of this man’s mental condition from an experienced
reporting doctor and the issues
as to the continuation of a Forensic Order and,
if it is continued, its form, be fully ventilated in light of the best available
information. That is the reason for my simply adjourning the hearing of the
appeal at this stage.
[23] The course is somewhat unusual because it means that the undetermined
appeal will lie in this Court notwithstanding that the
regular six monthly
review schedule continues in the MHRT. It is to be hoped that the MHRT will
deal with those reviews having regard
to what this Court is attempting.
However, even if the MHRT does conduct reviews while this Court is seized of the
appeal, I cannot
see any great difficulty in giving WAB leave to amend his
appeal at the final hearing of it, so that it refers to the most recent
[24] Counsel for the Attorney-General submitted that I ought to simply deal with
the appeal and dismiss it. He submitted that because
of WAB’s behaviour
it was clear he needed to remain on a Forensic Order inpatient, and that the
July 2019 order granted sufficient
leave. It was said that my Assisting
Psychiatrists had advised me that a Forensic Order ought to remain in place and
to be the end of the matter.
[25] I hope I have explained why I will not follow this course, and that my
Assisting Psychiatrists did not advise me to do so.
Their advice that WAB
remain on a Forensic Order inpatient was in the context that he remain in the
secure mental health facility
where he is so that he can be observed; weaned
from antipsychotic drugs, and ultimately, examined by independent psychiatrists
by this Court as part of a plan to reassess whether this man should be
on a Forensic Order, and if so, what type.
[26] When delivering this judgment I anticipate making orders for the
examination of WAB by independent psychiatrists and placing
this matter on the
Mental Health Court call-over list so that the appeal can be supervised towards
a final hearing.
[27] That is the end of my reasons for adjourning the matter. I now turn to a
separate issue which was raised by the circumstances
Interaction between Forensic Orders and Detention in a
[28] At the time of the hearing before me on 9 October 2019 WAB was in prison
even though he was subject to a Forensic Order inpatient.
This was the Forensic
Order originally made by the Mental Health Court in October 2013 and confirmed,
most recently by the MHRT
on 5 July 2019.
[29] From the material before this Court it seems that in June 2016 WAB received
a custodial sentence. It appears he was living
in the community at the time,
and I am not certain whether his Forensic Order had been changed to a Forensic
Order community at that
stage. Perhaps it was a Forensic Order inpatient with
full limited community treatment under the 2000 Act. In any event, in June
it appears that WAB was released on parole with two years and eight months of a
sentence left to run. (That must mean he is
now very close to his full-time
release date.) When released on parole in June 2017 WAB was taken to the
Authorised Mental Health
Service which had care of him under the terms of the
Forensic Order; he remained there as an inpatient.
[30] It appears that on 27 December 2018 WAB was arrested on a warrant from the
Parole Board. The material before me does not reveal
the status of his Forensic
Order at that stage, ie, whether it was inpatient or community.
[31] It appears that on 8 March 2019 the MHRT confirmed WAB’s Forensic
Order as being inpatient with no limited community
Later it seems WAB was
removed from jail and taken back to the same hospital as a Classified Patient
(on 9 May 2019).
[32] Then it appears that on both 7 June 2019 and 5 July 2019 the MHRT confirmed
the Forensic Order as an inpatient order. Escorted
absences only were allowed
by way of leave under the 7 June 2019 order. The order of 5 July 2019 gave more
scope to allow leave
at the discretion of the treating psychiatrist, up to seven
unsupervised overnight absences per week. Both those orders were incompatible
with WAB’s status as a Classified Patient. A Classified Patient is
(rightly) subject to a strict regime under Chapter 3 of
Mental Health Act
It is quite separate from the provisions in the Act governing
patients on Forensic Orders. It is much more restrictive, eg, a Classified
Patient has very limited leave – see s 219 of the 2016 Act.
[33] It appears that WAB was still being detained on the hospital ward when, on
7 August 2019, he was taken from the hospital to
jail pursuant to a warrant
issued by the Parole Board. He remained in prison at the hearing on 9 October
[34] There remain legal difficulties with WAB’s detention. WAB is now in
a secure mental health facility which is where he
ought to be, in my opinion,
and in the opinion of the Assisting Psychiatrists (see above). However, he is
not there as a patient
on a Forensic Order inpatient. He is there as a
Classified Patient.
[35] Classified Patients are prisoners who need either to be examined in an
Authorised Mental Health Service, or to be cared for
in an Authorised Mental
Health Service because they have a mental illness – see s 61(b) of the
2016 Act. WAB is not properly
a Classified Patient. He is not in hospital to
be treated for a mental illness. The most up-to-date information this Court has
is that no-one treating him believes he has a mental
Certainly, if he has a
mental illness it does not need to be treated in hospital.
[36] More fundamentally, WAB is not properly a Classified Patient because he is
not properly in the custody of Corrective Services.
By an order of this Court,
confirmed by the MHRT, WAB is required to be an inpatient in an Authorised
Mental Health Service. This
is not just a matter of language or
form-filling-in. A Classified Patient has different (and lesser) rights than a
patient on a
Forensic Order. There is a very precise regime for making someone
a Classified Patient and releasing someone from that status.
At the moment the
Chief Psychiatrist of Queensland is holding WAB otherwise than in accordance
[37] The removal of WAB from a hospital ward to jail, see [33] above, was
contrary to the Forensic Order made by this Court and confirmed
on 5 July 2019
by the MHRT. Those orders required WAB to be held at an Authorised Mental
Health Service as an inpatient.
[38] The definition of inpatient in the
Mental Health Act 2016
(a) in relation to the category of a treatment authority, forensic order
(mental health) or treatment support order, the person subject
to the authority
must be detained in an inpatient unit of an authorised mental health
while receiving treatment and care; and
(ii) may receive limited community treatment; ...” (my underlining)
[39] Further, inpatient unit is defined:
of an authorised mental health service, means a part of the
service to which patients are admitted for treatment and care and discharged
a day other than the day of admission.”
Section 6(1)
Corrective Services Act 2006
provides that a
person sentenced to a period of imprisonment must be detained in a Corrective
Services facility. However,
of that Act provides that this is
subject to the provisions of the
Mental Health Act 2016
[41] I am not aware of any decision of this Court which is contrary to the idea
that a Forensic Order inpatient requires a patient
to be held in an Authorised
Mental Health Service. I am only aware of three decisions dealing with the
matter and all three are
to the effect that if this Court makes a Forensic Order
inpatient, the patient is to be detained on a hospital ward, not held in
In the case of
reviewed my decision in
and Justice
Ann Lyons’ decision on 30 September 2010 in
While I differed
from Justice Lyons because I thought that a Forensic Order community would allow
a defendant to be held in prison,
we were both of the view that someone subject
to a Forensic Order inpatient must be kept in hospital, not in a prison.
[42] On 7 August 2019 it was contrary to law for WAB to have been removed from
the hospital ward and taken to prison. The Authorised
Mental Health Service
having charge of WAB under the Forensic Order ought to have attempted to
persuade parole authorities not to
arrest WAB. Were they unsuccessful in doing
so, they ought to have made an urgent application either to the MHRT or to this
[43] Unfortunately the history of WAB’s interaction with this Court; the
MHRT; his Authorised Mental Health Service, and Corrective
Services shows that
the arrest on 7 August 2019 was not the first time this Court’s order
had been disregarded. Not only that,
from submissions made by counsel on behalf
of the Attorney-General in this case, and in
I suspect the practice
may be widespread.
I said the following:
Attorney-General’s submissions rest on the assertion that there is a well
understood and longstanding practice
that ‘warrants for imprisonment
override any Forensic Order detaining a patient to [an Authorised Mental Health
This is said to be the effect of
Services Act
. I must say that my experience on the Mental Health Court is
that a Forensic Order Inpatient is inconsistent with detention in jail.
was the basis for the decision in
and the decision in
Mental Health Act 2000
Mental Health
require persons subject to inpatient orders to be in an Authorised
Mental Health Service. If there has been a practice in the MHRT
consistent with
the order under appeal in the current case, that practice has ignored these
provisions. It has also ignored the
position as set out in
Re M (No 2).
[45] In this case counsel for the Attorney-General made submissions to me about
the practice of the Mental Health Court which: did
not accord with my
experience, having sat on the Court for six years; were not supported by any
case authority, and were directly
contrary to the only cases I have been
referred to in relation to these points:
SAL, Florey,
Re M (No 2).
The Chief Psychiatrist made submissions that
accord with these last three cases I have mentioned and with my view that a
a Forensic Order inpatient cannot lawfully be removed to a
[46] The Chief Psychiatrist, the MHRT and, it appears, the Attorney-General of
Queensland need to ensure that their thinking about
these matters is correct.
If this Court makes a Forensic Order inpatient, and if that order is confirmed
by the MHRT, the subject
of the order is to remain in an inpatient unit, not be
taken to jail. I cannot overstate the importance of this point. At stake
the liberty of citizens who are often unable to act effectively in their own
interests, and obedience to orders of this Court.
Court’s Ancillary Powers
[47] Having regard to the nature of the issue involved, I found it utterly
remarkable that on the hearing of this application counsel
Attorney-General of Queensland submitted, “The issue of the legality of
that removal [from a hospital ward to prison]
is not within the jurisdiction of
the Mental Health Court ...” – t 1-7; “... My submissions are
that the Mental
Health Court in its jurisdiction doesn’t have the ability
to enquire into legality or make rulings on unlawfulness or illegality”,
and, “... I do have the written instructions from the Attorney-General
through the Crown Solicitor to make the submission that
the issue of legality is
outside the jurisdiction of the Mental Health Court – of its appeal
1-8. These submissions were repeated in undated
written submissions lodged on behalf of the Attorney-General after the hearing
December – paragraph 2.
[48] The Mental Health Court is a superior Court of record –
Mental Health Act 2016
It is a statutory Court; unlike the Supreme
Court it does not have plenary jurisdiction. It has jurisdiction to hear
appeals from
it is provided
“(2) In exercising its jurisdiction, the court
(a) must inquire into the matter before it; and
(b) may inform itself in relation to the matter before it in any way it
considers appropriate.”
of the Act it is provided that a member of the Mental Health
Court retains all the member’s jurisdiction as a Supreme Court
meaning of this provision is problematic and I would not rely upon it in the
present case. However, at
of the Act it is provided
“Without limiting the powers conferred on it under
this or another Act, the Mental Health Court may do all things necessary
convenient to be done for the exercise of its jurisdiction.”
[50] Such a power does not extend the Court’s jurisdiction, but is an
ancillary power.
The scope of
such a power must be construed having regard to the subject matter in question
and the Act as a whole –
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
Cuttler v Browne
Muir JA had this to say about the powers of
Courts and Tribunals over their own processes:
Court’s power to protect its processes from abuse arising from the
misconduct of those availing themselves of
its processes was stated in the
following terms in
Cocker v Tempest
and approved by the Court of Appeal
Bhamjee v Forsdick (No 2)
‘The power of each Court over its own process is unlimited; it is a
power incident to all Courts, inferior as well as superior;
were it not so, the
Court would be obliged to sit still and see its own process abused for the
purpose of injustice. The exercise
of the power is certainly a matter for the
most careful discretion.’
[53] That power, as the above passage makes plain, is not limited to courts
of superior jurisdiction.
[54] The principle extends to tribunals as explained in the reasons of
Sheppard J in
Australian Securities Commission v Bell
‘Unless there is a clear legislative intention otherwise, tribunals of
all kinds will have the power to regulate and control
their own proceedings.
That power is implied into the statutory provisions pursuant to which a given
tribunal is created. The power
is implied because it is necessary that the
tribunal have it in order to be able properly to discharge its functions: see D
& R S Geddes,
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
ed), par 33, p 37. I refer also to the decisions of Lockhart J in
Sterling; Ex parte Esanda Ltd
[1980] FCA 61
(1980) 44 FLR 125
at 129-130 and Toohey J
(when a judge of this Court) in
Re Briggs; Ex parte Briggs v Deputy
Commissioner of Taxation
(1986) 12 FCR 310
...’” (footnotes omitted)
[52] The Court of Appeal considered a ‘necessary and convenient’
power residing in the Legal Practice Tribunal in
Legal Services Commissioner
v Baker (No 1).
Justice Chesterman said this:
Supreme Court Act
(NSW) provides that that court should ‘have
all jurisdiction which may be necessary for the administration of justice in New
South Wales’. The grant of power to the Tribunal is wider: it has such
power as is ‘necessary or convenient’ for
the exercise of its
Dwyer v National Companies & Securities Commission
(1988) 15 NSWLR 285
the director of a company was served with a notice the
effect of which was to prevent him acting as a director of any company without
the leave of the Supreme Court. The director appealed from the decision of the
regulator which had served the notice and sought a
stay until his appeal could
be heard. McLelland J thought that the power to stay the notice was incidental
to the existence of a
right of appeal to the court and derived both from its
inherent power and from
section 23.
[13] His Honour referred with approval to what had been said by Macfarlan J
Ex parte Farren; Re Austin
(1960) 77 WN (NSW) 743
at 744, that the
power conferred by
‘extends to whatever may be necessary to
prevent any injustice occurring with respect to matters which come within its
cognisance’.
Veghelyi v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
(1989) 17 NSWLR 669
the appellant sought an order from a judge of the
Supreme Court that he be allowed to practise as a solicitor pending his appeal
from the Law Society’s refusal to issue him with a practising certificate.
Section 37(2)
Legal Profession Act
(NSW) provided that
subject to any order of the Supreme Court an appeal did not stay the effect of a
refusal to issue a certificate.
Smart J, following
, held that
Supreme Court Act
was a sufficient grant of power to
order a stay, or to make an affirmative order that the applicant be permitted to
practise pending
his appeal. His Honour thought:
‘The basis of the jurisdiction to make an interlocutory order pending
appeal depends upon the need to avoid injustice.’
[15] The (New South Wales) Court of Appeal said in
New South Wales Bar
Association v Stevens
[2003] NSWCA 95
(2003) 52 ATR 602
, that Macfarlan
J’s statement in
was a good expression of ‘the scope
of the power to stay the effect of a decision subject to appeal ...’. The
court approved
the decisions in
[16] These cases are more than adequate authority for the opinion that
section 432(1) of the Act confers a power on the Tribunal to
make an order
deferring the operation of a recommendation that a practitioner’s name be
removed from the roll. If there were
a proper case for a stay of an order made
by the Tribunal injustice would be done if the stay could not be granted. In
such a case
an order granting a stay would be necessary or convenient for the
exercise of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.”
[53] In this appeal the evidence shows confusion about, and lack of
understanding of, the interaction between Forensic Orders made
Mental Health Act 2016
and the provisions of the
Corrective Services
on the part of health authorities; Corrective Services officers; counsel
for the Attorney-General (who appears regularly in the MHRT),
and the MHRT.
These misunderstandings have not just occurred on one occasion but on several
involving WAB, and, as I explained above,
I infer in other cases. As explained,
it seems that these misunderstandings have resulted in wrongful arrests and
actions contrary
to orders of this Court. There is every reason to think that
this Court has power under s 640 of the 2016 Act to enquire into these
circumstances.
[54] I accept the point raised by counsel for the Attorney-General that no
formal order or declaration about these matters ought
be made without there
being a Court proceeding which gives Corrective Services and the Parole Board
the opportunity to be heard.
One potential procedure which would allow such a
hearing is for this Court to prefer contempt charges against those who remove
from inpatient facilities where they are detained pursuant to this
Court’s order. Another possibility is for the Member constituting
Mental Health Court to adjourn proceedings in the Mental Health Court and begin
proceedings in the
parens patriae
Having regard to the difficulty with the order initially made, see paragraph [1]
above; the fact
that WAB must be near his full-time release date, see [29]
above, and the fact that the Chief Psychiatrist is trying to correct the
situation and to educate Authorised Mental Health Services as to the correct law
involved, it would seem at present that
this case is not the best vehicle for
such action. Of course, that may change in the future.
[55] Nonetheless there seems to be a great measure of utility in investigating
and ventilating these issues in a way which might
Mental Health Services, Corrective Services staff, the Parole Board and the MHRT
[2019] QMHC 3
[2018] QMHC 12
and a decision of
Re M (No 2)
referred to in
but not yet published.
[2019] QMHC 2.
Report 29/5/2019, pp 6-7.
The Tribunal hearings of 7
June 2019 and 5 July 2019 had Dr Singh’s report (above), which clearly
supported the idea that
WAB may never have had a mental illness. Yet that
highly significant fact does not seem even to have been recognised by the MHRT.
Much less did the MHRT take any positive steps to clarify the position.
See report of Dr Singh, 29 May
Dr Singh’s report, 29
May 2019, p 6.
Dr Singh’s report, 29
May 2019 and report of Dr Kamavarapu, 4 December 2019, pp 8-9.
[2019] QMHC 3.
[2018] QMHC 12.
Still not published because
of the requirements of the Act.
Legal Services
Commissioner v Madden (No 2)
[2008] QCA 301
, [79], [93], and the authorities
at footnote 24 of that decision.
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
382, cited in
Cuttler v Browne & Anor
[2010] QCA 346
[2005] QCA 482.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (273 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter