URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2002/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Banyans Tavern, Aitkenvale [2002] QLAT 69 (16 October 2002)
APPELLANTS:
Dennis Graham and The Aitkenvale School Parents And Citizens
Association
(APPLICANT)
Steele Davis Pty Ltd
RESPONDENT:
Chief Executive, Department Of Tourism, Racing And Fair Trading
(incorporating Liquor Licensing)
APPEAL NUMBER:
69 and 70 of 2001/2002
PROPOSED PREMISES
Banyans Tavern situated at 186-188 Nathan Street, Aitkenvale,
HEARING DATE:
26 JULY 2002
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST
Grant of General Licence
Mr J. Rolls
Mrs J. Harrington
Mr D. Stitt
DECISION DATE:
16 OCTOBER 2002
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. On the 14th of October 1999 the applicant, Steele Davis Pty Ltd, made an
application pursuant to
Liquor Act 1992
(the Act) to the
Chief Executive for a general licence. The proposed premises was situated at
186-188 Nathan Street, Aitkenvale,
a suburb of Townsville. The proposed trading
hours were 10.00 am to 12 midnight, Monday to Sunday. The applicant’s
application
contemplated that the Tavern would form part of a larger shopping
complex which would include a bottle shop, a “Blockbuster
store and a fast food outlet, which was to trade under the name of
2. On the 22nd of November 1999 the application was advertised, stating that the
primary purpose was “general licence - the
sale of liquor for consumption
on, or on and off the premises and the provision of entertainment on the
premises”. Closing
date for objections was the 22nd of December
3. On the 22nd of November 1999 the Chief Executive, as he is required to do
pursuant to the provisions of
of the Act, informed the Townsville City
Council and the Assistant Commissioner Queensland Police Service, Northern
Region, of the
application and sought the comments from these organisations upon
the application. On the 15th of December 1999 the Townsville City
objected to the
application.
4. On the 20th of December 1999 the Assistant Commissioner of Northern Region,
Dr Jefferies, also objected to the application. The
Commissioner’s objection also enclosed a report from a Senior Constable
Scholl which expanded upon the objections
articulated by the Assistant
Commissioner.
5. The advertising elicited 50 individual objections on amenity grounds, 2
objectors incorporating need, 7 invalid objections as
addresses were not given
and 4 late objections. Further, two petitions containing 54 signatures were
also lodged opposing the application.
The concerns of the objectors
• an increase in traffic noise caused by vehicles attending the
• an increase in crime, litter and vandalism;
• an increase in the current undesirable problems the residents are
experiencing with youth in the area;
• concerns of those tenants within the Stockland Plaza Shopping Centre
that intoxicated persons would be walking through the
centre to get to taxi
ranks and bus stops;
• an increase in noise caused from entertainment and patron noise;
• persons consuming liquor in the parks and minors obtaining access to
liquor through adults purchasing the liquor and passing
it onto the
6. On the 21st of February 2000 an objector’s conference was convened in
accordance with
of the Act. Twenty three objectors attended the
conference which was held at a local school college hall at Cranbrook. No
was able to be reached at this conference between the applicant, the
Chief Executive and the objectors.
7. On the 10th of May 2000 the applicant asked the Chief Executive to put the
application “...in abeyance until further notice”.
8. On the 20th of October 2000 it appears that the applicant caused to be sent,
by facsimile, to the Chief Executive proposed site
Perusal of these plans
reveal that it was then contemplated that two buildings would be constructed on
the premises. One described
as “Banyans on Nathan” which seems to
encompass various shops and the other being, the proposed tavern is a now
building. However, that building containing the tavern had been
moved closer to Pope Street and Arthur Street.
9. Officers of the Department of Tourism and Racing considered these amended
plans. A Mr Wratten, a licensing officer, by memorandum
dated the 21st of
December 2000 wrote to Mr B. Smith in respect of the amended
“I refer to the above application and wish to advise that I have
recently met with Mr Davies in relation to the moving of the
proposed premises.
I advised Mr Davies that I have a number of concerns in relation to the
proposed moves.
The main concern is that at the objection conference it was made quite clear
to people that the premises was going into the small
shopping centre and not out
in the open.
The other concern is that the premises are now much closer to residents in
both streets.
Mr Davies advised that the premises will be fully sound proof and there
should not be a problem with noise.
He also advised that premises was advertised on both positions.
Even thought this may be the case I still have reservations about approving
an area different that (sic) that was indicated to the
objectors at the
conference. I think we are leaving ourselves open to ridicule if we approve a
different area.”
10. We accept this as an accurate statement of the effect of the changes made by
the applicant to the application. It appears that
the possible impact on the
amenity of the area could be quite significant. We say this because the
division of activities conducted
on site from one building into two would
increase activity over the site. This would potentially increase and distribute
across the entire site which may disturb a greater number of residents
who live in contiguously or in close proximity to the site.
11. On the 24th of May 2001 the Chief Executive sought the comments of the Chief
Executive Officer, Townsville City Council, with
respect to the amended
application. On the same date, the comments of the Assistant Commissioner of
Police, Northern Region, in
respect of the amended application was also
12. On the 5th of June 2001 the Townsville City Council informed the Chief
Executive of its objection to the application. Perusal
seem to centre on the
fact that the amended application would remove a large fig tree which was then
present on the property. The
Council required that this tree would be retained
as part of any new development and had stipulated as such in its Rezoning
Order No. DA0250/1993.
13. On the 15th of June 2001 the Assistant Commissioner, Northern Region,
Queensland Police Service, Graham Williams, maintained
the Queensland Police
Service’s objection to the application.
14. On the 10th of July 2001 the applicant, by its solicitors, made a submission
to the Chief Executive responding to the matters
of objection raised by the
Queensland Police Service.
15. On the 10th of May 2000 Dr Jefferies replied to the Department’s
letter of 26 April 2002 which sought further comment on
the application and
advised that the Queensland Police Service then had no objection to the
application. However, on the 8th of
August 2001 Graham Williams indicated that
he was not prepared to change the Queensland Police Services stance in respect
application presumably which maintained his objection.
16. On the 30th of August 2001 Mr Wratten again penned a memo to Mr Smith
concerning this application. Mr Wratten observed:
“If this change took place the tavern would now be a standalone
premises and much closer to the residents in Pope and Arthur
In its original position the premises would have been further away and part
of the shopping centre and facing the major road of Nathern
(sic) Street
The premises are not buffeted from the residents in the area at all and the
nearest resident would be only approximately 10 to 20
metres from the proposed
17. Mr Peter Reinhold also prepared a memo to a Liquor Licensing Officer, Lee
Kelly, dated the 25th of September 2001. It appears
that this memo considered
the requirements of s.116 of the Act. Mr Reinhold’s analysis, in summary,
“Public need being the satisfaction of the reasonable requirements of
the public for liquor and related services in and about
the locality would be
satisfied by the granting of this
application.”
18. Mr Reinhold observed:
“Health and social impact considerations have been carefully examined
but found to be of lesser significance than the need for
19. It appears that on the 24th of August 2001 Mr Williams wrote to the Liquor
Licensing Division and, although maintaining his objection,
that objection does
not appear to have been strongly articulated in that piece of correspondence as
it had been on earlier occasions.
20. On the 13th of November 2001 the Townsville City Council withdrew its
objection to the granting of the application providing
the premises did not
operate outside the hours of 9.00 am to 12 midnight.
21. Mr Lee Kelly, an officer of the Department, ultimately reported to the Chief
Executive on the 24th of January 2002 after considering
all of the material then
Mr Kelly recommended
that the application be refused. After carefully considering public objections
it was considered by Mr Kelly
that amenity would be unduly affected by the
application. The Chief Executive on the 8th of February 2002 accepted this
recommendation
and refused the application.
22. The refusal of the application did not deter further discussion with respect
to this particular matter. The applicant, on the
13th of February 2002, lodged
an appeal to this Tribunal in relation to the determination. However, further
discussions were held
between Mr Wratten and the applicant. The
applicant’s solicitor had contacted the residents of Arthur
who apparently indicated
that they did not have any objection to the application.
23. Mr Wratten stated in a further memo to a Mr P. Thomas:
“After looking at the plans and speaking to the developer I believe
that the majority of my concerns in relation to noise from
the premises have
been addressed.
Considering the new information received and particularly the withdrawal of
Council objection and that the person who appeared to
be the prime instigator of
the majority of objections is now supporting the application if the division
were to reconsider its position
on this application this office would have no
objections”.
24. The applicant provided a submission (undated) to the Department concerning
the appeal.
25. By letter dated the 20th of March 2002 the applicant sought the
Department’s advice as to whether or not “liquor
licensing will
further consider the application”. Further, it appears that some
statements from those persons who were residing
in Arthur Street were also
provided to the Department. A local councillor, Jenny Hill, withdrew her
previous objection to the development.
Further, the applicant agreed to the
provision of a “no left turn” sign at the Arthur Street egress from
the premises
which would prevent traffic travelling along Arthur Street in the
direction of Pope Street and then along Pope Street, requiring
traffic exiting
the premises to travel along Arthur Street in the direction of Nathan Street and
then into Nathan Street itself.
26. On the 4th of April 2002 Mr Lee Kelly again penned a memo to the Chief
Executive concerning the request made by the applicant
to reconsider the
decision of 8 February 2002. Mr Kelly recommended that the Chief Executive
reconsider his decision on the grounds
• the prime instigator of the majority of objections and the councillor at
the time has withdrawn her objection and now supports
the proposal;
• the regional licensing officer now has no objection to the application
after perusing the amended proposal;
• a 2 metre high noise attenuation fence on the full frontage of Arthur
Street and Pope Street is to be erected with substantial
landscaping;
• the residents residing in Arthur Street who may be directly affected by
the proposal support the development; and
• confirmation that traffic attenuation will require all traffic not to
continue into the suburban areas.
27. On the 4th of April 2002 the Chief Executive purporting to act under
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
rescinded his earlier decision to
refuse the application and decided to grant it. On the 23rd of April 2002 the
objectors were advised
of this decision.
28. On the 26th of April 2002 the appeal by Steele Davis Pty Ltd against the
determination of the Chief Executive made the 8th of
February 2002 was
withdrawn. On the 3rd of June 2002 the appellants, Dennis Graham and the
Aitkenvale School Parents and Citizens
Association, lodged this appeal. Both
grounds of appeal identified “misleading information” as being
relevant. Perusal
of this allegation reveals that it relates to the style of
premises to be operated and to the type of operation to be conducted under
auspices of the general licence. In the appeal lodged by the Parents and
Citizens Association the following appears:
“When our parents
material provided to us by the Liquor Appeal Tribunal (sic) and understood the
real nature of the Banyan Tavern they expressed
concern at the loss of amenity
such an establishment would bring to a mixed precinct.”
29. From the foregoing, it can be observed that this application has had a
somewhat convoluted history. It is, however, clear that
the application
considered by the Chief Executive in making his ultimate determination was
different from that which had been initially
lodged back in October 1999. The
process of advertisement and objection related to the application in its
original form. It appears
to us that the central question on this appeal is
whether or not the variation of the application without re-advertisement
invalidates
the decision. To answer this question it is necessary to consider
the provisions of the Act which provide the legislative background
against which
an application such as this is considered.
30. Section 118 of the Act provides for the advertisement of applications. This
provision is in the following terms:
“Advertisement of applications
An application for the following must be advertised
under this section—
(a) a licence or variation of a
(b) an approval under section 59(1)(d) (Authority of general
(c) an extended hours permit, or variation of an extended hours permit, that
would extend trading hours on a regular basis;
(d) another application that the chief executive requires, by written notice
to the applicant, to be advertised.
If an application must be advertised, the applicant
(a) in a form, and on days, approved by the chief executive generally or in
a particular case, publish notice of the application,
at the applicant’s
(i) once in the Gazette;
(ii) twice in a newspaper circulating
in the locality; and
(b) display a copy of the notice on the premises to which the application
relates on a sign the dimensions of which (including dimensions
of the print)
are approved by the chief executive, generally or in a particular case;
(c) ensure the copy is displayed conspicuously for 28 days immediately
before the last day for making submissions about the reasonable
requirements of
the public in the locality or filing objections to the
application.
The chief executive may approve publication and display
(a) substantially complies with subsection (2);
(b) has already taken place for another purpose and substantially complies
with subsection (2).”
31. Section 119 provides as
“Objection to grant of
applications
If notice of an application is published as required by
section 118, any member of the public may object to the grant of the
application,
by writing filed with the chief executive on or before the last day
for filing of objections as specified in the
An objection may be made individually or by
The grounds on which an objection may be made are
(a) if the application were granted—undue offence, annoyance,
disturbance or inconvenience to persons who reside or work or
do business in the
locality concerned, or to persons in or travelling to or from an existing or
proposed place of public worship,
hospital or school is likely to happen;
(b) if the application were granted—the amenity, quiet or good order
of the locality concerned would be lessened in some
In subsection
“member of the public”
means any adult individual
or body of persons that in the chief executive’s
(a) has a proper interest in the locality concerned; and
(b) is likely to be affected by the grant of the
application.”
32. Subsequent to advertising a compulsory conference must be
It is clear from the Act
that objections can be the subject of comment by the applicant as the Chief
Executive is required to give
the applicants written notice of all objections
properly made. The conference contemplated under s.121 must be held after the
has received from the Chief Executive notice of the objections to its
application.
33. Pursuant to the Act, in deciding whether to grant the application the Chief
Executive is presented with two alternatives. If
the conference is held he may
make a decision consistent with what was agreed at the
conference,
or if a conference
was not held grant the
application.
The Act is silent
as to the Chief Executive’s powers if a conference was held but no
agreement was reached. A later amendment
to the Act fills this legislative
However, that amendment
does not affect this
application.
In other words,
there is no legislative power for the Chief Executive to decide an application
if agreement was not reached at the
conference or if the conference was not
held. In such circumstances, the following principle is
“To give effect to the purpose of the legislation, a court may read
words into a legislative provision if by inadvertence Parliament
has failed to
deal with an eventuality required to be dealt with if the purpose of the Act is
to be achieved.”
34. The three steps which must be established in order for such a step to be
taken have been identified as follows:
“First, the Court must know the mischief to which the Act was dealing.
Secondly, the Court must be satisfied that by inadvertence
Parliament has
overlooked an eventuality which must be dealt with if the purpose of the Act is
to be achieved. Thirdly, the Court
must be able to state with certainty what
words Parliament would have used to overcome the omission if its attention had
to the defect.”
35. In this case, the “mischief” with which the Act was dealing is
the deciding of applications made under the
. It is clear that
Parliament has inadvertently omitted dealing with the situation where a
conference is held and an agreement is
not reached at the conference. Thirdly,
the words which ought be read into the statute are those which Parliament saw
fit to subsequently
provide that, “if a conference was held but agreement
was not reached under sub-section
- grant the
application”. These are the words that are able to be identified
“with certainty” that would overcome
the legislative admission which
otherwise exists. They ought be read into the Act.
36. Thus, we take the view that in circumstances where a conference was held, as
in this case, but agreement was not reached, as
in this case, that the Chief
Executive must have regard to those matters set out in
of the Act.
Those matters which are relevant in
s.121(5)(c)
, (d), (e), (f), (g) and (h) of
the Act. Accordingly, we are of the view that the Chief Executive must, in
deciding the application,
have regard, inter alia, to the objections made to the
grant of the application.
37. It is noted that objections can only be made under the two grounds set out
of the Act. Nevertheless, it is clear that in order for such
objections to have any particular relevance, an objector must have
knowledge of what is contemplated by the application. To merely say that a
general licence will operate from a specific location
tells a person who lives
or works in close proximity to that location little about the activity which is
ultimately to be conducted
or its manner of performance. The manner in which a
person uses the privilege given to them by the grant of a general licence can
take many different forms. An objector, if that objector is to make a
meaningful objection, must, at some stage of the process,
be given a reasonable
amount of information about the application.
38. It appears that under the scheme presently in operation that the objector is
given little information prior to lodging their
objection. Instead, the
objector must object and then would appear to be told something about the nature
and extent of the application
at the objection’s conference. We consider
that this reverses the process which should be adopted. In order to sensibly
a person must know something about the nature and extent of the
application. In those circumstances, it would be preferable if the
application,
shorn of those parts which may be regarded as commercially sensitive, was on
public display at the Department’s
offices so that people could examine
the proposal as part of a decision as to whether an objection is lodged. This
notice would
be of assistance to that person in framing his or her objection.
This also means that an applicant in responding to the objection
applicant is entitled to do under
can carefully consider a response and
ascertain what steps can be taken to ameliorate concerns of those who object so
that agreement
could be reached at the objector’s
conference.
39. The process as it presently operates means objectors are given little
information other than told that the premises is to be
the site where liquor is
to be sold under the auspices of a general licence. In effect persons object
“in the dark”
only to be told later, at the objector’s
conference (provided they are able to attend), something about the application.
communication of information at the objector’s conference means that
objections, when subsequently examined, are unhelpfully
general and any
information supplied at the objector’s conference may, arguably, be
excluded from examination by the Tribunal
on any appeal pursuant to
40. Despite the flaws in the process referred to above, the objectors were, so
it appears, told about the application in its original
form at the conference.
The applicant received adverse comments about this application in that form not
only from objectors but
also from the other entities which are required to be
consulted by the Chief Executive as part of the decision making
Subsequently, perhaps
as a consequence of these comments, the application was changed. But that
change was not the subject of any
re-advertising such that persons who reside or
work or do business in the locality could comment upon it.
41. In considering the combined effect of
of the Act, we
consider the following statement of the High Court is
“This section
secures the attainment of two important goals. It provides the Council with the
views of those who oppose an application; written
grounds of objection will be
before it, supported by relevant facts and circumstances and it will thus be
relieved of the special
burdens associated with decision making when only one
side of the argument is known. It also provides objectors with an opportunity
both to make their views known and, if their objections are unavailing, then to
appeal to the local government court against the
proposed decision of the
Each of these goals depends for its attainment upon the giving of public
notice of an application and the importance with which the
legislation attaches
to this is evident from the care with which the precise modes of giving notice
are prescribed.
42. The Chief Executive in order to validly decide an application under
of the Act must take into account the objections made to the grant of the
application. However, those objections must relate to
the application the
subject of the decision. This does not mean that there is no power to amend an
application without advertising.
It would be “manifestly
inconvenient”
applicant was unable to amend its application. Ultimately, the question
whether, in any particular case, the amendment, if
made, will constitute a new
proposal or whether the proposal as amended remains, in substance, the same
proposal is a question of
It is considered the
applicable principles governing the amendment of development applications is of
assistance. In
Matus v. Council of the City of
“The Court has on many occasions considered varied or amended plans and
the need to re-advertise prior to a local authority
making a decision thereon.
The issue resolves around whether the variation or amendment is of such a nature
as to require such variation
or amendment to be re-advertised. ... In
considering the nature of a proposed amendment or variation, the proposal ought
at broadly and fairly for the purpose of determining whether the
amendment or variation is of such consequence that public notice
should be given
When the amendment contains ‘immaterial variations’ (North v.
Ipswich City Council
30 LGRA 267
at 271) or is not a ‘markedly different
concept, or a building of a different character’ (Mt Isa Mines Limited v.
City Council
25 LGRA 123
at 127; or is not ‘a development
different or substantially different at any rate from that proposed’
(Druitt Securities
Pty Ltd v. Woollahara Municipal Council
23 LGRA 257
Stocks v. Holdings (Constructions) Pty Ltd v. Waverley Municipal Council
at 270) it is not necessary to lodge an amended application to the local
authority or re-advertise the amended proposal. A variation
or amendment
providing for a materially larger or different development, or introducing a new
or enlarged factor which may cause
interference with residential amenity, or
with other lawful uses being conducted in the locality would undoubtedly require
application and
re-advertisement.”
43. Ultimately, the question is one of fact and degree. Therefore changes which
reduce the size and intensity of a proposal may
not require
re-advertisement
or changes made
to meet submissions or objections would not require
re-advertisement.
considered whether or not this “exception” would apply in this
instance. In our view it does not. Whilst amendments
were made apparently to
deal with objections made by the local authority, police and licensing officers,
those amendments still did
not take into account the impact on amenity which
appeared at various stages of this application to be significant. Accordingly,
in our view this line of authority is of no assistance in this
44. One can see from the Appeal Books that the nature of the development has
changed in that the general licence was to be operated
as part of a complex
involving a number of other retail outlets. That proposal changed so that those
retail outlets continued to
be operated from a smaller property but that the
premises which was subject to the general licence became a “stand
facility which was moved much closer to residences along Pope and
Arthur Streets. The Tribunal is of the view that it is difficult
to escape the
conclusion that this proposal introduces a newer and enlarged factor which may
cause interference with residential
amenity. Thus, any objections to this
amended proposal ought to have been considered if it was to be properly granted.
45. When the representative of the Department, at the hearing of the appeal, was
asked whether objections were considered to the
amended proposal, it was
asserted that the Department, being experienced in the processing of such
applications as it no doubt is,
knew what the objectors would have said and
therefore did not need to consult them. In our view, this is unsatisfactory.
Executive ought to have had the benefit of the views expressed by the
objectors under the Act as he is required to take such objections
into account.
The objectors ought to have been part of the process. The amendment of the
application effectively disenfranchised
them from participating in the decision.
One can well understand the surprise that the appellants have expressed at
having the decision
granted by the Department and obtaining an appeal book and
finding out that the application was fundamentally different to that which
considered previously. One can well understand, in such circumstances, why the
objectors would feel mislead. Without considering
the objectors’
objections to the amended application, it is our view that the Chief Executive
failed to have regard to a matter
that legislatively he was required to consider
in deciding to grant the application.
46. In our view, that omission fatally flaws the decision made by the Chief
Executive. It cannot be said that the “decision”
made on 8 February
2002 or again on 4 April 2002 can be valid as, in either case, objections made
to the grant of the amended application
had not been taken into account. We are
of the view that the decision of 4 April 2002 of the Chief Executive ought be
but we also regard the decision of 8 February 2002 as having no
47. However, the application, although arousing some animosity in the area, is
one which may have some merit. In those circumstances,
the considerable
endeavours of the applicant in prosecuting this application over a long period
of time ought not be wasted. The
application ought be properly considered.
Further, the amendments to the Act have inserted changes, meaning that if a
fresh application
were to be lodged, new
considerations
would need to be
addressed. This would, in our view, place an unnecessary burden on the
applicant. Accordingly we are of the view
that it is appropriate that we
exercise power conferred on the Tribunal by s.36(2)(b)(ii) of the Act such that
the decision of the
Chief Executive is set aside and the amended application is
returned to the Chief Executive with a direction that this application
re-advertised and that the Chief Executive consider any objections made,
together with all other matters required to be taken
into account by the Act, in
deciding the application afresh.
48. During the course of this appeal argument was also addressed as to the
applicability of
Acts Interpretation Act
Section 24AA
Acts Interpretation Act
24AA Power to make instrument or decision includes power to amend
If an Act authorises or requires the making of an instrument or
(a) the power includes power to amend or repeal the instrument or decision;
(b) the power to amend or repeal the instrument or decision is exercisable in
the same way, and subject to the same conditions, as
the power to make the
instrument or decision.”
49. The Chief Executive relied on this provision, and this provision alone, to
rescind his earlier refusal of the application and
subsequent granting of the
application. Having regard to the views that we have expressed previously, it
is not strictly necessary
for us to deal with this argument. However, as the
matter was raised and was the subject of some argument, we feel it is
appropriate
to express some views with respect to the
50. It is our view that
Acts Interpretation Act
applicable to decisions made under the
Liquor Act 1992
. We take this
view that s.24AA is excluded by the operation of
Interpretation Act
which provides:
“The application of this Act may be displaced wholly or partly by a
contrary intention appearing in any
51. The legislative scheme of the
excludes the more general
provision being, s.24AA. Reference to only a few provisions is sufficient.
of the Act provides for persons who have an entitlement for appeal
against the determination of the Chief Executive. The Act also
provides that if
the Chief Executive fails to notify an applicant of a grant or refusal of an
application within 30 days at the end
of the time from which a step is required
under the Act to be taken then:
“...for the purposes of an appeal the Chief Executive is taken to have
given the applicant notice of a decision to refuse the
application at the end of
the period of 30 days”.
52. A person who wishes to appeal must file a notice of appeal within 28 days
after receiving notice of the decision. A decision
of the Chief Executive, even
in the face of a notice of appeal, remains in force and is to be given effect by
all persons.
These provisions
demonstrate that a decision is not made from time to time but once only, and if
a party is aggrieved that party
may appeal.
53. The amendments to the
made in 2001 provide, in our view,
further evidence that the decision of the Chief Executive is to be made,
generally, once and once
only. Section 35A of the Act provides for the
admission of fresh evidence on appeal. Fresh evidence may be admitted by leave
the Tribunal. Such evidence can then be considered on the appeal. The
Tribunal may, if it decides to grant leave, adjourn the proceeding,
require the
applicant to make a new application or continue with the appeal by way of
rehearing on the material which was before
the Chief Executive and on the new
evidence. Further, s.35A(4) of the Act provides:
“Despite sub-section
if the Chief Executive
applies for an adjournment to allow the Chief Executive to reconsider the
decision appealed against together
with the new evidence, the Tribunal must
adjourn the proceeding for a stated reasonable
54. It ought be noted that in this instance such a provision was not sought to
be used by the Department. The law which operated
at the time of deciding the
application was that before the 2001 amendments came into effect but, the
appeal, being lodged after
the commencement of the amendments to the Act, was to
be in accordance with the practices and procedures applying after the amendments
came into force.
provision could have been used by the Chief Executive to reconsider the
application if he so wished.
55. The process of deciding an application in our view requires finality and
certainty for all those participating in it. The time
limits prescribed by the
Act are not capable of extension by the Tribunal or anyone else. Once an
application is decided participants
in the process before the Chief Executive
have rights of appeal. Those rights cannot in our view be unilaterally removed.
of reconsideration or revocation is inconsistent with the fact that a
decision made by the Chief Executive is subject to appeal.
Of course, there are
exceptions to that principle. One is provided for by s.35A(4) of the Act, or a
decision induced by fraud or
misrepresentation may be reconsidered.
Alternatively, reconsideration can occur by consent so that if the applicant,
objectors and
Chief Executive agree to re-consider the decision, then that can
be done. However, there was no consent in this case nor was there
any fraud or
misrepresentation alleged and proven.
56. It is noted that there are two previous decisions of the Tribunal where
Acts Interpretation Act
has been found to be open to the
Chief Executive to reconsider
determinations.
decisions, in our view, ought not be followed. We say this for two reasons.
Firstly, perusal of the reasons given in each
of those decisions disclose that
the Tribunal did not apparently consider the full legislative context pursuant
to which decisions
of the Chief Executive are made and the compatibility of the
Act with the operation of
Further, the Tribunal did not, in those
decisions apparently consider the prospect that an applicant who was successful
in obtaining
a licence having it later removed on the basis that an objector
manages to persuade the Chief Executive to reconsider the decision
provision of further information. Such uncertainty which is the result of the
operation of
is to be avoided. In reaching this conclusion, we have
adopted and applied the views of Chesterman J expressed in
Distributors Pty Ltd v. Carson &
and those expressed in
the article “Revocation and Variation of Administrative
Decisions”.
57. Secondly, the amendments to the Act made in 2001 which give power to the
Chief Executive to reconsider the decision clearly identify
a legislative
process by which any reconsideration is to occur. Of course this amendment
makes plain the process which is to be
followed, was not in force when those
earlier decisions of the Tribunal were made. This emphasises the fact that
Acts Interpretation Act
has no application where a specific
legislative basis for reconsideration of determinations now exists. This, in
our view, is a clear
legislative intention to displace the operation of
58. In any event,
provides that the power to amend or appeal the decision
is exercisable in the same way and subject to the same conditions as the
to make the original decisions. In that context, in order to validly remake a
decision, s.121(5) must be complied with. In
those circumstances, for reasons
which we have advanced previously, it is clear that even if
was capable
of application in this instance, that decision making process was flawed by
virtue of the fact that the objections to
the amended application have not been
relevantly sought and considered.
59. In those circumstances we are of the view that if it was necessary for us to
finally decide the point, the decision made by the
Chief Executive, rescinding
the earlier refusal of the application and subsequently granting it, sought to
use a power that the Chief
Executive did not possess. However, as we have
already noted both the decision refusing the amended application and the
decision granting it were decisions which are fatally flawed by
virtue of the failure to properly advertise the amended application
and consider
the resultant objections, if any.
60. The Tribunal orders the decision of the Chief Executive made on 4 April 2002
be set aside and the matter remitted to the Chief
Executive for further
consideration after the amended application has been re-advertised in accordance
with the Act.
See page 104, Appeal
These site plans appear
at page 325-326 of the Appeal
Appearing at page
347-348 of the Appeal Book.
See page 501 of the Appeal
See page 547-555 Appeal
Apart from one, see page
570 Appeal Book.
See page 570
Appeal Book.
This submission appears at page
572-583 of the Appeal Book. There are also a number of schedules to this
submission.
have assumed are members of the
Association.
See page 4B
Appeal Book.
See s.121(3)
of the Act.
See s.121(5)(a)
of the Act.
See s.121(5)(b)
of the Act.
Amendment Act 2001
See s.261 of the
Birmingham v.
Corrective Services Commission of New South Wales
(1988) 15 NSWLR 292
per McHugh JA.
at p. 302. See also
Wentworth Securities v. Jones
(1980) AC 74
per Diplock LJ.
Of s.121 of the Act.
Police and local authority; see s.117 of the
Being s.22 of the
City of Brisbane Town Planning Act 1964.
Scurr v. Brisbane City
[1973] HCA 39
(1973) 133 CLR 242
at 251-252 per Stephen J with whom Barwick,
McTiernan, Menzies and Gibbs JJ
Yaksich v. Town Planning Board
(unreported, TPAT, Appeal No. 15 of
Prime Holdings Pty
Ltd v. City of Cockburn
(unreported, TPAT, Appeal No. 22/1994,
(1981) QPLR 106.
Harderan Pty Ltd v. Logan City Council
(1987) QPLR 233
Brisbane City Council
(1984) QPLR 34.
The applicant would need to
satisfy the Chief Executive that the application was in the public interest
rather than satisfy the
Chief Executive that the application was necessary for
the reasonable requirements for liquor and related services in the
s.35(6) of the Act.
contains the powers given to the Tribunal referred to above.
See s.259 and s.261 of the Act
Showgirls Pty Ltd
(unreported, Liquor Appeals Tribunal, Appeal No. 52
of 2001-2002, 20 February 2002).
Appeals by K.E. & M.
Haidley & Ors Re: Osborne Hotel (unreported, Liquor Appeals Tribunal,
Appeal Nos. 14, 15, 16 of 1996,
8 August 1996); Appeal by Liquorland Queensland
Pty Ltd & Ors, Re: Belmont Family Taverna (unreported, Liquor Appeals
Appeal Nos. 10, 11 and 12 1999/2000, 23 February
By professor Enid Campbell
1996, 22, Monash University Law Review, page 30.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (166 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter