URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/163.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RXY v Commissioner of Police [2025] QDC 163 (10 November 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
RXY v Commissioner of Police
[2025] QDC 163
(Appellant)
COMMISSIONER OF POLICE
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court, Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
10 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
6 November 2025
Heaton KC DCJ
Appeal dismissed
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE – GROUNDS FOR
INTERFERENCE – SENTENCE MANIFESTLY EXCESSIVE OR INADEQUATE
the Appellant pleaded guilty to the offences Serious Assault of a police officer
causing bodily harm, Contravention
of a Domestic violence order (aggravated
offence), Obstruct police officer and Contravention of a direction or
requirement of a police
officer – where the Appellant was sentenced in the
Magistrates Court to 24 months’ imprisonment with parole release after
had served 8 months – whether a denial of procedural fairness caused the
sentence to miscarry – whether the sentence
imposed was manifestly
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the Appellant.
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions for the Respondent.
Introduction
November 2025, I made an order dismissing the appeal against the sentence
imposed upon the appellant by the Southport Magistrates
Court on 5 September
2025 whereby he was sentenced to a total of 24 months’ imprisonment with
parole release after he had served
8 months, that is, on 3 May 2026. These are
the reasons for making that order.
Appellant entered a plea of guilty to the offences Serious Assault of a police
officer causing bodily harm, Contravention
of a Domestic violence order
(aggravated offence), Obstruct police officer and Contravention of a direction
or requirement of a police
officer all committed on a single occasion on 5 June
[3] The appeal
is pursuant to s 222 of the
Justices Act 1986
Relevantly,
s 222(2)(c) provides that where a defendant pleads guilty, as the Appellant did
here, they may appeal on the sole ground
that the sentence is excessive. An
appeal pursuant to s 222 is by way of rehearing on the evidence given in the
proceedings before
the Magistrate (s 223(1)).
v Commissioner of
it was said
“It is a normal attribute of an appeal by way of
rehearing that the powers of the appellate court are exercisable only where
Appellant can demonstrate that, having regard to all of the evidence now before
the appellate court, the order that is the subject
of the appeal is the result
of some legal, factual or discretionary error... On an appeal by way of
rehearing an appellate court
can substitute its own decision based on the facts
and the law as they stand at the date of the decision of the
[5] Further, in
McDonald v Queensland Police Service
[2017] QCA 255
, Bowskill J
“It is well established that, on an appeal under s
222 by way of rehearing, the District Court is required to conduct a real
of the trial, and the Magistrate’s reasons, and make its own determination
of relevant facts in issue from the evidence,
giving due deference and attaching
a good deal of weight to the Magistrate’s view. Nevertheless, in order to
succeed on such
an appeal, the Appellant must establish some legal, factual or
discretionary error.” [citations omitted]
Forrest v Commissioner of Police
[2017] QCA 132
, Sofronoff P
“...an appellate court hearing an
appeal by way of rehearing must conduct a real review of the evidence and make
mind about the case.”
[7] By notice
filed on 16 September 2025, amended on 28 October 2025, the Appellant contends
two grounds of appeal, namely:
denial of procedural fairness caused the sentence to miscarry; and
sentence imposed is manifestly excessive in all the
circumstances.
contention of the Appellant is in essence that the learned Magistrate imposed a
penalty which exceeded, by a significant margin,
the penalty contended for by
the Prosecution and the defence lawyer without informing the parties of her
intention to do so, and
in that way, denied the defendant the opportunity to
address the merits of such a sentence, thereby denying him procedural fairness.
[9] In addition,
it is contended that a sentence of 2 years’ imprisonment with parole
release after 8 months is outside the
bounds of an appropriate penalty having
regard to the circumstances of this case and a consideration of other cases of
broad comparability.
Instead, it is submitted, a penalty of 18 months’
imprisonment with release after 6 months ought to have been imposed.
Complainant, Sgt Stretton, is a serving police officer who responded to a 000
call in relation to a domestic violence incident
whereby a male was seen to be
dragging a screaming female along the street. He travelled alone to the
nominated location. When
he arrived, he met with the Appellant and Ms C.
[11] At the
time, there was a Domestic Violence Order in place (issued on 30 May 2023) which
listed the Appellant as the Respondent
and Ms C as the Aggrieved. It is in
place until May 2028 and prohibits the Appellant from contacting or approaching
[12] Consequently,
his contact with her on this day was in breach of the Domestic Violence Order
and that is Charge 4 to which the
appellant pleaded guilty before the sentencing
Magistrate.
Stretton informed the Appellant and Ms C that they were detained. The Appellant
responded by saying, “
we are free to do what we wish
told Ms C to walk with him away from the police officer. Sgt Stretton repeated
his direction that they were both
detained and the Appellant then responded,
You touch me and it’s not gonna look pretty, mate
whilst squaring off with the police officer. He then grabbed Ms C and told her
to go. Again, Sgt Stretton issued a direction
to not leave, and it was then
that the Appellant pushed the police officer in the chest, advancing
aggressively towards him and telling
him to go, whilst abusing him at the same
Appellant then ran at the police officer and struck him in the head with an open
hand, followed by a closed fist punch to
the opposite side of his head, and then
a further blow and elbow strike to the head. Sgt Stretton felt immediate pain.
He attempted
to deploy his taser whilst the Appellant continued to strike him.
The police officer, who I might add was in uniform, momentarily
consciousness and suffered injuries as a result of the assault, namely a
laceration to his lip, and bruising and swelling.
attempted to intervene and pull the Appellant away. Another member of the public
stepped in to also assist, and further
police were called. The Appellant then
set off to walk away but was shortly afterwards apprehended by other police who
the scene. Those circumstances are reflected in the charge of
Serious Assault of a police officer causing bodily harm.
Appellant continued to resist and obstruct the efforts of police to apprehend
him and arrest him. He was charged with the
offence of Obstruct police officer
to which he also pleaded guilty.
[17] He further
refused to state his name and address despite a formal direction to do so,
resulting in an offence of Contravene a
direction or requirement of a police
officer. As already noted, his contact with Ms C on that occasion was in breach
of the Domestic
Violence Order then in force. Further investigation by police
revealed that the defendant became upset whilst visiting his estranged
he heard a fighter jet fly overhead, and in reaction to it, grabbed Ms C and
dragged her into the street. He was considered
at that time to be in no state
to be interviewed. He was arrested and remanded in custody where he remained
for 92 days until he
was sentenced by the Magistrate.
[18] At the time
of sentencing, he was aged 47 years, and he had a history of prior offending
recorded across 17 pages of a Queensland
Criminal History. The history records
persistent offending, including offences of dishonesty, drugs, and some
violence, including
contraventions of Domestic Violence Orders and obstruct and
assault police, dating back to 2004 with an apparent break in offending
2007 and 2013. Over the history of his offending, a variety of sentencing
options were imposed upon him with little to no
apparent effect on his offending
conduct, including sometimes quite substantial periods of imprisonment.
[19] At the
sentencing hearing, the submission was made by the prosecutor that a sentence of
15 to 18 months’ imprisonment was
warranted. She referred to the
circumstances that the offending was protracted, that the officer was struck
several times and that
he felt it necessary to deploy his taser, that the
officer was acting in the execution of his duties and that the offending called
for denunciation in support of her submission. The Magistrate interjected to
continue the list of relevant aggravating circumstances
to include that the
officer was alone, that he had to be assisted by a member of the public and that
it was only then that the Appellant
stopped his assault on the police officer.
Reference was also made to the highly relevant circumstances of the
Appellant’s
significant criminal history including a concerning history of
domestic violence offending.
[20] On behalf
of the Appellant, it was submitted that he endured a degree of disadvantage in
his life. It was submitted that his
parents separated when he was young and
thereafter, he experienced an unsettled childhood leading to estrangement from
his family.
After finishing school, he joined the army. As a result of his
experiences in the army he was said to have suffered post-traumatic
stress, but
no evidence to support that diagnosis was provided to the court.
The Question of Natural Justice
[21] Mr Honnef,
on behalf of the Appellant in this appeal, submits that the sentence imposed was
a result of the denial of natural
justice. That contention arises in this way:
The prosecution submitted for a penalty of 15 to 18 months’ imprisonment.
legal representative for the Appellant contented for a sentence of 12
months. A submission for immediate release was initially made,
and later framed
as a submission that the Appellant should be released after the 92 days in
pre-sentence custody already served.
(In the circumstances of this case, Mr
Honnef recognises that that was an ambitious submission.) The learned
Magistrate imposed
a sentence of 2 years’ imprisonment for the offence of
Serious Assault of a police officer causing bodily harm with no prior
that the penalty imposed would exceed that which was contended for by the
prosecution.
[22] It goes
without saying that a Magistrate or judge must act fairly when making decision
which will deprive a person of their liberty
or other rights. The High Court in
HT v The Queen
, particularly
at 18 and 19, observed that there is an obligation on a judicial officer to
allow a defendant the opportunity to be
heard and to present their case. A
defendant is entitled to know the case advanced against them and they ought to
be in a position
to put their case in response to the orders sought. The Court
went on to state that:
“The content of procedural fairness
may vary according to the circumstances of the particular case. Procedural
fairness is
not an abstract concept; rather, it is essentially practical. The
concern of the law is to avoid practical injustice.”
[23] It is said
that practical injustice arose in this case by the failure of the sentencing
Magistrate to alert the parties that
she regarded the appropriate penalty to be
one which exceeded the contentions advanced by both the prosecution and the
defendant’s
representative, and that the result was a penalty that was
manifestly excessive.
[24] In the
context of the contentions in this appeal, it is important to understand that
the process of sentencing is an exercise
of discretion. A sentencing judge has
an extremely wide discretion to be exercised within the limits of the principles
applicable.
necessarily involves the assessment of various factors and the courts have long
recognised that it is not possible to say that
a sentence of a particular
duration is the only correct or appropriate penalty to the exclusion of any
other penalty.
sentencing Magistrate rightly regarded the offending as being serious. It is
not said that she failed to take into account
a relevant factor, nor that she
improperly took into account an irrelevant factor in arriving at the sentencing
imposed. The contention
in relation to a lack of procedural fairness seems
founded on the proposition that a sentencing Magistrate cannot impose a sentence
which exceeds that for which the parties are content without stating that to be
her intention. It is in that sense that a practical
injustice is said to arise.
review of the material and the circumstances of the sentencing hearing, I am not
satisfied that such an injustice properly
arose in this case. The prosecution
made submissions as to the appropriate penalty by reference to a single case
WBT v Queensland Police Service
[2021] QDC 250)
in which a number of
other cases were also reviewed. Whilst consistency in sentencing, and in the
application of principle to facts
involved in a given case, is an important
principle, sentencing is not about numerical equivalence. Following the
contentions of
the prosecutor as to penalty and the aggravating circumstances
warranting the penalty submitted for, the Magistrate referred to further
circumstances which, quite properly, aggravated the factual circumstances of the
case for sentencing. A judicial officer is not
bound to accept the contentions
of any party as to the appropriate penalty. An advocate, consistent with their
duty to the Court,
should properly make submissions as to the appropriate
sentencing response having regard to the application of sentencing principles
the facts of the case. Other cases of broad comparability assist a court to
achieve an appropriate outcome, but the submissions
of the prosecution do not
confine a judicial officer to only that level of penalty.
interventions of the Magistrate in response to the prosecution submission ought
to have reinforced to the legal representative
for the Appellant of the need to
persuade the Magistrate as to the penalty which was contended for. It was not
reasonable for the
legal representative to have assumed that the submission of
the prosecution would be accepted. The submissions are designed only
the sentencing court to arrive at a just penalty, not to define, nor confine,
the parameters within which the sentencing
can take place. Ultimately, it is
the responsibility of the sentencing Magistrate to exercise the sentencing
discretion having regard
to the objective circumstances of the offending and the
applicable sentencing principles to arrive at a sentence which is just in
the circumstances.
[28] In my view,
upon by consideration of all of the material placed before the sentencing
Magistrate and the transcript of the hearing
itself, there was no practical
injustice by the failure of the Magistrate to alert the parties to her view that
the appropriate penalty
exceeded the penalty contended for by the parties. It
was, in my view, apparent on a proper reading of the transcript of the hearing
that the Magistrate considered the offending to be of a degree of seriousness,
committed in the context of a significant history
of prior offending, having
regard to the maximum penalty being 14 years’ imprisonment, as to warrant
a penalty which exceeded
18 months’ imprisonment.
[29] Contrary to
the notion of a denial of procedural fairness, the defendant’s legal
representative was given the opportunity
to make whatever submissions she
thought warranted in her endeavour to persuade the Magistrate to impose a
penalty of only 12 months.
It was clear that the Magistrate required some
convincing before acceding to that submission. The legal representative made
submissions
at large in relation to the appropriate penalty. She should not
have assumed, which she seems to have done, that the penalty imposed
independent exercise of the Magistrate’s sentencing discretion would
exceed no more than was contended for by the prosecution.
[30] This case
is not like the circumstances which were found to have resulted in unfairness in
R v Cunningham
, in which a
period of licence disqualification was imposed without either party making
submissions on the issue, in
where the sentencing
judge set the parole release date at later than the mid-point with no discussion
between the parties and the
R v McDougall &
involving the making of
a serious violent offence declaration also without anticipating that it was in
contemplation. Those are
examples of cases in which the focus of unfairness was
on the imposition of an additional element to the sentencing discretion beyond
the mere quantum of penalty. In the present case, the focus of what is said to
have occasioned unfairness is simply as to the appropriate
level of penalty
warranted in all of the circumstances. That is, respectfully, the purpose of
making submissions as to penalty in
the hearing, which the legal representatives
for the Appellant had every opportunity to do.
procedural unfairness has been established in the circumstances of this case.
Manifestly Excessive?
[32] I turn now
to the contention that in any event, the penalty was manifestly excessive and
that a sentence no greater than 18 months
with release after 6 months was called
restatement of the process of sentencing by the plurality in
Barbaro v The
“Sentencing an offender is not, and cannot be
undertaken as, some exercise in addition or subtraction. A sentencing judge
reach a single sentence for each offence and must do so by balancing many
different and conflicting features. The sentence cannot,
and should not, be
broken down into some set of component parts. As the plurality said in Wong v
The Queen, ‘[s]o long as
a sentencing judge must, or may, take account of
all of the circumstances of the offence and the offender, to single out some of
those considerations and attribute specific numerical or proportionate value to
some features, distorts the already difficult balancing
exercise which the judge
Queen v Pham
, French CJ,
Keane and Nettle JJ recently described the conclusion an appellate court must
reach in order to intervene for manifest
excessiveness or manifest inadequacy in
a sentence. Citing
at [58], and
at [61], their Honours said at
“Appellate intervention on the ground of manifest
excessiveness or inadequacy is not warranted unless, having regard to all
relevant sentencing factors, including the degree to which the impugned sentence
differs from sentences that had been imposed
in comparable cases, the appellate
court is driven to conclude that there must have been some misapplication of
principle.”
Goodwin, Ex Parte Attorney-General
, Fraser JA observed at
“... It is necessary to mention only Barbaro v The
Queen; Zirilli v The Queen, in which the High Court concluded that past
do not mark the outer bounds of a sentencing judge's permissible
, and that a
sentencing judge who is properly informed about the facts, relevant sentencing
principles, and comparable sentences "will
have all the information which is
necessary to decide what sentence should be
. Comparable sentences
assist in understanding how those factors should be treated, but they are not
determinative of the outcome
and they do not set a "range" of permissible
sentences. Whether or not a sentence is manifestly inadequate or manifestly
is not to be decided by reference to a predetermined range of
available sentences but by reference to all of the factors relevant
to sentence.
Because sentencing involves a case-by-case synthesis in which past sentences may
be used only as guidelines and are
not determinative, there can be no underlying
range of available sentences for a particular case which may be narrowed or
over time by subsequent sentencing decisions.
[36] Further in
, the plurality
“[I]n seeking consistency, sentencing judges must
have regard to what has been done in other cases. Those cases may well
a range of sentences which have been imposed. But that history does
not establish that the sentences which have been imposed mark
the outer bounds
of the permissible discretion. The history stands as a yardstick against which
to examine the proposed sentence.”
[37] Consequently,
in order to make good the contention that a sentence is manifestly excessive or
inadequate, it is not enough to
show that the sentence is different, even
markedly different, from sentences in other cases. The difference must be such
the result embodied in the court’s order is
‘unreasonable or plainly unjust’ and the appellate court infers
in some way there has been a failure properly to exercise the
discretion which the law reposes in the court of first
instance’.”
contention of the Appellant that the sentence imposed in this case was affected
by error is said to be supported by a comparison
of a number of other cases of
broad comparability.
Queensland Police Service
[2021] QDC 250
, a sentence of 15 months’
imprisonment was imposed for an offence of Serious assault police causing bodily
harm, obstruct police
and contravention of a domestic violence order. That case
involved some factual similarities in that the offending was committed
context of a domestic violence breach in which the Aggrieved was assaulted and
the police who attended were also assaulted.
The offender, a 35-year-old Torres
Strait Islander man was said to have an extensive criminal history including
prior violence,
contraventions of Domestic Violence Orders and breaches of Court
orders. Unsurprisingly, his appeal against the severity of the
sentence was
refused. Whilst the circumstances of that case are, on their face comparable to
the present one, that case is authority
only for the proposition that the
sentence imposed there was not manifestly excessive.
Dawkins v Queensland Police Service
[2018] QDC 161
, the offender was
sentenced for 12 offences, the most serious of which was a serious assault
police causing bodily harm. He violently
resisted arrest, threatened to kill
police, spat at police and later kicked a police officer in the eye causing
bodily harm. His
history of prior criminal offending was recorded across 9
pages, which also included prior violence including grievous bodily harm.
was sentenced to 18 months’ imprisonment for the most serious offence with
concurrent lesser terms for the other offending.
On appeal, the accumulation of
offending was thought instead to warrant a sentence of 20 months’
imprisonment, but the parole
release date was moved forward to the date of the
[41] In his
analysis of the contentions on that appeal, His Honour Judge Morzone considered
a number of earlier cases of broad comparability.
His analysis is promoted by
the appellant in support of this appeal also. In
a sentence of 2½ years’ imprisonment was reduced to 18 months for
an offence of Assault, striking police officer in the
face and spitting blood
and saliva into the faces of police officers. At the time the maximum penalty
was 7 years, whereas the maximum
for the present offence is 14 years. This case
does not support the contention of the Appellant that a sentence of 24 months
manifestly excessive in the circumstances of the present case.
[42] Similarly
[2013] QCA 185
, a sentence of 15 months was imposed in
relation to an offence of serious assault committed in the context of other
offences. She
was 50 years of age with a lengthy history of prior, liquor
related offending. The appeal was allowed and the sentence reduced to
approximately 7 months she had then already served, which was considered to be
appropriate punishment in the circumstances of
that case. Again, that offence
was committed at the time when the maximum penalty was 7 years. This case also
does not assist the
contentions of the Appellant here.
[2014] QCA 188
a sentence of 18 months was imposed with parole after
6 months. The violence perpetrated by the offender was significant. He punched
the police officer in the eye, pulled the officer into him and choked him, then
hooked his finger into the officer’s eye causing
substantial pain. In the
efforts to restrain him, an officer was bitten on the leg. He too had an
extensive criminal history including
for offences of violence. He was also in
breach of parole so that the sentence operated cumulatively, but only to the
an additional 2 days of custody. Unsurprisingly, a sentence of that
magnitude for that offending was not considered to be manifestly
[44] Finally, in
Townsend v Commissioner of Police
[2017] QDC 45
, a sentence of 18
months’ imprisonment was reduced to 16 months following a successful
appeal. She was 28 years of age with
a minor and insignificant criminal history.
She fought against police to resist them, kicked and bit officers on the leg.
She scratched
the face of another officer and bit her on the breast breaking the
consideration of these cases referred to by the Appellant fails to demonstrate
that the sentence imposed here is manifestly
excessive or affected by error. As
the jurisprudence referred to above demonstrates, sentencing is not a process of
comparing and
contrasting relevant circumstances to arrive at a single correct
sentence within some range determined by reference to earlier cases.
exercise of discretion. Each of the circumstances of the cases referred to
turned on the application of principle to the
circumstances of those particular
violence by the defendant in this case was serious. His attack was upon a
police officer who responded alone to the call
for assistance following
allegations of domestic violence. It is well recognised that a significant
feature for sentencing in cases
such as this is for the protection of police
acting in the execution of their duty who routinely place themselves in
way for the protection of the community. Of significance in this
case is that the Appellant has a criminal history recorded across
including prior violence. His history demonstrates the need, in sentencing, for
a penalty which gives primacy to the need
to protect the community from
offending by the Appellant, and the need to provide a strongly deterrent
sentence, structured to provide
appropriate supervision and support once back in
the community. It was acknowledged that he had a difficult background and,
the lack of formal material to support it, that he had mental health
challenges operating at the time of his offending. As much
was evident in the
factual circumstances. The sentencing Magistrate also properly considered the
Appellant’s criminal history
to be a significant factor in sentencing, not
just because of the fact of it, but its contents and what it said about the need
protect the community from further offending by him, and how the sentencing
framework could best achieve the purposes of sentencing.
[47] Further
undermining the force of the Appellant’s contentions is that the cases
referred to of
involved offending for which the
maximum penalty was 7 years. The significant uplift in the maximum penalty,
introduced on 29 August
2012, applicable to the Appellant’s offending,
reflects the seriousness with which the offending is regarded by the community
giving the legislative imprimatur to impose appropriate penalties up to the
maximum of 14 years.
The Appropriate Penalty?
[48] In all of
the circumstances of this case, there was a powerful need in sentencing for
community denunciation, personal and general
deterrence, and protection of the
community. Violence against police acting in the execution of their duty and
which causes bodily
harm requires a strong sentencing response to deter not only
the Appellant, but also likeminded individuals.
[49] As noted
above, the contention of the Appellant that the sentencing was infected by a
lack of procedural fairness is not, in
my assessment of the material in this
case, made out.
[50] Further, I
am unable to conclude that the sentencing discretion miscarried in this case.
In my view, the sentence of 2 years’
imprisonment with parole release
after serving 8 months was an appropriately stern sentencing response to the
particular offending
involved. Whilst having proper regard to the role of
comparable sentences in the sound exercise of a sentencing
discretion,
the cases referred
to do not support the contention that the penalty imposed here was outside the
appropriate range of penalty in
all of the circumstances of this offending.
review of the whole of the evidence now before me in this appeal, I am unable to
conclude that the sentence imposed in
the Magistrates Court on 5 September 2025
by the learned Magistrate is the result of some legal, factual or discretionary
For the reasons articulated above, the offending was sufficiently
serious as to justify the sentence imposed. No errors are demonstrated,
sentence is not manifestly excessive. The appeal is dismissed.
[2009] QCA 84
[2009] 2 Qd R 489
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
(2000) 203 CLR 172
at 180-181.
(2019) 269 CLR 403
Markarian v R
CLR 357 at 371 [27]
R v Melano; ex
[1994] QCA 523
[1995] 2 Qd R 186
Lowe v The Queen
[1984] HCA 46
(1984) 154 CLR 606
612 per Mason J.
[2005] QCA 321
[2008] QCA 86
[2006] QCA 365
Barbaro v The Queen
[2014] HCA 2
[2014] 253 CLR 58
This passage was referred to by the Court of Appeal in
Goodwin; ex
[2014] QCA 345
R v Williams
[2015] QCA 276
[2015] HCA 39
[2001] HCA 64
(2001) 207 CLR 584
[2014] HCA 2
[2014] 253 CLR 58
[2014] HCA 2
[2014] 253 CLR 58
Barbaro v The Queen
(above) per French CJ, Hayne, Keifel and Bell JJ at [41].
This is essentially the
statement of principle from
House v The King
and which has been often
referred to including in
Barbaro v The Queen
[2014] HCA 2
(2014) 253 CLR 58
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
and recently by the
Court of Appeal in
R v Williams
[2015] QCA 276
Barbaro v The
[2014] HCA 2
[2014] 253 CLR 58
R v Goodwin, Ex Parte Attorney-General
[2014] QCA 345.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (210 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter