URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2025/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Corporation of the Synod of the Diocese of Brisbane v Brisbane City Council & Anor [2025] QPEC 11 (5 June 2025)
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT
OF QUEENSLAND
The Corporation of the Synod of the Diocese of Brisbane v Brisbane City
Council & Anor
[2025] QPEC 11
THE CORPORATION OF THE SYNOD OF THE DIOCESE OF
(Appellant)
BRISBANE CITY COUNCIL
(Respondent)
LION-BEER, SPIRITS AND WINE PTY LTD
ACN 008 596 370
(Co-respondent)
Planning and Environment
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning and Environment Court, Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
5 June 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
17, 18 and 19 February 2025, 29 April 2025, and 1 and 6 May 2025
Kefford DCJ
The appeal is returned to the applications list for
review on 16 July 2025.
CATCHWORDS:
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT – APPEAL – where the Co-respondent
seeks approval to materially intensify its industrial use
– where the
Co-respondent seeks approval to intensify its use by introducing an ethanol
storage facility to facilitate increased
production of alcoholic beverages
– where the Council approved the development application – where the
Appellant as adjoining
neighbour opposes the grant of an approval –
whether there is an unacceptable risk to public safety and property from an
of the tank chamber containing the ethanol storage tanks –
whether the tank chamber is appropriately located – whether
the proposed
development unduly affects reasonable health expectations – whether the
proposed development should be approved
in the exercise of the discretion
LEGISLATION:
Planning Act 2016
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
Planning Regulation 2017
Abeleda & Anor v Brisbane City Council & Anor
[2021] QPELR 1003
Ashvan Investments Unit Trust v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[2019] QPEC 16
[2019] QPELR 793
Austin BMI Pty Ltd v Ipswich City Council & Ors
[2023] QPEC 27
Barro Group Pty Ltd v Sunshine Coast Regional Council
[2021] QPEC
[2022] QPELR 235
Brisbane City Council v YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
Chiodo Corporation Operations Pty Ltd v Douglas Shire Council
Gaven Developments Pty Ltd v Scenic Rim Regional Council & Ors
[2010] QPEC 51
[2010] QPELR 750
GFW Gelatine International Ltd v Beaudesert Shire Council & Ors
[1993] QPLR 342
Gracemere Surveying and Planning Consultants Pty Ltd v Peak Downs Shire
Council & Anor
[2009] QCA 237
(2009) 175 LGERA 126
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
Murphy v Moreton Bay Regional Council & Anor; Australian National
[2019] QPEC 46
[2020] QPELR 328
Onetech Pty Ltd v Shaw
[1999] WASCA 289
Pynhall Pty Ltd v Logan City Council
[2024] QPEC 11
Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council & Ors;
Dexus Funds Management Limited v Fabcot Pty Ltd & Ors
[2021] QCA 95
[2022] QPELR 309
Ward v The Ritz Hotel (London) Ltd
(1992) 1 PIQR 315
Wilhelm v Logan City Council & Ors
[2020] QCA 273
[2021] QPELR
Willis v Endall
[2011] WASC 45
M Batty KC and J Bowness for the Appellant
B Job KC and M Rodgers for
the Respondent
C Hughes KC and L Walker for the Co-respondent
SOLICITORS:
Colin Biggers & Paisley for the Appellant
City Legal - Brisbane
City Council for the Respondent
Gadens Lawyers for the Co-respondent
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
land at 185 Milton Road, Milton (“
the subject land
”) contains
the iconic XXXX Brewery that has been used to brew alcoholic beverages for more
than 130 years. The use commenced
prior to the town planning laws and
regulation. As such, there is no development approval authorising its
commencement. The use
of the subject land to brew alcoholic beverages enjoys
the protection afforded to existing lawful uses by successive planning regimes.
[2] Version
Brisbane City Plan 2014
”) recognises
the existing lawful industrial use of the subject land. It maps the subject
land as part of a designated Strategic
Inner City Industrial Area, the Low
impact industry zone and the Brewery precinct in the Ithaca district
neighbourhood plan area.
Relevantly, in relation to the Brewery precinct, the
Ithaca district neighbourhood plan code states:
“This precinct
contains a purpose-built brewery of cultural heritage significance. The brewery
is a Brisbane icon and a well-known
landmark of the city, with a great physical
presence in the locality. ...”
[3] Although
the subject land is in the Low impact industry zone, the overall outcomes for
the Brewery precinct in the Ithaca district
neighbourhood plan code anticipate
that the subject land may be approved for medium impact industry uses where the
uses are for brewery
11 December 2020, the Council gave a development permit for a material change of
use for medium impact industry. The Council
approved changes to that
development permit on 3 June 2021 and 17 December 2021. Properly construed, the
changed development permit
authorises the use of the subject land to produce
ready-to-drink alcoholic beverages by mixing syrup and ethanol. The development
permit, as changed, is subject to conditions, which stipulate that:
(a) the production of alcoholic beverages by mixing syrup and ethanol is only to
occur in conjunction with the existing brewery use
on the subject land, and that
aspect of the use must cease should the brewery use cease;
(b) the ethanol tanker unloading area is to be designed and constructed to
direct spills to underground spill containment tanks that
have capacity to
contain the largest likely spill;
(c) the underground spill containment tanks are to be fitted with a means of
determining the level of their contents;
(d) the underground spill containment tanks are to be emptied by a licensed
waste contractor on a regular basis to ensure capacity
is maintained in the
(e) prior to the commencement of the use, certification is to be provided by a
suitably qualified Registered Professional Engineer
”) engineer to demonstrate that the design and
construction of the ethanol tanker unloading area, including the underground
spill containment tanks, is in accordance with all the requirements of the
conditions;
(f) prior to the commencement of the use, certification is to be provided by a
suitably qualified dangerous goods consultant or RPEQ
engineer to demonstrate
that the ethanol pipeline, which is located between the ethanol tanker unloading
area and the building containing
the syrup process room, has been designed,
constructed and located in accordance with Australian Standard
storage and handling of flammable and combustible liquids
(g) the storage of ethanol is to be limited to 10,000 litres in
intermediate bulk containers.
[5] On 31 August
2022, the Co-respondent, Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd, made a development
application to Brisbane City Council
the Council
a development permit for a material change of use (“
the development
application
[6] Lion-Beer,
Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd seeks approval to materially intensify that part of the
existing use that involves mixing
flavour syrups with ethanol to produce
ready-to-drink
” alcoholic beverages such as seltzers and
alcoholic ginger beer. Relevantly, this practice does not require a brewing
To that end, the development application seeks approval for three
ethanol storage tanks, each with a capacity of 40,000 litres.
are to be located within a tank chamber. The development application also seeks
approval for a staff amenity building
of approximately 12 square metres.
composite use of the subject land, i.e., the use for beverage production by
by mixing syrup and ethanol, will produce more than 200,000
litres of beverage per annum.
[8] Under City
Plan, the “
High impact industry
” land use definition
“Food, beverages or pet food processing, smoking,
drying, curing, milling, bottling or canning works, if producing 200 tonnes
more per annum.”
development application was impact assessable and required public notification.
The public notification attracted only one
properly made submission. That
submission was made by the Appellant, The Corporation of the Synod of the
Diocese of Brisbane, which
is a corporate entity under the
Anglican Church of
Australia Act 1985
Appellant owns the land at 233 and 233A Milton Road, which adjoins the western
boundary of the subject land. The Appellant’s
land contains
St Francis Theological College, which has been operating at that location
since 1936.
[11] The Council
approved the development application subject to development conditions. The
reasons for its decision and the development
conditions are set out in a
decision notice dated 29 February 2024.
Appellant has appealed against the Council’s decision. It opposes
approval of the development application. The Appellant
acknowledges that the
industrial use on the subject land and the community use on the
Appellant’s land have co-existed in harmony
for many decades.
Nevertheless, the Appellant contends that approval of the material change of use
of the subject land, authorising
the introduction of the ethanol storage
facility, would result in an unacceptable risk.
[13] Ethanol is
a flammable chemical that is miscible in water, i.e., it dissolves in water.
The storage of ethanol is hazardous
if not managed correctly. When mixed with
air in the right concentration, ethanol vapours can create explosive mixtures.
The consequences
of an explosion in the tank chamber are potentially fatal.
[14] At first
blush, considering the explosive properties of ethanol, one can readily accept
that the proposed introduction of the
ethanol storage facility is
incompatible
with the sensitive uses on the Appellant’s land.
said, the proper assessment of the proposed development does not end there. It
has long been recognised that this Court
must be careful to resist the
attractions of avoiding responsibility for allowing a proposal that has been
demonstrated to have its
risks if not handled carefully:
Lane v Gatton Shire
[1988] QPLR 49
GFW Gelatine International Ltd v Beaudesert
Shire Council & Ors
[1993] QPLR 342
at 353. Proper consideration needs
to be given to the nature and extent of the risk and the means by which it is
proposed to be
GFW Gelatine International Ltd v Beaudesert Shire
Council & Ors
[1993] QPLR 342
Austin BMI Pty Ltd v Ipswich
City Council & Ors
[2023] QPEC 27
—[536]. These
well-established principles are not challenged in this case. They are accepted
by all the parties.
[16] Lion-Beer,
Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd bears the onus of establishing that the proposed
material change of use should be approved:
Planning and
Environment Court Act 2016
[17] For the
reasons that follow, Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd has discharged the
is the applicable framework for the decision?
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
, subject to
and (5), the appeal proceeds by way of hearing anew. The Court
has a broad discretion in determining the appeal. It is to be exercised
judicially and subject to the limitations in the relevant statutes. The
statutory framework in the
Planning and
Environment Court Act 2016
Planning Act 2016
(Qld) provides
relevant guidance in that respect.
[19] The Court
must assess the development application under
as if it were the assessment manager:
Planning and Environment
Court Act 2016
The Court’s decision is governed by
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
and informed by
Planning Act 2016
Sections 45(5)(a)(i)
and (7) of the
Planning Act 2016
mandate assessment against the
assessment benchmarks in a categorising instrument that was in effect when the
development application
was properly made. Version 24 of City Plan is such a
categorising instrument:
Planning Act 2016
. The correct
approach to the construction of planning schemes was recently confirmed in
Chiodo Corporation Operations Pty Ltd v Douglas Shire Council
[21] Weight can
be given to amendments to City Plan:
Planning and
Environment Court Act 2016
Planning Act 2016
The parties agree that there are no relevant amendments to be considered in this
[22] Pursuant to
Planning Act 2016
ss 31(1)(f)
and (g) and
Planning Regulation 2017
(Qld), the assessment must also be
carried out having regard to, amongst other things and to the extent that they
are relevant:
(a) the development approval for, and the lawful use of, the premises, to which
I have made relevant reference in paragraphs
(b) the common material for the development application.
assessment and decision-making process is to be approached consistent with the
Court of Appeal decisions of
Brisbane City Council v YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
[2021] QPELR 987
Abeleda & Anor v Brisbane City Council
[2020] QCA 257
[2021] QPELR 1003
Wilhelm v Logan City
Council & Ors
[2020] QCA 273
[2021] QPELR 1321
Trinity Park
Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council & Ors; Dexus Funds Management
Limited v Fabcot Pty Ltd & Ors
[2021] QCA 95
[2022] QPELR 309.
[24] Collectively,
those cases confirm the approach articulated in
Ashvan Investments Unit Trust
v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[2019] QPEC 16
[2019] QPELR 793
. That approach is also consistent with that described in
Moreton Bay Regional Council & Anor; Australian National Homes Pty Ltd v
Moreton Bay Regional Council & Anor
[2019] QPEC 46
[2020] QPELR 328
is explained in those authorities:
(a) the ultimate decision called for when making an impact assessment is a
broad, evaluative judgment that admits of flexibility
to approve an application
in the face of non-compliance with a planning scheme;
(b) the exercise of the discretion under
Planning Act
is subject to three requirements, including that it be based upon the
assessment carried out under
Planning Act 2016
Planning Act 2016
does not alter the characterisation of a
planning scheme as a document that reflects the public interest.
[26] With that
framework in mind, I now turn to identify the issues in
are the issues in dispute?
[27] The issues
in dispute, including the applicable assessment benchmarks, were originally
identified by an order of the Court made
on 26 July 2024.
[28] At a late
stage of the hearing, Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd proposed a change to
its development application. There
was no opposition to the change. For
reasons given during the hearing, I am satisfied that the change is a minor
change and that
it was appropriate to permit the trial to proceed based on the
changed development application.
[29] The minor
change to the development application resolved the earlier dispute about air
quality and narrowed the focus of the
dispute in relation to the risk posed by
the ethanol storage facility and the appropriateness of the proposed use.
addition, after the oral testimony of its experts, the Appellant reflected on
the shortcomings of its original case. In final
submissions, it further
confined its case. I commend Mr Batty KC and Ms Bowness for
their sound forensic judgment and the Appellant
for its responsible approach in
this regard.
What are the relevant
assessment benchmarks that remain in issue?
[31] As I have
mentioned, version 24 of City Plan was in force when the development application
was treated as properly made.
[32] Under City
Plan, the subject land is in the Low impact industry zone and requires impact
assessment. As such, the development
application is to be assessed against
assessment benchmarks in City Plan, to the extent they are put in issue by
parties in the appeal.
[33] In final
submissions, the Appellant indicates that it now relies on only eight assessment
benchmarks. They are identified in
Annexure A to the Appellant’s written
submissions. The Appellant alleges non-compliance with each of them. It does
not concede
compliance with the other assessment benchmarks that were previously
raised. Rather, it says that, if the proposed development warrants
after assessing compliance with the eight assessment benchmarks identified, that
outcome would not change by reason of assessment
against the other assessment
benchmarks. I again commend Mr Batty KC and Ms Bowness for their
responsible approach in this regard.
[34] Three of
the assessment benchmarks put in issue form part of the Strategic framework.
The Strategic framework sets the policy
direction for City Plan and forms the
basis for ensuring appropriate development occurs in the planning scheme area
for the life
of City Plan:
of City Plan. The Strategic
framework is comprised of:
(a) the strategic intent;
(b) five themes that collectively represent the policy intent of City Plan;
(c) strategic outcomes proposed for development in the planning scheme area for
each theme;
(d) elements that refine and further describe the strategic outcomes;
(e) the specific outcomes sought for each element; and
(f) the land use strategies for achieving each of these outcomes:
. of City Plan.
provisions of the Strategic framework put in issue relate to the juxtaposition
of industrial and sensitive uses. They are:
(a) land use strategy L1.4 in
, Table 3.3.3.1, for Element 1.2
– Brisbane’s industrial economy of Theme 1: Brisbane’s
globally competitive economy,
which states:
“Existing lawful industries continue to operate with certainty and are
protected from encroachment by sensitive land uses.
Proposed expansions of
these industries meet relevant health, safety and environmental
(b) the strategic outcome in
1.j. for Theme 3:
Brisbane’s clean and green leading environmental performance, which
“The strategic outcomes for clean and green leading environmental
performance are:
release of harmful pollutants is avoided or minimised and
the health and
safety of residents, business and visitors are protected from exposure to
harmful pollutants or
industrial hazards
(c) land use strategy L2.3 in
3.5.3.1, for Element 3.2 – Brisbane’s environmental quality and
sustainable design of Theme 3: Brisbane’s
clean and green leading
environmental performance, which states:
Development involving an interface between a residential use and
non-residential use achieves the level of residential amenity specified
applicable overlay and neighbourhood plan and does not otherwise affect
reasonable health expectations.
(emphasis reflects the Appellant’s allegation of non-compliance)
[36] These and
other assessment benchmarks in the Strategic framework record city-wide policies
that are then implemented through
finer-grained planning in City Plan, such as
the allocation of land to zones and the assessment benchmarks in zone codes. In
instances, such as that pertaining to the subject land, finer grained
planning at a local level is also provided by the allocation
neighbourhood plan areas and in neighbourhood plan codes. I have referred to
relevant provisions in that regard in paragraphs
respect to the finer-grained planning reflected by the zoning and zone code, the
Appellant puts in issue compliance with
the overall
outcome in s 6.2.5.1 2.i. of the Low impact industry zone code. It
“The purpose of the zone will be achieved through the
following overall outcomes:
Development
for an industrial use is located, designed and managed to maintain safety to
people and provide a buffer, to
avoid significant adverse effects on the
natural environment and
minimise impacts on adjacent non-industrial land
including sensitive uses
(emphasis reflects the
Appellant’s allegation of non-compliance)
Appellant also takes issue with the proposed development’s compliance with
four assessment benchmarks in the Industry
[39] The purpose
of the Industry code is to assess the suitability of development to which the
code applies. That purpose is intended
to be achieved through its overall
outcomes. The Appellant alleges non-compliance with three of them,
(a) the overall outcome in s 9.3.12.2 2.a., which states:
“Development is appropriately located and carefully designed to
mitigate the impacts of industrial activities.”
(b) the overall outcome in
s 9.3.12.2 2.c., which states:
“Development is compatible with a sensitive use in the vicinity of the
development.”
(c) the overall outcome in
s 9.3.12.2 2.d., which states:
Development
avoids or minimises the release of harmful
pollutants and
protects the health and safety of the occupants of a sensitive
use or a zone or a zone precinct intended for sensitive uses.
(emphasis reflects the Appellant’s allegation of non-compliance)
[40] Finally,
the Appellant alleges non-compliance with performance outcome PO3 in Table
9.3.12.3.A of the Industry code. It states:
Development
minimises the risk to public safety, property
and the environment
technological hazards such as
and toxic release
and achieves the hazard and risk criteria in Table 9.3.12.3.I
Note—A preliminary hazard analysis report prepared in accordance with
the Industrial hazard and risk assessment planning scheme
policy can assist in
demonstrating achievement of this performance outcome.”
(emphasis reflects the Appellant’s case about non-compliance)
[41] Pursuant to
Table 9.3.12.3.I, the relevant fatality risk criteria is 0.5 in a million and
the injury risk and property damage
criteria is 50 chances in one million per
Appellant contends that performance outcome PO3 of the Industry code is a
central provision in this case. The other parties
agree. So do I.
[43] Ultimately,
the case was run by all parties on the footing that compliance, or otherwise,
with the assessment benchmarks is informed
by determination of the
Appellant’s key contentions about the risk posed by the proposed
development. I agree with that approach.
It is sensible having regard to the
planning provisions that remain in issue. I commend all Counsel retained in
this case for their
exercise of sound forensic judgment in this regard.
What is the key issue that
remains in dispute?
[44] The real
issue that remains to be determined is whether the location and design of the
ethanol storage facility poses an unacceptable
risk to public safety and
property and unduly affects reasonable health expectations. The Appellant
accepts that this is a question
Appellant’s case is founded on the proposition that City Plan’s
approach to risk is not premised on its elimination.
Rather, it calls for the
minimisation of risk posed by an industrial hazard by avoiding avoidable
Appellant advances three key contentions to support its submission that the
evidence on this issue is such that the exercise
of discretion calls for refusal
of the proposed development. I identify the Appellant’s key contentions
in paragraphs
[47] Lion-Beer,
Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd and the Council each contend that the proposed
development does not present an unacceptable
risk and that it should be
[48] Before
turning to address the key contentions, it assists to appreciate:
(a) City Plan’s approach to industrial
(b) the features and character of the subject land and the locality generally;
(c) the parameters of the proposed development, including how the risk presented
by the ethanol storage facility is proposed to be
is City Plan’s approach to industrial risk?
Appellant’s position about City Plan’s approach to risk in
performance outcome PO3 of the Industry code is supported
by consideration of
that provision in the context of City Plan and the documents called up by
[50] The first
limb of performance outcome PO3 of the Industry code requires development to
minimise the risk to public safety, property
and the environment from
technological hazards such as fire, explosion and toxic release.
ordinary meaning of “
to reduce to the
smallest possible amount or degree
”: seventh edition of the
Macquarie Dictionary
. Determination of what constitutes the smallest
possible amount calls for an evaluative judgment. It is a question of fact and
degree that is to be determined by reference to the relevant facts and
circumstances:
Gracemere Surveying and Planning Consultants Pty Ltd v Peak
Downs Shire Council & Anor
[2009] QCA 237
(2009) 175 LGERA 126
[30] and [31].
requirement in performance outcome PO3 of the Industry code that development
” risk may be compared with the intention in
performance outcome PO1 that development “
” air emissions. The language of performance outcome PO3
recognises that industrial uses are typically attended with a level
unavoidable risk.
[53] The overall
outcomes of the Industry code acknowledge that industrial development will bring
with it some impacts. They require
that development:
(a) is appropriately located and carefully designed to
” the impacts of industrial activities:
s 9.3.12.2 2.a. of City Plan;
(b) achieves environmental performance of a “
satisfactory
”: s 9.3.12.2 2.b. of City Plan; and
(c) ensures that buildings that are located near sensitive uses can accommodate
industrial uses without causing “
unacceptable impact
amenity of the area: s 9.3.12.2 2.e. of City Plan.
[54] The overall
outcome in s 9.3.12.2 2.d. of the Industry code uses different
language (i.e., “
” health and safety of the occupants
of a sensitive use). That said, the Industry code provides an indication of the
by which that otherwise subjective intent can objectively be applied,
including in performance outcome PO3 of the Industry code.
[55] Further,
although performance outcome PO3 of the Industry code requires development to
both minimise the risk and achieve the
hazard and risk criteria in Table
9.3.12.3.I, consideration of the criteria reveals that they deal with the same
subject matter.
As such, one might reasonably expect that demonstration of
compliance with the criteria will assist in demonstrating that the risk
minimised, and that occupants of sensitive uses are appropriately protected.
[56] The note to
performance outcome PO3 of the Industry Code states that a preliminary hazard
analysis report prepared in accordance
with the Industrial hazard and risk
assessment planning scheme policy can assist in demonstrating achievement of
performance outcome
Industrial hazard and risk assessment planning scheme policy plays a supporting
role for City Plan: ss 1.2 2., 5.3.3 5, 9.3.12.1.1
note) and Table 1.2.6 of City Plan and
Planning Act
. It does not contain assessment benchmarks.
[58] The purpose
of the Industrial hazard and risk assessment planning scheme policy
“This planning scheme policy provides information
required for a development application and guidance and advice for satisfying
assessment criteria for the preparation of a preliminary hazard analysis report.
Minimising risk
of impact from industrial hazards
will require
new industrial
development to implement best available risk management
. However, even when best available measures and technologies are
risks from some industrial activities cannot be completely
eliminated. Therefore, minimising the impact of industrial hazards
people and the environment
will require appropriate separation between
sensitive and industrial uses
(emphasis added)
planning scheme policy defines risk as “
likelihood of harm
occurring from a hazard
” (emphasis added).
[60] The matters
that a preliminary hazard analysis report is to address are set out in
of the Industrial hazard and risk assessment planning scheme policy. A
preliminary hazard analysis report is to:
(a) identify the potential hazards associated with the development;
(b) identify sensitive uses that may be affected by hazards and risks;
(c) analyse each hazard in terms of consequence to people and the biophysical
environment and the likelihood of occurrence;
(d) quantify the analysis and estimate the resultant risks to surrounding land
(e) assess the risks in terms of the location, land use planning implications
and hazard and risk criteria;
(f) ensure that the proposed safeguards are adequate and that the development
will not impose an unacceptable level of risk;
(g) document results of the hazard and risk assessment, including comparison to
hazard and risk criteria, and graphical representation
of results at gridded
receptors; and
(h) describe the best available hazard and risk control measures to be applied
by the development to minimise hazard and risk impacts.
identified matters envisage that there will be some likelihood of resultant
risks occurring. They are to be quantified and
assessed in terms of hazard and
risk criteria, with an eye to determining safeguards that are adequate and do
not result in an unacceptable
level of risk. The best available control
measures are to be described with the intention that development minimise hazard
impacts, rather than remove or avoid them altogether.
preliminary hazards analysis report is to enable the assessment manager to make
a judgment about the level of risk involved
in a proposal and its acceptability.
It should allow the assessment manager to decide if the level of risk exceeds
the hazard and
risk criteria
and whether the level of risk can be
managed. This is not language that indicates an approach of avoiding
Industrial hazard and risk assessment planning scheme policy adopts a graded
approach to risk assessment. It sets three
levels of analysis. It requires an
analysis and assessment only as far as is needed to demonstrate that the
development does not
result in sensitive uses being exposed to unacceptable
levels of risk due to industrial hazards:
. Again, this is not
an approach that calls for the elimination of risk.
[64] In terms of
the graded approach:
(a) Level 1 is a qualitative approach based on comprehensive hazard
identification to demonstrate that the activity does not pose
a significant
(b) Level 2 supplements the qualitative analysis by sufficiently quantifying the
risk contributors to show that risk and consequence criteria will
not be exceeded; and
(c) Level 3 is a full quantitative analysis.
[65] A Level 2
partial quantification analysis is only required for a development if Level 1
has identified one or more risk contributors
with consequences beyond the site
boundaries but with a low frequency of occurrence. If off-site impacts are
demonstrated to be
unlikely, compliance with the relevant Australian Standards,
industry codes of practice and similar guidelines are considered adequate
control measures:
[66] As I will
explain in more detail below, although there were no identified risk
contributors with consequences beyond the subject
land, Dr Mendham prepared
a Level 2 partial quantification analysis to provide the Court comfort about the
acceptability of the risk.
[67] A Level 2
partial quantification analysis is to:
(a) model the consequences of all events for which hazard identification
indicates there could be
effects beyond the site boundary:
estimate the likelihood
of each event that detailed modelling
confirms would have significant off-site consequences:
(c) assess the results of the preceding steps to confirm that the overall effect
of events considered would not cause criteria to
be exceeded:
(d) be prepared in accordance with
Hazardous Industry Planning Advisory Paper
No. 6: Hazard Analysis
, which was published by the New South Wales
Department of Planning in January 2011:
(e) demonstrate that the risk level performs to the criteria established in
Hazardous Industry Planning Advisory Paper No. 4: Risk Criteria for Land
Use Safety Planning
published by the New South Wales Department of Planning
in January 2011:
Industry Planning Advisory Paper No. 6: Hazard Analysis
explains that
the purpose of a preliminary hazard analysis is to demonstrate that the risk
levels do not preclude a development approval:
p vi. The paper also
explains that:
(a) a final hazard analysis is anticipated at a later stage, after detailed
design: p vi;
(b) the objective of hazard analysis is to develop a comprehensive understanding
of the hazards and risks associated with an operation
or facility and the
adequacy of safeguards: p vii;
neither quantified nor qualitative analysis should be pursued
for its own sake
quantification of all dimensions or risk is not always
possible or
necessary to enable judgments to be made on sound hazard
(e) quantified risk results should not be seen as absolute or objective measures
nor as the most significant output of the analytical
process: p 3;
Quantification should be avoided where it will not add rigour
in the analysis or it is clearly entirely arbitrary
(g) the hazard identification process involves defining a worst-case scenario,
which defines the upper boundary for the range of
[69] Hazardous
Industry Planning Advisory Paper No. 4: Risk Criteria for Land Use Safety
explains that risk criteria should account for both the
consequences and the likelihood of hazardous events. This is because criteria
based on the consequences of the events in isolation are unrealistic as they
ignore the availability of safeguards and may result
in the unnecessary
sterilisation of land: p 4.
[70] A Level 3
full quantitative analysis is required where, relevantly, the Level 2 analysis
is unable to demonstrate that the risk
criteria will be met.
matters reinforce the materiality of demonstrated compliance with the identified
risk criteria.
Industrial hazard and risk assessment planning scheme policy indicates that
preliminary hazard analysis reporting is not
the last step in the risk
assessment process. A range of further safety assessment studies are to be
undertaken at the detailed
design stage:
The Industrial hazard and
risk assessment planning scheme policy provides for a final hazard analysis:
. It anticipates that a safety management system and hazard
audit system will be developed to ensure ongoing safety management:
. The policy explains that regular audits are an essential
component of that. It identifies that a safety management system, which
provides for regular audits, is to be finalised before commencement of
operations. Its implementation is to be ongoing:
. One might
reasonably expect that the preparation of reports of this nature would be dealt
with through the imposition of reasonable
and relevant conditions.
of the Industrial hazard and risk assessment planning scheme policy introduces
the ALARP (as low as reasonably practicable) principle.
Irrespective of the
numerical value
of any consequence or risk criteria level for risk
assessment purposes, new industrial development is to demonstrate the ALARP
. This does not detract from the significance of
compliance with the nominated criteria. Rather, it calls for demonstration
(a) all avoidable risk is avoided to ensure that risk is not introduced in an
feasible alternatives are
possible and
(b) risk is reduced wherever practicable, irrespective of the numerical value of
the cumulative risk level from the whole installation;
(c) the consequence of an event is contained within the site as far as
practicable; and
(d) if there is an existing high risk, additional risk is avoided as far as
practicable.
of the Industrial hazard and risk assessment planning scheme policy confirms
that development and overlay codes in City Plan contain
hazard and risk criteria
and provides an explanation of the criteria. It explains that the assessment of
that risk provides the
basis for compatible land use safety planning:
. The tolerability or acceptability of risk is influenced by
factors other than the physical magnitude of that risk. Risk criteria
identified as having a quantitative technical basis and account for qualitative
community concerns:
. Where an individual or group of people
is exposed to a risk
the acceptability of that risk is that it should be
low relative to other known and tolerated risks:
. For reasons
that I explain below, that is an apt description of the calculated risk here.
What is the character of the subject
land and the locality in which it sits?
[75] The subject
land has an area of 58,270 square metres. It is irregular in shape. It
has frontages to Milton Road, Finchley Street,
Paten Street and Heussler
Terrace, Milton. Milton Road, Finchley Street and Heussler Terrace each provide
vehicular access to the
subject land.
[76] As I have
noted above, the subject land is improved by the iconic XXXX Brewery. The built
form on the subject land includes
several buildings, silos and other structures
that are currently used for beverage production (being predominantly beer, but
some ready-to-drink alcoholic beverages). Ethanol is presently stored in
intermediate bulk containers in one of the buildings near
the western boundary.
[77] The subject
land is in Milton, which is a historical suburb of Brisbane. The suburb’s
character is informed by the juxtaposition
of significant commercial and
industrial activity with residential development and community facilities.
[78] Within
Milton, the subject land is part of a node of inner-city industrial facilities
that interface with residential areas and
community facilities. The subject
land is bounded:
(a) to the north by Heussler Terrace, with detached dwelling houses in the
Character residential (infill housing) zone beyond;
(b) to the east by a mix of industrial and other commercial uses addressing
Finchley Street that are within the Low impact industry
(c) to the south by Milton Road and the railway line and station, beyond which
is a high-density mixed-use area; and
(d) to the west by the Appellant’s land, which is mapped as part of the
Community purposes precinct of the Community facilities
zone under City Plan.
Appellant’s land contains Old Bishopsbourne, which was the residence of
the first Anglican Bishop of Brisbane, and
the Chapel of the Holy Spirit. Both
are State heritage listed buildings. The Old Bishopsbourne has been on the
Appellant’s
land since the 1860s and the Chapel was constructed in 1912.
[80] In addition
to the heritage listed buildings, the Appellant’s land includes an
educational establishment, being a theological
college, the college library,
administration buildings, and accommodation for students and staff in the form
of six multi-level townhouses
and three single-storey flats.
buildings on the Appellant’s land that are closest to the subject
land’s western boundary are:
(a) the college library, which is open to the community and contains over 35,000
books and a lecture or function space at the lower
(b) the spiritual direction building to the north of the library, which includes
an office and two meeting rooms; and
(c) townhouses containing residential accommodation.
Appellant’s land is open to the public. It is used for functions, school
visits, conferences, weddings and funerals.
The area between the boundary
shared with the subject land and the library is used as a breakout space during
are the parameters of the proposed development?
development application seeks to materially intensify that part of the existing
use of the subject land that involves producing
beverages by mixing ethanol and
syrup. The intensification is sought to be facilitated using liquid ethanol.
The liquid ethanol
is to be stored in a new ethanol storage facility containing
three tanks, each with capacity to store 40,000 litres of ethanol.
[84] The ethanol
storage facility is proposed to be situated on part of the existing ethanol
tanker unloading area near the western
boundary of the subject land. The
ethanol storage facility is between 9 and 10 metres in height. It will sit
at a lower ground
level than the Appellant’s land. It is setback a
minimum of 3.5 metres from the western boundary and 7.7 metres from
the nearest
building on the Appellant’s land.
proposed ethanol storage facility will interface with the existing pipework from
the existing ethanol tanker facility to
facilitate retrieval of ethanol for use
in the production of beverages. It is apparent from the common material that
the development
application does not only seek authorisation for the
introduction of the ethanol storage facility. It also seeks authorisation to
produce ready-to-drink alcoholic beverages by connecting the ethanol storage
facility to the existing ingredients store and syrup
mixing room and other parts
of the brewery.
proposed development involves many design, construction and operational features
that are directed to minimising the risk
posed to public safety, property and
the environment by the proposed storage of ethanol and its use in the beverage
production process.
Many of the proposed design, construction and operational
features are detailed in the approved drawings and documents referenced
Council’s decision notice and conditions. Two approved reports are
particularly informative, namely:
(a) the report titled “
Project Alpha 2 Tanker Unloading Area and Bulk
Ethanol Tank Chamber – Dangerous Goods Report Revision 5
3 August 2023 (as amended in red by the Council on 7 February 2024)
the approved Dangerous Goods Report
(b) the report titled “
Project Alpha Phase 2 Ethanol Tanker Unloading
& Storage in Tank Chamber – Hazardous Area Classification Revision
” dated 3 August 2023 (as amended in red by the Council on 7 February
the approved Hazardous Area Classification
details of the proposed development have been incorporated as part of the minor
change application made during the trial.
They are detailed in Exhibit 36. I
identify some of the key risk mitigation features of the proposed development in
What are the key design and
construction features of the tank chamber?
ethanol storage facility is an enclosed and roofed blockwork structure, which is
referred to as a tank chamber. The ethanol
storage tanks are to be placed
together inside the tank chamber.
minimum, the tank chamber is to be designed and constructed to comply with the
requirements of Australian Standard
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of
flammable and combustible liquids
, section 5.13 (Installation Method for
Tanks in Tank Chambers). This requirement, of itself, involves incorporation of
measures that are intended to minimise risk.
[90] Australian
Standards represent the consensus of professional opinion and the practical
experience about sensible, safe precautions:
Onetech Pty Ltd v Shaw
[1999] WASCA 289
Ward v The Ritz Hotel (London) Ltd
at 317. They are reviewed periodically to reflect progress in
science, technology and systems.
[91] Australian
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of flammable and combustible
supersedes AS1940—2004. It was prepared by Standards
Australia Committee ME-017. That committee was constituted by experts
received the assistance of other expert individuals during the draft’s
public comment period. Committee ME-017 contained
representatives from, amongst
others, Australasian Fire and Emergency Service Authorities Council,
Australasian Institute of Dangerous
Goods Consultants, Australian Industry
Group, Department of Defence, Engineers Australia, Fire Protection Association
Plastic and Chemicals Industries Association, SafeWork SA, WorkCover
NSW, Workplace Health and Safety Qld and WorkSafe Vic.
of the design requirements for the tank chamber are set out in
section 6.3
the approved Dangerous Goods Report. Some have been changed by the minor change
application. The design features exceed the
minimum requirements in the
Australian Standard. Relevantly, the tank chamber is to be designed and
constructed so that:
(a) the tank chamber walls will have a fire resistance level of 240/240/240;
(b) the tank chamber floor will have a fire resistance level of 180/180/180;
(c) the tank chamber roof will have a fire resistance level of 180/180/180 and
is to be constructed with hollow-core, precast roof
planks and a concrete
topping reinforced concrete slab that is at least 150 millimetres thick;
(d) there will be a clear space of at least 1,100 millimetres between
tanks, at least 600 millimetres between any tank and any wall
of the tank
chamber, and at least 2,100 millimetres between the top of any tank and the
underside of the tank chamber ceiling;
(e) the doorway to the tank chamber will be protected by an entry door with a
fire resistance level of -/120/30 that will ordinarily
remain closed and fire
shutters on a fusible link with a fire resistance level of -/120/30;
(f) the sill of the doorway will be raised to provide a liquid-tight compound
capable of sustaining the hydrostatic load and having
a net capacity of
approximately 78,000 litres, being a volume well in excess of the largest
(g) in place of the spillage disposal measures described in section 6.3.2 of the
approved Dangerous Goods Report, the bund sump in
the tank chamber will include
a valve to discharge any spillage in the bund to the existing underground spill
containment tanks referred
to on Drawing SA106 Issue K14. The bund sump and
valve will be designed to be:
(i) capable of draining at a rate of at least 11.4 kg/s;
(ii) activated on either or both of:
(A) detection of
liquid by a level switch system (see paragraph
below); and
(B) de-energisation
of the tank chamber; and
(h) the tank chamber will withstand pressure resistance of at least 30 kPa.
design measures ensure that the tank chamber will be fire-rated and act as a
radiant heat barrier to neighbouring buildings.
[94] Prior to
the commencement of the use, certification is to be provided by a suitably
qualified RPEQ engineer or appropriately
qualified dangerous goods consultant to
demonstrate that the tank chamber has been designed and constructed as
What are the key design
and construction features with respect to ventilation?
[95] Each tank
will be fitted with a free vent system that facilitates venting via vent lines
that penetrate the eastern wall.
[96] There is to
be a condenser fitted to the vent lines to condense the ethanol as liquid. The
condensate from the vent lines will
drain to the underground spill containment
tanks. The condenser will be designed and constructed to achieve an ethanol
efficiency of at least 98 per cent.
condenser will include a system for monitoring the condenser instruments
(including refrigerant supply/return temperature,
refrigerant flow and
compressor power draw) during the filling process.
[98] A control
system will be installed that blocks the transfer of ethanol from a tanker to
the ethanol storage tanks if the condenser
is not operating at the temperature
necessary to achieve the required ethanol removal efficiency.
[99] The vent
lines for the tanks will terminate via a single combined vent outlet. The
outlet will be fitted with a flame arrester
and insect exclusion device. In
accordance with recommendations made in a joint report of air quality experts,
the vent outlet will
be at a height of RL 29.6 and located at the eastern
end of the canopy that covers the tanker unloading area. That location is
from the Appellant’s land than the originally proposed vent
[100] All tanks
will have a pressure relief or emergency vent that will discharge within the
tank chamber. The tank chamber is a
sealed building that has a single
ventilation supply duct with a fan at a high level and a single ventilation
exhaust duct at low
level. The downstream ductwork will extend beyond the roof
of the chamber. Both ducts will be on the eastern side wall and will
protected with fire-rated shutters that will ordinarily be closed.
What are the key design and
construction features with respect to the electrical system?
[101] The tank
chamber will contain an equipotential bonding system that electrically bonds and
earths all piping, tanks and metal
surfaces to eliminate the likelihood of
static discharge that is otherwise potentially capable of igniting ethanol
electrical system in the tank chamber will be an explosion-protected electrical
system designed and constructed in accordance
section 6.1
of the approved
Hazardous Area Classification. This includes a requirement that all electrical
equipment is to be designed in accordance
with Australian Standard
Explosive atmospheres
– Electrical installations design,
selection and erection
electrical system will be independently audited and approved by a Queensland
Government accredited hazardous area auditor
prior to its initial
energisation.
What are the key
design features of the tanks?
[104] The tanks
within the tank chamber will be constructed of grade 304 stainless steel.
[105] The tanks
will contain a volume comparison alarm that measures:
(a) the level of ethanol within the tanks (via a level transmitter); and
(b) the amount of ethanol being transferred into the tanks (via a flow
transmitter).
What are the key design measures for
detection of ethanol in the tank chamber?
[106] The tank
chamber will contain ethanol vapour detectors capable of measuring the
concentration of ethanol vapour within the tank
chamber. Those ethanol vapour
detectors will be self-testing and are to be designed and installed up to safety
integrity level 3.
[107] The vapour
detection system will automatically trigger the activation of:
(a) alarms within the subject land that alert the operators of ethanol
concentration exceeding a low-level trigger point;
(b) a ventilation system to restore the concentration of ethanol vapour to
within acceptable limits inside the tank chamber; and
(c) a personnel safety lockout system that prevents people accessing the tank
chamber until ethanol vapour levels are considered
acceptable for entry.
level switch system will be designed to detect liquid within the bund sump and
installed in the bund sump as shown on Drawing
DA303 Issue C. It will be
designed and installed to safety integrity level
What are the key design and
construction measures for detection of fire in the tank chamber and the ethanol
tanker unloading area?
[109] The tank
chamber and the ethanol tanker unloading area will be fitted with a fire
detection system that detects the presence
of ignited ethanol. This will
trigger an automatic alarm signalling to the Queensland Fire Department and an
onsite emergency response.
The fire detectors will be
self-testing.
What are the key
design measures to address ethanol vapour or fire detected in the tank
[110] The minor
change to the development application replaces the internal fixed foam pourers
with a water mist fire and explosion
suppression system (“
mist system
water mist system will create water particles of an appropriate size
(a) dissolve ethanol vapour in the tank chamber; and
(b) extinguish an ethanol fire (in compliance with Australian Standard
AS4587:2020 – Water mist fire protection systems
water mist system will be:
(a) powered from a separate power supply to the tank chamber;
(b) provided with a continuous backup power source (for example, from a diesel
generator); and
(c) tested and certified as meeting the proposed requirements prior to the
commencement of the use, and the certification will be
provided to the Council.
water mist system will activate, and the tank chamber will be automatically
de-energised, if any one or more of the following
(a) the ethanol vapour detectors detect ethanol vapour concentration at, or
above, 5 per cent of the lower explosive limit of ethanol;
(b) the level switch detects 100 millimetres of liquid in the bund sump;
(c) the volume comparison alarm for the tanks detects a discrepancy between the
volume of ethanol being transferred to the tanks
and the volume of ethanol in
(d) the fire detectors in the ethanol tank chamber are activated; or
(e) any sensor, detector or switch referred to above is not operating correctly.
What are the key design, construction and
operational measures relating to access to the tank chamber and re-energising of
[114] The tank
chamber will be fitted with a personnel lockout system that prevents access to
the tank chamber until ethanol vapour
levels are considered acceptable for entry
(as required by section 6.3.3 of the approved Dangerous Goods Report). The
system will
deny access if any of the situations in paragraph
above occur.
[115] The tank
chamber will not be re-energised if any of the situations in paragraph
above remain
What are the key
additional design measures that assist to minimise risk during operation?
[116] Signage
will be displayed on the tank chamber in a location that is visible to
operators, tanker drivers and persons on the
internal roadway. The signage will
include warning labels that identify:
(a) danger – no smoking, no naked flames;
(b) the class of the danger, i.e., class 3 – flammable liquids diamond;
(c) that ignition sources (including electrical devices, tools, mobile phones or
other similar devices) are not permitted in any
hazardous zone.
[117] Also,
signage will be displayed at the site entry identifying:
(a) warning – restricted area, authorised personnel only;
(b) the relevant emergency contact names, titles and phone numbers;
(c) the name, address and phone number of the occupier; and
(d) the location, by diagram, of any fixed fire services that have been
installed, the drainage system and any emergency stop switches.
[118] There will
be visible and audible alarms that indicate the status of the tank chamber as
healthy or unhealthy. The “
” status alarm will be
triggered on the occurrence of, amongst other things, any one or more of the
(a) there is a power or control failure;
(b) any emergency stop switch has been activated;
(c) a fan has a run signal, but no running is detected;
(d) a liquid level is detected within the sump; and
(e) there is an ethanol atmosphere monitor reading of more than a specified
What other risk minimisation measures are
proposed prior to commencement of the use?
[119] Following
the detailed design of the measures identified above, a final hazard analysis is
to be prepared in accordance with
of the Industrial hazard and risk
assessment planning scheme policy.
final hazard analysis is to be submitted to, and approved by, the Council prior
to issue of a development permit for building
What other general
observations are pertinent with respect to the proposed development?
[121] The common
material for the development application reveals that the proposed development
has been the subject of extensive
input from experts. The experts provide a
detailed explanation of the proposed development and an assessment of its
performance
against the many relevant assessment benchmarks in City Plan.
[122] As one
would expect for a development such as this, the common material reveals that
the Council carefully reviewed the development
application. It requested
clarification and further details about certain matters. Lion-Beer, Spirits and
Wine Pty Ltd responded
to the important issues that were raised by the Council
during its assessment, including by refining details of the proposed
development.
[123] Similarly,
Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd responded to legitimate matters of concern
raised by the expert witnesses retained
for this hearing, even those raised late
in the trial. One relevant example of this is the way Lion-Beer, Spirits and
Wine Pty Ltd
responded to the criticisms about the effectiveness of its proposed
measures to minimise risk of a stoichiometric tank chamber explosion.
one of the key remaining contentions raised by the Appellant. I will return to
that issue in due course.
[124] The risk
mitigation measures proposed by Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd are
extensive and multi-layered.
effectiveness of the proposed risk mitigation measures can be ensured by the
imposition of reasonable and relevant conditions,
like those imposed in the
Council’s decision notice. (None of the Council’s conditions were
challenged by either Lion-Beer,
Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd or the Appellant).
such, when considering the risk posed by the proposed development, it is
reasonable to assume that any approval would be
subject to conditions that, at a
minimum, require:
(a) the design and construction of the approved use to be in accordance with the
approved Dangerous Goods Report and the approved
Hazardous Area Classification
with such necessary amendments to reflect the minor change to the development
application;
(b) the design and construction of the approved use to be in accordance with the
details outlined in paragraphs
(c) certification to be provided by a suitably qualified RPEQ engineer or
appropriately qualified dangerous goods consultant prior
to the commencement of
the use to demonstrate that the approved use has been designed and constructed
in accordance with the requirements
to which I have referred in paragraphs
the above details of the proposed development in mind, I now turn to assess
whether the proposed development poses an unacceptable
What is the risk issue that
requires consideration?
[128] As I have
already identified, the real issue in this case is whether the location and
design of the ethanol storage facility
poses an unacceptable risk to public
safety and property and unduly affects reasonable health expectations. This is
a question of
fact to be determined:
(a) on the evidence in the case; and
(b) having regard to the Appellant’s contentions about the evidence.
What is the relevant evidence about
[129] To assist
me with an assessment of the issue of risk, I was provided with evidence
(a) Dr Frank Mendham and Mr Peter Mauger, who were retained by
Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd;
(b) Dr Raghu Raman, who was retained by the Council; and
(c) Mr Richard Robinson and Dr Madhat Abdel-jawad, who were retained
by the Appellant.
qualifications and experience of each of the experts differ. So too did their
approach to the issue of risk.
[131] Dr Mendham
has been involved in dangerous goods, hazardous area design, fire engineering
and hazardous land use planning for
several decades. He has extensive practice
in the design and commissioning of dangerous goods, explosives facilities,
energy installations, hazardous chemicals safety management, hazardous
land use planning and hazardous area classification. He has
significant
experience in relation to industrial fire and risk, industrial fire protection,
and fire protection and detection design.
Dr Mendham also has proven
capabilities in safety integrity, reliability engineering, safety in design,
environmental risk, human
factors analysis and related safety science. His
qualifications include, amongst other things, a Master of Engineering –
and Risk Engineering, a Master of Science in Safety, Risk and
Responsibility and a Ph.D. in Industrial Fire and Risk Engineering.
Dr Mendham is recognised by the Queensland Government as a dangerous goods
consultant and is a Registered Professional Engineer
of Queensland in the
profession of fire engineering focussing in the industrial sector.
[132] Mr Mauger
prepared the approved Dangerous Goods Report and the approved Hazardous Area
Classification. He holds a Bachelor
of Science (Physics and Mathematics, with a
minor in Chemistry) and a Bachelor of Engineering (Honours), specialising in
Engineering. He is a Registered Professional Engineer Queensland and a
Chartered Professional Engineer with Engineers Australia.
Between 2014 and
2020, he was a Chemical College Board Member of Engineers Australia.
Mr Mauger also has a Diploma in Brewing from
the Institute of Brewing and
Distilling in London, a Certificate in HAZOP (Hazard and Operability Study) and
a qualification in Hazardous
Area Classification from Competency Training which
has been assessed by the Australasian Institute of Dangerous Goods Consultants
(of which he is a consultant member). In addition to his academic
qualifications, and before commencing practice as a consulting
Mr Mauger was employed as a brewer and engineer by Fosters Group and worked
at the Carlton United Brewery at Yatala (which
incorporated the blending and
packing of spirits from about 2007).
[133] Dr Raman
is an expert with 40 years’ experience in process engineering, safety
engineering, and risk management, and 30
years’ experience in safety
engineering, hazard analysis and risk management in the chemical, oil and gas,
dangerous goods
transportation and mining and mineral processing industries.
Dr Raman holds many qualifications. They include, but are not limited
a Bachelor of Technology (Chemical Engineering), a Master of Science (Chemical
Engineering), a Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering,
and a Master of Engineering
Science (Operations Research). Dr Raman is also a Certified Functional
Safety Expert, CFSE Governance
Board and an approved hazard specialist.
[134] Dr Abdel-jawad
is a gas dynamics expert who specialises in shock waves and explosions. He has
over 15 years’ experience
as an engineering consultant and
researcher. For several years he has worked on developing a fundamental
understanding of accidental
release, fires and explosions, in particular in
relation to high temperature gas dynamics, flame propagation, chemical kinetics
supersonic combustion (detonation). He has a Bachelor of Engineering
(Mechanical Engineering) and a Ph.D. in Aerospace Engineering.
[135] Mr Robinson
is a due diligence engineer. His experience is in undertaking safety due
diligence engineering reviews for a wide
range of industries, including with
respect to major hazard and dangerous goods assessments and safety cases. He
holds degrees in
Philosophy (History and Philosophy of Science) and Mechanical
Engineering.
evidence includes a joint expert report by Dr Mendham, Dr Raman and
Mr Robinson regarding hazard and risk, a joint expert
Dr Mendham, Dr Raman and Dr Abdel-jawad dealing with modelling of
the risk, and multiple individual reports by those experts.
The expert reports
are supported by other reports and information, including analysis in reports
provided during the development
application, reports about explosion models
generally and about the explosion modelling undertaken by the various experts,
During the hearing, the views of the experts were tested through
cross-examination.
[137] I find the
evidence of Dr Raman to be of greatest assistance to me. His evidence
comprehensively addresses all aspects of the
issues I am called upon to decide.
He provided cogent explanations for his opinions. I find all aspects of his
evidence to be compelling.
I also find the evidence of Dr Mendham and
Mr Mauger to be compelling.
[138] Dr Abdel-jawad
provided cogent explanations for some of his opinions. Other aspects of his
evidence were untested, such as
the results of his modelling using the exploCD
model. This is because he did not provide the type of detail about the model
would permit its interrogation. Leaving that to one side, for reasons I
explain below, I find Dr Abdel-jawad’s evidence to
be of limited
assistance.
[139] Mr Robinson’s
evidence about the acceptability of the risk posed by the proposed development
is founded on his approach
to assessment of risk. Mr Robinson is an
advocate for a precaution-based approach that effectively involves the
elimination of all
risk. As he said in his individual report, he tries
very hard not to discount a potential catastrophic hazard just because
it is considered to be rare
[140] Mr Robinson
sought to justify his approach on the basis that it is supported by the common
law, which he claims has been elevated
into statute law by the
Work Health
and Safety Act 2011
[141] I find the
evidence of Mr Robinson that is contained in Hazard and Risk Joint Expert
Report No. 1 and his subsequent individual
report to be of no assistance.
[142] Mr Robinson’s
approach to risk is not the approach called for by City Plan.
[143] City Plan
calls for an assessment of risk on a hazard-based approach, requiring the
reduction of risk to a level that is “
as low as is reasonably
practicable
”. A similar approach is adopted in the supporting
documents called up by City Plan, including the Industrial hazard and risk
assessment planning scheme policy,
Hazardous Industry Planning Advisory Paper
No. 4: Risk Criteria for Land Use Safety Planning
Industry Planning Advisory Paper No. 6: Hazard Analysis
. As such, to
the extent that Mr Robinson relied upon the test applicable under the
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
, he misdirected himself.
[144] It is
clear from his cross-examination that this misdirection was deliberate. He
confirmed knowledge of the approach called
for under City Plan but said
I happen to disagree rather fundamentally with that
”: Transcript of Proceedings,
The Corporation of the Synod
of the Diocese of Brisbane v Brisbane City Council
(Planning and Environment
Court of Queensland, 1234/24, Kefford DCJ, 29 April 2025) 67.
[145] Mr Robinson’s
evidence does not persuade me that the hazard-based approach is misconceived.
As Mr Robinson acknowledged,
the approach adopted in City Plan is
consistent with the dominant approach in Australia in recent times.
[146] Another
difficulty with Mr Robinson’s approach is its foundation on
misconceptions about the Court’s approach in
assessing development
applications. In Hazard and Risk Joint Expert Report No. 1, Mr Robinson
describes the Court’s approach
as follows:
experience, the way the courts assess the situation is to consult post-event
expert witnesses as to what could have been
done to have prevented the disaster.
Being an expert with the benefit of hindsight is a comparatively straight
forward task. The
only time the notion of risk is used in court is when the
court is testing to see if the precautions suggested by such experts (with
advantage of hindsight) were reasonable in view of what was known at the time of
the decision.”: Exhibit 6 p 17.
statement by Mr Robinson reflects an ignorance of this Court’s
extensive experience in assessing future risk. This
Court is regularly called
upon to consider the likelihood that development might pose a risk to people,
property, the enviornment
and amenity. The types of risk considered by this
Court are many and varied. Examples include the prospect of danger to life and
property in the event of landslip and structural engineering failure; safety
risk posed by explosions at a quarry; risk to people’s
safety by reason of
a proposed traffic design; environmental risk posed by the failure of a liner in
landfill; the risk to turtle
breeding posed by lighting associated with
development; and the risk to amenity of residents posed by the bulk of adjoining
development
or noise, light or dust emissions associated with development.
[148] Additionally,
Mr Robinson’s approach is inconsistent with those well-established
principles to which I have referred in
[149] Mr Robinson’s
oral testimony was also uncompelling.
Mr Robinson explained in his oral evidence, he does not design systems.
His experience is as a due diligence engineer.
Alone, Mr Robinson’s
qualifications do not suggest that he was not qualified to assist. However, his
oral evidence itself
left me far from satisfied that he was able to provide
relevant assistance on the key issues that I am to determine.
[151] During
cross-examination, Mr Robinson was defensive, rolling his eyes and sneering
at suggestions that his approach was not
appropriate in this case.
[152] Mr Robinson’s
criticisms of Dr Mendham and Dr Raman revealed a lack of appropriate
experience to effectively address the
issue of risk other than by advocating for
its elimination.
final submissions, the Appellant acknowledged there were threshold difficulties
with Mr Robinson’s evidence and disavowed
reliance on it other than
with respect to a few insignificant matters.
[154] For the
reasons given above, I do not find Mr Robinson’s evidence persuasive.
What are the Appellant’s
key contentions about risk?
[155] Ultimately,
the Appellant’s case for refusal is narrow in focus.
oral submissions, Mr Batty KC submitted that “
the Church will
either be successful on the chamber explosion or it won’t be successful at
”. This submission is consistent with the Appellant’s final
written submissions prepared by Mr Batty KC and Ms Bowness.
the Appellant’s summary of why the appeal should be allowed, the Appellant
frames the issue for consideration in these
“4. Ultimately, the matters to be considered in this
appeal are matters of risk, hazard and consequence. PO3 of the Industry
self evidently a central provision in this respect, including the obligation
inherent in that provision to minimise explosion
risk associated with the
proposed development. The more serious the potential consequences of a hazard,
the lower the likelihood
of the event occurring should be in order to ensure the
level of risk is acceptable. That is why the relevant fatality risk criteria
for an Educational establishment is 0.5 in one million, while the injury risk
and property damage criteria are 50 chances in one
million per annum, under the
Planning Scheme’s numerical hazard and risk criteria.
fact that the stoichiometric tank chamber explosion is rare (or very rare) in
likelihood does not mean it is necessarily acceptable
in terms of risk, when the
potential consequences of the explosion are catastrophic. Ultimately, this is a
question of fact to be
determined by the Court. The submission of the Appellant
is that in the circumstances of this case, especially given the troubled
in which Lion has conducted its case, the exercise of discretion called for
favours refusal of the proposed development.
comparing Dr Raman’s adopted Blast Effects table from HIPAP 4 at page 34
of Exhibit 6 to Dr Abdel-Jawad’s table of
maximum overpressure results at
page 25 of Exhibit 29, it is submitted that the consequences of the
stoichiometric tank chamber explosion
are potentially fatal. The fatality risk
criteria ought to be applied.
City Plan hazard and risk criteria require that a fatality risk of 0.5 chances
in 1 million per year is not exceeded. Primarily
as a result of its fluid
design throughout the appeal, the evidence does not establish that the Proposed
Development meets that likelihood
criterion. Dr Raman accepted this (T4-53,
L30-45 to T4-55, L5).
level of risk arising from the stoichiometric tank chamber explosion, even by
City Plan’s quantitative criteria, is in the
submission of the Appellant,
unacceptable.
is also a separate requirement in PO3 for risk to be minimised. In the
submission of the Appellant, there has not been persuasive
consideration given
to feasible alternative locations for the proposed development on the Brewery
Site. That failure arises from
the fact that the current proposal before the
Court (given the most recent minor change) is different from the proposal
by Lion (and its representatives and experts) on this point and
because, more generally, the siting of the tank chamber does not
minimise the
risk of an explosion hazard in accordance with PO3 due to its location on the
boundary of the land. The proposal does
not comply with the provisions of the
Planning Scheme set out in Annexure 1 to these submissions, which have been
narrowed from MFI
to its non-compliance with applicable assessment benchmarks, the proposed
development is inconsistent with the reasonable health
expectations of the
community. In particular, the residents who live, work and interact within about
8 metres of the tank chamber.
However, the Appellant accepts that this
consideration is now “bundled” with consideration of the question of
risk (which
ultimately determines the appeal overall).
has not discharged its onus. The Development Application should be
[157] In oral
submissions, the Appellant fairly conceded that partial non-compliance with the
quantitative criteria in performance
outcome PO3 of the Industry code is not, of
itself, determinative. It is a matter that is relevant to the Court’s
of the discretion. The Appellant accepts that whether such a
non-compliance should sound in refusal is a question of fact and will
the weight given to the evidence and the Court’s conclusion about the
acceptability of the risk. The Appellant’s
concession in this regard
accords with the approach identified in paragraphs
Appellant’s key contentions call for determination of three factual
there an unacceptable risk to public safety and property from a stoichiometric
tank chamber explosion?
the location of the proposed development minimise the risk to public safety and
the proposed development unduly affect reasonable health
expectations?
[159] I now turn
to consider those questions.
an unacceptable risk to public safety and property from a stoichiometric tank
chamber explosion?
Appellant contends that there is an unacceptable risk to public safety and
property from a stoichiometric tank chamber explosion.
This is refuted by
Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd and the Council.
is common ground that risk is a factor of the likelihood of an event occurring
and its consequences. In this case, the Appellant
maintains that both integers
are in issue insofar as they relate to a stoichiometric tank chamber explosion.
As such, there are
two intermediate questions of fact that inform determination
of the issue of risk:
is the consequence of a stoichiometric tank chamber explosion?
is the likelihood of a stoichiometric tank chamber explosion?
[162] Determination
of these two intermediate questions of fact involve consideration of the
evidence of Dr Mendham, Dr Raman and
Dr Abdel-jawad. Given my
findings about Mr Robinson’s evidence above, it is not necessary to
deal extensively with his evidence
on these issues.
considering the weight to be given to the evidence, the Appellant has urged me
to have regard to the “
troubled manner
” in which Lion-Beer,
Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd has conducted its case. As such, before turning to
each of the intermediate
questions of fact, it is helpful to appreciate how the
evidence evolved and the circumstances that informed the late change to the
development application.
addition, before considering the intermediate questions, it assists to
understand the relevant properties of ethanol.
[165] I will
briefly address these two matters
How did the evidence of the
experts regarding hazard and risk evolve?
[166] Initially,
the parties only retained Dr Mendham, Dr Raman and Mr Robinson.
Those experts met and produced Hazard and Risk Joint
Expert Report No. 1.
part of that joint meeting process, Dr Mendham provided his Preliminary
Hazard Analysis dated 17 July 2023 (“
the Preliminary Hazard
”). It forms part of the common material for the development
application. In the Preliminary Hazard Analysis, Dr Mendham analyses
risk associated with seven consequence scenarios. One of the scenarios was a
vapour cloud explosion in the tank chamber. On
Dr Mendham’s
analysis, the risk of fatality associated with such an explosion was less than
half a chance in 100 million or
less than one in 200 million. Neither
Dr Raman nor Mr Robinson criticised any aspect of that analysis.
experts identified and considered seven additional hazardous incident scenarios
that may have an impact on surrounding land
uses. By agreement, they were
modelled as part of the joint meeting process. The fourth agreed scenario
involved a spill of ethanol
in the tank chamber, ethanol pooling on the floor of
the tank chamber, vaporisation of the ethanol and a vapour cloud explosion
the tank chamber with the vents closed.
Hazard and Risk Joint Expert Report No. 1, Dr Mendham and
Dr Raman provided an analysis in support of their opinions that
explosion in the tank chamber causing failure of the tank chamber is not a
credible scenario.
Dr Mendham observed, such a scenario would require a failure of all safety
features due to electrical power failure
an ethanol leak from the
stainless-steel tanks
a source of ignition
simultaneous occurrence of all these events. Leaving aside the improbability of
the simultaneous failure of all safety features
while there is a leak in the
tank, Dr Mendham explains that there is no realistic possibility of an
ignition source.
[171] The only
possible remaining source of ignition to initiate an explosion in the scenario
would be static electricity. Ignition
from such a source is not credible. That
is because there will be a permanently connected equipotential bonding system.
connects all metallic surfaces, including the tanks, pipes, and
flanges, via bonding cables. This ensures that there is no potential
spark discharge from static.
[172] Nevertheless,
Dr Mendham modelled a worst-case scenario that assumed, without dissent
from Mr Robinson, that between five and
10 cubic metres of ethanal
vapour would form near the floor of the tank chamber. Based on his modelling,
Dr Mendham opined that
were there an explosion under those conditions, a
pressure peak of between 4.5 kPa and 9 kPa could occur for the
respective events.
Having regard to the calculations, Dr Mendham opined
that the tank chamber was likely to withstand an overpressure consistent with
reasonably foreseeable internal explosions.
relation to the modelled worst-case scenario, Dr Raman carried out his own
calculations. He opined that if no action was
taken for over two hours, an
equilibrium condition would be reached in the tank chamber. According to
if ignition occurred
at that time, it is possible that an
explosion overpressure would exceed 14 kPa and damage the tanks and tank
chamber. In his opinion,
there would be no effects on neighbouring
properties.
[174] In Hazard
and Risk Joint Expert Report No. 1, Mr Robinson did not dispute the
evidence of either Dr Mendham or Dr Raman about
the lack of
credibility to the tank chamber explosion scenario. Nor did he dispute the
opinions of Dr Mendham or Dr Raman about
the containment of the
consequences within the tank chamber should an explosion occur.
Mr Robinson opined that a stoichiometric
tank chamber explosion was a rare
and very unlikely scenario that would require major mechanical engineering fault
coupled with a
series of management and maintenance failures. He accepted that,
in terms of quantification of the risk, the numerical standard
set in City Plan
was most likely satisfied.
[175] After
the conclusion of the first joint expert meeting, in January 2025,
Dr Mendham provided his first individual report: Exhibit
[176] Given the
opinions expressed by Mr Robinson in Hazard and Risk Joint Expert Report
No. 1, the subsequent individual statement
of Dr Mendham addressed the risk
that the Appellant’s land might be exposed to overpressure in the order of
3.5 kPa because
of an unconfined vapour cloud explosion at the vent outlet.
That issue has now been resolved.
[177] In his
first individual report, Dr Mendham also further addressed the risk
associated with a vapour cloud explosion in the tank
chamber. He noted that it
was not a scenario that Mr Robinson required the modelling of in Hazard and
Risk Joint Expert Report No.
1. Dr Mendham reaffirmed his view that any
such explosion would be rare. It would require a major design, construction or
maintenance
error, coupled with a series of management and maintenance failures.
According to Dr Mendham, this is not a credible scenario. He
says that it
is not plausible that a situation will arise where the levels of ethanol in the
tank chamber will be sufficient to cause
spontaneous combustion.
Dr Mendham explains that this is because of the design of the tank chamber
combined with the additional
risk management measures. Nevertheless, to provide
comfort to the court, Dr Mendham prepared a Level 2 - partial
quantification
analysis in accordance with the Industrial hazard and risk
assessment planning scheme policy. It is a report titled “
Preliminary
Hazard Analysis (PHA) – Level 2
” and is dated 24 January 2025
the Level 2 Preliminary Hazard Analysis
Level 2 Preliminary Hazard Analysis demonstrates that, prior to the additional
risk management measures adopted in the minor
change application, the overall
effect of all events would not cause the criteria in Table 9.3.12.3.I to be
exceeded. It also demonstrated
as low as reasonably
practicable
” principles had been adopted. Ultimately, it shows that
the potential for an internal vapour cloud explosion in the chamber
is extremely
[179] In the
Level 2 Preliminary Hazard Analysis, Dr Mendham included a fault tree
analysis that described potential node failures
that may lead to an explosion in
the chamber. Dr Mendham used failure frequencies from published data in
his likelihood or frequency
analysis. His analysis culminated in an estimated
probability of an initiation of a fire and explosion event within the chamber
per year (i.e., 3.83 chance in a million per year) before
implementation of proposed controls.
[180] The Level
2 Preliminary Hazard Analysis then provided an event tree analysis, which
estimated the potential consequences and
likelihood of the outcome from the
initiation of a fire and explosion event within the tank chamber. The analysis
demonstrated that
a fire and explosion event with potential offsite impact has
an occurrence probability of 4.85 x 10
per annum (i.e.,
approximately 0.5 in 100 million per year or 0.005 in one million per year).
The estimate assumes a scenario where
all engineering controls have failed to
mitigate the risk and that a potential for offsite impact exists. From this
analysis, it
is reasonable to infer that the individual risk of fatality per
year is no more than 0.5 in 100 million per year. This is because
the offsite
impact may not result in fatality.
[181] Dr Mendham’s
assessment of the risk against the “
as low as reasonably
practicable
” criteria had the level of risk in the “
acceptable region
” (and below the “
[182] Despite
the views expressed in the joint expert report about the rarity of an explosion
inside the tank chamber, Mr Robinson
went on to say in his individual
report that the risk of a stoichiometric tank chamber explosion is of greatest
concern to him.
He opines that such an explosion represents a potentially
catastrophic event that could kill multiple people. In Mr Robinson’s
view, the potentially catastrophic nature of a stoichiometric tank chamber
explosion demonstrates that the risk should be reduced
to the smallest possible
degree by avoiding a tank chamber at all and by locating the tanks away from the
boundary or placing them
underground.
[183] Mr Robinson’s
approach focuses on the consequence of a stoichiometric tank chamber explosion.
He offers no independent
analysis of its likelihood.
[184] When the
hearing commenced, Dr Mendham gave evidence about how the introduction of
an air quality condenser reduces the predicted
overpressure that would occur if
there was an unconfined vapour cloud explosion at the vent outlet. His evidence
demonstrated that
the Appellant’s land would no longer be affected by
unacceptable overpressure.
[185] During
cross-examination, Dr Mendham was tested on aspects of his calculations.
Part of the calculation was based on information
provided to him by
Mr Mauger that Dr Mendham did not have with him at the time of
cross-examination. An application was made for
an adjournment to provide
relevant evidence from Mr Mauger. The application was uncontested.
[186] During the
adjournment, the Appellant retained Dr Abdel-jawad. He met with
Dr Mendham and Dr Raman to consider the modelling
with respect to an
unconfined vapour cloud explosion of vapours discharged from the tank vent.
They also addressed the risk associated
with the stoichiometric tank chamber
explosion described by Mr Robinson in his separate report.
Dr Mendham, Dr Raman and Dr Abdel-jawad
produced Hazard and Risk
Joint Expert Report No. 2.
[187] In that
report, Dr Mendham, Dr Raman and Dr Abdel-jawad agree that there
is no unacceptable risk associated with an unconfined
vapour cloud explosion of
vapours discharged from the tank vent. They each provide a cogent explanation
for their opinions. The
Appellant no longer pursues this issue.
respect to the issue of an explosion in the tank chamber, Dr Abdel-jawad
opined that the then proposed internal fixed foam
pourers would not effectively
prevent the formation of an explosive ethanol vapour cloud.
[189] Based on
Dr Mendham’s proposal to adopt the water mist system as an
alternative, it is reasonable to infer that he accepted
the legitimacy of
Dr Abdel-jawad’s concerns. The experts consider that alternative in
Hazard and Risk Joint Expert Report
[190] After
receiving Hazard and Risk Joint Expert Report No. 2, Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine
Pty Ltd indicated an intention to adopt
the further risk minimisation measures
identified by the experts. It eventually made an application for a minor change
to its development
application in that respect. Although the application was
made very late in the trial process, it demonstrates that Lion-Beer, Spirits
Wine Pty Ltd is committed to adopting all reasonable measures to minimise the
risk associated with its proposed development.
[191] In the
circumstances, the evolution of the evidence adduced on behalf of Lion-Beer,
Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd does not cause
me to doubt its reliability, nor do the
late changes to the development
application.
What are the relevant
properties of ethanol?
[192] There is
no real dispute between the parties about the relevant properties of
[193] Ethanol is
a flammable liquid. It is non-corrosive.
flashpoint of a flammable liquid is the lowest temperature at which liquid can
ignite when exposed to an open flame under
specified conditions. Ethanol has a
flashpoint of less than 23 degrees Celsius and a boiling point of greater
than 35 degrees Celsius.
flammable or explosive range of a substance is the concentration range of that
substance in air that can burn or explode
when ignited. It is defined by the
lower explosive limit and the upper explosive limit.
[196] Below the
lower explosive limit of 3.3 per cent ethanol to air, the mixture is too
lean to burn. Above the upper explosive
limit of 19 per cent, the mixture
is too rich to burn. Between the lower explosive limit and upper explosive
limit, the mixture
is flammable.
stoichiometric ratio is the exact ratio between air and flammable gas or vapour
at which complete combustion of the flammable
vapour takes place. The
stoichiometric concentration of ethanol vapour to air is 6.54 per
[198] Given the
properties of ethanol, its storage is hazardous if it is not managed correctly.
[199] While
burning of an ethanol and air mixture within the flammable range is certain to
if the mixture is ignited
, an explosion resulting in blast effect
can only occur under certain conditions, such as confinement of the vapour-air
The approximate temperature range in which an ethanol equilibrium
vapour and air mixture is in the explosive range is between 10
degrees Celsius
and 33 degrees Celsius.
[200] Another
important property of ethanol is that it is 100 per cent miscible with
water, i.e., it dissolves in water. In that
respect, ethanol is very different
to hydrocarbon chemicals such as petrol. Hydrocarbon gas is immiscible with
water mist, whereas
water mist is capable of dissolving ethanol vapor thereby
mitigating the risk of ignition and explosion.
What is the consequence of a
stoichiometric tank chamber explosion?
[201] In Hazard
and Risk Joint Expert Report No. 2, Dr Mendham, Dr Raman and
Dr Abdel-jawad used various models to predict the overpressure
be created by an explosion in four scenarios. The scenarios were an explosion
resulting from ignition of:
(a) an ethanol cloud that occupies the full tank chamber;
(b) an ethanol cloud that occupies 25 per cent of the tank chamber;
(c) an ethanol cloud that occupies 10 per cent of the tank chamber; and
(d) an ethanol cloud with a volume of 10 cubic metres.
[202] The models
predicted the overpressure that would be generated by such explosions.
considering the potential impact of the explosion, the experts indicated that
the overpressure should be considered in conjunction
with the pressure design
standard for the tank chamber. As I have already mentioned, the tank chamber is
to be constructed to withstand
pressure resistance of at least 30 kPa.
experts agree that the models show that overpressure of greater than 30 kpa
will be caused by an explosion associated with
the ignition of an ethanol cloud
that occupies the full tank chamber, or even 25 and 10 per cent of it.
Such an explosion will result
in structural failure of the tank chamber.
[205] Dr Abdel-jawad
opines that the modelled results of overpressure demonstrate that there will be
property damage on the Appellant’s
land in each explosion scenario.
Dr Abdel-jawad’s opinion is founded on an inference that he draws by
comparing the results
from various models. Dr Raman and Dr Mendham
disagree with this approach and the inference drawn by Dr Abdel-jawad.
[206] Dr Raman
disputes the efficacy of use of the model for any purpose other than to predict
whether the tank chamber will collapse
in the four modelled scenarios. He
explains that none of the four models used are appropriate for predicting the
damage that will
be caused by an explosion. This is because when the tank
chamber walls collapse, there is more room for venting. If the explosion
vented, the pressure will dissipate because there is more venting room
available. The models also do not account for the extent
to which the collapse
of the tank chamber will absorb the overpressure from the explosion. Rather,
the models assume that the pressure
will continue to build due to an inability
to vent. Dr Mendham gave evidence to similar effect.
[207] Dr Raman
does not dispute that in the event of an explosion that causes the tank chamber
to collapse, there
be blast effects beyond the extent of the tank
chamber. However, he says that the extent of the blast effects will depend on
variables. They include the quantity of vapour, the amount of air
available for combustion, the size of the enclosure, the area
available for
ventilation, the extent to which the pressure continues to build after the
structural integrity of the tank chamber
begins to fail, and the extent to which
the collapse of the tank chamber absorbs the overpressure from the explosion.
He says that
these matters have not been modelled.
accept the evidence of Dr Raman and Dr Mendham on this issue. They
each provide a cogent explanation about why the modelled
results cannot reliably
predict the outcomes that follow the collapse of the tank chamber. Having
regard to the evidence of Dr Raman
and Dr Mendham, I am not persuaded
[209] As I have
said, the consequences of explosions resulting from ignition of an ethanol cloud
that occupies 10 per cent, 25 per
cent or the full tank chamber were
not modelled. For present purposes, I am prepared to assume that explosions of
that magnitude
have the potential to result in fatalities. However, that is not
the end of the matter. This is because the likelihood of such
explosions is
[210] Before
turning to the issue of likelihood, it is appropriate to consider explosions of
lesser magnitude.
[211] Dr Mendham
accepts that there is a remote likelihood of an ethanol cloud with a volume of
10 cubic metres developing within
the tank chamber before the safety design
features activate and dissolve the ethanol cloud.
[212] Dr Raman
opines that the quantity of vapour that may be involved in an explosion depends
on when ignition occurs. Leaving aside
the possibility of an ignition source,
Dr Raman says it would take 2.2 minutes for a stoichiometric cloud of
10 cubic metres to form.
He estimates that there would be four minutes
between the automatic detection of a leak and the automatic activation of the
mist system. Dr Raman’s estimate includes an allowance of time
for the water mist system to be effective in dissolving the
ethanol vapour to
prevent ignition. Dr Raman calculates that a stoichiometric cloud of
18 cubic metres, or four per cent of the
tank chamber free volume,
could form in that four-minute period.
[213] Dr Mendham
and Dr Raman opine that,
assuming ignition
, an explosion of an
ethanol cloud with a volume of 10 cubic metres will produce a maximum
overpressure of 11 kPa.
[214] Although
Dr Mendham does not accept that a cloud of 18 cubic metres would
develop before mitigation measures take effect, he
explains that:
(a) a 10 cubic metre ethanol cloud would produce an explosion with
approximately 10 kPa overpressure;
(b) a 20 cubic metre cloud would produce an explosion with approximately
20 kPa overpressure; and
(c) a 30 cubic metre ethanol cloud would produce an explosion with
approximately 30 kPa overpressure.
[215] Dr Mendham’s
evidence is based on FLACS modelling. The FLACS model is a computational fluid
dynamics explosion study
undertaken by Gexcon. A copy of the model was provided
during the joint meeting process. The evidence includes a report that explains
the model, its inputs and assumptions and the results produced by it: Exhibit
[216] Dr Raman
accepts the results of the FLACS model.
[217] Based
on the results from the FLACS model, overpressures of the magnitude predicted by
Dr Mendham and Dr Raman are well below
the design specifications for
the tank chamber. For that reason, Dr Mendham and Dr Raman opine that
the impact of explosions of
ethanol clouds of those volumes will be contained
within the chamber and will not impair the integrity of the tank chamber. I
the evidence of Dr Mendham and Dr Raman to be compelling.
[218] Dr Abdel-jawad
disagrees. Based on modelling that Dr Abdel-jawad undertook using
exploCFD, he opines that a 10 cubic metre
ethanol cloud would produce an
explosion with approximately 37 kPa overpressure. He also says that even
if the overpressure is less
than the design pressure for the tank chamber, it is
not clear that the tank chamber will maintain its structural integrity because
of the duration of the overpressure impulses.
[219] Dr Abdel-jawad
did not provide a copy of the exploCFD model. After the evidence of
Dr Mendham and Dr Raman had concluded, Dr
Abdel-jawad provided an
affidavit in which he explains that he did not provide the original model files
during the joint meeting
process because the other experts did not request them.
This explains why neither Dr Mendham nor Dr Raman address the results
the exploCFD model in Hazard and Risk Joint Expert Report No. 2.
[220] In his
affidavit, Dr Abdel-jawad indicates that he can produce the original model
files. His offer to do so was made immediately
prior to him being called to
give evidence, after Dr Mendham and Dr Raman had already given
evidence. This explains Dr Mendham and
Dr Raman’s inability to
assist the Court with the differences between the results predicted by the FLACS
model and the exploCFD
model during their oral evidence.
relevant exploCFD model files are not in evidence before me. Nor do I have a
report explaining how the model works and
the inputs to it, such as that
provided by Gexcon in relation to the FLACS model.
[222] In the
circumstances, it is difficult to accept that I should give any, let alone
material, weight to Dr Abdel-jawad’s
evidence about the results of
his modelling:
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
, 729-30 [59]-[60], 733 [68], 743-4 [85].
[223] It is
unnecessary for me to dwell on these difficulties. Even if I were to accept all
Dr Abdel-jawad’s evidence about
the consequences, I am persuaded that
the risk is such as to warrant refusal given my findings below about the
likelihood of the
scenarios that were modelled. I now turn to deal with that
What is the likelihood of a
stoichiometric tank chamber explosion?
[224] It is
common ground that:
(a) both the
consequences
of a potential hazard
are relevant to the assessment of risk; and
(b) City Plan does not call for avoidance of all risk: rather, it seeks the
minimisation of risk and the avoidance of avoidable risk.
[225] As I have
mentioned already, the Industrial hazard and risk assessment planning scheme
policy defines risk as “
of harm occurring from a
” (emphasis added).
[226] That begs
the question: what is the evidence adduced by the Appellant that raises an issue
tank chamber explosion?
[227] As I have
already identified, Mr Robinson’s evidence focuses on the
consequence
of a stoichiometric tank chamber explosion. He gave limited
evidence about the
of such an event.
respect to likelihood, Mr Robinson opines that the scenario is rare but
possible. His opinion is not founded on an analysis
of likelihood. Rather, in
terms of the possibility of an explosion, Mr Robinson’s opinion is
founded on the fact that an ethanol
tank fire occurred in 2004 at Port Kembla in
New South Wales and an ethanol explosion has occurred in the United States of
[229] Mr Robinson
did not provide any information that allows an assessment of the comparability
of the systems in place at those
facilities with that proposed here. He also
did not provide any details as to the cause of the events to which he referred.
[230] The most
assistance provided by Mr Robinson was the reference details for the
article he consulted with respect to the ethanol
explosion in the United States
of America. It is reasonable to infer from the contents of that article that,
prior to the explosion,
the facility did not have systems such as those proposed
[231] In my
view, Mr Robinson’s opinion that a stoichiometric tank chamber
explosion on the subject land is possible is speculative
and uncompelling.
Mr Robinson offers no credible evidence to support his opinion.
Mr Robinson, Dr Abdel-jawad’s evidence focusses on the
consequence
of an explosion. In his modelled scenario,
Dr Abdel-jawad
the simultaneous occurrence of:
(a) an ethanol leak from the stainless-steel tanks;
(b) a source of ignition.
[233] Dr Abdel-jawad
did not analyse the
of the scenario that he modelled, i.e.,
the likelihood of a leak or a source of ignition, let alone the likelihood of
both occurring
simultaneously.
[234] Dr Abdel-jawad
took no issue with the calculations provided by Dr Raman in the Hazard and
Risk Joint Expert Report No. 2 or
those provided by Dr Mendham in his
Preliminary Hazard Analysis or his Level 2 Preliminary Hazard Analysis.
absence of meaningful consideration of the likelihood of the scenario was
highlighted during Dr Abdel-jawad’s cross-examination
Mr Hughes KC, when the following exchanges
“Can I ask you a number of other questions. Well,
you might – may or may not be able to assist. If you can’t, please
don’t hesitate to stay within your lane.
In terms of corrosion, which
you’ve considered, it’s clear that stainless steel has a resistance
to corrosion considerably
greater than carbon steel;
correct?‑‑‑Yes. Correct. But – but corrosion isn’t
the only way that the
release can happen, right?
No. No, I’m ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑So it could be
Just bear with me, would you?‑‑‑Sure.
Construction errors and welding failures. You’re not suggesting that
there wouldn’t be a very high level of supervision
of any welding and
construction of this proposal should it be approved by her
Honour?‑‑‑I have been in, um ‑
Sorry, you haven’t answered the question. You can say whatever you like
‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑Okay.
‑ ‑ ‑ but answer the question.
suggesting that her Honour should assume there won’t be a high level of
supervision of the construction and
welding activities should this development
be approved?‑‑‑I’m not suggesting that but errors
Thank you?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑
still happen
Thank you. In terms of the –
in terms of this assumption of a
– the modelling based on a 10 metre diameter hole
, that’s four
inches. Ten millimetres, I should say, is, in the old money ‑ ‑
than an inch, right?
Less than inch?‑‑‑Yeah.
what’s going to cause that, do you know?‑‑‑Uh,
anything could cause that. It could be a dropped object. It
could be a, um
– uh, anything. I mean, there’s a
Okay?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑
there’s a whole
bunch of – we – we – I didn’t look into the, sort of,
scenario that’s going to
cause the hole. We just look at the consequences
of the hole because they do happen for a variety of reasons
So it could be anything? You can’t ‑ ‑
I mean, it could be a variety of things,
It could be a variety of things?‑‑‑Yep.
It could be something being dropped?‑‑‑
Yeah, a cropped
object, a collision, an accident, uh -uh, uh, yeah.
A dropped object?‑‑‑
Bad maintenance – bad
maintenance.
Yeah. Unintentional bad maintenance.
A dropped object fracturing or penetrating the stainless steel tank; is
that what you’re saying or ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑It
depends on how heavy the object is, right? And how ‑ ‑ ‑
And a collision. What, you’re not talking about a vehicular
collision or – what are you talking about the ‑ ‑
‑?‑‑‑Yeah, it could be a vehicular collision, right?
Inside this – the tank? Inside the ‑ ‑
‑ ‑ ‑ tank chamber?‑‑‑I – to be
honest, I didn’t consider these – uh, these
lead-up scenarios
because there’s a – there is a different one for every accident,
Yes. And ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑
‑ you know, don’t want to ‑ ‑ ‑
in fact, you didn’t assess the probability
of this happening, did you? You assessed the consequences of there being a
‑ ‑?‑‑‑Correct. Correct.
(emphasis added)
potential causes of a leak proffered by Dr Abdel-jawad are not plausible.
That lack of plausibility is demonstrated by
the evidence given by
Mr Robinson during cross-examination by Mr Job KC, wherein the
follow exchanges occurred:
“Okay. And in terms of the hazard
scenarios in – that were mentioned in the joint report, but you’ve
set them out
in your separate report, for example, at paragraph 19, and you told
us there that they were in decreasing order of
consequence?‑‑‑Yes.
The first one being the vapour cloud explosion in the chamber. For ethanol
chamber to be released inside the chamber, there must be
event pipe failure
between the tank and the roof, correct?‑‑‑Or a leak from the
And the possibilities for the pipe failure include corrosion of the pipe,
correct?‑‑‑Yes.
A leak between the tank and pipe connection?‑‑‑Some
mechanical failure, yes.
Yes. An impact failure on the vent pipe; for example, from maintenance
work?‑‑‑Something like that, yes.
Or overpressure from a blockage?‑‑‑Yes.
found another one when I was checking something in the last couple of days
Right. And in terms of corrosion, the first one I mentioned ‑
‑ ‑?‑‑‑Yes.
‑ ‑ ‑ we’re dealing with stainless steel here,
aren’t we?‑‑‑Yes, I believe so.
And it’s by its nature not vulnerable to corrosion, is
it?‑‑‑Much less, yes.
Well, it’s not – it’s much, much less than, what, carbon
steel?‑‑‑Carbon steel, things –
stuff like that.
Right. So considerably less than carbon
steel?‑‑‑Mmm-hmm.
Right ‑ ‑ ‑
HER HONOUR: Was that a yes? You need to speak your
answers?‑‑‑I’m sorry.
Yes, it should be considerably
less than carbon steel.
MR JOB: And just apropos that, you were in evidence when
gave his evidence today?‑‑‑Yes.
indicated that his fault tree was based upon carbon steel rather
than stainless steel?‑‑‑Yes.
And so you agree with him that the likely risk of a failure of stainless
steel would be considerably less than what he applied?‑‑‑I
would expect so, yes.
Right. In terms of the stainless steel and corrosion, the nature of
ethanol is also that it’s non-corrosive,
correct?‑‑‑It’s
a solvent. It’s not corrosive as
an acid sense or anything like that ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ It’s a –
it’s OH, so it’s a – it’s an alcohol.
And in terms of corrosion still, there would be maintenance checks
you would expect to be conducted ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑I
would anticipate, yes.
And despite the stainless steel and the non-corrosive properties of
ethanol, if corrosion was in fact to occur, you would expect that
facility it would be detected and dealt with?‑‑‑The –
there are detectors in there, and if they’re
well maintained they should
detect it, yes.
Yes. Part of the workplace health and safety regime that you
champion?‑‑‑Yes.
All right. And the scale and nature of the brewery and its operation is
that you would expect it to have very good systems of maintenance
like?‑‑‑Ah, I can’t comment, but one would imagine so. I
don’t know.
In terms of the leak scenario, the vent connections, the whole system
would be leak tested after installation?‑‑‑One
would expect it
to be tested, yes.
Yes. And once tested, none of these assembled parts are interfered with,
correct?‑‑‑One would expect not, but things
Right. And if they – what are you saying “Things
happen”; someone breaks into the chamber or ‑ ‑
like, the case that the – the
[indistinct]. I was just looking up something on the weekend, and I just noticed
You’re very keen to tell us about what you looked up on the weekend,
but you haven’t told us about that previously in
writing?‑‑‑No.
In terms of the leaks, there again would be maintenance
regimes?‑‑‑One would hope so, yes.
Yes. And as to the maintenance, there wouldn’t be maintenance work,
for example, during the course of an ethanol transfer from
a tanker, would
there?‑‑‑I wouldn’t have thought so.
No. And if there’d been some impact on the pipes or the tanks or
whatever from a maintenance activity that was occurring at
other times,
you’d expect that investigation of that and corrective actions to be taken
before more ethanol is received, for
example?‑‑‑I – I
obviously can’t comment on the nature and the way in which Lion conducts
their business,
but a reputable organization would do that.
Yes. Again, consistent with the workplace due diligence regime that you
champion?‑‑‑Yes.
Yes. And the same is true of the blockage scenario; it would require
something to be clogged, which would be not a realistic scenario
periodic maintenance and the monitoring and the like?‑‑‑I
can’t answer that ‑ ‑ ‑
Right?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ Strange things
(emphasis added)
[237] As for the
likelihood of an ignition source, Dr Abdel-jawad says that a water spray,
mist or deluge system can enhance explosion
likelihood and increase the severity
of explosions. He opines that they can lead to ignition and increased
overpressure. According
to Dr Abdel-jawad, at the very least, several
industry leaders urge the testing of these systems on a case-by-case basis. He
that, given the proposed system has not been tested, it will be
ineffective and quite likely even damaging.
[238] I do not
accept Dr Abdel-jawad’s evidence in this respect. His criticism is
based upon literature to that effect but,
as he conceded in cross-examination,
the literature relates to hydrocarbon gases rather than ethanol. The latter is
100 per cent
miscible in water, whereas the former is not. As
Dr Mendham explains, that is a fundamental difference. Dr Abdel-jawad
accepted the difference and conceded that the water mist system
do not share Dr Abdel-jawad’s residual concern that the water mist
system is untested. I prefer the evidence of Dr
Mendham and Dr Raman
in this regard.
[240] During
cross-examination, Dr Mendham explained that there is a critical difference
between a water mist system and a water deluge
system like that considered in
some of the literature referred to by Dr Abdel-Jawad. He says a water deluge
system involves droplets
of water that spray from an outlet on the roof. In
contrast, a water mist system produces much smaller water particles, more in
order of half the thickness of hair. Dr Mendham likened water mist to the
steam from a kettle. Water mist is very dense. It
would fill the tank chamber
like a fog. Dr Mendham explains that the technology is not new, but it is
evolving, with smarter and
better methods for delivery being developed.
similar view was expressed by Dr Raman in Hazard and Risk Joint Expert
Report No. 2. In response to Dr Abdel-jawad’s
concerns about the
effectiveness of the water mist system, Dr Raman explained that deluge
systems discharge large amounts of water
with relatively large droplet sizes.
They are used in fire suppression. By contrast, a water mist system, especially
a high-pressure
system, produces fine water droplets or mists with a higher
surface area to volume ratio. He says that a water mist system is used
minimising ignition probability and fire suppression. Dr Raman identified
professional literature that provides qualified
support for the suggestion that
there are potential benefits to injecting water mist to mitigate explosion
hazards in a compartment.
The literature indicates that benefits include the
cooling of potential ignition sources and an increase in ignition energy
to ignite a fuel-air mixture. To be effective, the water droplet sizes
must be small. Further, when considering the potential effectiveness,
Dr Mendham, Dr Raman considered it material that, unlike hydrocarbon
gas, ethanol is 100 per cent miscible with water mist.
Ultimately,
Dr Raman says that he expects that a water mist system would
” the ethanol vapour into solution.
Appellant submits that the evidence of Dr Mendham and Dr Raman
demonstrates that there is insufficient detail on the water
mist system to show
that the proposed development is appropriate.
[243] It has
long been recognised by this Court that full detailed design is often left for
later, once the Court has decided that
a proposed development should proceed.
However, in some instances, the details are critical. The degree of detail and
required will depend upon the type of approval sought and the matters
of relevance that the decision maker is called upon to assess
in granting or
withholding approval in the particular case:
Gaven Developments Pty Ltd v
Scenic Rim Regional Council & Ors
[2010] QPEC 51
[2010] QPELR 750
Murphy v Moreton Bay Regional Council & Anor; Australian National Homes
Pty Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council & Anor
[2019] QPEC 46
Barro Group Pty Ltd v Sunshine Coast Regional Council
[2021] QPEC 18
[2022] QPELR 235
, 249 [62].
[244] In this
case, the information should be sufficient for a judgment to be made about
whether, on the balance of probabilities,
an appropriate water mist system can
be designed and installed such that the grant of a development permit so
conditioned is not
[245] During
cross-examination, Dr Mendham and Dr Raman accepted that the design of
the system is critical and will need to be purpose
designed and tested. That
said, they provided cogent explanations as to why they considered the water mist
system was appropriate
and would be effective. Their evidence satisfies me that
the technology is sufficiently evolved that an appropriately conditioned
approval is not futile.
untested nature of the system is sufficiently addressed by those aspects of the
proposed development identified in paragraphs
above. The imposition of conditions
reflecting these aspects of the proposed development will ensure that
construction of the tank
chamber will not occur, and the use will not commence,
unless the water mist system is tested and certified as fit for its intended
[247] Given the
difficulties with the evidence adduced by the Appellant identified above, in my
view the evidence is insufficient
to raise a stoichiometric tank chamber
explosion as a credible scenario. As such, a requirement to quantify the risk
for the purpose
of demonstrating achievement of the hazard and risk criteria in
Table 9.3.12.3.I. in the Industry code would be entirely arbitrary.
In my view,
properly construed, performance outcome PO3 of the Industry code does not
necessitate the modelling of consequences
of scenarios that lack credibility:
see relevant context in this regard in paragraphs
[248] In any
event, the evidence of Dr Raman and Dr Mendham comfortably persuades
me that there is no unacceptable risk by reason
of a stoichiometric tank chamber
explosion. There are three noteworthy aspects of the evidence in that respect.
[249] First, I
accept the evidence of Dr Mendham and Dr Raman that there is no
credible risk of a stoichiometric tank chamber explosion
causing damage outside
the tank chamber: see paragraphs
above. The features of the proposed
development identified in paragraphs
above are such that:
(a) there is no credible risk of a leak occurring in the tank chamber; and
(b) even if there was a leak, the risk will be minimised by the proposed water
mist system such that the effect of any explosion
will be contained within the
tank chamber;
(c) there is no credible risk of an ignition occurring in the tank chamber.
[250] The second
noteworthy aspect of the evidence is Dr Mendham’s first individual
report to which I have referred in paragraphs
above. Although
Dr Mendham’s Level 2 Preliminary Hazard Analysis was based on the
proposed development before the minor change
on 1 May 2025, during
cross-examination, Dr Mendham opined that the changes to the proposed
development improved it from the risk
perspective. Dr Mendham explained
that, in terms of risk, the water mist system was certainly no worse than the
earlier foam suppression
system and, in his view, it would be better. I accept
his evidence in this regard. It is supported by the evidence of Dr Raman
[251] The third
aspect of the evidence that I find compelling is Dr Raman’s
calculation of the likelihood of an explosion in
the tank chamber. In Hazard
and Risk Joint Expert Report No. 2, Dr Raman sets out, in detail, the
sequence of events that would
be necessary to lead to an explosion because of an
ethanol leak from a tank or from pipework. He also details an additional
namely a tank vent pipe rupture and release during tanker unloading.
Dr Raman’s sequence of events demonstrate the breadth
and depth of
the mechanisms and controls incorporated in the proposed development to avoid
those consequences occurring.
[252] Following
his explanation of the sequence of events, Dr Raman explains his
methodology for the estimation of the size of a pool
of spilled ethanol in the
tank chamber. Dr Raman’s evidence demonstrates that the drainage
rate into the bund sump would exceed
the leakage (even for a hypothetical
50-millimetre hole) and therefore a pool of ethanol would be confined to the
path between the
leak source and the sump. Dr Raman’s calculations
demonstrate that the pool diameter would not grow or spread.
[253] Dr Raman
identifies two evaporation mechanisms from which he calculates an evaporation
rate. His calculation of the evaporation
rate was revised from that provided in
Hazard and Risk Joint Expert Report No. 1 to address belated criticisms made in
Mr Robinson’s
individual report.
[254] Dr Raman
then calculated the time taken to reach a stoichiometric concentration for 20,
30 and 40 degrees Celsius. In so doing,
he noted that a 100 per cent
stoichiometric concentration of the tank chamber would not be reached.
[255] Following
this, Dr Raman detailed his calculation of the response time from the time
of detection of ethanol vapour in the tank
chamber to the filling of the tank
chamber with water mist. His calculation shows a detection time of
approximately four minutes.
That period accounts for the response time taken by
the various components of the vapour detection system. It allows for the time
from leak source to drain point; the response time for the gas detector; the
time taken for confirmation of a leak from flow or level
discrepancy alarms; the
time taken for the leaked ethanol to reach the sump and accumulate to the extent
that it would activate the
liquid level sensor in the sump and the associated
alarm; and the time taken before automatic activation of the water mist system.
On Dr Raman’s calculations, in the four-minute response time, an
18 cubic metre stoichiometric mixture may form in the tank
chamber. That
represents only 4 per cent of the tank chamber free volume as the total
volume of the chamber is 460.4 cubic metres.
[256] Dr Raman
also undertook a fault tree analysis for the events in which he assumes failure
of the various protection layers.
A fault tree analysis is a method for
representing the logical combinations of various system failures leading to an
ethanol stoichiometric
vapour cloud explosion in the tank chamber. The fault
tree analysis is informed by the sequence of events described by Dr Raman.
He advises that after a detailed design where instruments are selected, it will
be possible to obtain reliability data from the
manufacturer.
[257] There was
conservatism in Dr Raman’s calculation. He explains that for vapour
detection, multiple detectors are proposed.
For his analysis, he assumes
failure occurs by the failure of a single detector. This is conservative as the
likelihood of all
detectors failing is much lower than that of one detector.
Dr Raman describes that likelihood as very low. Additionally,
adopts failure rates based on available data for steel pipes
rather than stainless-steel pipes. As he explains, the failure rate
stainless-steel is below that of steel, given its higher resistance to
[258] Based on
that conservative approach, Dr Raman calculates the event frequency to be
per annum (i.e., 1.46 per million per annum) for an
explosion from a leak from the tank or pipework scenario, and 1.5 x
(i.e., 1.5 per million per annum) for an explosion from a tank
vent pipe rupture and release during unloading. Dr Mendham described
Dr Raman’s assessment as fairly consistent with his own.
evidence from Dr Raman was not challenged and I accept it.
[260] There are
various features of the proposed development that further reduce the risk from
that calculated by Dr Raman (i.e.,
approximately 1.5 per million per
annum). They are detailed in paragraphs
above, particularly those that were
introduced in the application for minor change. They include:
(a) an ethanol vapour detector that is capable of measuring the concentration of
ethanol vapour, which is to be designed and installed
up to a safety integrity
(b) a level switch system that is to be installed in the bund sump shown on
Drawing DA303 Issue C, which is to be designed and installed
up to a safety
integrity level 3;
(c) a volume comparison alarm that measures the level of ethanol in the tank and
the amount of ethanol being transferred into the
(d) a water mist system designed to Australian Standard AS4587-2020, which is to
activate in response to detection systems.
[261] Having
regard to the combination of Dr Raman’s calculations, the
conservative nature of his calculations and the various
features of the proposed
development that further reduce the risk, I consider it reasonable to infer that
the proposed development
achieves the hazard and risk criteria in
Table 9.3.12.3.I of the Industry code. With the benefit of all of
Dr Raman’s evidence,
including his oral evidence, I understand that
such an inference is the basis of Dr Raman’s opinion that there is
with performance outcome PO3 of the Industry
Conclusion about the risk
associated with a stoichiometric tank chamber explosion
[262] For the
reasons provided above, I am comfortably satisfied that:
(a) a stoichiometric tank chamber explosion that has effects beyond damaging the
tanks and the structural integrity of the tank chamber
hazardous scenario;
(b) the likelihood of a stoichiometric tank chamber explosion that has effects
beyond damaging the tanks and the structural integrity
of the tank chamber is so
remote that a requirement to quantify the risk to demonstrate achievement of the
hazard and risk criteria
in Table 9.3.12.3.I. in the Industry code would be
entirely arbitrary; but, in any event,
(c) the evidence is sufficient for me to conclude that the proposed development
achieves the hazard and risk criteria in Table 9.3.12.3.I
of the Industry
(d) there is no unacceptable risk posed by a stoichiometric tank chamber
Does the location of the proposed development
minimise the risk to public safety and property?
[263] As I have
recorded in paragraph
Appellant alleges that the proposed development does not minimise the risk to
public safety and property as required by
performance outcome PO3 of the
Industry code.
Appellant’s case for refusal with respect to this allegation is founded on
two propositions, namely:
(a) the tank chamber does not comply with the separation distance requirements
in Australian Standard
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of flammable and
combustible liquids
(b) Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd has not demonstrated that it has
considered feasible alternative locations for the proposed
development on the
subject land.
[265] I now turn
to consider each of these
Does the proposed
development comply with separation distance requirements?
Appellant contends that the proposed development does not minimise risk as the
tank chamber does not comply with the separation
distances required in
Australian Standard
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of flammable and
combustible liquids
[267] Australian
Standards are not statutory instruments under
Instruments Act 1992
(Qld) to which the principles of statutory construction
might apply. They are documents that have been compiled and published by
corporate entity, Standards Australia International Ltd. (That entity has
previously been recognised by the Supreme Court of
Western Australia as an
independent, not-for-profit organisation recognised by the Australian Government
as the peak non-government
standards body in Australia:
Willis v Endall
[2011] WASC 45
, [26].) Australian Standards represent the consensus of
professional opinion and the practical experience about sensible, safe
precautions:
Onetech Pty Ltd v Shaw
[1999] WASCA 289
Ward v The Ritz Hotel (London) Ltd
(1992) 1 PIQR 315
Appellant relies on the evidence of Mr Robinson to support its contention
of non-compliance with the separation distances
required in Australian Standard
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of flammable and combustible
[269] Mr Robinson
did not raise any issue regarding separation distance in Hazard and Risk Joint
Expert Report No. 1. He only raised
the issue in his separate report. By
reference to Australian Standard
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of
flammable and combustible liquids
, Mr Robinson identifies the
interpolated separation distance required by Table 5.4 of the Australian
Standard to be 8.66 metres.
The Appellant says that the proposed development
breaches this standard. The proposed development is located approximately
metres from Ms Linda Burridge’s townhouse on the
Appellant’s land. It is even closer to the open community space on
Appellant’s land, which area immediately adjoins the boundary.
[270] There is
no dispute that the Appellant’s land is a protected place for the purpose
of Australian Standard
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of flammable and
combustible liquids
[271] Dr Mendham
and Dr Raman opine that the proposed development complies with the
separation distance requirements when measured
from the boundary.
[272] According
to Dr Raman, Mr Robinson’s analysis overlooks or ignores the
requirements in s 3.8.1 of Australian Standard
AS1940:2017 The storage
and handling of flammable and combustible liquids
“Separation distances may be measured in a horizontal
plane around the end of any intervening vapour barrier, provided that
barrier complies with the following:
(a) For separation from protected places and on-site protected places, such a
vapour barrier is also a firewall.
(b) Building walls may be treated as firewalls or vapour barriers provided that
they qualify as such.
Firewalls and vapour barriers may be used to achieve the separation distances
in Tables 4.1, 4.2, 5.3 and 5.4 to protected places,
public places and security
[273] The term
vapour barrier
” is defined in s 1.4.73 of Australian
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of flammable and combustible
“A wall or other barrier constructed and
placed with the object of preventing the passage of vapour from any one place to
[274] The term
” is defined in s 1.4.26
“A wall or other barrier having a specified fire
resistance level, constructed and placed for the purpose of preventing the
spread of fire.”
[275] The term
fire resistance level
” is defined in s 1.4.24
“The grading period, in minutes, determined in accordance
with AS 1530.4 for—
(a) structural adequacy;
(b) integrity; and
(c) insulation,
and expressed in that order (e.g. 60/60/30).”
[276] As I have
mentioned in paragraph
(a) the tank chamber walls will have a fire resistance level of 240/240/240;
(b) the tank chamber floor will have a fire resistance level of 180/180/180;
(c) the tank chamber roof will have a fire resistance level of 180/180/180.
[277] Having
regard to those features, I accept the evidence of Dr Raman that the tank
chamber is a firewall and a vapour barrier.
[278] In those
circumstances, Dr Raman says that the measurement of the separation
distance is to be undertaken around the intervening
vapour barrier, i.e., it is
measured to the door to the tank chamber.
[279] In support
of his approach, Dr Raman explains that the purpose of separation distances
is to control the potential for vapour
to disperse and find an ignition source.
The measurement of the separation distance around the wall to the door is
consistent with
that purpose.
[280] The aid
prepared by Dr Raman demonstrates that, adopting that calculation method,
the separation distance is 24 metres, which
is compliant with Australian
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of flammable and combustible
[281] I prefer
the evidence of Dr Raman to that of Mr Robinson and the approach of
the Appellant. Dr Raman’s explanation for
his opinion is compelling.
It reveals an intimate understanding about the consensus of professional opinion
and practical experience
regarding sensible, safe precautions reflected in
Australian Standard
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of flammable and
combustible liquids
. The same cannot be said of Mr Robinson’s
evidence. Having listened to his evidence, I am not persuaded that
Mr Robinson
has any relevant experience with the proper application of
Australian Standard
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of flammable and
combustible liquids
. Rather, he appears to have reached his opinion based
on a layman’s incomplete reading of the Australian Standard.
satisfied that the proposed development complies with the separation distances
required in Australian Standard
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of
flammable and combustible
Are there feasible
alternative locations for the proposed development?
Appellant contends that avoiding all avoidable risk requires the investigation
of alternative locations. It says that Lion-Beer,
Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd has
not properly investigated feasible alternatives on the subject land. As such,
the Appellant says that
the siting of the tank chamber on the western boundary
of the subject land does not minimise the risk as required by performance
outcome PO3 of the Industry code. The Appellant also says that this failure by
the Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd sounds in
non-compliance with the other
assessment benchmarks relied on by the Appellant that call for development to be
appropriately located.
[284] In support
of its contentions, the Appellant says the
Hazardous Industry Planning
Advisory Paper No. 4: Risk Criteria for Land Use Safety Planning
provides relevant guidance in
, wherein it
“Irrespective of the numerical value of any risk
criteria level for risk assessment purposes, it is essential that certain
qualitative
principles be adopted concerning the land use safety acceptability
of development. The following qualitative criteria are appropriate
making zoning decisions, assessing the risk implications of a development
project of a potentially hazardous nature or the
locational safety suitability
of a development in the vicinity of a potentially hazardous installation:
(a) All ‘avoidable’ risks should be avoided. This necessitates the
investigation of
alternative locations and alternative technologies
wherever applicable, to ensure that risks are not introduced in an area
feasible alternatives are possible and justified
(b) The risk from a major hazard should be
reduced wherever practicable,
irrespective of the numerical value of the cumulative risk level from the whole
installation
. In all cases,
if the consequences (effects) of an
identified hazardous incident are significant to people
and the environment,
all feasible measures (including alternative locations) should be
adopted so that the likelihood of such an incident occurring is
. This necessitates the identification of all contributors to the
resultant risk and the consequences of each potentially hazardous
incident. The
assessment process should address the adequacy and relevancy of safeguards
both technical and locational
) as they relate to each risk
contributor...”
(emphasis reflects that added by the Appellant)
Appellant also relies on s 2.4.1 of
Hazardous Industry Planning Advisory
Paper No. 4: Risk Criteria for Land Use Safety Planning
relevantly states:
“In assessing the tolerability of risk
from potentially hazardous development, both qualitative and quantitative
aspects need
to be considered. Relevant general principles are:
the avoidance of
all avoidable risks;
the risk from a
major hazard should be reduced wherever practicable, even where the likelihood
of exposure is low;
the effects of
significant events should, wherever possible, be contained within the site
boundary; and
where the risk
from an existing installation is already high, further development should not
pose any incremental risk.”
Appellant says that Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd has focussed on the use
of operational management measures, rather
than increasing separation distance
to attempt to minimise the explosion risk. The use of operational measures and
separation distance
to minimise risk are not mutually exclusive. The Appellant
says that the features proposed by Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd
have been used in conjunction with an increased separation distance.
[287] The choice
of location of the facility is dealt with by the evidence of Mr Horn, the
Group Operations Director of Lion-Beer,
Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd.
[288] Mr Horn
provided a statement setting out six design options that were considered by
Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd. Two
of the options involved locating the
tanker unloading facility and the ethanol storage facility on the east side of
Bellevue Street,
farther from the Appellant’s land. Those options
involved lesser construction costs and located the tank cluster at least
56 metres from the Appellant’s land.
[289] In terms
of the location that is now proposed, Mr Horn
“Although the proposed location results in an increased
cost of construction for the tank chamber, it was considered by the
Co-Respondent to be the most appropriate option given that it allowed for
appropriate operation of the Tanker Unloading Facility.”
Appellant submits that Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd should not gain a
benefit from the fact that previous approvals
were obtained to set up the tanker
unloading facility in its current location.
addition, the Appellant submits that there is no persuasive evidence that the
options that are farther from the Appellant’s
land are not feasible, as
opposed to simply not preferred by Lion-Beer, Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd.
According to the Appellant, Mr
Horn’s statement does not prove that
all reasonably practicable measures have been taken to reduce the risk, or that
risk reduction
measures that have been rejected are grossly disproportionate in
cost to the risk reduction achieved.
[292] Implicit
in the Appellant’s submissions is an assumption that the location of the
tanker unloading facility was chosen
without considering the ramifications for
the later location of the ethanol storage facility. The Appellant did not
require Mr Horn
for cross-examination, and this was not put to him.
[293] I am not
persuaded that the option selected involves gaining a benefit from electing to
pursue approval for the tanker unloading
facility in its current location.
evidence before me indicates that the ethanol tanker unloading facility and the
building containing the syrup mixing room
were proposed as an initial stage of
Project Alpha
”. The ethanol storage facility is another
stage of that project.
[295] In the
circumstances, I am not prepared to infer that the location of the ethanol
tanker unloading facility was chosen without
considering the feasibility of
alternative locations for either the whole project or aspects of the project
such as the ethanol storage
[296] In any
event, even if I were to draw the inference invited by the Appellant, that is
not the end of this matter. Dr Mendham
also gave evidence on this
[297] Dr Mendham
opines that the proposed location and design of the tank chamber is the best
location in the best format and meets
the requirement to avoid avoidable risk.
During cross-examination, Dr Mendham provided a cogent explanation about
the greater safety
risks associated with alternative locations on the subject
land. Other considerations that inform the appropriateness of the location
include the safety associated with the extent of manoeuvring required of the
tankers delivering ethanol and proximity to other hazards
on the subject land.
I found Dr Mendham’s evidence on this issue to be persuasive.
evidence of Dr Mendham alone satisfies me that the alternative locations
are not appropriate.
regarding the location of the tank chamber
[299] Whether
the location of the ethanol storage facility, including its minimal separation
from sensitive uses, is appropriate is
a question of fact and degree. The
question is to be determined in the context where City Plan and the supporting
documents called
up by it collectively recognise that elimination of risk is
unrealistic. It calls for an evaluative judgment to determine whether
adopted separation is appropriate
in all the circumstances.
[300] I accept
the evidence of Mr Mewing that the interface between industrial and
non-industrial uses is capable of being managed
by either separation or the
management of the interface between uses through design. The location of uses
that give rise to risk
proximate to sensitive uses is not extraordinary.
[301] In this
case, the separation distance should be viewed in its relevant context. There
is an existing, long-standing interface
between a lawful industrial use on the
subject land and the adjoining sensitive use on the Appellant’s land. It
is reasonable
to expect the subject land to continue to be used for industrial
uses. Further, as I mentioned in paragraph
above, although the subject land is in
the Low impact industry zone, City Plan anticipates that the subject land may be
for more intensive industry uses.
circumstances here also include the adoption of sophisticated design and use of
extensive risk mitigation measures, as well
as compliance with the separation
distances under Australian Standard
AS1940:2017 The storage and handling of
flammable and combustible liquids
[303] In the
circumstances, I am comfortably satisfied that the proposed development is
appropriately located.
proposed development unduly affect reasonable health expectations?
Appellant contends that the proposed development will unduly affect reasonable
health expectations and, as such, is contrary
to those assessment benchmarks
identified in paragraphs
above, namely land use strategy
L2.3 in s 3.5.3, Table 3.5.3.1, for Element 3.2 of Theme 3 of the Strategic
framework and the overall
outcomes in ss 9.3.12.2 2.c. and d. of the
Industry code.
Appellant’s allegations are founded on its proposition that the location
of the proposed development does not minimise
the risk to public safety and
property as required by performance outcome PO3 of the Industry code. That
proposition underpins the
Appellant’s case that the location of the tank
chamber near the boundary is not compatible with the sensitive uses on the
Appellant’s
Appellant concedes that if the Court is satisfied that the proposed development
complies with performance outcome PO3 of
the Industry code, then there is no
remaining planning reason for refusal. However, it says that if there is some
non-compliance
with performance outcome PO3 of the Industry code, then the
proposed development would unduly affect the reasonable health expectations
those occupants of the sensitive uses on the Appellant’s land.
[307] Considering
my findings above, it is unnecessary to further address this issue.
reasons already given, I am satisfied that the proposed development complies
with performance outcome PO3 of the Industry
code and that it will not unduly
affect reasonable health expectations. It complies with the assessment
benchmarks in land use strategy
L2.3 in s 3.5.3, Table 3.5.3.1, for Element
3.2 of Theme 3 of the Strategic framework and the overall outcomes in
ss 9.3.12.2 2.c.
and d. of the Industry
Does the proposed development
comply with the relevant assessment benchmarks?
[309] For the
reasons provided above, I am satisfied that the proposed development complies
with each of the assessment benchmarks
that remain in
Should the proposed
development be approved in the exercise of the discretion?
parties agree that the outcome of this case is dependent on the view of the
Court on the issue of risk. It is also common
ground, and I accept, that the
approach to be adopted in examining risk is informed by the principles
summarised by His Honour Judge
Williamson KC in
Pynhall Pty Ltd v Logan
City Council
[2024] QPEC 11
, wherein His Honour observed:
“[51] Having regard to the above decisions, and those set out
at paragraph 41 of Council’s written submissions, a number
of propositions
of general application can be distilled with respect to an examination of risk.
The propositions are as follows:
(a) caution, and a careful approach, is appropriate where matters of public
safety are involved;
(b) the presence of risk does not, in and of itself, call for a nervous approach
or intolerance;
(c) the attractions of avoiding responsibility for allowing a proposal which has
an element of serious risk, while only too obvious,
must be resisted because to
adopt such an approach would be superficial and an abrogation of the judicial
(d) the standard to which the Court must be satisfied that a development will
not be a source of unacceptable risk is the civil standard,
namely a degree of
persuasion of the mind according to the balance of probabilities; and
(e) the assessment of risk and its acceptability calls for an examination of:
(i) the nature and extent of the risk; and
(ii) the means by which the risk is proposed to be addressed.”
[311] As I have
explained above, the Appellant advances three propositions that are fundamental
to its case for refusal, namely:
(a) there is an unacceptable risk to public safety and property from a
stoichiometric tank chamber explosion that will result in
effects beyond the
failure of the tank chamber;
(b) the location of the proposed development adjacent the Appellant’s land
does not minimise the risk to public safety and
property because:
(i) the separation distance between the tank chamber and the Appellant’s
land does not meet the requirements of Australian
AS1940:2017 The
storage and handling of flammable and combustible liquids
(ii) there are alternative feasible locations on the subject land; and
(c) the proposed development will unduly affect reasonable health expectations.
respect to the third proposition, the Appellant’s case was founded on an
assumption that the Court would make some
findings consistent with the first two
propositions advanced by the Appellant.
reasons explained above, the evidence comfortably persuades me that none of the
Appellant’s concerns are established.
observations of His Honour Judge Quirk in
GFW Gelatine International Ltd v
Beaudesert Shire Council & Ors
[1993] QPLR 342
at 353 are apposite in
this case. His Honour observed:
“The onus of showing that the
application for town planning consent should be approved of course rests with
the Applicant, but
this is not to say that in a proposal yet untried, the
complete absence of any likely future difficulty must be demonstrated. It
essential that it be shown that the relevant procedures and their likely impact
on the environment are properly understood by
the Appellant and its expert
consultants and that there is a capacity to deal with any difficulty that might
arise in a way which
will preclude unacceptable results.
The results that are achieved are all important and the means whereby these
results are achieved are less so. While there should
be no uncertainty at all
regarding the way in which these
results are attained. Lessons will be learned
in practice and there will, no doubt, be advances in technology. As I have
said, the proposed Environmental Management Plan is of considerable
importance in this context and I accept that, prior to the commencement
proposed use, the form of this Plan be carefully settled to the satisfaction of
the appropriate authority.”
[315] Lion-Beer,
Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd has persuaded me that it and its expert consultants
properly understand the nature of the
risk, its likely impact, applicable
standards, and the relevant risk management measures and procedures.
[316] Lion-Beer,
Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd’s response to the issues belatedly raised by
Dr Abdel-jawad with respect to the foam
suppression system shows that there
is capacity to responsibly respond to any difficulty that might arise in a way
that will preclude
unacceptable results.
[317] On the
evidence given in the appeal, I am satisfied that the proposed development, with
all its risk management features, can
be carried out in a responsible manner
that affords protection to the community’s interests.
[318] As such,
having considered the nature and extent of the risk and the way the risk is
proposed to be addressed, I am comfortably
satisfied that the risk will be
appropriately addressed by the grant of a development permit subject to
conditions. The conditions
included in the Council’s decision notice will
require refinement to reflect the changed development application and to ensure
the incorporation of each of those features identified in paragraphs
and conditions of the type referred
to in paragraph
Council may also wish to consider the imposition of conditions of the type
mentioned in paragraph
[320] Lion-Beer,
Spirits and Wine Pty Ltd has discharged the onus.
[321] In due
course, the Council’s decision will be set aside and replaced with a
decision to approve the development application
(as changed) subject to
conditions.
facilitate the preparation of a suite of conditions, I will return the appeal to
the applications list for review on 16 July
2025. The appeal will remain on
that list unless and until a dispute arises about conditions of approval.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.03 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter