URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2022/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Desbois v Chief Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads; Chief Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads v Desbois [2022] QLAC 1 (23 May 2022)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF
Desbois v Chief Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads; Chief
Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads v Desbois
[2022] QLAC
Chief Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads
(appellant)
Clive John Desbois
(respondent)
LAC No LAC001-22
Land Court No AQL696-19
Clive John Desbois
(appellant)
Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads
(respondent)
LAC No LAC002-22
Land Court No AQL696-19
Land Appeal Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
Appeal from the Land Court of Queensland
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
23 May 2022
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
21 April 2022
PG Stilgoe OAM, Member of the Land Court
Preston J, Acting Member of the Land Court
1. The appeal by the Chief Executive, Department of Transport
and Main Roads, proceedings No LAC001-22, is dismissed.
2. The Chief
Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads is to pay the costs of Mr
Clive Desbois of proceedings No LAC001-22.
3. The appeal by Mr Clive Desbois,
proceedings No LAC002-22, is upheld.
4. The Chief Executive, Department of
Transport and Main Roads is to pay the costs of Mr Clive Desbois of proceedings
No LAC002-22.
5. The matter is remitted to the Land Court for determination
in accordance with the reasons of this Court.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL – resumption of land – compensation determination
– highest and best use – service station in rural
whether hypothetical approval likely to have been granted for such use –
whether correct area of such use –
condition of approval requiring
acceleration lane – whether condition would require a longer acceleration
lane and widening
of bridge – whether error in determining the discount
for the risk of such a condition – value to be derived from comparable
sale – analysed rate per hectare too low – whether error in failing
to adjust rate per hectare – whether error
in reducing discount to
counterbalance too low rate per hectare
Acquisition of Land Act
Land Court Act 2000
Planning Act
Sustainable Planning Act 2009
Abeleda v Brisbane
City Council
(2020) 6 QR 441
[2020] QCA 257
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB
Industries Ltd
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
Brisbane City Council v YQ Property
[2020] QCA 253
Barro Group Pty Ltd v Sunshine Coast Regional
[2021] QPEC 18
Bell v Brisbane City Council
Desbois v Chief Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads
[2021] QLC 43
Department of Transport and Main Roads v Mahoney
(2014) 201 LGERA 257
[2014] QLAC 1
Gold Coast City Council v K &
K (GC) Pty Ltd
[2019] QCA 132
(2020) QPELR 631
Mio Art Pty Ltd &
Ors v Brisbane City Council
[2009] QLC 177
Pamalco Pty Ltd v Minister
Administering the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974 (No 3)
(1991) 71 LGRA
Randwick Municipal Council v Manousaki
(1988) 66 LGRA
Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council & Ors;
Dexus Funds Management Limited v Fabcot Ltd & Ords
Wilhelm v Logan City Council & Anor
[2020] QCA 273
APPEARANCES:
Mr R J Anderson QC with Mr J Ware (instructed by Clayton Utz) for Chief
Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads
Mr E J Morzone QC with Ms D
C Whitehouse (instructed by Kelly Legal) for Mr Clive John Desbois
[1] NORTH J: I have had the benefit of reading the Reasons of
Preston J. I agree with his Honour and with the orders proposed.
STILGOE: I have had the advantage of reading the reasons prepared by Preston J
and respectfully agree with the reasons
and the orders proposed.
PRESTON J: The Department of Transport and Main Roads (DTMR) resumed 1.934
hectares (ha) of a total area of 59.556ha owned
by Mr Desbois for the Mackay
Ring Road Project. The land adjoined the Bruce Highway west of Mackay. Mr
Desbois applied to the Land
Court to decide his compensation entitlement under
Acquisition of Land Act 1967
[4] The President of the Land Court
(the primary judge) determined compensation under
Acquisition of
in the sum of $948,961. This sum comprised the loss in land value of
$781,355, interest of $83,576.08 and disturbance of $84,000:
Desbois v Chief
Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads
[2021] QLC 43.
DTMR and Mr Desbois, being dissatisfied with the amount determined for the loss
in land value, have appealed under
Land Court Act 2000
succeed on appeal, either party must ordinarily establish that the primary
judge’s decision resulted from factual,
legal or discretionary error:
Department of Transport and Main Roads v Mahoney
[2014] QLAC 1
issues on this appeal
[6] Both parties sought to establish that the primary
judge erred at different steps in the process of determining the land value
the resumed land. The Land Court used the before and after method of valuation
(at [4] of the judgment). This involved first valuing
the whole site of 59.556ha
before the resumption, valuing the residue of the site after resumption of
1.934ha, and then deducting
the latter land value from the former land value to
derive the value of the resumed land.
[7] The parties had agreed upon the
land value of the residue land after the resumption, the subtrahend in the
subtraction sentence,
which was its rural value (at [124] of the judgment). The
disagreement between the parties concerned the minuend in this subtraction
sentence, being the land value of the whole site before resumption.
Desbois had contended that the highest and best use of a part of the site
fronting the Bruce Highway was for a service station/truck
stop, a type of
commercial use. Mr Desbois contended that the area of this part of the site
would be 2.25ha. Mr Desbois contended
that there were good prospects of planning
approval being granted for the use of this area of 2.25ha for a service
station/truck
stop. Accordingly, this area of the site should be valued for this
commercial use, with the balance of the site being valued for
[9] DTMR contested that the highest and best use of any part of the site
would be a commercial use, such as the proposed service station/truck
contended that planning approval would not be granted for a commercial use in a
rural zone. As a consequence, DTMR contended
that the whole site only had rural
[10] The primary judge noted at the outset that where there is a
dispute about whether the highest and best use of the land would
be approved and
if so on what conditions, the Court’s function is not to decide, as a
fact, whether the planning authority
would approve the use and on what
conditions. Instead the Court must decide how a hypothetical developer would
have viewed the potential
to use the land for that purpose in settling on the
sale price (at [10]).
[11] The primary judge found that the hypothetical
developer would have been advised that there were good prospects of obtaining
approval for a service station/truck stop and that this use was a
realistic potential use of the disputed part of the site (at [23],
[82], [123]
of the judgment). Because there were good prospects of planning approval, the
primary judge found that there was no need
to reduce the land value for use as a
service station/truck stop to account for the risk of not obtaining planning
approval (at [141]
of the judgment).
[12] The issue of whether planning
approval was likely to have been granted to use part of the site for the
proposed commercial use
of a service station/truck stop was raised by DTMR in
grounds 1, 2, 4 and 5 of its appeal (the town planning grounds). DTMR argued
that the primary judge erred in finding that there were good prospects of
planning approval for a service station/truck stop in the
rural zone.
[13] Alternatively, if any part of the site should be valued for its
potential commercial use as a service station/truck stop, DTMR
contended that
the area of this part of the site would not be the 2.25ha proposed by Mr Desbois
but rather would be a smaller area
of 1.8ha. DTMR contended that the Land Court
erred in using an area of 2.25ha rather than 1.8ha in determining the commercial
of this part of the site (at [128]-[131] of the judgment) (the area of
commercial use ground).
[14] The parties agreed that the balance of the site,
other than the disputed part of 2.25ha or 1.8ha, had only rural value. The
agreed on the rate per hectare for such rural value (at [124] of the
[15] Related to the issue of the prospects of planning approval
being granted for a service station/truck stop was another issue concerning
risk of a condition of approval being imposed requiring an acceleration lane of
such a length that it would require the widening
of a nearby rail bridge. The
cost of widening the rail bridge was agreed to be very high ($1,175,000), making
any development that
was required by a condition of approval to do so
economically unviable.
[16] Mr Desbois had argued that any condition of
approval would likely require an acceleration lane of no longer than 315m, which
would avoid the need to widen the railway bridge. DTMR had argued that any
condition of approval would likely require an acceleration
lane of 435m, which
would necessitate widening the railway bridge.
[17] The primary judge found
that a hypothetical developer would be advised that a probable condition of
approval would require an
acceleration lane (at [99] of the judgment). The
primary judge found, however, that there were reasonable prospects of a traffic
safety condition of approval requiring an acceleration lane of no longer than
315m (at [123] of the judgment).
[18] The issue of the length of the
acceleration lane that might be required by a condition of approval was raised
by DTMR in ground
3 (the length of the acceleration lane ground).
parties agreed, however, that there was a risk that the condition of approval
might not limit the length of the acceleration
lane to 315m but instead require
an acceleration lane of 435m, which would then necessitate widening the railway
bridge. For this
reason, both parties accepted that the commercial value of the
part of the land to be used as a service station/truck stop should
be discounted
by a percentage to reflect this risk. Mr Desbois had accepted a discount of 30%
to account for the risk of being required
to widen the bridge (at [126] of the
judgment). DTMR argued that the risk of widening the railway bridge was so high
and the discount
so large that there was no potential for the land to be used as
a service station/truck stop (at [126], [147] of the judgment).
primary judge applied a discount of 15%. This lower percentage discount was
adopted to counterbalance using a lower rate
per hectare to determine the
commercial value of the part of the site to be used for a service station/truck
stop (at [153] of the
[21] Mr Desbois challenged this discount of
15% in grounds 2 and 3 of his appeal, arguing that the primary judge had
conflated the
two steps of determining the appropriate rate per hectare and the
percentage discount to be applied to that appropriate rate per
hectare. DTMR
challenged the discount of 15% in ground 2 of its appeal as being far too low to
account for the near certainty of
the hypothetical development being required to
widen the railway bridge. I will refer to these grounds collectively as
risk discount grounds”.
[22] Once the primary judge decided
that there were good prospects of obtaining planning approval to use an area of
2.25ha of the
site for a service station/truck stop, and reasonable prospects of
a traffic safety condition that required an acceleration lane
of no longer than
315m, the next step was to determine the land value of that area of the site to
be used for this commercial use.
The parties had agreed that the most comparable
sale was of land bought for a service station at Gracemere. The parties’
agreed that the analysed rate for the sale was $400,000 per hectare (at
[7], [134] of the judgment). The parties’ valuers disagreed,
however, on
the adjustment that should be made to the analysed rate of $400,000 per hectare
in order to derive the value of that
part of the subject site to be used for a
service station/truck stop. Mr Desbois’ valuer relied on the difference in
the passing
traffic statistics for the two properties in 2016 (the year the land
was resumed) to increase the analysed rate for the sale by 86%
to $750,000 per
hectare (at [135] of the judgment). DTMR’s valuer made no adjustment in
applying the analysed rate for the
sale of $400,000 per hectare to the subject
site (at [135] of the judgment).
[23] The primary judge found that the
analysed rate for the sale of $400,000 per hectare was too low to be applied to
the subject
site, as it was heavily discounted for the sale’s uncosted
flood mitigation risks and did not reflect the superior locational
attributes of
the subject site (at [140], [152] of the judgment). Nevertheless, the primary
judge applied this analysed rate for
the sale of $400,000 per hectare to the
subject site without making any upward adjustment to account for these factors.
The primary
judge’s stated reason was that there was no information that
would allow an adjustment of the analysed rate for the sale (at
[152] of the
judgment). To compensate for using too low a rate per hectare, the primary judge
reduced the percentage discount to
be applied to the rate per hectare from the
30% that had been proposed by Mr Desbois’ valuer to 15% (at [153] of the
[24] The issue of the rate per hectare that should be derived
from the comparable sale was raised by Mr Desbois in grounds 1 and 3
appeal (the land value grounds). DTMR also obliquely raised the issue in its
ground 7, where it contended that the primary
judge had erred in applying the
liberal estimate principle to reduce the percentage discount to counterbalance
using a lower rate
per hectare. At the hearing of the appeal, DTMR did not press
this ground as a separate ground, only as informing the other grounds.
Accordingly, I will not address this ground separately.
The resolution of the
[25] I find that, with one exception, DTMR and Mr Desbois have not
established that the primary judge’s decision resulted from
any factual,
legal or discretionary error, so that the grounds of their respective appeals
have not been made out.
[26] The exception concerns the primary
judge’s failure to determine separately the appropriate rate per hectare
that should
be derived from the comparable sale for the subject site and the
appropriate discount that should be applied to that derived rate
per hectare.
Instead, the primary judge conflated the two valuation tasks by attempting to
counterbalance the effect of applying
a rate per hectare that the primary judge
had found was too low by reducing the discount to be applied to that rate per
15%. This involved a constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction to
determine the appropriate land value of that part of the site
before resumption
to be used as a service station/truck stop. This failure to determine the
appropriate land value could not be overcome
by reducing the percentage discount
that was to be applied to the land value to account for the risk that a
condition of approval
to use the site for a service station/truck stop might
require a longer acceleration lane and concomitantly the widening of the railway
[27] To this extent, grounds 1, 2 and 3 of Mr Desbois’ appeal
should be upheld. None of DTMR’s grounds of appeal concerning
value should be upheld, as DTMR sought to challenge the primary judge’s
use of the $400,000 per hectare rate and 15%
discount for different reasons that
have not been made out.
[28] Mr Desbois’ appeal should therefore be
upheld and DTMR’s appeal dismissed. The matter should be remitted to the
Court to be determined in accordance with this Court’s reasons. DTMR
should pay Mr Desbois’ costs of both DTMR’s
appeal and Mr
Desbois’ appeal.
The town planning grounds
[29] DTMR contended that
the primary judge erred in finding that there were good prospects of obtaining
planning approval for a service
station/truck stop in four ways:
(a) incorrect reliance on a superseded version of the
relevant planning scheme;
(b) misdirection or misapplication of the relevant
provisions of the planning scheme;
(c) misapplication of the test to be
applied under
Sustainable Planning Act 2009
(d) failure to find the demonstration of need required to support the
proposed development.
[30] I will deal with each in turn.
Reliance on superseded
planning scheme
[31] On the date of resumption of 12 August 2016, the Mackay
City Planning Scheme 2006 (Mackay Planning Scheme) was in force. By that
Amendments 4 of 2010 had commenced (on 19 December 2011).
[32] The Mackay
Planning Scheme was annexed to the parties’ planners’ joint report.
The Mackay Planning Scheme that was
annexed was the unamended version, although
the 2010 amendments were attached. It would appear that the primary judge
referred to
the unamended version of the Mackay Planning Scheme and overlooked
the amendments in the attachment. The primary judge quoted the
unamended version
s 1.4(2)(k)
of the Strategic Framework (in [38] of the judgment) and the
unamended version of Desired Environmental Outcome
s 3.1(3)(c)(xi)
(in [37] of
the judgment).
[33] The primary judge’s reference to the unamended
version of Mackay Planning Scheme was understandable as the evidence of
parties’ planners and the parties’ submissions relied largely on the
unamended version of the Mackay Planning Scheme.
Nevertheless, the planning
scheme that was in force at the time of the resumption was the Mackay Planning
[34] The unamended provisions referred, in various ways, to
“economic activities” while the amended provisions refer to
“rural activities”. Thus,
s 1.4(2)(k)
as amended described the
strategy and outcomes for the rural areas as:
“Rural land is developed
and used for a wide range of rural activities including extractive industries,
forestry, grazing, intensive
animal husbandry and water supply
development.”
“The use and development of rural land for
uses other than a rural activity is not consistent with the scheme’s
[35] Desired Environmental Outcome
s 3.1(3)(c)(xi)
amended reads:
“Rural land:
(A) is protected from incompatible land
uses, particularly urban (including but not limited to residential, industrial
and commercial)
(B) is maintained in agricultural use, where possible,
in order to ensure the viability of the sugar industry in the City; and
provides opportunities for a wide range of rural activities (including
agriculture, animal husbandry, aquaculture, extractive
industries, forestry,
intensive animal husbandry, kennels or a rural industry) and water supply
development.”
[36] DTMR argued that the primary judge’s error in
referring to the unamended provisions of the Mackay Planning Scheme materially
affected the primary judge’s approach to the likelihood of a service
station/truck stop being approved. The primary judge,
relying on the language in
the unamended
s 1.4(2)(k)
of “economic activities”, found that
language to be “broad enough to encompass a service station/truck
(at [39] of the judgment). The primary judge, referring to the
reference in the unamended Desired Environmental Outcome
s 3.1(3)(c)(xi)(A)
protect rural land from “incompatible land uses”, observed that
whether a service station/truck stop is “an
incompatible land use as that
term is used in the high level desired environmental outcome requires
consideration of more specific
provisions within the scheme” (at [39] of
the judgment).
[37] DTMR submitted that the primary judge may not have made
these findings had she referred to the amended provisions of the Mackay
Scheme. DTMR argued that a service station/truck stop is not a rural activity,
for which rural land is to be developed and
s 1.4(2)(k)
, but rather
is a use other than a rural activity. A service station/truck stop is also an
incompatible land use, particularly an
urban (a commercial) use, from which
rural land is to be protected under Desired Environmental Outcome
3.1(3)(c)(xi)(A).
DTMR submitted that had the primary judge referred to the
amended provisions she would have found a clear conflict between approving
service station/truck stop on rural zoned land and these provisions of the
Mackay Planning Scheme.
[38] Mr Desbois acknowledged that the primary judge
did refer to the unamended rather than the amended provisions of the Mackay
Scheme. He submitted, however, that this error was immaterial and did
not vitiate the primary judge’s decision.
[39] Mr Desbois first
pointed out that the Strategic Framework in Division 2 of
of the Mackay
Planning Scheme does not have a role in development assessment under the
planning scheme, as
clearly states. The role of the Strategic Framework
is limited to providing the context for understanding how policy contained in
the planning scheme was determined
(s 1.3(3)).
The Strategic Framework serves an
interpretive role, not a substantive role. Hence, there can be no conflict
between an assessment
manager’s decision to approve a proposed development
and the provisions of the Strategic Framework. Any error in the primary
referring to the unamended provisions of the Strategic Framework rather than the
amended provisions cannot therefore have affected
the primary judge’s
finding that approval of a service station/truck stop would not conflict with
the Mackay Planning Scheme.
[40] Mr Desbois submitted that the primary
judge’s reference to the unamended Desired Environmental Outcome
3.1(3)(c)(xi)
was also immaterial. This Desired Environmental Outcome, like all
of the Desired Environmental Outcomes in
, are for the city of Mackay area
as a whole, not just the Mackay Framework Locality, the Rural Zone and the
Goosepond Creek precinct
within which the subject land is located.
provides that:
“The Desired Environmental Outcomes are to be
read as a whole. Each Desired Environmental Outcome is to be achieved to the
practicable having regard to the other Desired Environmental
[41] The particular Desired Environmental Outcome in
3.1(3)(c)(xi)
is expressed at a high level of generality, both in the unamended
version and the amended version. Both versions seek in (xi)(A)
for rural land to
be protected from “incompatible land uses”. The amended version
particularises the incompatible land
uses as being urban (including commercial)
uses, but this does not add to what would otherwise be implied from the
expression “incompatible
land uses”. Both versions sought in (xi)(C)
for rural land to provide opportunities for a wide range of activities and
particularise
the types of activity. The unamended version described these
activities as “economic” activities, while the amended version
describes them as “rural” activities and adds some more types of
rural activities, but the intent of both provisions
remained the same –
rural land should provide opportunities for rural activities.
Desbois submitted that this Desired Environmental Outcome – that rural
land provide opportunities for rural activities
and be protected from
incompatible land uses – is entirely unremarkable. Mr Desbois submitted
that the proposed use of the
site for a service station/truck stop “could
not conceivably conflict with a provision with such broad application”.
Indeed, that was the evidence of Mr Desbois’ planner, Mr Schomburgk, with
which evidence DTMR’s planner, Mr Gaskell,
did not seriously disagree. The
only rural activity currently undertaken on the site of nearly 60ha was the
agistment of two horses.
Using 2.25ha of this site for a service station/truck
stop would have no impact on this nominal rural use of the site.
Desbois submitted that it was reasonably open to the primary judge to accept
this evidence that the use of a relatively small
area of the site for a service
station/truck stop would not conflict with this Desired Environmental Outcome,
regardless of how it
is expressed in the unamended or amended versions. The
decision would be the same.
[44] I agree with Mr Desbois’ submissions.
The primary judge’s reference to the unamended rather than the amended
s 1.4(2)(k)
of the Strategic Framework and Desired Environmental
s 3.1(3)(c)(xi)
was not a material error.
Section 1.4(2)(k)
Strategic Framework has no role to play in development assessment under the
Mackay Planning Scheme
(s 1.3(2)).
The primary judge’s error in referring
to the unamended provision was therefore immaterial.
[45] Desired
Environmental Outcome in
s 3.1(3)(c)(xi)
does have a role to play, but it is an
overarching and aspirational one. This Desired Environmental Outcome has to be
read with all
of the other Desired Environmental Outcomes in
be achieved to the extent practicable having regard to the other Desired
Environmental Outcomes
(s 3.1(2)).
The terms in which the Desired Environmental
s 3.1(3)(c)(xi)
are expressed are common place for rural land. Rural
land is to provide opportunities for rural activities, and to be protected from
incompatible land uses, otherwise it risks losing its rural character and
utility as rural land. The definition of “rural area”
in the Mackay
Planning Scheme embodies a similar aspiration. A “rural area” is a
“non-urban area where rural activities
predominate”. The notion of
rural activities predominating accepts that activities other than rural
activities can still be
carried out in a rural area provided that rural
activities predominate.
[46] The amendment of Desired Environmental Outcome
s 3.1(3)(c)(xi)
did particularise the uses that might be incompatible land uses,
from which rural land is to be protected, as including commercial
uses, and also
particularised the rural activities for which rural land should provide
opportunities. But this was to make express
what was already implied. The
amendments did not materially affect the substance of the provision.
this regard, the primary judge’s reference to the unamended provisions
rather than the amended provisions would not
have materially affected her
finding that use of a part of the site for a service station/truck stop would
not conflict with this
Desired Environmental Outcome. The primary judge was
entitled to rely on the evidence of the planners that a use of a part of the
site for a service station/truck stop would not conflict with the Desired
Environmental Outcome. The current nominal use of the site
to agist two horses
would not be affected by using 2.25ha of the site for a service station/truck
stop. This use would not foreclose
opportunities to use the site for rural
activities and in that regard would not be an incompatible land use.
this circumstance, the primary judge’s findings that there was no conflict
with the provisions of
s 1.4(2)(k)
s 3.1(3)(c)(xi)
of the Mackay Planning
Scheme was not affected legally or factually by her reference to the unamended
versions of those provisions.
Misconstruction or misapplication of
provisions of planning scheme
[49] DTMR contended that the primary judge, in
finding that there would be no conflict with certain other provisions of the
Planning Scheme, misconstrued or misapplied those other provisions. In
its submissions in chief, DTMR identified two provisions which
it said the
primary judge had misconstrued or misapplied:
(a) the additional overall outcome for the Goosepond Creek
precinct in the Mackay Frame Locality in Division 6, (5)(a); and
overall outcome for the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality in Division 12,
[50] In its reply submissions, DTMR added specific outcome P1
for the Mackay Frame Locality and specific outcome P5 for the Rural
Zone in the
Mackay Frame Locality.
[51] At its broadest, DTMR’s contention was
that the commercial use of a service station/truck stop is an inherently
incompatible
land use in rural zoned land, so that there must necessarily be
conflict with these overall and specific outcomes.
Overall outcome (5)(a)
for Goosepond Creek precinct
[52] Starting with overall outcome (5)(a) for
the Goosepond Creek precinct of the Mackay Frame Locality, DTMR’s planner,
Gaskell, identified as a conflict with the Mackay Planning Scheme the
inconsistency of the proposed use of a service station/truck
stop, which is a
“commercial activity occurs within the boundaries of the
commercial zone and accords with the network of centres described in
the Desired
Environmental Outcomes and as shown on the Information Map – Network of
[53] Mr Desbois’ planner, Mr Schomburgk, disagreed
with Mr Gaskell that there was any conflict.
[54] The primary judge accepted
Mr Schomburgk’s opinion, finding:
“[57] Although Mr Schomburgk
agreed the activity is commercial, he did not agree either that they were best
supported in a commercial
or industrial zone, or that the scheme actively
discouraged them in the rural zone.
[58] I prefer Mr Schomburgk’s
opinion on that point. To prohibit all commercial activity outside the
commercial zone is contrary
to the Assessment Table for this Locality and the
rural zone. In the absence of a clear statement to that effect, this overall
for the Precinct should be read in the context of those higher order
indications.”
[55] DTMR submitted that there were three errors in the
primary judge’s finding. First, DTMR submitted that the primary
reference to “those higher order indications” was a
reference to
s 1.4(2)(k)
of the Strategic Framework and Desired Environmental
s 3.1(3)(c)(xi).
DTMR submitted that these provisions as amended provide
no support for commercial activity occurring in the rural zone.
[56] Secondly, DTMR submitted that the primary judge made a wrong finding of
fact. A service station/truck stop is a commercial activity,
which overall
outcome (5)(a) states is to occur within the boundaries of the commercial zone.
There is thus a clear conflict in approving
a service station/truck stop in the
rural zone. The evidence of Mr Schomburgk, which the primary judge preferred,
could not overcome
a finding of conflict. Mr Schomburgk’s disagreement
that the commercial activity of a service station/truck stop was best supported
in a commercial or industrial zone was not to the point; overall outcome (5)(a)
provides that commercial activity is to occur within
the commercial zone. DTMR
submitted that Mr Schomburgk’s opinion that the planning scheme did not
actively discourage the commercial
activity of a service station/truck stop in
the rural zone was incorrect, having regard to
s 1.4(2)(k)
of the Strategic
Framework and Desired Environmental Outcome
s 3.1(3)(c)(xi)
, and in any event
could not avoid a finding of conflict with overall outcome (5)(a) for the
Goosepond Creek precinct.
[57] Thirdly, DTMR submitted that the primary judge
was in error in reading overall outcome (5)(a) as “prohibiting” all
commercial activity outside the commercial zone, as the word
“prohibit” was not used in overall outcome (5)(a) and it
only to land in the Goosepond Creek precinct.
[58] Mr Desbois submitted that
any misconstruction or misapplication of additional overall outcome (5)(a) for
the Goosepond Creek
precinct of the Mackay Frame Locality could not affect the
primary judge’s finding that the use of the site as a service
station/truck
stop did not conflict with the Mackay Planning Scheme. This
inevitably flows from
of the Mackay Planning Scheme.
Section 5.7(1)
specifies the provisions that comprise the Mackay Frame Locality Code. These
include relevantly the overall outcomes for the Mackay
Frame Locality in
Division 6, the specific outcomes for the Mackay Frame Locality in Division 7
and the specific outcomes for each
zone in the Mackay Frame Locality in
Divisions 8 to 20. Section 5.8(1), however, focuses only on the specific
outcomes for the locality
in Division 7 and the specific outcomes for the
relevant zone in Divisions 8 to 20 but not the overall outcomes for the Mackay
Locality in Division 6. Section 5.8(1) provides:
“Development
that is consistent with the following complies with the Mackay Frame Locality
(a) the specific outcomes for the locality Division 7;
specific outcomes for the relevant zone (Division 8 to Division
[59] The consequence is that, even if the development is not
consistent with the overall outcomes for the Mackay Frame Locality in
(which includes the overall outcomes for the Goosepond Creek precinct of the
Mackay Frame Locality in (5)), provided the
development is consistent with the
specific outcomes for the locality in Division 7 and the specific outcomes for
the relevant zone
in Divisions 8 to 20, the development will comply with the
Mackay Frame Locality Code.
[60] In this circumstance, it is immaterial
whether the proposed use of a service station/truck stop would or would not
conflict with
overall outcome (5)(a) of the Goosepond Creek precinct of the
Mackay Frame Locality. Even if it were to be in conflict, contrary
primary judge’s finding, this would not cause the development not to
comply with the Mackay Frame Locality Code.
[61] In any event, Mr Desbois
submitted that the primary judge’s finding that the use of the site as a
service station/truck
stop would not conflict with the planning scheme revealed
no error of misdirection or misapplication of overall outcome (5)(a). Mr
submitted that the overall outcomes for the Goosepond Creek precinct are
“in addition” to the overall outcomes
for the Mackay Frame Locality.
These additional overall outcomes for the precinct need to be read together with
the overall outcomes
for the Mackay Frame Locality. In this context, it matters
not that the particular overall outcome for the Goosepond Creek precinct
(5)(a) does not refer to non-rural activity, such as commercial activity,
occurring in rural areas. Other overall outcomes allow
for non-rural activities
in rural areas provided that they do not adversely affect the operation of rural
uses (see overall outcome
(2)(m)) and that rural land is protected from the
constraining effects of encroaching urban (including commercial) development
outcome (2)(k)).
[62] The possibility of commercial activity
outside the commercial zone is thus admitted in the Mackay Frame Locality.
Furthermore,
within the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality, overall
outcomes seek to ensure the ongoing protection of rural uses from encroachment
of incompatible land uses (see Desired Environmental Outcome
s 3.1(3)(c)(xi)(A)).
[63] Mr Desbois submitted that this possibility of
a service station use in the Mackay Frame Locality is emphasised by the planning
scheme. Assessment Table 5-1 does not note that use as a service station is an
inconsistent use in the Rural Zone, so that it is
a consistent use in that zone
(s 5.6(2)), and does note that use as a service station is impact assessable.
This designation of a
service station use as being a consistent use and impact
assessable in the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality informs the
construction
of the overall outcomes for the Mackay Frame Locality and the
additional overall outcomes for the Goosepond Creek precinct in the
Mackay Frame
Locality. These overall outcomes should not be construed as being inconsistent
with the Assessment Table, such as by
construing the overall outcomes as not
admitting of the possibility of approval of a service station use, which is a
activity, in a rural area that is not within the boundaries
of the commercial zone.
[64] I find that DTMR has not established that the
primary judge misconstrued or misapplied additional overall outcome (5)(a) for
the Goosepond Creek precinct in the Mackay Frame Locality. I accept Mr
Desbois’ submissions.
[65] The primary judge accepted that the proposed
use of a service station/truck stop was a “commercial activity” and
that the site was in the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality and hence not
“within the boundaries of the commercial zone”
for the purposes of
additional overall outcome (5)(a) (at [55], [57], [58] of the judgment). The
primary judge found, however, that
this did not necessarily lead to the proposed
use being in conflict with the planning scheme. The primary judge noted that the
overall outcome for the Goosepond Creek precinct needed to be read in
the context of the Assessment Table for the Mackay Frame Locality
and the Rural
Zone (at [58]). That Assessment Table notes that use as a service station is a
consistent use in the Rural Zone and
impact assessable. This admits of the
possibility of approving use as a service station, a type of commercial
activity, on land in
the Rural Zone, which is evidently not within the
boundaries of the commercial zone.
[66] This is what the primary judge was
referring to in [58]. To construe additional overall outcome of (5)(a) as not
permitting (or
prohibiting) the commercial activity of a service station in the
Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality would be contrary to the
Table for this locality and the Rural Zone. The primary judge noted that
“in the absence of a clear statement to
that effect”, referring to
the absence of the Assessment Table noting that a service station use is an
inconsistent use or
is otherwise prohibited in the Rural Zone, overall outcome
(5)(a) for the Goosepond Creek precinct should be read in the context
“those higher order indications”, referring again to the Assessment
Table. No error is revealed by this reasoning
of the primary judge at
[67] The primary judge expressed a preference in the opening sentence
of [58] for Mr Schomburgk’s opinion over Mr Gaskell’s
“on that point”. The point to which the primary judge was referring
was explained in the balance of her reasoning
in [58]. This is the point that
additional overall outcome (5)(a) for the Goosepond Creek precinct needs to be
read in the context
of the Assessment Table designating use of a service station
as being a consistent use and impact assessable in the Rural Zone. The
judge’s summary of Mr Schomburgk’s opinion in [57] of the judgment
is consistent with this point. A service station
use, although a commercial
activity, is not only permitted by the planning scheme in the commercial zone
but can also be approved
in the Rural Zone. Whether or not the way in which Mr
Schomburgk expressed his opinion, as summarised by the primary judge in [57],
accords precisely with the language of the Mackay Planning Scheme is not
material. What is important is the point the primary judge
draws from Mr
Schomburgk’s opinion. That point is what the primary judge stated in [58],
which does accord with the planning
scheme and in particular the Assessment
Table. No error is therefore revealed by the primary judge saying that she
preferred Mr Schomburgk’s
[68] In any event, however, even if
the primary judge were to be seen to have misconstrued or misapplied overall
outcome (5)(a) for
the Goosepond Creek precinct in the Mackay Frame Locality,
such error would not be material or vitiate the primary judge’s
that the service station use did not conflict with the Mackay Planning Scheme.
By operation of s 5.8(1) of the Mackay Planning
Scheme, the service station use
will comply with the Mackay Frame Locality Code if it is consistent with the
specific outcomes for
the locality in Division 6 and the specific outcomes for
the relevant zone in Divisions 8 to 20. Such compliance with the Mackay
Locality Code will result regardless of whether or not the service station use
is consistent with the overall outcomes for
the Mackay Frame Locality in
Division 6. The additional overall outcome (5)(a) for the Goosepond Creek
precinct of the Mackay Frame
Locality is an overall outcome for the Mackay Frame
Locality in Division 6. Hence, even if the proposed use as a service
station/truck
stop were not to be consistent with overall outcome (5)(a), this
would not cause that use not to comply with the Mackay Frame Locality
Overall outcome (2)(d) for Rural Zone in Mackay Frame Locality
[69] Division 12 of the Mackay Planning Scheme identifies both overall
outcomes and specific outcomes for the Rural Zone in the Mackay
Frame Locality.
Overall outcomes for the zone, identified in (2), are the purpose of the code
(see (1)). The specific outcomes for
the zone are identified in (3).
[70] DTMR focused on the overall outcome for the Rural Zone in the Mackay
Frame Locality in (2)(d), namely that “Non-rural activities
occur”. DTMR submitted that the proposed use of a service station/truck
stop, which is a non-rural activity, was clearly
in conflict with this overall
outcome. That was Mr Gaskell’s evidence. The proposed use which Mr Gaskell
characterised as commercial,
was not a non-rural activity, and hence was not to
occur in the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality.
[71] DTMR contended
that the primary judge erred in not so finding. The meaning of the text of
overall outcome (2)(d) is clear –
non-rural activities are not to occur in
the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality – and should have been given
that meaning.
DTMR submitted that the primary judge did not do so, but instead
read the overall outcomes for the Rural Zone with the indication
Assessment Table that a service station use is a consistent use and impact
assessable in the Rural Zone (at [48]-[53] of the
judgment). DTMR submitted that
was in error.
[72] DTMR submitted that the primary judge also was in error
in using Mr Schomburgk’s evidence to interpret the overall outcomes.
Schomburgk’s evidence was that Mr Gaskell’s interpretation of
overall outcome (2)(d) would prevent any commercial
activity (which is a
non-rural activity) in the Rural Zone (at [47] of the judgment). Mr Schomburgk
drew attention to the Assessment
Table which noted that use as a service station
is a consistent use and impact assessable in the Rural Zone (at [48], [49] of
judgment). That designation in the Assessment Table demonstrates that a
service station is not inherently inconsistent with the objectives
or intentions
for the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality (at [51] of the judgment).
[73] DTMR submitted that this evidence could not change the conclusion that
the proposed use as a service station/truck stop was in
conflict with overall
outcome (2)(d). A finding that a conflict arose would not “prevent”
such a commercial activity
within the Rural Zone, contrary to Mr
Schomburgk’s evidence. Rather, it would lead to the application of the
decision-making
Sustainable Planning Act
, which sets out
the circumstances where an approval may be granted where such a conflict arises.
[74] DTMR submitted that the primary judge erred in fact in finding (at [51]
of the judgment) that the evidence of both planners,
Mr Schomburgk as well as Mr
Gaskell, accorded with Mr Desbois’ submission that the Assessment Table is
a clear statement that
a service station is not inherently inconsistent with the
objectives or intentions for the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality
[50] of the judgment). DTMR submitted that the planners had expressed
considerable reservations about the weight to be given
consistent/inconsistent dichotomy in the Assessment Table.
[75] DTMR further
submitted that the primary judge erred in fact in accepting Mr
Schomburgk’s evidence “that a service
station is not an incompatible
land use or a non-rural use in this zone, merely because it is commercial in
nature” (at [53]
of the judgment). DTMR submitted that the primary judge
erred in referring to “non-rural uses” when overall outcome (2)(d)
refers to “non-rural activities”. DTMR submitted that the proposed
service station/truck stop must be a “non-rural
particularly when this overall outcome is read with other provisions of the
Mackay Planning Scheme, such as Desired
Environmental Outcome
s 3.1(3)(c)(xi)
and overall outcome (5)(a) of the Goosepond Creek precinct in the Mackay Frame
Locality. These provisions indicate a demarcation
between rural activities and
commercial activities.
[76] Mr Desbois again relied on
Mackay Planning Scheme to dispute the materiality of any error in construction
or application of overall outcome (2)(d). The
overall outcomes for the Rural
Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality in Division 12 do not comprise the Mackay
Frame Locality Code. Section
5.7(1)(d) identifies only the specific outcomes,
not the overall outcomes, for each zone in the Mackay Frame Locality in
8 to 20. Section 5.8(1)(b) provides that development that is
consistent with the specific outcomes for the relevant zone in Divisions
complies with the Mackay Frame Locality Code. Accordingly, in Division 12, only
the specific outcomes, and not the overall
outcomes, for the Rural Zone in the
Mackay Frame Locality comprise the Mackay Frame Locality Code and development
will comply with
the Mackay Frame Locality Code if it is consistent with the
specific outcomes for the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality, irrespective
of whether or not it is consistent with the overall outcomes of the Rural Zone.
It matters not, therefore, whether the proposed use
as a service station/truck
stop is in conflict with overall outcome (2)(d), as even if there be a conflict
it cannot cause the development
not to comply with the Mackay Frame Locality
[77] Mr Desbois submitted that, in any event, the primary judge did not
err in her construction and application of overall outcome
(2)(d) for the Rural
Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality. Mr Desbois submitted that the primary judge
correctly construed this overall
outcome for the Rural Zone in the context of
other overall outcomes for the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality as well
outcomes for the whole of the Mackay Frame Locality. The primary
judge also correctly construed overall outcome (2)(d) for the Rural
Zone in the
Mackay Frame Locality in the context of the Assessment Table, noting that a
service station use is a consistent use and
impact assessable in the Rural
[78] Mr Desbois further submitted that the primary judge’s
finding that the proposed service station/truck stop did not conflict
with the evidence of both planners. Mr Gaskell and Mr Schomburgk agreed that the
proposed use could consistently go in the
Rural Zone.
[79] I find that DTMR
has not established that the primary judge misconstrued or misapplied overall
outcome (2)(d) for the Rural Zone
in the Mackay Frame Locality. I accept Mr
Desbois’ submissions.
[80] The primary judge did not misconstrue
overall outcome (2)(d). She accepted that the proposed use of a service
station/truck stop
was to be characterised as commercial (at [46]). This did not
necessarily mean, however, that it was “an incompatible land
non-rural use” in the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality (at [53]).
The reason the primary judge gave was that
the Assessment Table designated a
service station use as a consistent use and impact assessable in the Rural Zone.
That designation
in the Assessment Table reveals that use of land in the Rural
Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality as a service station is not inherently
inconsistent with the objectives or intentions for the Rural Zone in this
locality (at [50]). Overall outcome (2)(d) cannot, therefore,
be interpreted to
mean that non-rural activities can never occur in the Rural Zone in the Mackay
Frame Locality, as such activities
are permitted with approval in the Rural Zone
in that locality. This is what the primary judge was referring to when she
Mr Schomburgk’s evidence that a service station is not an
incompatible land use in the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality.
primary judge did not therefore err in construing overall outcome (2)(d) for the
Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality in the
context of the Assessment
[81] The primary judge did not err in her application of overall
outcome (2)(d). The primary judge accepted the evidence not only
Schomburgk but also Mr Gaskell that the proposed use of a service station was
not an inconsistent use in the Rural Zone in
the Mackay Frame Locality and that
this kind of use could consistently go in the Rural Zone (at [52]). The primary
findings were reasonably open on the evidence. The fact that DTMR
considers that different factual findings should have been made
on the evidence
does not establish that the primary judge’s findings were in error.
[82] In any event, even if there were to be an error in construing or
applying overall outcome (2)(d) for the Rural Zone in the Mackay
Frame Locality,
this would be of no legal consequence. The overall outcomes for the Rural Zone
in the Mackay Frame Locality in (2)
of Division 12 do not comprise the Mackay
Frame Locality Code. Section 5.7(1)(d) specifies that only the specific outcomes
zone in the Mackay Frame Locality comprise the Mackay Frame Locality
Code. Section 5.8(1) provides that a development that is consistent
specific outcomes for the relevant zone complies with the Mackay Frame Locality
Code. Accordingly, even if the proposed
use of a service station/truck stop were
not to be consistent with overall outcome (2)(d) for the Rural Zone in Division
would not cause the development not to comply with the Mackay Frame
Locality Code.
Specific outcomes P1 and P5 for the Rural Zone in the Mackay
Frame Locality
[83] In reply submissions, DTMR added two specific outcomes,
which DTMR contended the primary judge misconstrued or misapplied, being
specific outcome P1 in Division 7 and specific outcome P5 in Division 12.
[84] Specific outcome P1 for the Mackay Frame Locality
“Commercial development is located in the commercial zone and
does not detract from the network of centres referred to in the
Environmental Outcomes.”
[85] DTMR submitted that specific outcome P1
reflects overall outcome (5)(a) for the Goosepond Creek precinct in the Mackay
Locality. DTMR contended that the proposed use of a service station/truck
stop conflicts with specific outcome P1 for the same reasons
that it had
advanced for why the use conflicts with overall outcome (5)(a) for the Goosepond
Creek precinct.
[86] Specific outcome P5 for the Rural Zone in the Mackay
Frame Locality provides:
“Non-rural activities are not located within
the Rural Area unless the use specifically requires that particular rural
for synergies or co-location.
[87] DTMR submitted that there was no
evidence before the primary judge that the proposed use of a service
station/truck stop specifically
requires that particular rural location for
synergies or co-location with rural activities. In this circumstance, the
proposed use
is contrary to specific outcome P5.
[88] DTMR submitted that as
a consequence of the proposed use not being consistent with these two specific
outcomes, the development
did not comply with the Mackay Frame Locality Code
(see s 5.8(1)).
[89] Mr Desbois accepted that the specific outcomes for the
Mackay Frame Locality in Division 7, including specific outcome P1, and
specific outcomes for the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality in Division
12, including specific outcome P5, do comprise
the Mackay Frame Locality Code
(by s 5.7(1)(c) and (d)) and that development that is not consistent with these
specific outcomes
for the locality in Division 7 or the specific outcomes for
the Rural Zone in Division 12 will not comply with the Mackay Frame Locality
Code (by s 5.8(1)). However, Mr Desbois argued that DTMR has not established
that the primary judge erred in relation to either of
these two specific
[90] The primary judge did not directly deal with these specific
outcomes as no issue concerning them had been raised by the parties
in the court
below. Nevertheless, the primary judge indirectly addressed these specific
outcomes by her consideration and determination
of the overall outcomes that
were to the same effect. The primary judge’s finding that the proposed use
of a service station
in the Rural Zone would be consistent with overall outcome
(2)(d) in Division 12 for the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality
sufficient to support a finding that the proposed use would be consistent with
specific outcome P5 in Division 12 for the Rural
Zone in the Mackay Frame
Locality, as the two outcomes are to a similar effect. The primary judge’s
finding that the proposed
use of a service station would be consistent with
overall outcome (5)(a) in Division 6 for the Goosepond Creek precinct in the
Frame Locality is sufficient to support a finding that the proposed use
is consistent with specific outcome P1 in Division 7 for
the Mackay Frame
Locality, as again the two outcomes are to similar effect.
[91] I find that
DTMR has not established that the primary judge’s decision that the
proposed use of a service station/truck
stop does not conflict with the Mackay
Planning Scheme is affected by any error in relation to specific outcome P1 in
for the Mackay Frame Locality or specific outcome P5 in Division 12
for the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality. I accept Mr
submissions.
[92] DTMR, as the appellant, needed to establish that the
primary judge had erred in not finding that the proposed use is not consistent
with these two specific outcomes. Only if the proposed use is not consistent
with these specific outcomes would the development not
comply with the Mackay
Frame Locality Code (s 5.8(1)). Although the primary judge did not directly
address the two specific outcomes,
as she was not asked by the parties to do so,
her reasons for finding that the proposed use would be consistent with overall
(2)(d) in Division 12 for the Rural Zone in the Mackay Frame Locality
and overall outcome (5)(a) in Division 6 for the Goosepond
Creek precinct would
equally justify a like finding that the proposed use would be consistent with
specific outcome P5 in Division
12 and specific outcome P1 in Division 7
respectively. I have found that DTMR has not established that the primary judge
making her findings in relation to the overall outcomes, so that it
follows that DTMR has not established that the primary judge
erred in relation
to the specific outcomes that are to the same effect as the overall outcomes.
Misapplication of s 326 of
Sustainable Planning Act
convenient to deal with the third and fourth of DTMR’s town planning
grounds together. At the date of the resumption,
Sustainable Planning Act
was still in force. A new planning law, the
Planning Act 2016
(Qld), had been
passed and had received royal assent but was not yet in force. The
Planning Act
commenced on 3 July 2017.
Section 326
Sustainable Planning Act
so far as is relevant:
“(1) The assessment manager’s decision
must not conflict with a relevant instrument unless—
(b) there are
sufficient grounds to justify the decision, despite the
[94] The primary judge found that the proposed service
station/truck stop use did not conflict with any of the provisions of the Mackay
Planning Scheme. The primary judge did not accept Mr Gaskell’s views on
the asserted conflicts: at [71] of the judgment. In
these circumstances, it was
not necessary for the primary judge to determine, under
Sustainable
Planning Act
, whether there were sufficient grounds to justify a decision to
approve the use, despite the conflict. The primary judge did note,
however, that
“grounds” in
referred to matters of public interest and
that need for a development to be approved would fall within that concept: at
[70]. Nevertheless,
the primary judge considered that the evidence before the
Court about need was insufficient, either to persuade her if she had been
conducting a planning appeal (at [72]) or so as to cause a hypothetical
developer not to be uncertain about the prospects of approval
without further
investigation (at [78]).
[95] DTMR contended that the primary judge erred in
fact in finding that the proposed use would not conflict with the provisions of
the Mackay Planning Scheme. As a consequence, DTMR submitted the primary judge
erred in failing to have regard to
in order to determine whether there
were sufficient grounds to justify a decision to approve the proposed use
despite the conflicts.
It was necessary for the primary judge to find that there
were sufficient grounds before the primary judge could conclude that a
hypothetical developer would have been advised that there were good prospects of
obtaining planning approval for a service station/truck
stop. DTMR submitted
that sufficient grounds to overcome a conflict will only occur in exceptional
circumstances: Bell v Brisbane
City Council
[2018] QCA 84
, [70]. DTMR
submitted that the evidence before the Court did not establish that exceptional
circumstances, of the kind contemplated
in Bell v Brisbane City Council,
[96] Need was the only possible “sufficient ground”,
but not just any need will do. It was insufficient merely to prove
was a need for the proposed use. The existence of a need for a particular use is
only the starting point; it is necessary
to identify why that need should not be
met by a development on the site that does not give rise to a conflict with the
scheme: Gold Coast City Council v K & K (GC) Pty Ltd
(2020) QPELR 631
. DTMR submitted that the primary judge found,
correctly, that the need case for the proposed use was weak. No other evidence
available to establish need of the sort referred to in Gold Coast City
Council v K & K (GC) Pty Ltd. This meant that need was
established.
[97] As a consequence, DTMR submitted, the primary judge should
have found that there were not sufficient grounds to justify a decision
approve the proposed use, despite the conflicts with the planning scheme, and
accordingly the prospects of approval were poor.
[98] Mr Desbois submitted
at the outset that the primary judge was correct in finding that there was no
conflict with the provisions
of the Mackay Planning Scheme, for the reasons it
had earlier advanced. In the absence of a conflict, it was unnecessary for
to be relied upon for the purposes of
Sustainable Planning
. The primary judge did not, therefore, err in not considering and applying
to determine the prospects of approval of the proposed use as a service
station/truck stop.
[99] Even if it were to be necessary to consider
Mr Desbois contested that the only sufficient ground to justify the conflict was
need. Whilst the primary judge did consider the
need case advanced by Mr
Desbois, that was not the only ground advanced. Mr Schomburgk had identified a
number of positive grounds
why, in his opinion, approval of the proposed use was
justified. These could also be sufficient grounds for the purposes of
[100] In any event, Mr Desbois submitted there was sufficient evidence to
establish need as a positive case to justify approval. First,
Mr Desbois gave
evidence of being approached by two persons interested in the development of the
site for a service station. Secondly,
the service station experts, who had the
benefit of the town planners’ joint reports as well as the traffic
reports, agreed as to the unique attractiveness of the subject
site and having assessed the site against eight criteria, both experts
that the land achieved an 8/8 network assessment score, which would have been
attractive to a large, first-tier oil company
or developer. The primary judge
correctly identified the finding of the service station experts in relation to
“network fit”
inferred that there was a need.
[101] Finally, Mr
Desbois submitted that it was relevant, in assessing the prospects of approval
of the proposed use, to consider
what would be the applicable planning law at
the time of determining any application for approval. Mr Desbois submitted that
hypothetical developer would consider that the
Planning Act
, which had
received royal assent but had not yet commenced at the date of resumption, would
likely commence by the time any application
seeking approval for the proposed
service station/truck stop use would be determined.
Section 63(3)
Planning Act
permits more flexibility to approve an application for development
that conflicts with a planning scheme than did
Sustainable
Planning Act
: Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council &
Ors; Dexus Funds Management Limited v Fabcot Ltd & Ords
[2021] QCA 95
, the exercise of the planning discretion involves a
balanced decision: Abeleda v Brisbane City Council
(2020) 6 QR 441
, [43], [55], [57]; Wilhelm v Logan City Council & Anor
, [80], [84] and Barro Group Pty Ltd v Sunshine Coast Regional
[2021] QPEC 18
. The assessment under the
Planning Act
“the merits of the proposal based on established policy and other relevant
considerations to reach a balanced decision
in the public interest”, where
it is apparent the reference to “established policy” is to
assessment benchmarks,
such as the relevant planning scheme, and the reference
to “other relevant considerations” is to those matters which
decision-maker is permitted to consider under
of the Act: Abeleda v
Brisbane City Council at [57]; Brisbane City Council v YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
. Shortly stated, “the ultimate decision called for
when making an impact assessment under
Planning Act
broad, evaluative judgment”: Brisbane City Council v YQ Property Pty Ltd
[102] I find neither of these grounds concerning
Sustainable Planning Act
to be established. First, the primary judge can only
have erred in failing to consider whether there were sufficient grounds to
a decision to approve a service station/truck stop use if such use was
in conflict with the Mackay Planning Scheme. This is clear
from the terms of
, both the chapeau (that the decision to approve “must not conflict
with a relevant instrument”) and the closing phrase
of paragraph (b)
(“despite the conflict”).
[103] In the present case, the primary
judge found that approval of the proposed use as a service station/truck stop
would not conflict
with the Mackay Planning Scheme, rejecting DTMR’s
planner’s evidence to the contrary. DTMR’s challenge to those
findings has not been made out, for the reasons I have given earlier. Hence, the
primary judge’s findings that there was no
conflict with the Mackay
Planning Scheme stands and it was not necessary for the primary judge to
determine whether there were sufficient
grounds to justify a decision to approve
the proposed use under
s 326(1)(b).
[104] Even if there were to have been a
conflict, however, it would not necessarily follow that the primary judge would
have had to
apply the decision-making rule in
Sustainable
Planning Act
instead of that in
Planning Act
. The task for the
primary judge was not to determine for herself whether she would have granted
approval for the proposed use as
a service station/truck stop, as if she were to
be sitting in the Planning and Environment Court, or to decide whether a
authority would have granted such approval, but rather to find what
advice a hypothetical developer would have been given as to the
prospects of
approval being granted for the proposed use. That advice would inform the price
the hypothetical developer would be
prepared to pay to purchase the resumed land
at the date of resumption: see Mio Art Pty Ltd & Ors v Brisbane City Council
[2009] QLC 177
[105] Obtaining approval necessitates applying for
approval. Any application for approval would not be made and any grant of
would not be given by the date of resumption, but rather both would be
done after that date. Any advice given about the prospects
of approval would
have regard to the planning law that would likely govern the making and approval
of any application for approval.
In circumstances where the
Planning Act
been passed and assented to, although not commenced, it would be reasonable for
such advice to be given on the basis that the
Planning Act
, and not the repealed
Sustainable Planning Act
, would likely govern the making and approval of any
application to use the subject site land as a service station/truck stop.
Section 63(3)
Planning Act
allows greater flexibility in
approving proposed development that conflicts with the planning scheme than did
Sustainable Planning Act
. The confined grounds upon which courts
have held that a decision-maker can find there are sufficient grounds to justify
to approve a development that conflicts with a planning scheme do not
apply in making a decision under the
Planning Act
, including
circumstances, the primary judge cannot be said necessarily to have erred in
failing to consider and apply
Sustainable Planning Act
determine the prospects of approval being granted to the proposed use.
[107] For these reasons, I reject each of the town planning grounds.
Area of commercial use ground
[108] DTMR challenged in ground 6 the
primary judge’s finding that the area that would be approved for use as a
service station/truck
stop would be 2.25ha, rather than the lesser area of 1.8ha
that had been proposed by DTMR’s planner, Mr Williams.
[109] The issue
arose because Mr Desbois’ planner, Mr Schomburgk, had originally proposed
an area of 2.25ha to be used for a
service station/truck stop as well as a
motel. He later removed the motel component but did not reduce the area proposed
use as a service station/truck stop. Instead, he replaced the motel with
a motor vehicle repair workshop and associated hardstand
(at [15] of the
judgment). In effect, he spread the use of service station/truck stop over the
area of 2.25ha. DTMR’s planner,
Mr Williams, contested that the whole
2.25ha would be used as a service station/truck stop, and opined that once the
motel had been
removed, which occupied 0.45ha, the area for the service
station/truck stop should have been reduced to 1.8ha.
[110] The primary judge
found that the evidence did not support Mr Williams’ approach (at [129] of
the judgment). The primary
judge accepted Mr Schomburgk’s evidence about
the mix of uses that could be applied to the 2.25ha under the modified concept
plan (at [130]). She also accepted the evidence of the service station experts
called by the parties, Mr Lunney for Mr Desbois and
Mr Coudrey for DTMR, that
“the mix of facilities and activities identified in the modified concept
plan would be attractive
to a developer” (at [130]). The primary judge
noted in [131]:
“When asked whether 2ha would be the minimum needed for
a highway site, Mr Lunney said ‘That would be comfortable. Yes.’
Coudrey was not asked to comment. Neither expert was asked whether the area was
excessive given the removal of the motel proposal.”
[111] DTMR argued
that the primary judge erred in fact in accepting the evidence of Mr Schomburgk
and the service station experts
instead of Mr Williams’ evidence. Mr
Desbois contested that the primary judge had made a wrong finding of fact. In
however, the finding was one the primary judge was entitled to make
on the evidence before her.
[112] I find that DTMR has not established that
the primary judge erred in fact, law or discretion in finding that the area to
used as a service station/truck stop would have been 2.25ha. There was an
evidentiary basis for that finding, being the evidence
of Mr Schomburgk and both
parties’ service station experts. The primary judge identified that
evidence as supporting her finding.
There was no error in the primary judge
preferring the evidence of these experts over the evidence of another expert, Mr
[113] I reject the area of commercial use ground.
of the acceleration lane ground
[114] Both parties agreed that if approval
were to be granted for the proposed use of a service station/truck stop, it
would be subject
to a condition requiring the construction of an acceleration
lane. The primary judge so found (at [99]). Mr Desbois had contended
length of the acceleration lane would be no more than 315m, while DTMR contended
that the length of the acceleration lane
would be 435m. The primary judge found
that there were reasonable prospects that the condition of approval would
require an acceleration
lane of no longer than 315m: at [123] of the judgment.
[115] DTMR contended that the primary judge erred in three respects in so
finding. First, the primary judge gave insufficient weight
to the Austroads
Guide to Road Design. DTMR submitted that the primary judge’s statement
that the Guide “is not prescriptive
and does not have regulatory
force” (at [86] of the judgment) and her rejection of DTMR’s
approach to the Guide as being
“at odds with its purpose and elevates it
to a regulatory instrument” (at [121] of the judgment) involved a failure
give real weight to the Guide. DTMR accepted that the Guide was not
prescriptive and was not a regulatory instrument, but submitted
that that was
not what it had argued in the court below. Rather, it had argued that the Guide
would be followed strictly by DTMR
in its consideration, as a referral agency,
of any application for development approval. It was in this context that DTMR
the primary judge ought to have given, but did not give, real weight
to the Guide.
[116] Secondly, DTMR contended that the primary judge erred in
finding that the traffic in the through lane was low, one of the circumstances
in which departure from the acceptable design tables was permissible. Table 5.4
of the Guide indicates the length of the acceleration
lane by reference to the
design speed of the entry curve (here, from the site into the acceleration lane)
and the design speed of
the road entered (here, the Bruce Highway). Both
parties’ traffic engineers assumed a design speed of entry curve of
because vehicles would accelerate within the site before entering the
acceleration lane (at [102] of the judgment). The design speed
of the road
entered was 100km/hour, being the posted speed limit at the point where the
acceleration lane would join the Bruce Highway.
According to Table 5.4, these
parameters would give the length of acceleration lane as being 435m (at [103] of
the judgment).
Section 5.4.2
of the Guide, however, allows for a
shorter acceleration lane in certain circumstances:
“While it is
desirable in most cases that the accelerating vehicle reaches the mean free
speed of the adjacent through lane
(about numerically equal to the posted speed
limit) before merging, in some situations where the site is constrained and the
in the through lane is low it may be acceptable to design for a speed
decrement of 20km/h within the merge area (i.e. a merging vehicle
travelling at
80km/h enters a traffic stream of vehicles travelling at 100km/h).”
(Quoted by the primary judge at [104] of
the judgment).
parties’ traffic engineers agreed as to the first circumstance that the
site was “constrained” by there
being a railway bridge within the
length of the acceleration lane that would be required by Table 5.4 (435m) and
by the cost of widening
the bridge to provide an acceleration lane (at [109] of
the judgment). The primary judge found that the site was constrained by the
bridge and the cost of widening it (at [117]).
[119] The traffic engineers
disagreed as to the second circumstance of whether the volume of traffic in the
through lane was low.
Mr Desbois’ traffic engineer, Mr Camilleri,
considered the volume was low, while DTMR’s traffic engineer, Mr Johnston,
considered it was not low. The primary judge preferred Mr Camilleri’s view
that the volume of the through traffic was low (at
[117]). The primary judge
noted that: “Mr Camilleri considered the traffic volumes were low at the
relevant time, having regard
to the operating capacity of the road. During the
peak hour there are about 500 vph, less than a third of the operating capacity
of the highway. At other times of the day there are in the order of 300
vph.” (at [113]). The primary judge noted that Mr Johnston
disagreed (at
[120] The primary judge also referred to DTMR’s upgrade of the
intersection of Glendaragh Road and the Bruce Highway in 2010.
That intersection
was only 900m to the west of the site. DTMR did not provide an acceleration lane
at all and the deceleration lane
was shorter than the table in the Guide
indicated. The primary judge noted that volumes at Glendaragh Road were
approximately 9,500
a day in 2010 and 9,000 a day in 2016, and that the traffic
volumes adjacent to the site were near identical (at [116]). The primary
inferred that DTMR’s decision not to provide an acceleration lane and to
provide a deceleration lane shorter than the
Guide would otherwise require
indicated that the through traffic volumes at that site were accepted to be low
(at [115], [116]).
[121] DTMR contended that the primary judge erred in
accepting Mr Camilleri’s view that the traffic volumes were low having
regard to the operating capacity of the road. DTMR submitted that the operating
capacity of the through lane was not a relevant referent
for ascertaining
whether the volume of traffic in the through lane was low. Rather, regard should
be had to the nature of the through
lane. Here, it was the Bruce Highway known
to carry in 2016 more than 9,000 vehicles per day in both lanes, including in
peak approximately 600 vehicles per hour in the eastbound through lane.
DTMR submitted that this volume could not be considered to
[122] Thirdly, DTMR contended that the primary judge erred in her
consideration of DTMR’s upgrading of the intersection of Glendaragh
and the Bruce Highway without providing an acceleration lane. DTMR submitted
that the primary judge erred in inferring that
the non-provision of an
acceleration lane indicated that the volume of traffic in the through lane (the
Bruce Highway) at the intersection
was low. DTMR submitted that there were other
factors in the Guide that might have supported DTMR not providing an
acceleration lane
at the intersection. The Guide distinguishes between
greenfield sites (such as the subject site) and brownfield sites (such as
Road), applying more stringently to the former than the latter. The
design of the Glendaragh Road intersection uses different traffic
standards than
those proposed for the subject site. The Guide provides for the intersection
treatments that should be used with major
roads, depending on traffic and turn
volumes. These treatments are different to those applicable to the subject site.
The Glendaragh
Road intersection used an alternative traffic treatment, a stop
sign (which is a type of BAL treatment), so that there was no need
acceleration lane. DTMR submitted that these matters provide no support for the
primary judge’s finding that DTMR’s
upgrade of the intersection of
Glendaragh Road and the Bruce Highway indicated that through traffic volumes at
that site were accepted
[123] For these reasons, DTMR submitted
that the primary judge erred in finding that the volume of the through traffic
was low and
hence that the circumstances in
of the Guide would exist
justifying a shorter acceleration lane than indicated by Table 5.4 of the
[124] Mr Desbois disputed that the primary judge had erred in
concluding that there were reasonable prospects of a traffic safety
requiring an acceleration lane of no longer than 315m. In so finding, the
primary judge preferred the evidence of Mr Camilleri,
as she was entitled to do.
There was no error of law or principle of assessment in the primary judge
preferring the evidence of one
expert over the evidence of another: Pamalco Pty
Ltd v Minister Administering the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974 (No 3)
(1991) 71 LGRA 441
[125] Mr Desbois submitted that the primary judge
did not err in her consideration and application of the Guide. She did not fail
to give real weight to the Guide, as DTMR had submitted, but rather recognised
that it provides valuable guidance, quoting directly
from the Guide in
“It ‘provides valuable guidance to designers in the
production of safe, economical and efficient road designs.’
It adopts a
‘safe system approach’ to road safety that recognises human
fallibility. In a safe system ‘roads should
be designed to reduce the
incidence and severity of crashes when they inevitably
[126] The primary judge correctly applied the Guide. She
quoted Table 5.4 of the Guide (in [101]). She found that “strictly
applied, the Table indicates an acceleration lane of 435 m” (at [103]).
She recognised that s 5.4.2 provides flexibility in
determining the length of
the acceleration lane. She noted the situations referred to in s 5.4.2 of the
Guide where it may be acceptable
to provide an acceleration lane of a length
less than what Table 5.4 requires, quoting the passage from s 5.4.2 at [104].
The primary
judge noted that this passage in s 5.4.2 “refers to what is
desirable and identifies when a different design might be acceptable.”
[127] Mr Desbois submitted that the primary judge’s
consideration and application of the Guide reveals no error.
Desbois rejected DTMR’s argument that the primary judge erred in finding
that the traffic volumes were low, so that
it would be acceptable to provide an
acceleration lane of 315m rather than the 435m required by Table 5.4. The
question of whether
the traffic volumes were low was a question of fact to be
determined on the evidence. There was sufficient evidence before the court
below, particularly that of Mr Camilleri, on which the primary judge was
entitled to find that the traffic volumes were low. That
Mr Camilleri’s
opinion that the traffic volumes were low had regard to the operating capacity
of the through lane (the Bruce
Highway) revealed no error. That was his opinion,
and the primary judge committed no error of fact or law in accepting that
[129] Mr Desbois submitted that the primary judge was also entitled
to find that DTMR’s upgrade of the intersection of Glendaragh
Road and the
Bruce Highway in 2010 indicated that the through traffic volumes at that site in
2010 were accepted to be low because
DTMR did not provide an acceleration lane.
That too was an inference of fact open to the primary judge on the evidence.
to DTMR’s submission, the fact that the intersection had a stop
sign BAL treatment rather than an acceleration lane might also
indicate that the
volume of through traffic was low. The Guide provides that BAL treatments are
most appropriately used where the
volume of through traffic is low. Mr Desbois
noted that the primary judge found that the traffic volumes at the intersection
of Glendaragh
Road and the Bruce Highway, which was approximately 900m west of
the subject site, were near identical to those at the subject site
(at [116] of
the judgment).
[130] In these circumstances, Mr Desbois submitted it was
reasonably open to the primary judge to rely on what DTMR had done in the
upgrade of that intersection in determining what would be required for an
acceleration lane at the subject site.
[131] I find that DTMR has not
established that the primary judge’s finding that there were reasonable
prospects that the traffic
safety condition would have required an acceleration
lane of no more than 315m resulted from any factual, legal or discretionary
[132] The primary judge did not misconstrue or misapply the Austroads
Guide to Road Design. The primary judge’s reasons reveal
understood and correctly applied the Guide. Her statement in [86] that the Guide
“is not prescriptive and does not
have regulatory force” was
correct, a point not disputed by DTMR. In the balance of [86], the primary judge
explained the purpose
of the Guide as providing valuable guidance for the safe,
economical and efficient design of roads, quoting from the Guide.
misreads the primary judge’s statement in [121] of the judgment. The
primary judge did not find that adherence to
the Guide would elevate it to the
status of a regulatory instrument. To the contrary, the primary judge well
understood that the
Guide was not a regulatory instrument. That was what the
primary judge had said at [86]. What she was saying at [121] was that she
perceived DTMR to be arguing that the Guide should be strictly followed.
DTMR’s traffic engineer had said that there was no
discretion in applying
Table 5.4 of the Guide to determine the length of the acceleration lane unless
what he referred to as the
“preconditions” in s 5.4.2 of the Guide
were met (at [119]). These “preconditions” were that “the site
is constrained and the volume in the through lane is low”. While Mr
Johnston accepted that the first precondition was met,
he disputed that the
second precondition was met. In that circumstance, Mr Johnston said that Table
5.4 must be strictly applied.
This was the approach that DTMR had submitted the
primary judge should adopt.
[134] The primary judge did not accept that this
was the approach to be followed, for the reasons she gave in [121]. The full
makes this clear and puts the reference to the Guide being elevated to
a regulatory instrument in context:
“The Guide is ambiguous and lacks
definition for terms that DTMR purports to treat as ‘pre-conditions’
to the ‘relaxation’
of a ‘requirement.’ I have already
observed that approach to the Guide is at odds with its purpose and elevates it
a regulatory instrument. The Guide uses discretionary language and invites
the exercise of professional judgment. The specific discretion
provided by s
5.4.2 does not limit the discretion that otherwise applies in using the
[135] The primary judge in this passage referred not only to
the specific discretion provided by s 5.4.2, but also to a general discretion
applying the Guide. The Guide specifically affords discretion in s 5.4.2 to
accept a shorter acceleration lane than would be indicated
in Table 5.4 in
certain circumstances, but that does not exclude the general discretion to apply
the Guide differently in other circumstances.
[136] The primary judge had
dealt with the specific discretion in s 5.4.2 in [104]-[117], concluding that
both circumstances in s
5.4.2 did exist, as the site was constrained and the
volume of the through traffic was low. The primary judge went on to consider
general discretion “if I am wrong in that finding” that the
circumstances in s 5.4.2 were met (at [118]). The primary
statements in [121] were the culmination of her discussion of the general
discretion in the application of the Guide.
[137] In summary, the primary
judge’s discussion of the Guide, and of the specific and general
discretion in applying the Guide,
does not reveal any error in construction or
application of the Guide.
[138] In particular, DTMR’s contention that
the primary judge did not give any real weight to the Guide is demonstrably
The primary judge’s discussion reveals that she did give real
weight to the Guide. The primary judge applied the Guide, both
Table 5.4 in
order to ascertain the length of the acceleration lane indicated by that table,
and the specific discretion in s 5.4.2
to find that a shorter acceleration lane
would be acceptable. This involved giving real weight to the Guide. The primary
on to exercise the general discretion in the Guide if she were to be
wrong in her finding applying the specific discretion in s 5.4.2.
DTMR does not
challenge that there is a general discretion in applying the Guide. Hence, the
primary judge’s exercise of the
general discretion in the Guide in itself
gave real weight to the Guide.
[139] In any event, the weight to be given to
the Guide was within the discretion of the primary judge. Questions of the
the relative significance, to be accorded to particular facts or to
particular aspects of the Guide, once it is determined that different
conclusions are reasonably open, are questions of fact: Randwick Municipal
Council v Manousaki
(1988) 66 LGRA 330
at 334. See also Azzopardi v Tasman UEB
Industries Ltd
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
at 155-156. That DTMR urged different
conclusions of fact or weight than were found by the primary judge does not
reveal any error
justifying appellate intervention.
[140] DTMR also has not
established that the primary judge’s finding that the second circumstance
in s 5.4.2, that the volume
of traffic in the through lane was low, was in
error. There was an evidentiary basis for that finding. First, there was the
of Mr Camilleri. Mr Camilleri considered the traffic volumes to be low,
having regard to the operating capacity of the through lane
(the Bruce Highway).
The circumstance in s 5.4.2 that the volume of traffic in the through lane is
“low” requires some
referent: low compared to what? Mr Camilleri
considered a reasonable referent to use was the operating capacity of the road.
DTMR considered this referent to be “irrelevant” matters not;
it was a referent reasonably open to be used to ascertain
whether the volume of
traffic in the through lane could be described as low. The primary judge did not
err in preferring Mr Camilleri’s
evidence that used this referent.
[141] Secondly, there was evidence before the Court that DTMR had upgraded
the intersection of Glendaragh Road and the Bruce Highway
without providing an
acceleration lane. The primary judge drew the inference that DTMR must have
considered the volume of traffic
in the through lane (the Bruce Highway) at this
intersection to be low, otherwise DTMR would have required an acceleration lane
accordance with the Guide. That inference was reasonably open to be drawn. It
matters not whether this was expressly put to the traffic
engineers, a point
made by DTMR. The inference was one of fact that the primary judge was able to
draw without the need for the traffic
engineers to opine as to why DTMR did not
provide an acceleration lane.
[142] DTMR referred to other factors that
could possibly explain why DTMR did not provide an acceleration lane. But all
this serves
to indicate is that other inferences were available to be drawn. It
does not demonstrate that the inference drawn by the primary
judge was not
reasonably open. Where multiple inferences are open to be drawn on the evidence,
the drawing by the primary judge of
one of these inferences rather than another
inference reveals no error of fact or law.
[143] I reject the length of the
acceleration lane grounds.
The risk discount grounds
[144] Both parties
challenged the primary judge’s selection of a discount of 15% for the risk
that the traffic safety condition
might require an acceleration lane of 435m,
which would necessitate the widening of the railway bridge at a cost that would
the proposed development economically unviable.
[145] DTMR contended
that the primary judge wrongly applied only a 15% discount for the risk that the
condition might require a longer
acceleration lane and the widening of the
railway bridge, when she should have found that the risk was much higher and the
so large that the proposed development was unfeasible (see grounds 2
and 3). Mr Desbois contended conversely that the primary judge
erred in finding
that a discount of 15% was an appropriate basis upon which to assess
compensation (grounds 2 and 3).
[146] The primary judge did not apply a
discount for the risk in obtaining planning approval, because she had found that
“good prospects” of obtaining planning approval (at [82]
and [123] of the judgment). On this finding, there was no need
to reduce the
award for loss in land value for the risk of not obtaining planning approval (at
[141] of the judgment). The primary
judge adopted a different approach for the
risk that a condition of approval might require a longer acceleration lane and
widening of the railway bridge. As the primary judge found that there
were “reasonable prospects”, rather than “good
prospects”, of a traffic safety condition requiring an acceleration lane
of no longer than 315m (at [123]), she recognised
that there was a risk that the
condition might require a longer acceleration lane and that it was therefore
appropriate to discount
the award for loss of land value to account for this
risk (at [150]).
[147] Mr Desbois’ valuer, Mr Eales, had assessed that
risk as justifying a 30% discount, but this discount was applied to a
starting valuation of $750,000 per hectare that he had derived from comparing
the passing traffic statistics for the sale site
and the subject site. After
hearing the evidence of the traffic experts, Mr Eales conceded that his initial
allowance of a 30% discount
on an applied rate of $750,000 per hectare was a
“very liberal allowance for this perception of risk”. DTMR’s
Mr Williams, did not quantify as a percentage the risk that the
condition would require a longer acceleration lane and consequently
the widening
of the railway bridge. Nevertheless, consistent with DTMR’s traffic
engineer’s view, he considered the risk
to be so high and hence the
discount for that risk to be so large that the proposed development was
unfeasible (at [126], [147] of
the judgment).
[148] The primary judge did
not accept Mr Williams’ assessment of the high risk, and hence the large
discount, because she found
that there were “reasonable prospects”
of the traffic safety condition requiring an acceleration lane of no more than
315m (at [148] of the judgment). That finding was reasonably open to the primary
judge on the evidence, as I have explained when
dealing with the length of the
acceleration lane grounds. No error is established in the primary judge not
accepting DTMR’s
valuer’s evidence that the discount should be so
large as to make the proposed development unfeasible. I therefore reject
risk discount grounds.
[149] The primary judge also did not
accept Mr Eales’ evidence that the discount should be 30%. That discount
was dependent
on Mr Eales’ valuation that the rate should be $750,000 per
hectare. That valuation was based on the differential traffic volumes
sale site and the subject site. The primary judge rejected Mr Eales’
method as not providing a reliable indication of
value (at [139] and [153] of
the judgment).
[150] The rejection of Mr Eales’ method of valuing the
rate per hectare raised doubt about the 30% rate that Mr Eales had applied
his rate per hectare that the primary judge had rejected. Nevertheless, the
primary judge did not determine what should be the
appropriate discount having
regard to her assessment of the risk of the condition of approval requiring a
longer acceleration lane
and hence the widening of the railway bridge. Instead,
the primary judge reduced the discount to 15% to counterbalance her assessment
that the value derived from the sale of $400,000 per hectare was too low. This
is evident in [153] of the judgment:
“Mr Eales applied a 30% discount
from his starting rate of $750,000/ha. I have rejected that rate/ha. After
hearing the evidence
from the traffic engineers, in particular the possibility
of an alternative to an acceleration lane, Mr Eales said he thought that
discount was too high. I have found that a hypothetical developer would be
advised they had good prospects of securing planning approval
and reasonable
prospects of achieving a traffic condition that did not require them to widen
the bridge. In those circumstances,
and given my view that $400,000/ha is too
low, I will apply a 15% discount, resulting in a value of $765,000 for the
2.25ha ($400,000
x 85% x 2.25 ha). I consider that adequately compensates Mr
Desbois for the loss of his land.”
[151] Mr Desbois challenged the
primary judge’s determinations of both the discount and the rate per
hectare on a number of
related grounds. At the core of all of these grounds, but
particularly ground 3, was the contention that the primary judge failed
determine separately, and to explain her reasons for so determining, the
appropriate discount and the appropriate rate per hectare.
Instead, the primary
judge conflated these two tasks. The primary judge selected a discount of 15% to
counterbalance her view that
the rate of $400,000 per hectare was too low. But
the primary judge determined neither what should be the appropriate rate per
if $400,000 per hectare was too low nor what should be the appropriate
discount to reflect the risk that the condition of approval
might require a
longer acceleration lane and consequently the widening of the railway bridge.
These errors are common to Mr Desbois’
risk discount grounds and land
valuation grounds.
[152] Mr Desbois further contended, in ground 2, that the
discount of 15% was too high. Mr Desbois submitted that having regard to
traffic engineers’ evidence, and the primary judge’s findings on
that evidence that there were reasonable prospects
of the condition of approval
requiring an acceleration lane of no more than 315m, the discount should have
been in the range of 10%
to 20% but closer to 10%.
[153] I find that the
primary judge did err in conflating the two tasks of determining the appropriate
rate per hectare and the appropriate
discount to apply to that rate per hectare
to account for the risk that the condition of approval might require a longer
acceleration
lane and consequently the widening of the railway
[154] The primary judge’s downward adjustment of the discount
from the 30% suggested by Mr Eales to 15% was seemingly undertaken
counterbalance the value of $400,000 per hectare being too low. But that was to
adjust the discount for a purpose other than the
purpose for which the discount
was being applied, which was to reflect the risk that a condition of approval
might require a longer
acceleration lane and hence the widening of the railway
bridge. As a consequence, the primary judge’s discount of 15% did not
necessarily reflect this risk.
[155] To this extent, the primary judge erred
on a principle of assessment in determining the loss of land value. Once the
judge had determined that it was appropriate to discount the award for
loss of land value to take account of the risk that a condition
of approval for
the proposed use might require a longer acceleration lane and hence the widening
of the railway bridge, the primary
judge can be seen to have constructively
failed to exercise jurisdiction to determine what was the appropriate discount
that reflected
that risk. To this extent, Mr Desbois’ risk discount
grounds should be upheld.
[156] I do not uphold Mr Desbois’ contention
that the primary judge erred in not fixing the discount closer to 10% rather
the 15% the primary judge selected. The error lies not in the particular
percentage selected as such, but in the selection of that
percentage for a
reason other than to reflect the primary judge’s assessment of the risk
that the condition might require a
longer acceleration lane. That task has yet
to be performed by the primary judge. On remitter, the primary judge will need
so. The parties can make submissions as to what percentage discount should
be used, based on the evidence before the Court.
The land value grounds
[157] The primary judge applied the rate of $400,000 derived from the
Gracemere sale to the subject site without adjustment, notwithstanding
had found that rate to be too low. The rate was too low because it was heavily
discounted for the sale’s uncosted
flood mitigation risks and did not
reflect the superior locational attributes of the subject site (at [152] of the
judgment). The
reason the primary judge gave for not adjusting that rate was
that she had no information that would allow her to adjust the rate
(at [152]).
[158] In that circumstance, the primary judge sought to counterbalance her
using too low a rate by reducing the discount that she
applied to that rate to
15% to account for the risk that the condition of approval might require a
longer acceleration lane and hence
the widening of the railway
[159] Mr Desbois challenged the primary judge’s use of the rate
of $400,000 per hectare on two sets of grounds. The first, in
grounds 1 and 3,
were to the same effect as Mr Desbois’ risk discount grounds. The primary
judge conflated the two tasks of
determining the appropriate rate per hectare
and the appropriate rate of discount. She was required to, but failed to,
these tasks independently of each other. Having found that the
analysed rate of $400,000 per hectare was too low to be applied to
the subject
site, the primary judge was required to determine what was the appropriate rate
per hectare. That task could not be avoided
by reducing the discount that was to
be applied to the rate per hectare. The primary judge was equally required to
determine the
appropriate discount that reflected the risk of the condition
requiring a longer acceleration lane and hence widening of the railway
The selection of a lower discount than might otherwise be appropriate simply to
counterbalance using too low a rate per hectare
avoided undertaking that
[160] The second challenge, in ground 1, was that the rate of $400,000
per hectare was too low on the evidence and should have been
at least $600,000.
That figure was derived by adjusting the analysed rate of $400,000 per hectare
for the sale for the differential
flooding risks and costs of the sale site and
subject site.
[161] I find that the primary judge did err in applying a rate
of $400,000 per hectare, which she had found was too low. As I explained
dealing with the risk discount grounds, the primary judge was required to
determine separately both the appropriate rate per
hectare and the appropriate
discount to be applied to that rate per hectare. The primary judge’s
failure to do so was an error
of principle of assessment and a constructive
failure to exercise jurisdiction. To this extent, I uphold Mr Desbois’
land valuation
[162] I do not accept the other ground that the rate
of $400,000 was too low and should have been $600,000. It may be accepted that,
if the primary judge had assessed what should be the appropriate rate per
hectare, she would have found the rate should be higher
than $400,000 per
hectare. After all, she did find that the rate of $400,000 was too low, as that
rate was heavily discounted for
the sale’s uncosted flood mitigation risks
and did not reflect the superior locational attributes of the subject site. But
how much higher than $400,000 per hectare the primary judge would have found the
rate should be, if the rate was adjusted for these
two factors, has not been
determined. This is the error – the failure to determine the appropriate
rate – not that the
primary judge did not determine the rate at $600,000
per hectare as Mr Desbois submitted. On remitter, the primary judge will
what is the appropriate rate per hectare to be used, having regard to
the evidence before the Court.
Conclusion and orders
[163] DTMR has not
established any of its grounds of appeal. DMTR’s appeal should be
dismissed, with costs. Mr Desbois has established
aspects of his grounds of
appeal concerning the constructive failure of the primary judge to determine
separately the appropriate
rate per hectare and the appropriate discount to be
applied to that rate per hectare to assess the loss of land value. Mr Desbois
has not otherwise established his grounds of appeal. Nevertheless, having
established the primary aspects of his grounds of appeal,
Mr Desbois’
appeal should be upheld with costs.
[164] I propose this Court make the
following orders:
1. The appeal by the Chief Executive, Department of
Transport and Main Roads, proceedings No LAC001-22, is dismissed.
Chief Executive, Department of Transport and Main Roads is to pay the costs of
Mr Clive Desbois of proceedings No LAC001-22.
3. The appeal by Mr Clive
Desbois, proceedings No LAC002-22, is upheld.
4. The Chief Executive,
Department of Transport and Main Roads is to pay the costs of Mr Clive Desbois
of proceedings No LAC002-22.
5. The matter is remitted to the Land Court for
determination in accordance with the reasons of this Court.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (447 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter