URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/214.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v KBK [2025] QCA 214 (4 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
[2025] QCA 214
(appellant)
CA No 270 of 2024
DC No 656 of 2024
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Appeal against Conviction
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Southport – Date of Conviction: 18 November
2024 (Balić DCJ)
DELIVERED ON:
4 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
5 June 2025
Bond JA and Freeburn and Sullivan JJ
Appeal dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – PARTICULAR GROUNDS OF
APPEAL – MISDIRECTION AND NON-DIRECTION – where
the appellant was
convicted of 1 count of repeated sexual conduct with a child, 14 counts of
aggravated indecent treatment, 1 count
of armed assault occasioning bodily harm,
and 1 count of rape of the complainant – where there was a delay between
of the offending and the making of the complaint to police –
where the appellant brought an appeal on the basis that the trial
judge erred in
not directing the jury under
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
Evidence Act 1977
(Qld) that there was sufficient evidence to justify a direction that the delay
in complaint was relevant to the complainant’s
credibility – where
the appellant’s representatives at trial did not request the direction
– where the appellant
submits that where there is sufficient evidence to
justify the direction,
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
ought to be construed as imposing a
positive obligation on the judge to give the direction – where the Crown
disputes that
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
imposes a positive statutory obligation to give
the direction where there is sufficient evidence – where the appellant
the trial judge ought to have incorporated the complainant’s
alleged motive to lie about his complaint, being for revenge for
the appellant
kicking the complainant out of home, in a
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
direction as an
alternative explanation for the delay in making the complaint – whether
there was sufficient evidence to justify
the direction – whether the trial
judge erred in not giving the direction to the jury
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE
– PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES NOT AMOUNTING TO MISCARRIAGE
MISDIRECTION OR NON– DIRECTION – where the appellant brought an
alternative ground of appeal on the basis that
a miscarriage of justice was
occasioned because the trial judge did not direct the jury that delay was
relevant to the complainant’s
credibility – where the appellant
submits where there is sufficient evidence to justify the direction, it amounts
to a material
miscarriage of justice to not have given the direction –
where the Crown concedes that if the Court finds there was sufficient
to justify the direction, in this case, failure to give the direction would
amount to a miscarriage of justice because the
Court has a duty to conduct the
case fairly – whether there was sufficient evidence to justify the
direction – whether
the lack of a direction amounted to a miscarriage
CRIMINAL LAW – EVIDENCE – CORROBORATION AND POST-OFFENCE
CONDUCT – WARNING REQUIRED OR ADVISABLE – SEXUAL
OTHER PARTICULAR CASES – where the trial judge gave directions consistent
with her obligations pursuant to
ss 103ZZ(2)(a)
and (b) – where the
appellant submits the trial judge ought to have incorporated the
complainant’s alleged motive to
lie about his complaint, being for revenge
for the appellant kicking the complainant out of home, in
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
direction as an alternative explanation for the delay
in making the complaint – where
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
a direction about delay in complaint being relevant to the
complainant’s credibility, unless there is sufficient
evidence to justify
the direction – where the Crown submits that on the proper construction of
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
there must be evidence which is sufficient to reveal
inconsistencies between the complaint and the delay, for the delay to be
to the assessment of credit – where the Crown submits there is
not sufficient evidence to warrant the direction in this case
there was sufficient evidence to lift the conditional prohibition against giving
the direction in
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
– whether the trial judge had a duty to
give the direction that the delay was relevant to the complainant’s
credibility
to ensure a fair trial
Criminal Law (Coercive Control and Affirmative Consent) and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 2024
Evidence Act 1977
Alford v Magee
(1952) 85 CLR 437
[1952] HCA 3
v The Queen
(1973) 129 CLR 460
[1973] HCA 30
RPS v The Queen
(2000) 199 CLR 620
[2000] HCA 3
Svajcer v The Queen
(2010) 200 A Crim R 587
[2010] VSCA 116
M J Jackson for the appellant
C W Wallis for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the appellant
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Queensland) for the respondent
I have the advantage of reading in draft the reasons for judgment of
Sullivan J.
Honour’s careful examination of the issues in the case and of the relevant
aspects of the record permits me to express
in a summary way my reasons for
agreeing with the orders proposed by his Honour.
[3] First, and
for the reasons expressed in
the appellant’s
submission that
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
Evidence Act
can be regarded as
the source of a legal obligation on a trial judge to give directions that
delayed complaint is relevant to a complainant’s
credibility must be
rejected. The arguments which sought to justify the existence of an obligation
to make such a direction by reference
to whether a statutory “sufficiency
of evidence” threshold had been met were misconceived. Ground 1 must
[4] Second, for
ground 2 to succeed, and having regard to the observations made in
the appellant would need
to demonstrate that the trial judge’s failure to make the suggested
comment occasioned a miscarriage
of justice, having regard to the trial
judge’s obligation to ensure a fair trial of the accused. The statutory
“sufficiency
of evidence” threshold would only become relevant in
the event there was a concern that a comment or warning, otherwise called
the application of first principle, might infringe the prohibition expressed
s 103ZZ(2)(c).
In the present case, the reasons for judgment of Sullivan J
have demonstrated that there was nothing about the conduct of the trial
bound the trial judge to make such a comment. No miscarriage of justice was
occasioned by the trial judge following the course
the High Court described
as the safer course. Ground 2 must also fail.
[5] Both grounds
of appeal having failed, the order proposed by Sullivan J should be made.
[6] FREEBURN
I too have had the advantage of reading in advance the reasons of
Sullivan J. I agree that the appeal should be dismissed, and
I agree with
the reasons of Sullivan J.
103ZZ(2)(c)
Evidence Act 1977
(Qld) prohibits a trial judge from
directing a jury that the absence of a complaint, or the delay in making a
complaint, is relevant
to the complainant’s credibility unless there is
sufficient evidence to justify such a direction.
103ZZ(2)(c)
is framed as a prohibition on such a direction unless
a precondition is met, that is, there is sufficient evidence to justify
a direction.
[9] The trial
judge did not give such a direction and was not asked to do so.
[10] I agree
with Sullivan J that the evidence in this case was not sufficient to justify the
direction. The trial judge was right
not to give a direction that the
complainant’s delay in making a complaint was relevant to his credibility.
The trial judge’s
directions to the jury, correctly in my view, focused on
the real issue which was whether the complainant had lied and whether the
complainant had a motive to make a false complaint. Delay in making a complaint
did not feature as a real issue and there was no
sufficient evidence to justify
the direction.
[11] For those
reasons grounds one and two must fail and the appeal should be dismissed.
[12] SULLIVAN
The appellant was charged with 21 sexual offences against the
complainant. The alleged offending was said to have occurred between
[13] The charges
proceeded to trial on a replacement indictment which was presented on
11 November 2024. On the third day of trial,
Counts 3, 8, 13, 15 and 16
were the subject of a nolle prosequi. The rest of the counts were ultimately
left to the jury, resulting
in the following convictions on 18 November
(a) Count 1: repeated sexual conduct with a child (1 April 1996 –
16 November 1998)
(b) Counts 2, 4 - 12, 14, 17, 18: aggravated indecent treatment (1 April 1996
– 16 November 1998)
(c) Count 19: AOBH, armed (30 January 2000 – 30 November 2000)
(d) Count 20: rape (24 April 2001 – 1 July 2002)
(e) Count 21: aggravated indecent treatment (24 April 2001 – 1 July 2002)
appellant was sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment on 1 May 2025.
[15] The appeal
involves the operation of
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
Evidence Act 1977
(Qld). That section concerns circumstances where there has been a delay in the
making of a complaint in relation to the commission
of a sexual offence.
It provides that the judge “must not direct the jury that absence of
complaint or delay in complaining
is relevant to the complainant’s
credibility unless there is sufficient evidence to justify the
direction.”
[16] Here, the
trial judge had not been requested to make such a direction and did not do so of
her own volition. It is the absence
of such a direction which underlies the
appellant was granted leave to amend the Notice of Appeal so that the grounds of
appeal were as follows:
(a) Ground one: The learned trial judge erred at law in not directing the jury
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
that there was sufficient evidence to justify a
direction that delay was relevant to the complainant’s credibility; and
(b) Ground two: Alternatively, a miscarriage of justice was occasioned because
the learned trial judge did not direct the jury that
delay was relevant to the
complainant’s credibility.
appellant contended that
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
ought to be construed as imposing
a positive obligation on the judge to give the relevant direction if there
is “sufficient
evidence to justify the direction,” whether or not
such a direction had been requested by the defence. The alternative ground
to the effect that even if there was not such a positive statutory obligation,
if there was “sufficient evidence to justify
a direction”, then
it would have been a miscarriage of justice not to have given the relevant
direction, and that miscarriage
of justice would have been a material one, in
the sense that the absence of the relevant direction could realistically have
the reasoning of the jury to the verdicts of guilty at the trial.
[19] The Crown
disputed that
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
imposes a positive statutory obligation to
provide the direction where there is “sufficient evidence to justify the
direction.”
However, the Crown conceded that if, contrary to the
Crown’s submission, there was sufficient evidence to justify the
in the circumstances of the case, failure to do so must be regarded
as amounting to a miscarriage of justice. In particular, it
was conceded that
in accordance with the duty of the Court to conduct the case fairly,
a failure to give the direction would have
resulted in a material
miscarriage of justice sufficient for the appeal to be allowed.
[20] The real
issue on the appeal then is whether there was “sufficient evidence to
justify” the relevant direction.
appellant had been a police officer who had married the complainant’s
mother. The complainant and his mother had moved
into and resided at the
appellant’s house. The complainant’s mother was an alcoholic who
was often drunk and passed
out on the couch at their residence.
complainant’s evidence was that he had considered the appellant a father
complainant gave evidence that over an initial period of two and a-half years in
the mid to late 1990s, the appellant maintained
an unlawful sexual relationship
with him. At that stage, the complainant was aged 8 to 11 years of age. The
complainant alleged
a variety of sexual acts were engaged in during this period.
Some of those acts were particularised in Counts 2 to 18 in respect
separate occasions. They included allegations of mutual touching, oral and anal
penetration, as well as exposing the complainant
to pornography.
cross-examination the complainant’s consistent evidence was that he had
been kicked out of the house by the defendant
and went to live with his
grandparents.
complainant gave evidence that in later years in the early 2000s, at a time when
he was said to be 12 to 15 years of age,
the appellant had physically assaulted
him and later orally raped and indecently dealt with him.
complainant’s mother gave evidence at trial. Her evidence included that
she had a drinking problem, that the complainant
was kicked out of home and
that she did not see or hear anything which led her to suspect sexual contact
between the appellant and
the complainant.
complainant’s grandmother also gave evidence, which included that she had
been asked by the appellant to pick up the
complainant from the family
residence, on the basis that he had been a bad influence on the other children
(who were his younger
siblings), and that the appellant did not want the
complainant at the house anymore.
[28] During the
trial, the Crown led evidence that preliminary complaints had been made by the
complainant to various peers over the
years. More specifically, these were as
complainant’s friend and colleague, a Ms TN, at some time after first
meeting the complainant in around 2003 or 2004,
a statement that the appellant
had “touched” the complainant.
To a friend and
colleague, a Mr BQ, a statement that the appellant had “basically sexually
assaulted” the complainant.
To a Mr RP, a
statement that the appellant had “pretty much molested” the
complainant, and that the appellant had raped
the complainant.
fiancée of the complainant, a Mr EV, a statement made in the later part
of the 2010s that the appellant had “raped”
the complainant.
To a colleague
of the complainant, a Ms ZD, during the Covid pandemic, a statement that the
complainant had been “touched as
[29] Ms TN also
gave evidence that at a party at her house, they were asking the complainant why
he had moved out of home and he “...brought
to our attention that, you
know, things were inappropriately done to
In cross-examination
she was asked, “Did he tell you he’d been kicked out of the
house?”, to which she replied,
[30] In the very
short cross-examination of Mr BQ in respect of what he said the complainant had
told him, Mr BQ was asked, “This
is a story he tells when explaining how
it was that he left the family home, that’s right isn’t it?”,
Mr BQ replied,
[31] In 2023,
the complainant made his first complaint to police.
[32] On 22 June
2023, a pre-text call occurred between the complainant and the appellant.
During the call the appellant repeatedly
referred to his having difficulty in
remembering things. Part of those exchanges included the
COMPLAINANT: “What...you don’t remember all
the times we used to play with...you used to make me play with you of a night
come into my room...you’re telling me you’ve mana...you’ve
just managed to forget all of that...like it never
APPELLANT: Well I’ve pushed it out of my mind whatever went on or
whatever happened.”
[33] On 19 July
2023, the appellant participated in a recorded interview, in which he denied the
offending. In this recorded police
interview, the appellant had confirmed that
he had kicked the complainant out of home.
appellant’s case at trial was that the complainant had lied about the
suggested motive for the telling of the lies about the offending was revenge for
having been kicked out of home by the appellant.
[36] There were
a number of credit attacks on the complainant. One of those was that when the
complainant made the first of the preliminary
complaints he had said that he
left home due to the abuse. This was said in address to be an example of a lie
by the complainant.
The evidence said to support this credit attack has been
set out above.
[37] In the
closing addresses, counsel for the appellant addressed this point of attack on
a number of occasions, examples of which
“He was kicked out of the house, that’s the
truth of the matter, and we know that. He even used that language himself
that recorded phone call with [the appellant]. There’s no doubt about
that. He was sent packing. He didn’t leave home.
So what has culminated
now in this criminal trial started with a lie. That lie, I say to you, was the
genesis of the story that evolved
and took on colour and movement and has been
weaponised as an act of revenge against that man
He’s a man who we know, from when he first started to tell the story,
he’s prepared to start it with a
So who’s the bad man here? I suggest to you common sense tells you
it’s more likely than not the accuser, not the alleged
perpetrator.
It’s the accuser who’s seeking to bring down the homophobic
stepfather with allegations of homosexual behaviour.
How delicious that would be
for a man like [the complainant]. What the ultimate act of revenge. What a
gripping storyline. What a
wonderful script for a performer to follow. The sort
of storyline befitting a reality TV producer, an entertainer and a performer,
someone who produces game shows and designs the games that the people, the
contestants on those shows, perform. Contestants who win
shows by being
deceitful and telling
explaining that motive, counsel for the appellant had linked it to the
allegation that the plaintiff had allegedly lied to
a number of the persons
identified above in respect of the reason why he had left the household.
[39] Part of
counsel for the appellant’s address to the jury was that the first of the
preliminary complaints that had been
made had been coupled with the complainant
asserting that he had left the home as a result of abuse, when the other
evidence of the
mother, the grandmother and the complainant himself was that he
had been thrown out of the home.
[40] I pause
here to note that the evidence in support of the alleged lie, in my view, fell
short of evidence that the complainant
had actually made inconsistent statements
to the two peers to the effect that he had left the household due to abuse.
Both answers
were consistent with the statements about the abuse coming out
whilst that topic of why he left the house was discussed. The two
but importantly different things.
[41] At the
commencement of the trial, the trial judge had made inquiries of the parties as
to what directions they sought to be given
throughout the trial.
[42] The Crown
prosecutor identified that there would be a need to give directions under
Evidence Act
. That reference was, in the context of
the discussion with counsel, a reference to the need to give the directions
contemplated
ss 103ZZ(2)(a)
(2)(b), namely:
(a) a direction that the absence of complaint or delay in complaining does not,
of itself, indicate that the allegation that the
sexual offence was committed is
(b) a direction that there may be good reasons why a person who does not consent
to a sexual activity may hesitate in making, or
may refrain from making,
a complaint about a sexual offence.
[43] The Crown
had requested those directions to be made by the trial judge prior to the
complainant giving evidence.
[44] Counsel for
the appellant did not disagree with the directions requested by the Crown,
including the directions under
ss 103ZZ(2)(a)
[45] In her
summing up, the trial judge gave directions which included the
as to delay, the complainant did not complain to police until last year. That
does not mean that the complaint is false.
There were of course some assertions
by the defendant that it may be a conspiracy, that’s how he felt about it,
simply did not know why a person would make these things up
But of course, you might recall that at this point in time, the mother for
example still does not know about this complaint at
An argument proffered to
you is that this was revenge or vindictiveness. Of course, the complainant did
not give evidence of this,
it’s simply offered as an argument. There may
be good reasons for a person to delay complaint or not make any. It may be
of relationships or many others. As you heard from the complainant, he
suppressed it.
In this category, there probably is one other aspect that I should mention.
In cross-examination of the complainant he was asked questions
concerning a
motive to lie in his account.
The suggestion, you might recall, is that he threatened to make the defendant
him homeless when he
was kicked out of the house, and his mother later on. The complainant rejected
this proposition. If you reject
the motive to lie put forward on behalf of the
defence, that does not mean he is telling the truth. Remember, it’s for
prosecution to satisfy you that he is telling the truth, because it is the
prosecution’s burden to satisfy you of the guilt.”
[46] The first
two paragraphs of those quoted directions included the directions which had been
requested by the Crown in respect
ss 103ZZ(2)(a)
(2)(b) of the
Evidence Act
Relevant legislation
provisions which are relevant to the assessment of the ground of appeal came
into force on 23 September 2024 via the amending
Criminal Law
(Coercive Control and Affirmative Consent) and Other Legislation Amendment Act
explanatory memorandum to the Bill for the amending Act identified that the
amendments were implemented as a response to
reforms recommended by the Royal
Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse -
Justice Reports
, and the Hear her Voice Report 2 - Volume 1.
Amongst other things, the explanatory memorandum
Jury directions -
sexual offences
The Taskforce found that despite improved understanding of violence against
women, some in the community still hold concerning views
and attitudes that
enable common misconceptions about sexual violence (‘rape myths’)
and harmful beliefs about women
and violence to perpetuate. The Taskforce heard
that these rape myths continue to influence criminal justice processes,
Consistent with the Taskforce’s
recommendation (recommendation 77 of Report Two), the Bill introduces jury
directions for sexual
offences, in similar terms to the directions contained in
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Sexual Consent Reforms) Act 2021
and recommendation 78 of the Victorian Law Reform Commission report,
Improving the Justice System Response to Sexual Offences
The Bill inserts new Part 6B Division 3 into the
Evidence Act
, Division 3, subdivision 4 provides for a number of directions
in making complaint and evidence of post-offence
relationship.”
relevant provisions are
, which provide as
“Subdivision 4 Directions to
103ZZ Direction on lack of complaint or delay in making complaint
(1) This section applies if evidence is given, or likely to be given, or a
question is asked, or is likely to be asked, of a witness
that tends to
(a) an absence of complaint in relation to the commission of the sexual offence
the subject of the criminal proceeding by the complainant;
(b) delay by the complainant in making a complaint in relation to the commission
of the sexual offence.
(2) The judge—
(a) must direct the jury that absence of complaint or delay in complaining does
not, of itself, indicate that the allegation that
the sexual offence was
committed is false; and
(b) must direct the jury that there may be good reasons why a person who does
not consent to a sexual activity may hesitate in making,
or may refrain from
making, a complaint about a sexual offence; and
Examples of good reasons—
person was overborne by the abuse of a relationship of authority, trust or
dependence.
person has employed strategies to cope with the sexual offence such as
suppression or disassociation from the offence.
person has a fear of ostracism from their community.
(c) must not direct the jury that absence of complaint or delay in complaining
is relevant to the complainant’s credibility
unless there is sufficient
evidence to justify the direction.
(3) If the criminal proceeding also relates to a domestic violence offence
alleged to have been committed by the defendant against
the same complainant,
the judge may—
(a) also give a warning under
section 103ZD
(b) give a single warning to address both types of offences.
(4) In this section—
domestic violence offence
Subdivision 5 Prohibited directions
103ZZB Prohibited directions etc. in relation to credibility of
complainant’s evidence
The judge in the criminal proceeding—
(a) must not direct, warn or suggest to the jury that complainants who do not
make a complaint or who delay in making a complaint
are, as a class, less
credible than other complainants; and
(b) must not direct, warn or suggest to the jury in relation to the evidence of
complainants who do not make a complaint or who delay
in making a
(i) that it would be dangerous or unsafe to convict the defendant on the
evidence; or
(ii) that the evidence should be scrutinised with great care.”
[50] Recourse to
the explanatory memorandum and to the reports to which it refers suggest that
the legislative reform seeks to address
what have, in the years since
1973 High Court decision of
Kilby v The
been identified
as the deficiencies in the common law concerning the issue of absent or delayed
v The Queen
Barwick CJ referred to a suggestion made in
Hawkins’ Pleas
of the Crown
that “it is a strong, but not a conclusive, presumption
against a woman that she made no complaint in a reasonable time after
fact” and concluded that “just as the fact of a proximate complaint
tends to support credibility of the complainant
so its absence may be a
considerable factor where a tribunal of fact is deciding on the credibility of
the complainant.” Indeed,
founded on what his Honour apprehended was the
common law position, Barwick CJ
would no doubt be proper for a trial judge to instruct a jury that in evaluating
the evidence of a woman who claims to have
been the victim of a rape and in
determining whether to believe her, they could take into account that she had
made no complaint
at the earliest reasonable opportunity. Indeed, in my opinion,
such a direction would not only be proper but, depending of course
particular circumstances of the case, ought as a general rule to be
Evidence Act
mark a distinct rebalancing for the
way in which sexual offence trials are to be conducted where there is, or is
likely to be, evidence
of absent or delayed complaint, or questions suggesting
absent or delayed complaint.
observations can be made of the operation of these provisions in the context of
a trial judge’s duty to ensure the
fair conduct of a criminal
expresses a general prohibition against a trial judge giving
directions consistent with the assumptions about human behaviour which
have underpinned the common law position and the general rule concerning the
giving of a
[55] Second
and similarly,
ss 103ZZ(2)(a)
(2)(b) mandate the trial judge
giving positive directions which are directly inconsistent with such
assumptions. Notably those directions
do not go so far as mandating a direction
to the jury to disregard absent or delayed complaint on the grounds that it is
necessarily
irrelevant to their task.
sections just require the jury to be told to conduct any assessment in
conformity with
ss 103ZZ(2)(a)
(2)(b). A jury might well,
consistently with the two mandated directions, nevertheless conclude that absent
or delayed complaint
did cast doubt on the complainant’s
observations are those recently made by this
[2025] QCA 186
and [14] by Bond JA
(with whom the other members of the Court agreed). Rather than seeking to
paraphrase them, it is appropriate
to set them out in full as
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
expresses a
conditional prohibition on a trial judge directing the jury that absent or
delayed complaint
relevant to the complainant’s
credibility. Unless the specified evidentiary threshold is met, such a direction
is impermissible.
As to this:
(a) The subsection seeks to conditionally proscribe the
making of a judicial comment that the fact of absent or delayed complaint
relevant to the complainant’s credibility. The course of
law reform referred to in the explanatory memorandum suggests that
“relevant” in this context means that it is a consideration which
adversely affects the credibility of the complainant.
(b) The subsection does not proscribe the giving of appropriate directions as to
how absent or delayed complaint
in combination with
other circumstances of the case, be relevant in the circumstances of the case,
so long as the direction avoids
the suggestion that absent or delayed complaint
is relevant
(c) Although made when the law provided that “the judge must not warn or
suggest in any way to the jury that the law regards
the complainant’s
evidence to be more reliable or less reliable only because of [delayed
complaint]”, these observations
by Keane JA remain apposite:
“Properly construed, s 4A(4) [of the
Criminal Law (Sexual
Offences) Act 1978
(Qld)] proscribes any suggestion by a trial judge that
delay in making a complaint is a reason for regarding complainant’s
evidence as unreliable. Any warning given by a trial judge must avoid any
such suggestion. As
shows, delay in making a complaint may, in
combination with other circumstances of the case, give rise to an appreciation
on the part
of the trial judge that the complainant’s evidence of sexual
abuse is sufficiently implausible to require a strong warning
to the jury;
must not be suggested as a reason for the scepticism
which calls for close
(emphasis in
(d) Pursuant to s 103ZZ(2)(c), the judge may make the conditionally
proscribed direction only if the judge makes the evaluative judgment
is “sufficient” evidence to warrant doing so.
, the fundamental duty of the trial
judge in relation to the jury continues to subsist, albeit with some statutory
modification as
to content. In this regard:
(a) Section 103ZR makes it clear that the new Division 3
is not intended to limit the matters about which the court may direct the
Alford v Magee
the High Court explained
that the judge’s obligation is to decide what are the real issues in the
case and to tell the jury,
“in the light of the law, what those issues
The judge is obliged
to direct the jury about the law “not merely with reference to the facts
of the particular case but with
an explanation of how it applied to the facts of
the particular case”.
Gaudron ACJ,
Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ elaborated upon the
Alford v Magee
follows (emphasis added, footnotes omitted):
The fundamental task of a trial judge is, of course, to ensure
a fair trial of the accused. That will require the judge to instruct
in the case.
No doubt that will require instructions about the elements of
the offence, the burden and standard of proof and the respective functions
judge and jury.
Subject to any applicable statutory provisions it will
require the judge to identify the issues in the case and to relate the law
those issues. It will require the judge to put fairly before the jury the case
which the accused makes. In some cases it will
require the judge to warn the
jury about how they should
reason or about particular care that must
be shown before accepting certain kinds of evidence.
But none of this must be permitted to obscure the division of functions
between judge and jury. It is for the jury, and the jury alone,
to decide the
facts. As we have said, in some cases a judge must give the jury warnings about
how they go about that task. And, of
course, it has long been held that
a trial judge may comment (and comment strongly) on factual issues. But
although a trial judge
comment on the facts, the judge is not bound
to do so except to the extent that the judge’s other functions require it.
perhaps much more often than not, the safer course for a trial judge will
be to make no comment on the facts beyond reminding the
jury, in the course of
identifying the issues before them, of the arguments of counsel.”
(d) The foregoing passages identify the source of and the constraints applicable
to the trial judge’s duty to formulate directions
to the jury and to make
comments regarding factual issues which arise in a particular case. They
continue to inform the trial judge’s
duty where an issue arises concerning
absent or delayed complaint in a sexual offence case. In that regard, the
introductory phrase
to the second highlighted portion is significant. In the
present context, it means that no direction could permissibly be made which
invited the jury to reason in a way which did not conform with
ss 103ZZ(2)(a) and 103ZZ(2)(b) or which was formulated in a way which
contravened the prohibitions expressed in s 103ZZB. And a trial judge could
not direct a jury in the terms prohibited by s 103ZZ(2)(c)
unless there was
sufficient evidence to justify that course.”
Real issue: was there sufficient evidence to justify a positive direction
that the delay in complaining was relevant to the complainant’s
credibility?
(a) Appellant’s contentions
appellant submitted that there was sufficient evidence to justify the relevant
direction. He developed his argument broadly
in the following terms.
[59] First, it
was noted that the trial judge gave directions to the jury in accordance with
ss 103ZZ(2)(a) and 103ZZ(2)(b). This
was because there was likely to be
evidence given that suggested that there was a delay by the complainant in
making a complaint
in relation to the commission of the sexual offences.
[60] Secondly,
in support of the appropriateness of the contended for direction, it was pointed
out that the trial judge had felt
it necessary within the direction required by
s 103ZZ(2)(b), to make a comment about the defendant’s argument of a
revenge or vindictiveness as an explanation for the
complainant’s allegation of sexual offending by the appellant.
[61] Thirdly,
and in a similar vein, it was pointed out that immediately after having given
the ss 103ZZ(2)(a) and 103ZZ(2)(b) directions,
the trial judge had then
stated, “In this category, there probably is one other aspect that I
should mention...”
introduction to the topic of the complainant having been cross-examined
concerning a motive to lie about his complaint.
[62] Fourthly,
it was noted that in the giving of the s 103ZZ(2)(b) direction, the trial
judge gave as an example of a good reason
for a person to delay complaint or not
to make any, that the complainant said he had suppressed it, being a reference
to the various
events of sexual abuse. It was submitted that the potential
motive to lie, being that the complainant was kicked out of his home
appellant, constituted a response to the potential good reason which had been
given to the jury as an example for the delay.
submission was in the following terms, namely that all the jury was told was
“...on the one hand, there’s good
reason for the
but they should
have potentially been told that there was an argument going the other way. It
was contended that this was why the
two concepts were relevant, both as a matter
of law and because of the way in which the trial judge had directed the
[64] While the
trial judge had directed the jury about the suggested motive to lie, it was
submitted that the trial judge ought to
have incorporated the motive to lie in
a s 103ZZ(2)(c) direction as an alternative explanation for the delay
in making the complaint
to police. The appellant submitted that the two
directions would have been much more coherent and powerful for the appellant,
were justified because there was sufficient evidence for the jury to be
directed about both the motive to lie and separately the
motive to lie as a
possible explanation for the delay.
[65] Fifthly,
the appellant illustrated the type of direction which he alleged ought to have
been given in respect of delay in complaining
being relevant to the
complainant’s credibility. He did so by a modified form of direction
number 69 in the Benchbook as follows:
“Although the delay in
complaining does not of itself indicate that the complaint of the offending was
false, you have before
you the following evidence:
The defendant made the
complainant homeless when he was kicked out of the house
It is a matter for you whether you accept any or all of that evidence, but if
you accept the totality of it, you may consider whether
the delay in making a
complaint in fact detracts from your assessment of the Complainant’s
credibility. If you find it does,
you may take that into account in determining
the Complainant’s credibility overall. If it does not, you must put it to
side when assessing the Complainant’s credibility overall.” [the
underlining is that of the appellant]
[66] Sixthly,
whilst the appellant accepted that the alleged motive to lie did not explain the
passage of time before complaint, it
was submitted that such a requirement of
what was “sufficient evidence” to justify the direction involved too
of a view of s 103ZZ(2)(c). It was submitted that there was
sufficient evidence of the motive to lie contention, and the motive
contention was a potential answer to the good explanation for the delay provided
by the complainant, which had been the subject
of a direction by the judge. In
those circumstances, it was contended that a s 103ZZ(2)(c) direction
ought to have been given in
order to properly balance the directions to the
(b) Crown’s contentions
[67] The Crown
contended that there was not sufficient evidence to justify the relevant
direction. Its submissions can be broadly
summarised as follows.
[68] First, the
Crown submitted that the position that was arrived at within s 103ZZ was
that there may be many reasons a complainant
may delay in complaining
independent of untruthfulness, and such a delay was no longer to be considered a
reliable indicator of credit
warranting judicial instruction solely on that
score. Delay is still a matter which a jury could consider, but it would be
the previous common law assumption that delay, by itself, is indicative
of the ultimate complaint being false.
[69] Secondly,
the Crown drew support for its contention from judicial observations which had
been made in respect of the previously
existing Victorian section which shared
a similarity
s 103ZZ(2)(c)
Evidence Act
Svajcer v The Queen
(2010) 200 A Crim R 587
, Redlich JA observed as
“...The Act is concerned with the circumstance where
evidence has been given or a suggestion made during the trial that there
delay in making complaint as to an offence. The trial judge is not permitted to
give such a warning unless an application is
made on behalf of the accused that
a warning be given and the judge is then is satisfied that the
complainant’s credibility
is sufficiently affected by the delay so as to
justify giving such a
...the mere fact of a lapse of time between the alleged offence and the
making of a complaint will not necessarily be such as to permit
reasoning that
the complainant’s credit is affected. It is necessary for the trial judge
to consider how the period of time
between the relevant offence and the making
of the complaint, might affect the jury’s assessment of the credibility of
complainant. The lapse of time will become relevant to an assessment of the
complainant’s credit where it may be viewed as
inconsistent with aspects
of the complainant’s
[70] Thirdly,
the Crown submitted that the proper construction of s 103ZZ(2)(c) is that
before the relevant direction can be given,
there must be evidence which is
“sufficient” to reveal “inconsistencies” between the
allegation and the delay.
It was further submitted that where the delay is not
“inconsistent” in some way with the allegations, then the delay
not relevant to the assessment of credit.
[71] Fourthly,
it was submitted that the central plank of the defence case was not that the
delay was “inconsistent” with
the complainant’s accounts, but
the motive to lie and his concealment of it undermined his credibility. While
it was accepted
that the motive to lie was germane to the question of
credibility, it was contended that it did not operate to compel a conclusion
that, because of it, the delay was a matter adverse to the complainant’s
credit. It was said that there was simply two separate
factual considerations
which do not overlap to the degree, if at all, that the appellant
[72] It was in
this way that it was said that there was insufficient evidence in the case to
warrant an adverse direction due to delay.
And that this was a case where the
fact of the delay did nothing to impact the credit of the complainant and
thereby trigger the
relevant direction which was
(c) Resolution of contentions
[73] As was
recognised in
[2025] QCA 186
, s 103ZZ(2)(c) is not
the source of a legal obligation on a trial judge to give a direction that
delayed complaint is relevant to
a complainant’s credibility. It operates
as a conditional prohibition against giving the identified direction concerning
absence of or delay in complaint. The duty to give the direction contended
for by the appellant is to be derived from the trial
judge’s duty to
ensure a fair trial as explained in
Alford v Magee
[74] Applying
the construction and principles identified above, the evidence in this case is
not sufficient to justify the direction
[75] First, it
may be accepted that a significant part of the Crown’s case was founded
upon the jury accepting the complainant’s
account of the
[76] Accordingly,
issues of the credibility and reliability of the complainant were real issues in
[77] During the
course of the summing up, the trial judge referred to various parts of the
evidence which concerned the potential
reliability or unreliability of the
complainant.
[78] In doing
so, her Honour dealt with the evidence of the preliminary complaints made by the
complainant to his peers. The relevance
of this evidence concerned whether it
demonstrated consistency or inconsistency on the part of the complainant on the
occasions when
he spoke about the alleged offending to others.
[79] The summing
up of the trial judge on this issue was favourable to the appellant.
Relevantly, after having summarised the evidence
of the preliminary complaints,
her Honour stated:
“...But can I give you one word of warning
ultimately a matter for you, but you might find it hard to
gauge consistency. The fact that these things were said cannot be taken
as proof of the offending. Depending on your view, it could bolster the
complainant if you can gauge that consistency, given
my comment.
If there are inconsistencies, and equally that may lead you to doubt the
credibility - or reliability of the complainant, of course
these conversations
happened quite some time ago, you might remember. Accuracy is difficult. You
might recall some argument about
the connection attempted between being kicked
out and this evidence which was inaccurate or fabricated ... Ultimately these
are matters
for you as to whether or not any of these matters matter, but the
defence at least urged upon you a view that this does taint him
[80] This part
of the summing up directed the jury’s attention to the appellant’s
contention of an inconsistency by the
complainant. The appellant’s
in his address to the
jury, said that the complainant had told his friends “he left because of
what was going on”. This
was said to be a lie, because the complainant
had been kicked out. The trial judge drew the jury’s attention to this
in the context of it being something which may affect the credibility
or reliability of the complainant.
[81] However,
this alleged lie did not provide any basis for a positive direction that the
delay in making a complaint to the police
was relevant to the
complainant’s credibility. This alleged lie did not in any way explain
the passage of time.
[82] Secondly,
counsel for the appellant had addressed the jury on the contention that the
complainant had a motive to make a false
[83] Again, in
her summing up, the trial judge specifically identified and referred to this
contention in the context of the potential
lack of reliability and credibility
of the complainant.
[84] Again,
there is no logical link between the motive to lie contention and the delay
itself. It had been conceded on appeal by
the appellant’s counsel,
rightly in my view, that the motive to lie contention did not in any way explain
the delay of the
[85] At the age
of around 13, the complainant had been kicked out of the house by the appellant.
The raising of a motive said to be
based upon an event occurring 20 years
earlier does not provide a logical basis to justify the court making a positive
that the 20 year delay is relevant to the credibility of the
complainant. An explanation was given that the complainant had tried
suppress the events of the abuse. If accepted by the jury, this would have
given an explanation for the delay in making the complaint
to the police.
[86] I do not
accept that such a conclusion involves too narrow a construction of
“sufficient” evidence. The appellant
made a number of credit
attacks on the complainant. The trial judge identified these and appropriately
drew them to the jury’s
attention as part of the summing up of the real
issues in the trial.
[87] The motive
to lie contention did not provide some type of special answer to the
complainant’s evidence that he had sought
to suppress the events of abuse.
The contention only provided a potential general answer in the sense that an
acceptance of the motive
might have affected the credibility of the complainant.
The same general affect could equally have arisen from any of the other attacks
on the complainant’s credit. The existence of these attacks on the credit
of the complainant did not constitute “sufficient”
evidence in the
circumstances of this case.
[88] Thirdly,
had the appellant’s counsel sought and obtained a positive direction or
redirection at trial to the effect that
delay itself was relevant to the
complainant’s credibility, it is likely that the evidence of preliminary
complaints by the
complainant to various peers would also have been referred to
in such a direction. That highlighting of the preliminary complaints
peers in this context would, on balance, have been to the detriment to the
appellant by highlighting that the complainant
had not simply been silent during
the 20 years. It is an obvious reason why counsel for the appellant did not
seek such a direction
or redirection at the trial.
[89] Fourthly,
no complaint was raised in this appeal about the substance of the
ss 103ZZ(2)(a) and 103ZZ(2)(b) directions or the
substance of the motive to
lie direction which were in fact given. The trial judge did sum up on evidence
of motive to lie on two
occasions. The fact that the second of these occasions
was immediately after the directions given pursuant to ss 103ZZ(2)(a) and
103ZZ(2)(b) above is irrelevant. In a similar fashion, the fact that the trial
judge did mention revenge or vindictiveness having
been raised as an argument by
the appellant between giving the directions for ss 103ZZ(2)(a) and
103ZZ(2)(b) is equally irrelevant.
conclusion, the fact that the complaint to police was made around 20 years after
the events was self-evident to the jury.
Rather than focus on the delay of
complaint to police, counsel for the appellant focused on a variety of
contentions which sought
to attack the reliability and credibility of the
complainant. The trial judge fulfilled her duty as explained in
RPS v The Queen
by identifying these contentions as real
issues for the jury. The trial judge identified and briefly summarised the
competing points
made by the parties on these issues.
[91] There was
no evidence pointed to by the appellant which, by itself or in combination with
other evidence, provided a “sufficient”
basis to justify the Court
giving the positive direction sought.
conclusion that there was not sufficient evidence to justify the relevant
direction means that the prohibition in s 103ZZ(2)(c)
remained intact.
Accordingly, no occasion arose for the trial judge to make the otherwise
prohibited direction. For this reason,
grounds one and two must fail, and
accordingly the appeal should be
[2025] QCA 186
– [14] and [34] – [35].
RPS v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
199 CLR 620
[2025] QCA 186
RPS v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
199 CLR 620
ARB Vol 2, p. 287 ll 4-5.
ARB Vol 2, p. 287 ll
ARB Vol 2, p. 290 ll
ARB Vol 2, p. 409.
T4-13 ll 40-45; ARB Vol 1, p.
T4-17 ll 1-3; ARB Vol 1, p.
T4-17 ll 6-14; ARB Vol 1,
T5-16 ll 4-27; ARB Vol 1 p.
This was a reference to the
evidence of the complainant that he had not then told his mother that he was
making the complaint to
the police.
Criminal Law (Coercive
Control and Affirmative Consent) and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2023
Explanatory Notes, p. 22.
Kilby v The Queen
[1973] HCA 30
(1973) 129 CLR 460.
Kilby v The Queen
[1973] HCA 30
(1973) 129 CLR 460
Kilby v The Queen
[1973] HCA 30
(1973) 129 CLR 460
per Bond JA (with whom the other members agreed) at [12].
Alford v Magee
[1952] HCA 3
(1952) 85 CLR 437
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth)
(2013) 250 CLR 135 at [28].
Alford v Magee
[1952] HCA 3
(1952) 85 CLR 437
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v JM
(2013) 250 CLR 135 at [28].
RPS v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
(2000) 199 CLR 620
T5-16 l 17; ARB Vol 1, p.
Transcript of appeal
hearing 1-3 ll 36-37.
The sections are not
Svajcer v The Queen
(2010) 200 A Crim R 587
Ibid at [17].
There were other parts of
the Crown’s case at trial which involved alleged statements against
interests made by the appellant
in the pre-text call, and an attack on the
credibility of the appellant arising from alleged inconsistencies between the
appellant’s
statement of failing memory in the pre-text call when compared
to the detail of the appellant’s denial in his interview with
ARB Vol 1, p. 78 ll
The appellant’s
counsel at trial was different to his counsel on the appeal.
Transcript of appeal
hearing 1-4 ll 15-37.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (344 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter