URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCAT/2025/443.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ACF v Chief Executive - Department of Education [2025] QCAT 443 (10 November 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
ACF v Chief Executive – Department of Education
[2025] QCAT
(applicant)
CHIEF EXECUTIVE – DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
General administrative review matters
DELIVERED ON:
10 November 2025
HEARING DATE:
13 October 2025
DECISION OF:
Member Taylor
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld) the publication of material in this proceeding is prohibited to the extent
that it could identify or lead to the identification
of any child, by way of
direct identification or the identification of the applicant, any family member
of the applicant, or any
non-party to the proceeding.
respondent’s decision dated 14 May 2025 under
(General Provisions) Act 2006
(Qld) to issue a direction prohibiting the
applicant from entering the premises of the [named] State School for 365 days
date is confirmed.
CATCHWORDS:
EDUCATION – INSTITUTIONS – SCHOOLS – GOVERNMENT –
OTHER MATTERS – where the parent of a student of a
primary school in
Queensland engaged in aggressive conduct towards a student, other parents, and
staff at the school on or near school
grounds – where that parent had been
the subject of warnings and a ban from the school grounds – where the
engaged in mediation with the school’s representatives to
refrain from statements that may come across as threatening or intimidatory
– where despite that commitment the parent engaged shortly thereafter in
such conduct – where subsequently he confronted
the schools Deputy
Principal at the school gates, video and audio recording same and uploading it
to social media – where the
parent was subsequently banned from the school
grounds for up to one year – where the parent sought a review of that
decision – whether the ban should be imposed – whether the
period of one-year was excessive
Criminal Code
(Qld), s 54A, s 359, s 359B, s
Education (General Provisions) Act 2006
Human Rights Act 2019
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Chief Executive Department of Education and Training v Funch
Chief Executive, Department of Education and Training v Funch
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
Self-represented
Respondent:
Mr M.G. Duncan of Counsel
REASONS FOR DECISION
there is no express provision of legislation requiring this Tribunal to do so,
and no submission was made to this Tribunal
that such should be done, given the
issues raised herein concern children it seemed to me that I should make an
order under
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
”) prohibiting the
publication of material in this proceeding to the extent that it could identify
or lead to the identification
of any child, by way of direct identification, or
the identification of the applicant, any family member of the applicant, or any
non-party to the proceeding. An order was made to that effect. For this reason,
this document is published in a de-identified format.
has been banned for a period of one year from entering the grounds of the
primary school at which his daughters attend. Such
a ban is one permissibly made
Education (General Provisions) Act 2006
imposed because of a series of events in which he engaged in conduct that was
considered would, if permitted to be able
to be engaged in again if he was not
otherwise banned, have had the effect of causing at the least the apprehension
of fear or physical
harm to another person when the other person is at the
school, and/or to disrupt the good order or management of the school. ACF
opposed that ban seeking to have it set-aside by this Tribunal, or at the very
least reduced in duration.
[4] For the
reasons given herein he was unsuccessful. As I discuss it, his conduct was
egregious and could not be condoned as being
reasonable in any circumstance. But
moreover, in the presentation of his case before me he sought to minimise the
severity of his
conduct and to justify it as being permissible due to the
frustration he says he was experiencing due to alleged inaction by the
terms of his daughter being bullied by another student. In all respects he
failed to satisfy me that if he was not banned
from the school grounds, he might
readily repeat such conduct or such like it.
[5] My decision
was that a one-year ban on ACF from entering the school grounds was the correct
and preferable decision.
children attend a state primary school (the “
[7] He was given
a warning in August 2022 and a second warning in June 2023, both in terms of
what was said to be his unacceptable
conduct in engaging with a parent of
another student. In September 2023 he was given a direction prohibiting him from
entering School
grounds for up to 60 days following his involvement in an
altercation with other persons on the schoolgrounds which caused distress
students and staff.
[8] He later
engaged in further inappropriate conduct on schoolgrounds whereby:
(a) on 1 May 2025 he confronted a young student about her alleged bullying of
his daughter; and
(b) on 2 May 2025 he confronted teachers in the administration office about
their alleged failure to have done anything of substance
[9] On each
occasion that conduct was in front of other students.
[10] Because of
that conduct, on 14 May 2025, the respondent issued a direction prohibiting ACF
from entering the schoolgrounds for
one year (the
[11] On 12 June
2025, ACF applied to this Tribunal for a review of the Decision. He sought to
have it set aside, in the alternative
to reduce the ban period to allow him to
attend his children’s graduation ceremony.
application came before me for determination in a single day hearing on 13
October 2025. By the end of the hearing, ACF
had effectively abandoned his
application to the extent he sought to have the Decision set aside. He conceded
that his actions on
1 and/or 2 May 2025 were sufficient grounds for a direction
banning him from the schoolgrounds, submitting that at its highest the
period should be the 217 days proposed by the School’s Principal.
ACF’s concession at the end of the hearing, the singular issue that arose
in this proceeding for my determination
was – what was the appropriate
duration of the ban. However, notwithstanding that concession, I was still
required to be reasonably
satisfied on the issue of whether a ban should be
imposed. Accordingly, I discuss both aspects in these reasons.
The Relevant Law
Education (General Provisions) Act 2006
objects of the
include amongst other things to make available to
each Queensland child or young person a high-quality education that will help
his or her educational potential; and enable him or her to become an
effective and informed member of the
Such is to be to be
achieved by amongst other things placing responsibilities on parents, and
providing for the operation of schools
as safe and supportive learning
environments.
The Act also lays out
some ‘guiding principles’ aimed at achieving those objects, one of
which provides for “
parents, teachers
school communities
work collaboratively to foster a commitment to achieve the best
educational outcomes for children and young
[15] One of the
ways in which the Act expressly provides for the implementation of
responsibilities on parents, whilst also providing
for a safe and supportive
environment within a school, is providing for ‘
Good order and
management of State education institutions
’ in the manner expressed in
Chapter 12 of the Act.
mechanism provided therein is for a school principal to issue a person a
direction about that person’s conduct or movement
at the school’s
premises. This is found in s 337, which as relevant to this proceeding I extract
(1) A State instructional institution’s principal may give a person (the
directed person
) a written direction about the directed person’s
conduct or movement at the institution’s premises for up to 30 days
the day on which the direction is given if the principal is reasonably satisfied
it is necessary to give the direction—
(a) to ensure the safety or wellbeing of other persons lawfully at the
premises; or
(b) to prevent or minimise damage to the premises or to property at the
premises; or
(c) to maintain good order at the premises; or
(d) for the proper management of the institution.
[17] A related
provision also appears in s 341 of the Act which is at the core of the issues in
this proceeding, it providing a mechanism
whereby a person may be prohibited
from entering a school. For ease of reference, I extract here that section to
the extent it is
relevant in this proceeding:
Prohibition
from entering premises
(1) The chief executive may give a person (the
prohibited person
written direction requiring the prohibited person not to enter the premises of a
State instructional institution for more than
60 days, but not more than 1 year,
after the day on which the direction is given if the chief executive is
reasonably satisfied that,
unless the direction is given, the prohibited person
is likely to—
(a) cause physical harm to, or apprehension or fear of physical harm in,
another person when the other person is at the premises;
(b) damage the premises or property at the premises; or
(c) disrupt the good order or management of the institution.
(2) A direction under subsection (1) may not be given to an exempt person for
the institution.
(3) The direction must state—
(a) the terms of the direction; and
(b) the ground for the direction; and
(c) an outline of the facts and circumstances forming the basis for the ground;
(d) the time the direction is to remain in force.
(5) The direction has no effect until the chief executive gives it to the
prohibited person.
Human Rights Act 2019
is also the application of the
Human Rights Act 2019
”) that I was required to consider.
main objective of the
is to protect and promote fundamental human
rights. However, the rights listed therein are not exclusive, nor are the rights
thereunder absolute. They may be limited, but only as far as is
reasonable and justifiable. In deciding whether a limit is reasonable
justifiable relevant factors include inter-alia the nature of the human right,
the nature and purpose of the limitation, whether
there are any less restrictive
and reasonably available ways to achieve the purpose, the importance of the
purpose of the limitation,
the importance of preserving the human right, taking
into account the nature and extent of the limitation on the human right, and
balance between the last two points. That being so, all statutory provisions, as
far as is possible consistent with their purposes,
must be interpreted in a way
that is compatible, or most compatible, with human rights. Such includes the
[20] I return to
my discussion on the
at the conclusion of these reasons.
The Nature of this Review Proceeding
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to review the Decision arose under the
Chapter 15 Part 3, more particularly s 397 therein, read together with
Chapter 2 Division 3. In constituting the Tribunal for this
proceeding, I was required to exercise this jurisdiction in accordance
those pieces of legislation and the
. In doing so I had all the
functions of the decision-maker for the decision to be
proceeding was not a traditional adversarial process as one should expect in a
commonplace civil proceeding of a claim by
one party on another. Nor was it an
inquisitorial process such that I was required to question both parties to
identify the relevant
facts and legal issues. The purpose of the review was to
produce the correct and preferable decision, such to be reached by way of
fresh hearing on the merits.
[23] That being
so, the respondent’s representative was not participating in an
adversarial role advocating for the correctness
of the decision by the
respondent’s decision-maker, rather the representative’s role was to
Accordingly it was not
necessary for me to consider whether the respondent’s decision-maker had
made an error in making the
Decision, the focus being solely on the cogency of
ACF’s case as presented to this Tribunal.
[24] At the
conclusion of the review, I was empowered to confirm or amend the Decision; set
aside the Decision and substitute my own
decision; or set aside the Decision and
return the matter to the respondent’s decision-maker for reconsideration
with directions
I considered to be
appropriate.
The Evidence and Submissions
5 August 2022, the School Principal gave a warning letter to ACF following ACF
having confronted the parent of another student
on School grounds on 9 June
2022. That warning brought to ACF’s attention s 337 of
That letter contained the following statement of the
You (ACF) were
entering school, when it appears one of your daughters was knocked over near the
main gate, by another parent ...
You confronted
this parent near the canteen and you and your partner tried to speak to the
other parent.
There are two
witness statements ... which [state that] (sic) the impression of the witnesses,
is that your manner could be considered
intimidating.
The recording of
the incident sent to [person named] by [ACF’s partner named],
indicate a raised voice on your part, however, it
, the other parent, clearly trying to move away and being
[26] On 9 June
2023, the School Principal sent a letter to ACF raising concerns about his
communication with a parent of another student
at the School, wherein it was
said he did so in a “
threatening manner
” and stated that the
parent had one week to remove their child from the
September 2023, the School Principal gave a direction to ACF prohibiting him
from entering the School grounds for 60 days
following his verbal altercation
with a member of the public at the front gates of the grounds on 6 September
2023, observed by staff
and students on the
[28] On 28 April
2025, ACF, together with his partner TLX, engaged in a mediation conference with
the School Principal wherein the
following was expressed in a ‘Mediation
Agreement’:
All parties commit to future communication that is respectful in nature –
[ACF and TLX] agree that they will give careful consideration
communication and refrain in future from any statements that may come across as
threatening or intimidatory towards staff.
[29] Despite
this express recorded agreement, contrary to his agreement in terms of
refraining from statements that may be construed
as being threatening or
intimidatory:
(a) on 1 May 2025, whilst on the School grounds he confronted a young student
occurring whilst
the student was serving toast to other students at the Chaplain’s Toast
Table, with ACF having made this
Next time you come near my family [student named] and you harass my (indistinct)
child named [name given] I am going to get the older
sister to start harassing
you. Do you understand? We’ve had enough. Stay away from our family.
(b) on 2 May 2025 he confronted teachers in the administration office of the
School about their alleged failure to have done anything
of substance about the
said bullying, during which, in a raised voice, ACF expressed extreme
obscenities to the staff making inter-alia
It’s OK – just run the school how your doing. Say hi to social media
because I’m going to take all your jobs your
f..king jobs your c...ts.
... if you’re asking us to leave – we’ll leave –
that’s fine – but be prepared ...
... and if you ever touch [name given] again I swear to f...king God, you keep
your hands off my child. Do you understand? Do not
touch my child.
portrays the first of these events in the following manner in his
... The environment was noisy, as children were gathered at the table. The
recording shows that no yelling or threats were made,
no physical intimidation
occurred, and my words were brief and limited.
My intention was to tell [student named] that what she is doing is unacceptable
and try to see how she would feel if she started
getting harassed like she was
doing to [children named]. It was an effort to try and get her to stop harassing
our children.
Despite this, the Respondent has sought to portray this incident as aggressive
or intimidating. The objective recording demonstrates
that my conduct was not
threatening and did not justify escalation or disciplinary action.
[31] Whilst the
first of those events was the subject of an audio recording only, the second was
video recorded, with audio, by ACF
or a person in attendance with him. The video
shows other students present in the administration office area whilst ACF was
these statements. It is unclear from that video and the audio recording
as to which person the last statement was directed, that
being “if you
ever touch [daughter named] again”, but I infer it was to a student,
possibly being the student the subject
of the confrontation the day prior.
[32] On the day
following the second of those events, ACF sent an e-mail to the School, which he
described in his statement to this
Tribunal as being a ‘reflective
e-mail’, wherein he made these
statements:
I’m writing to acknowledge the intensity of the verbal exchange that
occurred on May 2
between myself, [ACF’s partner named], and
Deputy Principal [name].
While I stand firmly by the concerns raised ... I recognise that our approach
and language during that exchange were not ideal. I
am remorseful for the tone
used, though I hope the depth of our frustration is understood. ...
I want to be clear that our intention during that exchange was never to act
aggressively or to cause any physical harm. Our actions
stemmed solely from a
place of emotional exhaustion and parental desperation after watching our
daughter endure consistent bullying,
cultural disrespect, and physical
intimidation – without any meaningful intervention from the school.
Whilst we regret how our emotions were expressed, we stand by the legitimacy of
our concerns. We remain committed to engaging respectfully
moving forward ...
[33] On a date
which is not specified, but I infer from the way the evidence was presented it
was shortly after the 2 May 2025 incident,
ACF confronted the Deputy Principal
at the school gates. He once again video and audio recorded it, but also went
one more step and
later uploaded the recording to social media such that it was
visible to the public at large. He entitled it – “
Discussion with deputy (sic)
who managed to forget all the
meetings we have had in relation to the bullying
.” That video
recording contains images of not only a person identified as being the Deputy
Principal but of students walking
near to that person along the path and through
the gate, and thus I infer within hearing distance of the statements made by
[34] In that
recording, which ACF admits was made by him and thus I infer was an audio
recording of his voice, inter-alia he made
You know for 2 years, right 2 years, and I’ve got all thee e-mails and
everything [student named] has been bullying [daughter
named] for 2 years now.
We have all the e-mails. We’ve had many meetings to try and resolve it
– its continued.
... So if yous (sic) come at [daughter named] for finally snapping after yous
(sic) done nothing we are going to sue you and we are
going to put it on social
media. Do you understand ? ...
[35] In his
evidence in this proceeding, ACF sought to justify this and similar recordings
uploaded to social media in the following
... These videos were created to raise awareness of [daughter named]’s
ongoing victimisation and the Department’s failure
to act after repeated
complaints.
My focus in these videos was on the conduct of school officials ... in their
capacity as public servants.
I rely on my rights under the
Human Rights Act 2019
(Qld) including:
of expression): the right to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas of
part in public life): the right to have a say in public affairs, including the
performance of public information.
I also rely on the principle that
parents are entitled to raise complaints about the operation of Queensland
Government schools and
their staff without persecution. To penalise me for
expressing legitimate criticism of the school on a public platform would be
inconsistent
with these rights.
[36] Following
these incidents, on 7 May 2025 the Deputy Principal, in the role of Acting
Principal, sent a letter to the respondent’s
Regional Director requesting
that he consider giving ACF a direction under s 341 of the
period of 217 days. Therein the Deputy Principal made this
Despite all the support provided to ACF to build his understanding of
appropriate parent behaviour, he has continued to act in an
inappropriate way
towards to the [School named] SS community.
[37] Acting on
that request, ultimately the Decision was made and issued imposing a one-year
[38] In his
closing submissions, whilst not disputing any of this evidence, ACF argued that
the one-year ban excessive, submitting
does not meet the
proportionality test under the
Human Rights Act 2019
Discussion on the Evidence relative to the Law
this review, as the effective decision-maker, it is that last request which is
the point in time from when it may be properly
said that I pick up the issue. As
I discuss in the paragraphs that follow here, I agree with the observations made
by the Deputy
Principal in that request. The evidence up to that point
demonstrated that to be so. Moreover, the presentation by ACF of his case
me did not show me that he had progressed beyond that point.
[40] As was
observed by the learned Member of this Tribunal in
Chief Executive Department
of Education and Training v Funch
[2010] QCAT 604
In deciding whether to exercise its discretion to invoke the provisions of
section 341
Education (General Provisions) Act 2006
the tribunal
has to balance complex important and competing policy considerations: protection
of staff and students at the school
against the interests of a parent as a
member of the parent community having access to the school premises.
The proceeding involves an important issue of public interest and serious
consequences could arise for the respondent in the event
that the tribunal is
persuaded to prohibit him from entry onto the school premises for 12 months. On
the other hand, serious consequences
could arise for the staff and student body
at the school in the event that the tribunal is not persuaded to invoke the
section 341
Education (General Provisions) Act 2006
given the circumstances that the assault for which the respondent has been
convicted took place at the school in the presence of
[41] It is that
balancing of the ‘serious consequences’ which was at the core of
what I was being asked to decide in this
proceeding.
[42] In reading
ACF’s written material filed, and listening to him under cross-examination
and otherwise in the presentation
of his case, I was left with the impression
that he firmly believed that his conduct was entirely appropriate save only that
he realised
the use of swearing during the incident on 2 May 2025 should not
have occurred. It was not until the end of the hearing that he appeared
conceded that it was not so, or alternatively he made that concession for no
other reason than he wanted the hearing to finish.
[43] ACF did not
impress me as a person who could be trusted to do what he says he would do, nor
did he impress upon me in any way
that he understood his actions, either in part
or in whole, were entirely inappropriate and unacceptable in terms of a parent
with incidents involving their child at a school. He seemingly failed to
have any understanding of what proper conduct of a parent
was, nor for that
matter proper conduct of an adult when around young children, particularly in an
educational setting. He did not
demonstrate to me that he had any intent to work
collaboratively with the School to foster a commitment to achieve the best
educational
outcome for children at the School, nor in terms of facilitating a
safe and supportive learning environment at the
confrontation of the young student at the Toast Table on 1 May 2025 can readily
be described as not just intimidating but
as threatening. His actions are to be
condemned as atrocious. It demonstrates an absence of any sense of what is
appropriate conduct
in any setting. An adult should not at any time approach a
young child in such a manner. There is no justification for it. It must
subject of an admonishment.
[45] His conduct
on 2 May 2025 must be equally admonished and condemned as being not just
atrocious but put more simply – disgusting.
Whilst he acknowledged later
that his language was not appropriate, he sought to justify it as having
occurred out of frustration.
Such cannot be accepted as a justification for it.
Whilst ACF may have been feeling frustrated with what he considered to be a lack
of adequate action by the School’s representatives, there was no
justification for the abusive and rude language he used and
the manner in which
he went about expressing himself to the School staff in front of students,
particularly noting these were young
primary school students. His conduct, even
if one arising out of frustration, is conduct which demonstrates ACF to lack
control over
his own emotions and his ability to be able to identify conduct
which is inappropriate regardless of the circumstances by which it
may have come
[46] What is
equally concerning is that, notwithstanding his so-called ‘reflective
e-mail’ in which he expressed a commitment
to ‘engage respectfully
moving forward’, shortly thereafter ACF yet again confronted the Deputy
Principal, on that occasion
at the school gates, and not only video and audio
recorded that confrontation but then uploaded same to a social media platform.
Such is also to be admonished as being entirely unacceptable.
[47] Yet ACF
sought to justify this as being something he is entitled to do in the exercise
of his human rights to freedom of expression.
He is entirely misguided in that
[48] Whilst he
is entitled to such freedom, it does not extend to the posting of a recording
wherein he threatened to sue the School
and to make other postings on social
media, seemingly to get the School not to do something it may very well be
lawfully entitled
to do. Such amounts to one or more contraventions under the
Criminal Code
[49] Moreover,
the fact that his conduct on both 1 and 2 May 2025 occurred so soon after the
recording of that which was said to have
been agreed on 28 April 2025, as
expressed in the Mediation Agreement, namely to refrain from statements that may
come across as
threatening or intimidatory, suggests strongly that any such
commitment given by him was at best mere ‘lip service’,
or at worst
an absence of any understanding by him as to what is considered to be conduct
that is threatening or intimidatory. This
is made even more so concerning given
the earlier warnings and ban that occurred in 2022 and 2023. The same can be
said about his
confrontation of the Deputy Principal at the school gates and
uploading of the video to social media, such being entirely inconsistent
the commitment he gave in the reflective e-mail to ‘engage respectfully
moving forward’.
[50] For all
these reasons, I was not just reasonably satisfied, I was entirely satisfied,
that ACF had conducted himself in a manner
that was likely to not just disrupt
the good order or management of the School, it was such that was likely to
cause, at the very
least, an apprehension of fear of physical harm in another
person when that person was at the School in the circumstances of ACF
present on the School grounds. But the past events are not of themselves the
basis for imposing a ban under s 341 of the
, it is the likely
degree of the probability of any future recurrence of such conduct that
[51] I found
that there was a high degree of such a probability, it being found in the fact
that ACF showed he could not do that which
he said he would do, namely that as I
have already identified it from the mediation agreement and the reflective
e-mail. He has conducted
himself in a manner entirely inconsistent with the
commitments he had given therein. It seemed to me that ACF learned nothing from
the past warnings, the earlier ban, nor the agreements and expression of intent
reached in the mediation, nor as he committed to
in his reflective e-mail. His
conduct which so shortly thereafter occurred indicate that there was more than a
likely degree of the
probability of such conduct occurring once again in some
form. But more critically, his presentation of his case before me and his
apparent efforts to minimise and justify his conduct demonstrated to me with
clarity that he did not possess any degree of insight
into his conduct as to the
effect it had, or at the very least could have had, on others, and that there
was a very real chance of
him repeating conduct of the same nature given that
absence of insight.
balancing to which I referred earlier did not and could not swing in his favour.
The history of his conduct as I have described
it herein shows that to be so.
Thus, the threshold for a banning direction under s 341 of the
was met in the review on the merits and so I concluded that a direction banning
ACF from the School grounds should issue.
question then arose as to what the appropriate period of the ban should be.
Under s 341 it is more than 60 days but not more
than one year. ACF submitted
that a one-year ban is disproportionate to the nature of the incidents. However,
his argument as to
why is not simply confused, it is entirely misguided.
Firstly, he says it does not meet the proportionality test under the
, but without stating what that test is or where it is found in the
legislation. Secondly, he seeks to demonstrate it to be so because
existence of a one-year ban imposed in
Chief Executive, Department of
Education and Training v Funch
[2010] QCAT 434
in the circumstances of Mr
Funch having physically assaulted the Deputy Principal of the school in that
matter such that he required
medical treatment and had ongoing distress arising
from the assault, circumstances entirely different to ACF’s
discussed it with ACF in the hearing, such is not a proper nor appropriate test
of proportionality given that what was imposed
there was the maximum permissible
ban of one year. This is not an issue such as occurs in sentencing for criminal
conduct wherein
the degree of severity of conduct is measured against other
cases to get a guideline on duration of an adequate sentence. The relevant
under s 341 of the
is to consider the possibility of repeat
conduct over what period, such conduct being that which would fall into the
categories under
s 341(1)(a) to (c). On the facts as they were before me, as I
noted it earlier, ACF had not learned anything from the past warnings,
earlier ban, nor the commitment that he had given as recorded in the mediation
agreement, or as he expressed in the reflective
e-mail, this all having occurred
over a period almost two years. Moreover the egregious conduct he engaged in on
1 and 2 May 2025,
only a few days after that mediation agreement was struck, and
then his continuation of confrontation of the Deputy Principal at
the gates of
the School and uploading posts to a social media platform shortly after the
commitment in the reflective e-mail to ‘engage
respectfully moving
forward’ demonstrated to me that he had no intention of ceasing any such
behaviour. Accordingly, there
was no basis for which I conclude a ban period of
something less than the maximum permissible was appropriate.
the reasons I have given herein, in exercising the discretion under s 341 of the
as the decision-maker, it seemed to me that the maximum period of
a one-year ban was appropriate. Whilst, as noted in
, such would
have an adverse impact on ACF this was no reason to discount it to a lesser
period. Any such lesser period gives rise
to the possibility of repeat conduct
by him that causes disruption at the School within that one-year period. His
conduct, as I have
noted it herein, all took place on the School grounds or at
its gate, and was conduct that was in all instances engaged in whilst
were present. ACF did not demonstrate to me in the presentation of his case that
he would not engage in the same or similar
conduct again. To the contrary, I was
left with the impression that he may very well do so given his efforts to not
just minimise
his conduct but to justify it as being permissible as him acting
out of frustration. Such is not an excuse that could be in any meaningful
accepted as justifying such conduct.
[56] Moreover,
he engaged in such conduct very soon after expressing an intention not to do so.
To permit even the possibility of
that occurring once again within the maximum
permissible period would in my opinion give rise to an avoidable risk of serious
consequences
for the staff and students at the School. For this reason, I
concluded that a one-year ban was the correct and preferable decision.
order was made confirming the Decision.
[57] Finally, in
conclusion it is necessary for me to return to the
and make a few
further comments as I noted earlier herein I would do so, and to also briefly
comment on ACF’s reliance on the
to in part justify his
conduct, and to avoid a ban at least in part.
[58] Starting
with that last point first, it is unnecessary for me to express any conclusions
on the correctness or otherwise of his
entitlement, in terms of his asserted
human rights, to engage in posting his videos on social media. Whilst it may be
correct that
his action is consistent with rights he asserts a reliance on,
something I make no finding about, to the extent any right is afforded
, as I have discussed earlier herein such a right is not
absolute and it may be limited in certain circumstances by the application
other legislation. That includes the
critically, whilst ACF is afforded the benefit of rights under the
which must be considered by this Tribunal, there was a competing right that
could not be overlooked. It is one that permissibly limits
ACF’s rights in
the circumstances of the issues for consideration under the
is the right that every child has, without discrimination, to the protection
that is needed by the child, and is in the child’s
best interests, because
of being a child.
decision for the purposes of s 341 of the
which might be said to
infringe ACF’s rights will nevertheless be compatible with the
. This is because, despite any limit the decision places on his human
rights, the decision will be justified by the factors outlined
under s 13 of the
. This is because, amongst other things, it will have the proper
purpose of promoting and achieving the objects of the EGP Act as
I identified
them in paragraph
consistent with the guiding principles expressed in that Act.
[60] Thus, to
the extent ACF is afforded a right under the
, by application of
in conjunction with the
in making the correct
and preferable decision such rights must yield to the rights of a child and so
be limited. That would include
the making of a finding of reasonable
satisfaction under s 341 of the
and so impose the ban on him
entering the School grounds. Such is consistent with s 13 of the HR Act.
[61] Finally,
this should also be said. To the extent that ACF might consider there is a less
restrictive and reasonably available
way to achieve the purpose, as I discussed
that concept in paragraph
to the extent such methods were available, such as a warning, an earlier ban,
and a mediation, the evidence before me showed
that these had no effect on ACF,
thus demonstrating that a restriction on his human rights is not an
inappropriate step to have taken.
Education (General
Provisions) Act 2006
Ibid s 21(1).
Ex 1 pg 27.
Ibid pg 31.
Ibid pg 32. That is a
direction permissible under s 340 of the
, such to be contrasted
to s 341 of the Act which is a direction given by the Chief Executive exceeding
60 days up to 1 year.
Ibid pg 493 – see
para 11 therein.
This is as extracted from
the audio recording made by ACF forming part of his evidence – see Ex 3
Annexure G.
This is as extracted from
video and audio recording made by ACF forming part of his evidence – see
Ex 3 Annexure H.
Ex 3 paras 24 and 25.
Ex 3 para 29 –
Annexure J.
Ex 3 Annexure M.
Ex 3 paras 52–55. As
ACF confirmed under cross-examination, this was just one of twelve postings to
social media on the same
Ex 1 pg 507.
Ex 4 paras 24 and 27.
Consider again the Objects
and the Guiding Principles thereunder as I noted them in
paragraphs [14] and [15] herein.
Consider ss 54A, 359. It
may also fall into the category of ‘intimidation, harassment or
abuse’ when considered in the
context of the earlier incidents – see
s 359B therein; or even ‘extortion’ under s 415 therein.
Chief Executive,
Department of Education and Training v Funch
[2010] QCAT 434
, [21]. Even
though the citation for this decision is numbered earlier than the citation for
decision I referred to earlier herein, this decision post-dates
that other decision, this being delivered 30 August 2010 the other
being of an interlocutory matter having been delivered on 10 August 2010.
There are two Funch
decisions referred to in these reasons, the first in time being # 604 which was
on an interlocutory matter,
the second in time being # 434 which was on the
substantive application. It appears that the first in time was published after
second in time was published thus the absence of chronological recording in
the citation numbers.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (276 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter