URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2021/170.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Seiffert & Ors v Commissioner of Police [2021] QCA 170 (20 August 2021)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Seiffert & Ors v Commissioner of Police
[2021] QCA 170
SEIFFERT, Beau Richard
(first applicant)
Craig Patrick
(second applicant)
CUNDY, Kieron Daniel
MOLONEY, Wendel James
COMMISSIONER OF
(respondent)
CA No 96 of 2020
CA No 97 of 2020
CA No 98 of 2020
CA No 99 of
DC No 2205 of 2019
DC No 2206 of 2019
DC No 2209 of 2019
2210 of 2019
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Application for Leave s 118 DCA (Criminal)
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Brisbane –
[2020] QDC 50 (Rafter
DELIVERED ON:
20 August 2021
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
7 April 2021
Fraser and McMurdo JJA and Bradley J
The following orders are made in each applicant’s application for
leave to appeal:
(a) Grant leave to appeal.
(b) Allow the appeal.
(c) Set aside the orders made in the District Court.
(d) The respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs of the appeal
to the District Court and the costs of the application for
leave to appeal and
the appeal to this Court.
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – WORK HEALTH AND SAFETY – DUTIES AND
LIABILITIES – INVESTIGATIONS AND SECURING COMPLIANCE –
applicant was a union official who held a permit under the
Fair Work Act
and a “WHS entry permit” issued under the
Work Health and
(Qld) – where the applicants attended a work
site to conduct inquiries in relation to a suspected contravention of the
Work Health and Safety Act
– where the applicants were denied entry
by the employer and the industrial inspectors were unable to give a direction
s 141A of the
Work Health and Safety Act
– where the employer
authority under
Work Health and Safety Act
where each applicant was charged with trespass contrary to
Summary Offences Act
(Qld) – where the Magistrates
Court found the applicants had no case to answer and ordered that the charges be
dismissed –
where the respondent appealed to the District Court pursuant
Justices Act 1886
(Qld) against the dismissal of the
charges – where the District Court allowed the appeal and remitted the
proceedings to the
Magistrates Court to proceed according to law – where
the applicants contend that upon the proper construction of
Work Health and Safety Act
they (as a WHS entry permit holder)
were, at the time of their arrest, lawfully entitled to remain at the site in
where, further, or, in the alternative, the applicants contend
Summary Offences Act
excluded the applicant from
liability under
of that Act – whether the applicants’
conduct in remaining at the workplace was authorised under
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
and was therefore
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
COSTS – SCALES OF COSTS – DISCRETION TO VARY
COMPLEXITY, DIFFICULTY OR IMPORTANCE – where the Magistrates Court decided
that the respondent should pay the
applicants’ costs of defending the
charges – where the magistrate also exercised the discretion under
Justices Act
(Qld) that the just and
reasonable amount for costs was higher than the amount calculated in accordance
with the prescribed scale
of costs – where the respondent appealed to the
District Court against the magistrate’s exercise of that discretion
whether the magistrate erred in the exercise of their discretion under
Justices Act
Justices Act 1886
Offences Act 2005
Work Health and Safety Act
Baker v The Queen
(2004) 223 CLR 513
[2004] HCA 45
Coco v The Queen
(1994) 179 CLR 427
[1994] HCA 15
Doney v The Queen
(1990) 171 CLR 207
[1990] HCA 51
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
May v O’Sullivan
(1955) 92 CLR 654
[1955] HCA 38
Ramsay v Menso
(2018) 260 FCR 506
[2018] FCAFC 55
J K Kirk SC, with C A Massy, for the applicants
M D Nicholson for the
SOLICITORS:
Hall Payne Lawyers for the applicants
QPS Legal Unit for the
Each applicant was charged with trespass contrary to
Summary Offences Act
(Qld). The Magistrates Court upheld a
submission that the applicants had no case to answer, ordered that the charges
be dismissed,
decided that the respondent should pay the applicants’ costs
of defending the charges and that the just and reasonable amount
for costs was
higher than the amount calculated in accordance with the prescribed scale of
costs, and ordered that the respondent
pay the applicants’ costs of
$21,250.00 within two months.
respondent appealed to the District Court pursuant to
(Qld) against the dismissal of the charges and the
magistrate’s decision that the just and reasonable amount of the
applicants’
costs was higher than the amount calculated in accordance with
the prescribed scale. Rafter DCJ ordered that the appeal be allowed,
made in the Magistrates Court be set aside, and the proceedings be remitted to
the Magistrates Court at Brisbane to proceed
according to law. The applicants
seek leave to appeal against those orders.
The proposed appeals
against the orders setting aside the orders of the Magistrates Court dismissing
the charges
Summary Offences Act
made it an offence for a person to
“unlawfully enter, or remain in, a place used as a yard for, or a place
used for, a business
purpose”. The charge against each applicant was
that he unlawfully remained in a place used as a yard for a business purpose.
Section 11(3)
provided that
prevent an authorised industrial officer entering a workplace in accordance with
the terms of the person’s
appointment as an authorised industrial
officer.” The term “unlawfully” is defined to mean
“without authorisation,
justification or excuse by law”. The
expression “authorised industrial officer” is defined to include
permit holder under the
Fair Work Act
[4] The no-case
submission for the applicants was grounded upon four contentions. Those
contentions were accepted by the Magistrates
Court but each of them was rejected
in the District Court. The applicants now pursue only two of their original
contentions. The
relevant grounds of each applicant’s application for
leave to appeal are that upon the proper construction of
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(Qld) the applicant (as a WHS entry
permit holder) was, at the time of his arrest, lawfully entitled to remain at
the site in question;
and further, or, in the alternative,
Summary Offences Act
excluded the applicant from liability under
of that Act.
[5] As Rafter
DCJ observed, the question to be decided upon the applicants’ submission
that there was “no case to answer”
was whether, upon the evidence in
the prosecution case the applicants could lawfully be
and in deciding that
question the prosecution case must be taken at its
In the applications in
this Court there is no dispute about the facts capable of being proved beyond
reasonable doubt by the evidence
in the prosecution case. The arguments focused
instead upon the proper construction of
Work Health and
and (to a lesser extent) of
Offences Act
[6] The proper
construction of those provisions is important for the operation of the
Health and Safety Act
. It also has a broader significance because, as is
mentioned in
of that Act, its main object is “to provide for a
balanced and nationally consistent framework to secure the health and safety
workers and workplaces” by ways set out in that provision. Furthermore, a
consequence of the decision in the District Court
is to expose the applicants to
a risk of conviction which would not arise upon the construction of the relevant
provisions accepted
by the magistrate and propounded by the applicants in this
application. That construction is certainly reasonably arguable. It
appropriate to grant leave to appeal.
applicant was a union official who held a permit under the
Fair Work Act
and a “WHS entry permit” issued under the
Work Health and Safety
Section 117(1)
Work Health and Safety Act
provided that “a WHS entry permit holder may enter a workplace for the
purpose of inquiring into a suspected contravention
of this Act that relates to,
or affects, a relevant worker.” The expression “relevant
worker”, where it is used
in relation to a workplace, is defined
to mean “a worker ... who is a member, or eligible to be a member, of
a relevant union
... and ... whose industrial interests the relevant union is
entitled to represent ... and ... who works at that workplace.”
provided that the “permit holder must reasonably suspect before
entering the workplace that the contravention has occurred
occurring”.
Section 118
“(1) While at the workplace under this division, the
WHS entry permit holder may do all or any of the following in relation
suspected contravention of this Act –
(a) inspect any work system, plant, substance, structure or other thing
relevant to the suspected contravention;
(b) consult with the relevant workers in relation to the suspected
contravention;
(c) consult with the relevant person conducting a business or undertaking
(d) require the relevant person conducting a business or undertaking to allow
the WHS entry permit holder to inspect, and make copies
of, any document that is
directly relevant to the suspected contravention and that –
(i) is kept at the workplace; or
(ii) is accessible from a computer that is kept at the workplace;
(e) warn any person whom the WHS entry permit holder reasonably believes to
be exposed to a serious risk to his or her health or safety,
emanating from an
immediate or imminent exposure to a hazard, of that risk.
(2) However, the relevant person conducting the business or undertaking is
not required under subsection (1)(d) to allow the WHS entry
permit holder to
inspect or make copies of a document if to do so would contravene a law of
the Commonwealth or a law of a State.
(3) A relevant person conducting a business or undertaking must not, without
reasonable excuse, refuse or fail to comply with a requirement
subsection (1)(d).
WHS civil penalty provision.
Maximum Penalty – 100 penalty units.
(4) Subsection (3) places an evidential burden on the defendant to show a
reasonable excuse.
1 At least 24 hours notice is required for an entry to a workplace to inspect
employee records or other documents held by someone
other than a person
conducting a business or undertaking. See
section 120.
2 The use or disclosure of personal information obtained under this section
is regulated under the
of the Commonwealth.”
Work Health and Safety Act
obliged a WHS entry permit
holder, as soon as is reasonably practicable after entering a workplace, to give
notice of the entry and
suspected contravention to “the relevant person
conducting a business or undertaking” and “the person with
or control of the workplace”.
Section 119(2)
provided an
exception for cases in which giving the notice “would defeat the purpose
of the entry ... or unreasonably delay
the WHS entry permit holder in an urgent
[10] At the
hearing in the Magistrates Court the police prosecutor gave particulars of the
prosecution case against each applicant:
“... the prosecution
alleges that in the face of Mr James’ refusal to allow the defendants on
the site and his absolute
steadfast refusal to allow them to remain, the
defendants continuing to remain on the site became unreasonable as they were
going to be able to exercise their purpose that day. And, despite this,
they continued to remain to the detriment of Mr James whereupon
[11] Thus the
prosecution case did not include an allegation that the applicants did not
lawfully enter the site, or an allegation
that they did not lawfully remain on
the site before their continuing presence allegedly became unreasonable after Mr
James had persisted
in his objection to them remaining and they were allegedly
unable to conduct an inquiry of the kind described in
prosecution admitted by agreement the following
material times each [applicant] was a permit holder pursuant to the provisions
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (the FW
all material times each [applicant] was a permit holder pursuant to the
provisions of the
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(Qld) (the WHS
all material times each [applicant] was an authorised industrial officer for the
purposes of
Summary Offences Act 2005
charge against each [applicant] relates to premises known as Enco Precast which
is located at 73 Counihan Road in Seventeen Mile
all material times each [applicant] was exercising authority to enter the
premises under the FW Act and WHS Act;
of the [applicants] entered the premises at or about 7:40am on 17 December
entry each of the [applicants] provided entry notices to Mr Steven
James refused further presence on the premises to each of the [applicants] and
asked them to leave;
[applicants] were arrested at approximately 11:15am on the same day;
Helen Burgess, an inspector from Workplace Health and Safety Queensland (WHSQ),
attended the premises;
Burgess departed the premises without giving Mr James or any staff member of
Enco Precast a written direction under s.141A of the
James did not produce records as required by Ms Burgess under the WHS
useful here also to set out Rafter DCJ’s summary of the main facts
established by the evidence adduced in the prosecution
“[12] The main facts were not in dispute. At the time of
entry onto the premises the [applicants] each presented a notice of
accordance with s 119 WHS Act. Shortly after entering the premises the
respondents were asked by Mr James to leave. The
[applicants] referred Mr James
to their notices of entry which outlined the rights they were seeking to
exercise in accordance with
s 118 WHS Act. The [applicants] refused to leave the
[13] Mr James said that he would be calling the police. Mr Seiffert contacted
Ms Burgess at the Office of Industrial Relations and
requested assistance in
relation to entering the work site.
[14] Senior Constable Easton was the first police officer to arrive at the
site followed by Senior Constable Mackay and Constable
Cooper. Senior Constable
Mackay and Constable Cooper spoke to the [applicants] in a small office at the
work site. The [applicants]
stated that they were union officials and were at
the work site for the purpose of conducting a workplace health and safety
inspection.
The [applicants] said that they were remaining in order to exercise
their rights under ss 117 and 118 WHS Act.
[15] At about 9.00 am the industrial inspectors, Ms Burgess and Mr
arrived at the site and
spoke to the [applicants]. The [applicants] told them that they had entered the
premises in accordance with
s 117 WHS Act and were seeking to exercise their
functions pursuant to s 118 WHS Act.
[16] The industrial inspectors requested that Mr James provide them with
documentation and access to the workplace in order to assist
them to resolve the
dispute between the [applicants] and ENCO. Mr James refused to provide the
requested documentation or provide
access to the industrial inspectors.
Ms Burgess eventually told the [applicants] that she was unable to assist
with their entry.
[17] The industrial inspectors left the premises without issuing any
direction or making any determination in relation to the matter.
departure of the industrial inspectors the [applicants] informed the police
officers that they intended to remain on the
premises in order to exercise their
rights under the WHS Act.
[18] At about 11.15am the [applicants] were arrested for the offence of
trespass by remaining on the premises. There were video recordings
made of the
conversation principally between Sergeant Lewis and some of the [applicants]
leading up to and including the time of
transcript of the recording of interactions between the police officers and the
applicants in the period leading up to the
arrests demonstrates that the
applicants maintained throughout that they remained at the site for the purpose
of exercising their
statutory rights under the
Work Health and Safety
. A police officer told the applicants that police could not determine
if the applicants were there lawfully because Workplace Health
and Safety could
not make a determination. After one of the applicants referred to having a
report about illegal plumbing on the
job, one of the police officers said his
role was to assist Workplace Health and Safety, that was finished because they
and the applicants had to go because the owners of the premises say
that the applicants are not allowed to be there. The police
officers more than
once asked the applicants to leave the site. The applicants were arrested upon
charges of trespass when they
did not leave the site after police officers had
told the applicants they would be arrested if they did not leave
voluntarily.
[15] In response
to the no-case submission for the applicants, the prosecutor submitted that
“given that Enco were never going
to allow the [applicants] to exercise
their rights, and that no assistance from OIR [Office of Industrial Relations]
was forthcoming,
the argument about having a right to remain became a
“after speaking with
OIR officers, the [applicants] should have left the premises the moment they
realised they could not exercise
their powers under [the
Fair Work Act
Work Health and Safety Act
] legislation. In a situation where the
[applicants’] authority to enter was under question, and where Enco was
refusing to
allow the [applicants] to exercise any further powers, all
justification and execution to remain on site was
extinguished.”
prosecutor submitted that the continuing presence of the applicants was unlawful
after the inspectors from Workplace Health
and Safety Queensland did not issue
any direction under s 141A of the
Work Health and Safety Act
reliance in these arguments upon the fact that the industrial inspectors did not
give a direction under s 141A expanded the
prosecution case beyond the
particulars reproduced in [10] of these reasons. Section 141A was in
subdivision 1 (“Role of inspectors”),
in division 6 (“Dealing
with disputes”) of
Work Health and Safety Act
that subdivision,
empowered any party to a dispute about “the
exercise or purported exercise by a WHS entry permit holder of a right of entry
under this Act [to] ... ask the regulator to appoint an inspector to attend the
workplace to assist in resolving the dispute”.
Section 141A
“(1) This section applies if—
(a) an inspector is appointed by the regulator under
section 141
to assist in
resolving a dispute; and
(b) the dispute is about—
(i) whether the WHS entry permit holder has a right to enter the workplace
under division 2 or 3; or
(ii) whether
section 119
has been complied with in relation to notice
of the entry or purported entry.
This section does not apply if the dispute is about rights the WHS entry
permit holder may exercise while at the workplace under division
(2) The inspector may—
(a) decide the matter mentioned in subsection (1)(b)(i) or (ii); and
(b) if the inspector is reasonably satisfied the WHS entry permit holder has
a right of entry under division 2 or 3—give the
person conducting the
business or undertaking a direction, in writing, to immediately allow the
WHS entry permit holder to enter
the workplace under a stated provision of
division 2 or 3.
The commission may review a decision made under subsection (2) in dealing
with a dispute under subdivision 2—see section 142A.
(3) A direction under subsection (2)(b) must state—
(a) that the inspector is reasonably satisfied the WHS entry permit holder
has a right to enter the workplace under division 2 or
(b) the reasons the inspector is reasonably satisfied about the right to
(4) A person given a direction under subsection (2)(b) must comply with
WHS civil penalty provision.
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units.
(5) This section does not limit the powers of the inspector under this
Example of powers of the
the inspector’s power to issue a notice under
magistrate found there was no direction by the industrial inspectors under
s 141A because the employer would not give the
inspectors information they
required Mr James to give them. The magistrate did not accept that the
facts that Mr James objected
to the applicants entering the workplace and
the inspectors had not given a direction under s 141A had the effect
that the lawful
entry of the applicants became unlawful. The magistrate
accepted the arguments for the applicants that it would defeat the purpose
to adopt a narrow construction under which it applied only to entry to
premises and that the prosecution could not prove beyond reasonable
the applicants’ presence was unlawful.
[18] In Rafter
DCJ’s reasons for allowing the appeal to the District Court, his Honour
referred to the principle of legality
articulated in
(most relevantly, that
“Statutory authority to engage in what otherwise would be tortious conduct
must be clearly expressed
in unmistakeable and unambiguous language”).
His Honour also referred to an observation by the Full Court of the Federal
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v
“provisions as to entry on to work sites ... should be construed
conformably with the language used by Parliament practically
and with an eye to
commonsense so that they can be implemented in a clear way on a day-to-day
basis at work sites”. Rafter
DCJ quoted Barwick CJ’s statement
Benning v Wong
“a statute only authorises those acts which it expressly nominates and
those acts and matters which are necessarily incidental
to the acts so expressly
authorised or to their execution”. Rafter DCJ considered it
a surprising consequence of the magistrate’s
interpretation” of
Summary Offences Act
where the right of a WHS entry permit holder to remain at a workplace was
disputed, the person nevertheless would be entitled
to remain until the close of
business. After referring to
and 141A of the
Work Health and
, Rafter DCJ observed that a “very clear legislative intent
would be required to confer upon entry permit holders a right to
a workplace notwithstanding the existence of a dispute in relation to the
purported exercise of the right to enter.”
In Rafter DCJ’s view,
the argument for the applicants which the magistrate adopted “ignores the
rights of the occupier”.
[19] Rafter DCJ
referred to the following passage in
Kuru v New South
a person who enters the land of another must justify that entry by showing
either that the entry was with the consent
of the occupier or that the entrant
had lawful authority to enter. Secondly, except in cases provided for by the
common law and
by statute, police officers have no special right to enter land.
And ... an authority to enter land may be revoked and that, if
the authority is
revoked, the entrant no longer has authority to remain on the land but must
leave as soon as is reasonably practicable.”
[20] Rafter DCJ
considered that the applicants had a right under
s 142(4)(b)(i)
Work Health and Safety Act
to apply to the Industrial Commission to deal
with a dispute about the exercise or purported exercise of a right of entry and
Industrial Commission possessed power under
to deal with a
dispute about the right to remain on premises, including an issue under
in relation to whether the WHS entry permit holder reasonably
suspected that a contravention had occurred or was occurring.
Section 142
“(1) The commission may deal with a dispute about
the exercise or purported exercise by a WHS entry permit holder of a right
entry under this Act (including a dispute about whether a request under
is reasonable).
(2) The commission may deal with the dispute in any way it thinks fit,
including by means of mediation, conciliation or arbitration.
(3) If the commission deals with the dispute by arbitration, it may make 1 or
more of the following orders –
(a) an order imposing conditions on a WHS entry permit;
(b) an order suspending a WHS entry permit;
(c) an order revoking a WHS entry permit;
(d) an order about the future issue of WHS entry permits to 1 or more
(e) any other order it considers appropriate.
(4) The commission may deal with the dispute –
(a) on its own initiative; or
(b) on application by any of the following to whom the dispute relates
(i) a WHS entry permit holder;
(ii) the relevant union;
(iii) the relevant person conducting a business or undertaking;
(iv) any other person in relation to whom the WHS entry permit holder has
exercised or purported to exercise the right of entry;
(v) any other person affected by the exercise or purported exercise of the
right of entry by a WHS entry permit holder;
(vi) the regulator.
(5) In dealing with a dispute, the commission must not confer any rights on
the WHS entry permit holder that are additional to, or
inconsistent with, rights
exercisable by the WHS entry permit holder under this part.
(6) A person dissatisfied with the decision of the commission may appeal
Industrial Relations Act 2016
, chapter 11,
Industrial Relations Act 2016
, chapter 11,
[22] Rafter DCJ
observed that the applicants could commence proceedings in the Federal Court or
Federal Circuit Court seeking appropriate
declarations, injunctions and
penalties and “[t]he fact that the [applicants] may be inconvenienced by
having to take steps
to enforce their rights pursuant to
WHS Act is not a
reason for extending the scope of operation of the right of entry.”
Rafter DCJ referred to evidence given
by Mr James that “he denied
“further entry” to the [applicants] because he believed there were
no “relevant”
workers on the site and the entry notices “were
very general in their nature””. After Mr James did not comply
a request by one of the Workplace Health and Safety Queensland inspectors to
provide the names, contact details and job descriptions
of all employees,
notwithstanding that the inspector warned Mr James that hindering and
obstructing an inspector may constitute an
offence, the inspector told the
applicants that the inspectors “were unable to assist with their entry ...
and were unable
to determine the likelihood of the potential eligibility of
people in the workplace”. Rafter DCJ referred to the facts that
applicants remained on the premises for more than three hours after they had
entered it at about 7.40 am, the police officers
had arrived at about 8.50 am,
the inspectors had arrived at about 9.00 am, and during that time the applicants
“were not actually
engaged in inspections or consultations provided for in
[23] Rafter DCJ
“The broad interpretation of the immunity in
Summary Offences Act
would have the result that the
[applicants] would have been able to remain on the premises, at least until the
close of business.
The fact that Mr James may have hindered or obstructed the
[applicants] ... did not entitle them to remain on the premises in circumstances
where a dispute arose in relation to the exercise of rights under s 118 WHS
Act, and they were asked to
respectful opinion the Magistrates Court’s decision to uphold the no-case
submission and dismiss the charges against
the applicants was correct.
[25] The issue
whether the applicants’ conduct in remaining at the workplace was
authorised under ss 117 and 118 and therefore
lawful was admittedly raised upon
the evidence adduced in the Magistrates Court. The onus was upon the
prosecution to prove that
the conduct was not authorised by ss 117 and 118.
[26] As Dowsett
and Collier JJ recorded in
Work Health and Safety Act
confers an entitlement upon a permit
holder to enter premises where “the person is a permit holder; the person
reasonably suspects
a breach of the
; and the reasonable suspicion
relates to a worker who is a member or who is eligible to be a member of
the permit holder’s
organisation”. An effect of the admission that
the applicants lawfully entered the workplace under s 117 is that the
prosecution
case must be assessed upon the premise that each of the conditions
upon which s 117 operates was satisfied in each case. That is
with how the prosecution case was particularised and run in the Magistrates
[27] Having
regard to the principle of legality, ss 117 and 118 arguably require for their
continuing operation after a WHS permit
holder has lawfully entered a workplace
that the permit holder continues to hold the suspicion described in s 117 and
the workplace for the purpose of inquiring into the suspected
contravention described in s 117. As Rafter DCJ observed, Mr James
evidence that he disputed the basis of the entry by the
applicants.
That evidence was
to the effect that he believed there was no contravention such as is described
in s 117. Consistently with the
particulars of the prosecution case and the
admission that the applicants were authorised by s 117 to enter the
workplace, the prosecution
did not rely upon Mr James’ evidence as proof
that any of the applicants did not hold a reasonable suspicion that there was
a contravention of the kind described in s 117. Nor did the prosecution
allege or adduce any evidence that could justify a finding
that, contrary to the
evidence of the applicants’ conduct and statements while they were at the
workplace, any of the applicants
abandoned their original purpose of conducting
an inquiry into the suspected contravention. In this Court the respondent did
submit that the evidence adduced in the prosecution case might allow for any
such finding.
correct, as Rafter DCJ also observed, that during the time the applicants
remained at the premises they were not actually
engaged in inspections or
consultations provided for in
Work Health and Safety
. It does not follow that they did not continue to suspect a
contravention or that they abandoned their original purpose of conducting
inquiry. Upon the evidence, the time the applicants remained at the premises
without actually conducting an inquiry was occupied
by the applicants’
attempts to persuade Mr James to cooperate, the calling of the police, the
applicants waiting until police
arrived, the applicants seeking the assistance
of the industrial inspectors, the inspectors’ attempt to obtain Mr
cooperation, and the applicants’ attempts to persuade the
police officers that they were entitled to remain at the workplace
their proposed inquiry.
[29] Putting
that explanation aside, in a case in which the prosecution did not allege or
adduce evidence to prove that any of the
expressed conditions of the operation
was not fulfilled, the respondent’s argument did
not explain how the delay might have resulted in the extinguishment of statutory
rights to be at the workplace conferred upon the applicants by those
v The Queen
Brennan, Gaudron and McHugh JJ observed:
“Statutory authority
to engage in what otherwise would be tortious conduct must be clearly expressed
in unmistakable and unambiguous
language. Indeed, it has been said that the
presumption is that, in the absence of express provision to the contrary, the
legislature
did not intend to authorize what would otherwise have been tortious
conduct. But the presumption is rebuttable and will be displaced
if there is
a clear implication that authority to enter or remain upon private property
was intended.”
[31] As Rafter
DCJ accepted,
the right of
entry conferred by
clearly allows an entry permit holder to remain at
a workplace for the purpose of conducting the inquiries provided for in
The right to remain for that purpose is at least implicit in the
grant of authority to a WHS permit holder under
to enter for the purpose
of conducting an inquiry, and it is expressed in the grant of authority to such
a permit holder under
to do all or any of the specified things
which constitute the inquiry referred to in
“[w]hile at the
workplace under this division”.
are interrelated and must be read together. Those sections clearly
express in unmistakable and unambiguous language that, if a WHS
entry permit
holder reasonably suspects that a contravention of the
Work Health and Safety
that relates to or affects a relevant worker has occurred or is
occurring, that permit holder may enter and remain at the workplace
purpose of inquiring into the suspected contravention in the ways described in
The statutory language is not open to a construction under which
the rights conferred upon the WHS permit holder are exercisable
only with the
consent of the occupier. Such a construction also would be inconsistent with
the purpose of the Act and the statutory
[33] The object
of the Act is set out in
, most relevantly for present purposes in
“(1) The main object of this
Act is to provide for a balanced and nationally consistent framework to secure
the health and safety
of workers and workplaces by –
(a) protecting workers and other persons against harm to their health, safety
and welfare through the elimination or minimisation
of risks arising from work
or from particular types of substances or plant; and
(2) In furthering subsection (1)(a), regard must be had to the principle that
workers and other persons should be given the highest
level of protection
against harm to their health, safety and welfare from hazards and risk arising
from work or from particular types
of substances or plant as is reasonably
practicable.”
Section 14A
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(Qld) requires that
an interpretation that will best achieve the purpose
Work Health and Safety Act
is to be preferred to any other
interpretation. That requirement would not be fulfilled by implying that the
rights conferred upon
WHS entry permit holders by
qualified by a requirement to obtain the consent of the occupier.
[35] Nor can an
implication qualifying those rights be drawn from ss 141A or
Act. Each of those sections operate upon the premise that any right of a WHS
entry permit holder to enter a workplace is
attributable to a different
provision of the Act: see in particular s 141A(2)(b) (“a right of
entry under division 2 or 3”)
(“a right of entry
under this Act”). Neither section purports to qualify the statutory
provision which created the relevant
right. An inability of an industrial
inspector to be reasonably satisfied a WHS entry permit holder has a right of
entry for the
purposes of s 141A(2)(b) is not to be equated with a decision
that there was no such right of entry. No provision in the Act suggests
omission by a WHS entry permit holder to apply to the Industrial Commission
pursuant to
s 142(4)(b)(i)
is material to the resolution of the question
whether the permit holder continues to have the rights which accrued upon
satisfaction
of the conditions expressed in
[36] No doubt
the applicants (in common with other interested persons, including the occupier
of the workplace) could bring a proceeding
in a court to resolve an impasse at
the workplace such as that which was described in the evidence in this case.
That entitlement
also could not justify reading into the Act an implied
qualification upon the effect of the unambiguous language of
[37] To derive
from any of the provisions of the Act upon which the respondent successfully
relied in the District Court an implication
qualifying the rights of a WHS entry
permit holder under
also would not be the interpretation that
will best achieve the purpose of the
Work Health and Safety Act
An effect of such an implication is that a WHS entry permit holder who
is validly authorised to enter a workplace to conduct an
inquiry into a
suspected contravention would risk prosecution for trespass if an occupier
delays the inquiry by wrongly contending
that the permit holder is not entitled
to remain at the workplace. That would be calculated to deter permit holders
from carrying
out functions given to them by the Act. The suggested remedies of
applying to an Industrial Inspector or the Industrial Commission,
or commencing
litigation, would delay inquiries by WHS entry permit holders who are validly
authorised to conduct such inquiries.
[38] Nor are any
of the suggested statutory implications consistent with the scheme of the Act.
Consistently with the rights conferred
being “free
standing”, as they were described in the Full Court of the Federal
the issue of WHS entry
permits is carefully regulated, such permits must be recorded on a register
available to the public, and the
exercise of those rights is expressly qualified
in many ways.
[39] Such a
permit may be issued only to a union official who has satisfactorily completed
prescribed training and holds or will hold
either an entry permit under the
Fair Work Act
or an industrial officer authority
In deciding whether to issue the permit the industrial registrar must take into
account the object of the Act and “the object
of allowing union right of
entry to workplaces for work health and safety purposes”
Permits remain in effect for a term of three years
Sections 138
empower the Industrial Commission to revoke a WHS
entry permit upon application by the regulator, the relevant person conducting
business or undertaking, any other person in relation to whom the WHS entry
permit holder has exercised or purported to exercise
a right under
any other person affected by the exercise or purported exercise of a right under
by a WHS entry permit holder, if various conditions are satisfied,
including that the permit holder has contravened any condition
of the permit,
has acted or purported to act in an improper way in the exercise of any right
under the Act, and that in exercising
or purporting to exercise a right under
the permit holder has intentionally hindered or obstructed a person
conducting the business or undertaking or workers at a workplace.
industrial registrar is required to keep available for public access an up to
date register of WHS entry permit holders
exercise of rights under
is further regulated by the
following civil penalty provisions:
Section 123:
a WHS entry
permit holder must not contravene a condition imposed on the WHS entry permit.
(Such conditions may be imposed by the
industrial registrar under
Section 124:
a WHS entry permit holder must not enter a workplace unless
he or she also holds an entry permit under the
Fair Work Act
industrial officer authority.
Section 125:
a WHS entry permit holder must, at all times that he or she
is at a workplace under a right of entry under division 2 or 3, have
WHS entry permit and photographic identification available for inspection by any
person on request.
Section 126:
a WHS entry permit holder may exercise a right under
division 2 or 3 only during the usual working hours at the workplace.
Section 127:
a WHS entry permit holder may exercise a right of entry to a
workplace only in relation to the area of the workplace where the relevant
workers work or any other work area that directed affects the health or safety
of those workers.
Section 128:
a WHS entry permit holder must not exercise a right of entry
to a workplace under division 2 or 3 unless he or she complies with
reasonable request by the relevant person conducting a business or undertaking
or the person with the management or control of
the workplace to comply with any
work health and safety requirement that applies to the workplace and any other
legislated requirement
that applies to that type of workplace.
Section 129:
a WHS entry permit holder must not enter any part of a
workplace that is used only for residential purposes.
Section 146:
a WHS entry permit holder exercising, or seeking to
exercise, rights under
must not intentionally and unreasonably delay,
hinder or obstruct any person or disrupt any work at a workplace, or otherwise
in an improper way.
enactment of those express qualifications upon the rights of WHS entry permit
holders militates against acceptance of the
proposition that the quite different
qualifications upon those rights required by the respondent’s arguments
may be read into
respondent referred to
Section 144
provides that a person must
not, without reasonable excuse, refuse or unduly delay entry into a workplace by
WHS entry permit holder
who is entitled to enter the workplace under
Section 145
provides that a person must not intentionally and
unreasonably hinder or obstruct a WHS entry permit holder in entering a
or in exercising any rights at a workplace under
occupier (or other person) has a reasonable excuse under
, or does not
act intentionally and unreasonably under
, such a person may not be
convicted of an offence under those sections. Those are qualifications only
upon the liability for a civil
penalty of a person who acts in any of the
specified ways. They could not justify an implication that, notwithstanding the
of the conditions of the rights given to a WHS entry permit holder by
, those rights may cease to exist in circumstances other than
those expressed in the Act. Such an implication would be inconsistent
unambiguous language of
, incompatible with the expressed
object of the
Work Health and Safety Act
, and incoherent with the scheme
of the Act.
evidence in the prosecution case was incapable of proving beyond reasonable
doubt that the applicants remained at the site
unlawfully. The charges were
rightly dismissed by the Magistrates Court for that reason.
[44] In relation
Summary Offences Act
, Rafter DCJ referred to the
statements in the explanatory note to the
Summary Offences Bill 2004
(Qld) that s 11(3) was added to the
Summary Offences Act
that there was no conflict with the provisions of the
Industrial Relations
(Qld) and the
Workplace Relations Act 1966
“The latter Acts provide lawful authority for an
authorised industrial officer to enter a workplace to carry out a function
officer may perform under those Acts. Clause 11 of the Bill relates to
trespass. Although the clause requires that an entry
must be unlawful before it
constitutes a trespass, the amendment removes any doubt that there could be
conflict between the Bill
and the Acts.”
[45] The text of
s 11(3) and its purpose are inconsistent with it being construed in a way that
would cut across the defined meaning
of “unlawfully” in s 11(2)
in a way that would render unlawful conduct that was authorised by the
Health and Safety Act
. Because I would hold that the charges were correctly
dismissed by the Magistrates Court upon the basis already mentioned, it is
necessary for me to decide whether
also justified the dismissal of
the charges. I would mention only my view that, taking into account the purpose
of the provision
articulated in the explanatory memorandum, the provision in
“does not prevent an authorised industrial officer
entering a workplace in accordance with the terms of the person’s
appointment as an authorised industrial officer” is apt to confer an
immunity for such an officer who, after lawfully entering
a workplace, remains
at the workplace, if that conduct accords with the terms of that person’s
appointment.
remaining ground of the application for leave to appeal contends that the
District Court erred in failing to hold that the
proceeding at first instance
was attended by special difficulty, complexity or importance within the meaning
Justices Act 1886
(Qld), such that the higher
schedule of costs should be applied.
applicant’s argument under that ground raised a question of principle
concerning the approach of an appellate court
in an appeal against the exercise
of the discretion under that subsection. The identification of the correct
approach involves an
issue of principle of importance for future decisions. For
that reason, and because there is substance in the appellants’
it is appropriate to grant leave to appeal upon this ground.
Justices Act
, where a complaint is dismissed an
order for costs in favour of a defendant against a complainant police officer
may be made only
if the magistrate is satisfied that it is proper that the order
for costs should be made. In the appeal to the District Court the
did not challenge the magistrate’s decision to make an order for costs
against the complainant police officer in
this case. The challenge was only to
the exercise of the discretion under
Justices Act
to award costs above the scale of costs in a schedule in the applicable
regulation.
Justices Act
“(1) In deciding the
costs that are just and reasonable for this division, the justices may award
costs only –
(a) for an item allowed for this division under a scale of costs prescribed
under a regulation; and
(b) up to the amount allowed for the item under the scale.
(2) However, the justices may allow a higher amount for costs if the justices
are satisfied that the higher amount is just and reasonable
having regard to the
special difficulty, complexity or importance of the case.”
magistrate considered that it was appropriate to allow a higher amount for costs
for these reasons: the matter was significant for the
applicants because of their role as union officials; it was an important matter
because of the interaction between police, a government body, the complainant,
and the applicants; it was a complicated matter;
and it was very complicated
for the interplay of State and Commonwealth legislation.
[51] It should
be noted that at the hearing before the magistrate, the prosecution advanced
a detailed argument about what was submitted
to be an inconsistency between
Commonwealth legislation and State legislation. That argument was ultimately
abandoned and it was
not revived on appeal.
[52] In the
District Court, the applicant’s notices of appeal contended that the
magistrate had erred in the exercise of a discretion
to award costs in an amount
higher than scale allowed in accordance with
. Rafter DCJ accepted that the case involved more significant issues
than most cases of trespass but concluded that this did not
“necessarily” mean that it involved special difficulty, complexity
or importance.
Rafter DCJ cited
for rejecting the
proposition that a case could be regarded as involving special difficulty or
complexity simply because the applicable
legislation was complex. His Honour
accepted that a conviction for an offence of trespass might be relevant to a
decision by the
Fair Work Commission whether it was satisfied that the
applicants were fit and proper persons to hold entry
but observed that this
was only one of the factors to be considered by the Fair Work Commission and did
not mean that the case was
of special difficulty, complexity or importance.
After referring to the fact that the respondents were charged with a single
of trespass and identifying the eight prosecution witnesses and the
subject matters of their evidence, Rafter DCJ acknowledged that
the legislative
framework certainly made the case somewhat more difficult than other cases of
trespass but expressed the opinion
that the case did not involve special
difficulty, complexity or importance. His Honour concluded that the magistrate
erred in concluding
that an amount for costs above the scale in the Justices
Regulation was just and reasonable.
v The Queen
to which Rafter
DCJ referred, Gleeson CJ observed of legislation that requires courts to find
“special reasons” or “special
circumstances” as a
condition of the exercise of a power that “[t]his is a verbal formula that
is commonly used where
it is intended that judicial discretion should not be
confined by precise definition, or where the circumstances of potential
are so various as to defy precise definition.” The evaluative
nature of the circumstances described in s 158B(2), the use
of the word
“satisfied”, and the criterion of the power to allow a higher
amount that it is “just and reasonable”,
compel the conclusion that
a decision to allow a higher amount for costs is a discretionary decision, the
correctness of which could
be challenged on appeal only by showing an error in
the decision making
[54] The errors
that justify appellate correction in such as case are identified in
Rafter DCJ did
not identify an error of that kind. His Honour’s reasons convey that he
found error upon the basis that his
own evaluation of the question whether a
special difficulty, complexity or importance of the case made an allowance for a
amount for costs just and reasonable, differed from the Magistrates
Court’s evaluation. The mere fact that an appellate court
would exercise
a discretion differently from the way in which it was exercised at first
instance is insufficient to justify appellate
interference in the first instance
respectful opinion it was within the discretion of the magistrate to find that a
higher amount for costs was just and reasonable
having regard in particular to
the importance of the case. In the context of a national scheme of which the
Work Health and Safety Act
forms part, resolution of the issues raised in
the prosecution case reasonably could be regarded as being of special importance
as to justify an award of costs in an amount that exceeded the amount of
costs calculated according to the prescribed scale. The
respondent did not
submit that if the Court formed that view the Court should review the quantum of
costs awarded by the Magistrates
Proposed orders
[56] I would
make the following orders in each applicant’s application for leave to
(a) Grant leave to appeal.
(b) Allow the appeal.
(c) Set aside the orders made in the District Court.
(d) The respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs of the appeal to the
District Court and the costs of the application for
leave to appeal and the
appeal to this Court.
[57] McMURDO
I agree with Fraser JA.
[58] BRADLEY
I agree with the orders proposed by Fraser JA and with his
May v O’Sullivan
[1995] HCA 38
(1955) 92 CLR 654
Doney v The Queen
[1990] HCA 51
(1990) 171 CLR 207
R v Goldsworthy, Goldsworthy & Hill
. Rafter DCJ also referred to
Goli v Blue 11 Pty Ltd
[2018] QDC 108
(Porter QC DCJ).
Transcript 29 April 2019 at 1
These facts are set out in a
document the parties agreed upon during the hearing of the appeal in the
District Court.
The transcript records the
name of the witness as John Escuna. However, his surname is spelt Azcume in the
written submissions.
Reasons [12] – [18].
Prosecution written
submissions in response to the defendant’s “No Case Answer”
submission, para 19.
Prosecution written
submissions in response to the defendant’s “No Case Answer”
submission, para 31.
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
[2017] FCAFC 89
(2017) 251 FCR 470
– 475 [15].
(1969) 122 CLR 249
[2008] HCA 26
(2008) 236 CLR 1
Reasons [74].
[2018] FCAFC 55
(2018) 260 FCR 506
Reasons [65].
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
Reasons [53].
Ramsay v Menso
(2018) FCR 506
at 516 [43] (Dowsett and Collier JJ).
Rafter DCJ cited
Blackwood v Hinder
[2007] QDC 239
Cullinan v McCahon
[2014] QDC 120
Fair Work Act 2009
s 513(1)(c)(i).
[2004] HCA 45
(2004) 223 CLR 513
Cole and Allied
Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
[2000] HCA 47
203 CLR 194
– [21] (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron and Hayne
JJ) and 225 [75] (Kirby J).
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (310 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter