URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2003/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jimmy's on the Mall & Pig N Whistle [2003] QLAT 6 (19 December 2002)
APPELLANTS:
Jimmy’s on the Mall Pty Ltd in appeal 6 of 2002/2003; and
Stargloss Pty Ltd in appeal 7 of 2002/2003.
RESPONDENT:
Chief Executive of the Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading,
including Liquor Licensing
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST:
Deemed refusals under
Liquor Act 1992
application for extended hours permit to 5.00 am (on a regular basis)
Jimmy’s on the Mall and Pig N Whistle, Queen Street Mall,
HEARING DATE:
13 NOVEMBER 2002
Ms A Lindon (Presiding Member)
Mrs J Harrington
DECISION DATE:
19 DECEMBER 2002
BACKGROUND TO THESE APPEALS
1. On 18 February 2002, Jimmy’s on the Mall Pty Ltd and Stargloss Pty Ltd
(the “appellants”), licensees under on-premises
(meals) licences of
premises known as Jimmy’s on the Mall and Pig N Whistle respectively,
situated in Queen Street Mall, Brisbane,
each lodged an application with the
Chief Executive for an extended hours permit (on a regular basis) to extend
their trading from
2.00am to 5.00am daily.
2. The Jimmy’s on the Mall premises are currently licensed to trade from
7:00am – 2:00am daily. The Pig N Whistle premises
are currently licensed
to trade from 7:00am to 2:00am Monday to Saturday; and from 10:00am to 12
midnight on Sunday.
3. In July 2001, the appellants had lodged applications in respect of each
premises for extended hours permits (on a regular basis)
for the hours of 2.00am
– 7.00am daily. If granted, the permits would have allowed each premises
24 hour trading. Those applications
were subsequently deemed to have been
refused by the Division in January 2002, pursuant to
Qld (the “Act”) and the appellants’ appeals against
the deemed refusals were dismissed by this Tribunal in July
4. In view of the recent advertising undertaken in respect of the applications
to trade to 7.00am, and there having been no objections
lodged in response, the
Chief Executive determined to waive public advertising of the new applications,
pursuant to s.118(3)(c) of
5. The Brisbane City Council (the “Council”) and the Assistant
Commissioner of Police, Metropolitan North Region, were
asked to comment on the
applications pursuant to s.117(1)(a) of the Act.
6. By letter dated 22 April 2002, the Council objected to the applications on
the grounds that granting them would result in unacceptable
impacts on the
amenity of the locality and would contribute to an increase in alcohol related
crime in the mall in the early morning
. Although the objection was stated to
be in relation to 24 hour trading, this was accepted by the Division as an
objection against
the applications the subject of these appeals.
7. No response had been received from the Assistant Commissioner by 15 July
2002, on which date the appellants’ consultants
wrote to the Division,
requesting that the applications be referred to the Chief Executive for
determination. The Division did not
reply to that letter.
8. On 22 August 2002, the appellants lodged notices of appeal in respect of the
Chief Executive’s deemed refusal of the applications.
9. The Appeal books prepared by the Division each contained a “Statement
of Reasons for Decision” prepared by the Chief
Executive’s delegate.
Each stated identical “findings of fact” made by the Chief
Executive, and evidence relied
upon by the Chief Executive. No reasons for the
refusals were provided.
10. At directions conferences held on 18 September, 10 October and 8 November
and at the commencement of the appeal hearing on 13
November 2002, the Tribunal
granted applications made by the parties under s.35A of the Act for leave to
adduce information recently
received by the parties as new evidence in these
11. The new evidence for which leave was granted
under s.35A comprises:
(i) Bullet points numbers 5 and 6 in a letter dated 24 July 2002 to the
Tribunal from the appellants’ consultant, namely:
“On 27 March 2002 we forwarded the relevant form and fee to the
Brisbane City Council to facilitate their comment. Copies
of the Public
Interest Assessments were also lodged.
By letter dated 22 April 2002 the Council responded making reference to
the extended hours permit application to allow 24hr trading.
In reply we again
wrote Council on 1 May 2002 advising them that these current applications were
for trading 2.00am-5.00am and requesting
their consideration to these
applications. Copies of the abovementioned correspondence can be provided if
A letter dated 9 September
2002 from the Queensland Police Service to the Division and a Queensland Police
Service memorandum dated
4 September 2002;
The memorandum of Senior
Constable Adams of the Queensland Police Service dated 8 October 2002, together
with attachments;
The report dated 8 October
2002 from Senior Constable S J Adams to the Superintendent, Brisbane Central
The public interest report
of Acting Senior Liquor Licensing Officer Mr P Reinhold dated 9 October
The Division’s
decision memorandum dated 28 October 2002, in respect of the Jimmy’s on
the Mall premises;
The Division’s
decision memorandum dated 28 October 2002, in respect of the Pig N Whistle
Statement of Mr A Claire
dated 12 November 2002 and annexures; and
Report by town planner Mr J
G Coutts dated 1 November 2002 and annexures.
12. By the letter dated 4 September 2002 and the memorandum dated 8 October
2002, the Assistant Commissioner of Police, Metropolitan
North Region, opposed
the applications on grounds that granting them could increase alcohol related
anti-social behaviour; the perceived
decline in public safety of Brisbane City;
and the pressure on available police resources in providing a safe working
environment
for police officers.
13. In addition to the new evidence listed above and the appeal book in respect
of each applicant premises, at the request of the
Tribunal, the Division
supplied to the Tribunal a list of premises in the Brisbane CBD as at 30
September 2002 with permission to
trade to 5.00am. The Tribunal also inspected
the subject premises following the appeal hearing on 13 November 2002.
14. Two additional documents allowed as new evidence in the appeals were
internal memoranda to the Director-General in respect of
each premises, both
dated 28 October 2002. They gave the following reasons for the Division’s
opposition to the applications;
“ Pursuant to
Liquor Act 1992
, both the Assistant
Commissioner of Police for the locality concerned and the Chief Executive
Officer of the Brisbane City Council
objected to the application;
Pursuant to
s.121(5)(g)(ii)
-(iii) of the
Liquor Act 1992
, the Police and
Council objections indicate that the applicant would not be able to control the
noise and behaviour of persons on
and in vicinity of the premises and places
doubt on the suitability of the premises for which the extension is sought.
Pursuant to
Liquor Act 1992
, the underlying principle for
regulating the liquor industry must be in accordance with the maintenance of a
premises primary purpose
being the provision of meals in this instance. There
is doubt that the primary purpose will be maintained over the extended period
The applicant has not demonstrated the existence of public interest pursuant
Liquor Act 1992
for the extended hours
With the parties’ consent, the two appeals were
heard together.
PRELIMINARY ISSUE: STANDING OF BRISBANE CITY COUNCIL
TO PARTICIPATE IN APPEAL
15. At a directions conference convened on 8 November 2002, to hear an
application by the Division for leave to adduce new evidence,
Mr Herbert,
counsel for the appellants, objected to the appearance before the Tribunal of
the Council. He contended that the Council
was not entitled to be heard in the
appeal as it had not made an application, submission or objection within the
of the Act, which application, submission or objection is required
in order to qualify a person to receive notice of the start of
16. Mr Morzone of counsel submitted on behalf of the Council that it had
provided an objection or submission by way of its letter
to the Division dated
22 April 2002, in which it stated its objection to the subject applications. He
submitted that accordingly
the Council had made an “objection” or
“submission” and was entitled to participate in the appeals. He
that the 14 day time period prescribed in
s.117(3)(b)
within which the Council must provide a response to the Division’s letter
informing it of the applications, was
directory and not
17. Having considered the parties’ submissions and the material in the
appeal books, the Tribunal ruled that the Council had
not lodged a valid
“objection” or “submission” which would entitle it to be
heard in the appeal. We now
publish our reasons.
18. A person’s right to be heard in an appeal is governed by
provides relevantly:
At least 3 days before the hearing of the appeal is to start,
the registrar must give written notice of the time and place of the
the following persons─
(a) the appellant;
(b) the Chief Executive;
(c) as far as is practicable─each person whose name and address have
been given to the registrar under
At the hearing of the appeal, each person mentioned in subs.
(3)(a) to (c) is entitled─
for an individual─to
be heard personally; or
for a corporation─to
be represented by an officer of the corporation;
in any case─with the
Tribunal’s leave, to be represented by a
33 Notification to interested persons
As soon as practicable after receiving a notice of appeal, the Chief
Executive must give to the registrar of the Tribunal written
notice of the names
and addresses (as last known to the Chief Executive) of all persons who made an
application, submission or objection
in the proceeding relevant to the
The registrar of the Tribunal must give to each person whose name and
address have been notified to the registrar under subs. (1),
other than the
appellant, written notice that an appeal has been
Section 117
As soon as practicable after the Chief Executive receives an
application to which
applies or an application for a club licence or an
adult entertainment permit, the Chief Executive must tell the following about
the application─
government for the relevant locality;
if the application is for an
extended hours permit or an adult entertainment permit─the assistant
commissioner for the locality.
The local government or assistant commissioner
(a) comment on the reasonable requirements of the public in the locality;
(b) object to the grant of the application on the grounds that the amenity,
quiet or good order of the locality would be lessened.
The comment or
objection must be given to the Chief
(a) if the application was required to be advertised, on or before the last
day for filing objections to the application; and
(b) in any other case─within 14 days of receiving advice about the
application.”
21. Based on the material
before us the Tribunal was satisfied that:
On 1 March 2002 the Chief
Executive’s delegate determined to waive advertising of the applications
pursuant to
s.118(3)(a)
dated 13 March 2002, the Chief Executive informed the Council of the
applications and invited its comment or objection and
stipulated a 14 day period
in which a reply should be made;
The Council responded by
letter dated 15 March 2002, acknowledging receipt of the Division’s letter
of 13 March 2002 and advising
the name of the officer handling the
The Council again wrote to
the Division by letter dated 11 April 2002, advising that the Council was
considering the applications
and would provide its response
By letter to the Division
dated 22 April 2002, the Council referred to the Division’s letters of 13
March 2002 and stated that
it objected to the applications for extended
22. The question for the Tribunal is whether any of the Council’s
responses amount to a “submission” or “objection”
the meaning of
of the Act, so as to entitle the Council to be included in
the written notice given by the Chief Executive to the registrar of the
Tribunal, thereby acquiring an entitlement under
of the Act to be heard in
the appeal.
23. The Tribunal considers that neither of the Council’s letters dated 15
March 2002 nor 11 April 2002 constitute a “comment”,
“submission” or “objection”. The letters serve to
inform the Division that the Council is considering the
matters raised in the
Division’s letter of 13 March 2002.
24. Some differences of language arise in connection with
and how this may
be read with
Section 117(2)(a)
of the Act refers to the ability to
“comment” on the reasonable requirements of the public. If an
application is advertised
pursuant to
, a member of the public may make a
written submission to the Chief Executive about the matters to which he must
have regard under
– matters relevant to satisfying the Chief
Executive about public interest
contemplates the right of
persons who have made a “submission” in the proceeding relevant to
the appeal, that section
does not refer to a person who has made a
“comment” as may be made under
s.117(2)(a).
In the present case, the Tribunal regards the reference to
“comment” in
s.117(2)(a)
as, in substance, a
“submission” (in the sense that that term is used in
should be so regarded for the purposes of
25. While the Council’s letter dated 22 April 2002 states an objection to
and could be said to provide comments on the applications,
the Tribunal
considers that it is not a valid “objection” (or
“submission”) within the meaning of
of the Act. Whether the
letter is to be characterised as an “objection” or
“submission” is not material
here. The Council’s letter dated
22 April 2002 was supplied in response to the Division informing it of the
applications and
requesting its comment. This process is governed by
the Act which prescribes a limit of 14 days within which the Chief Executive
must be given a response, in circumstances where,
such as here, advertising was
not required.
26. In our view, a comment or objection supplied to the Chief Executive outside
the 14 day time limit specified in
s.117(3)(b)
might, at his discretion and
subject to the other provisions of the Act, nevertheless be considered by the
Chief Executive in appropriate
circumstances. However, it is considered that
the purpose of the Act in prescribing a time period within which the response
be given, is to limit to those persons responding within the prescribed
time frame, the right to participate in an appeal or to institute
an appeal from
the Chief Executive’s decision.
27. Support for this view is found in the decision of Queensland Court of Appeal
Hannaslea Nominees Pty Ltd v The Liquor Appeals Tribunal
[1996] 1 Qd R
where the Court determined that an ”objection”,
“submission” or “application” referred to in
the Act is one made pursuant to a right under the Act to be made. In our view,
the expression “made an application, submission
or objection in the
proceeding” where it appears in
of the Act, is to be read as
having the same meaning attributed by the Court in
expression where it appears in
Reference is also made to the approach
as to finality of time contemplated by the Act in
s.118(2)(c).
28. It is unfortunate that in the current proceeding, the Council’s
expectation of being heard in the appeal could to some
extent be suggested as
having been fostered by the Division and the Tribunal. Upon being notified of
the two appeals, the Division
had supplied to the Tribunal registrar a list
naming the Chief Executive Officer of the Council as an objector. The Tribunal
accordingly wrote to the Council informing it of the appeals and the
direction conferences. However, the Council’s receipt
of letters from the
Tribunal indicating that the Council was entitled to participate in the appeals
as an objector, does not overcome
the threshold issue of qualification under
It is noted in this respect that the time limit for responses under the
Act is clear, it was reiterated by the Division in its letter
of 13 March 2002,
the Council is experienced in dealing with objections under the Act and in this
case was legally advised.
29. The Tribunal notes that the Division’s practice, upon receiving
public objections lodged outside the time prescribed
by the advertising, is to
give written notice to the would-be objector informing them that the Division
considers the objection to
have been invalid. Such a course would seem to have
been appropriate in the present situation in relation to the Council’s
provision of its objection outside the time prescribed by
Section 117
imposes a very short time period for the Division to receive
responses from the Council and Police, in situations where advertising
waived. The Council and Police are routinely asked by the Division for their
comment or objection in respect of applications
for extended hours trading. In
the absence of a prompt response from the Council and Police, the
Division’s timely and thorough
consideration of issues is almost certainly
ISSUES IN THIS APPEAL
31. The first issue for the Tribunal to determine is whether the requirements in
(6) have been satisfied in respect of these appeals, so as to
enliven the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to hear and determine the appeals.
the Tribunal does determine that it has jurisdiction pursuant to “deemed
refusals” it must then consider the application
s.116(1)(c)
32. Pursuant to
, the appellants must satisfy the Tribunal that it
is in the public interest for the extended hours permits to be granted. If the
Tribunal is satisfied that public interest is established, then it must proceed
to consider the matters specified in
s.121(5)(a)
,(b),(c), (d) and (f), which are
issues relating to public interest including: matters referred to in
and (4), comments received from the assistant Commissioner and the Council, and
amenity of the community. As the applications seek
an extended hours permit for
an extension of hours beyond 2.00am, the Tribunal must take into account the
three criteria listed under
s.121(5)(g).
33. Pursuant to
of the Act, permits in respect of trading from
3.00am–5.00am remain in force for a maximum period of six months only and
required to be renewed by way of application to the Chief Executive. Any
permit for trading hours of 2.00am-3.00am is not renewable
six monthly, but may
be cancelled, suspended or varied pursuant to the procedures contained in
of the Act.
DEEMED REFUSAL
34. The Tribunal explained the application of
Jimmy’s on the Mall Pty Ltd and Stargloss Pty Ltd,
appeal numbers
54 and 55 respectively of 2001/02, unreported decision of the Tribunal dated 2
July 2002, at paragraphs 25-26. In
the present case, in the absence of public
objections, the Chief Executive was not required to convene a conference of
persons under
The Chief Executive wrote to the Council and to
the Assistant Commissioner on 13 March 2002 and accordingly, the 14 day period
prescribed by
within which the responses of the Council and Police were
required to have been provided to the Chief Executive would have expired
35. On a strict interpretation of
, it could be suggested that 29 March 2002
was the date by when all formal steps required or permitted under the Act had
(“the steps date”).
36. It is evident from the appeal books that the Division communicated with the
appellants’ consultants on three occasions
following receipt of the
applications – on 14 and 26 February 2002, regarding the request to waive
public advertising; and
on 13 March 2002, when the appellants agreed to a permit
condition proposed by the Division. From correspondence between the
appellants’
advisors and the Division it appeared the applicants were
aware that a reply from the Police and the Council had not been received
applicant provided to the Council a form, fee and copy of its Public Interest
Submission on or about 27 March 2002. Additionally,
the appellants’
correspondence with the Council led to their knowing of the Council’s
letter to the Division dated 22
April 2002 and wrote to the Council shortly
after that. Not having heard anything further, the appellants’ advisors
subsequently
wrote to the Division on 15 July 2002 requesting that the Chief
Executive make a decision. The appellants were otherwise not informed,
they received the appeal books after instituting their appeals, of steps taken,
or not taken, by the Division. It cannot have
been parliament’s intention
for the Act to operate so as to remove an applicant’s right to appeal
before the applicant
became aware of it.
37. In the circumstances, the Tribunal finds that the 30 day period referred to
(6) of the Act commenced to run on or about 15 July 2002, the
date the Division received the applicants’ letter requesting a
We find that the 30 day period expired on or about 13 August 2002 and that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction pursuant to s.22(1)(a)
of the Act to hear and
determine these appeals.
CONSIDERATION OF THE ISSUES
38. The Tribunal has made findings above in respect of its jurisdiction to hear
these appeals.
39. As we have indicated above, in deciding these appeals the Chief
Executive, and in this appeal the Tribunal, is required
to take into account
matters listed in
(5). Based on the material before
us, we find that the “locality” for the purposes of
is the Brisbane Central Business District.
40. While the Tribunal considers that there is adequate evidence before us to
enable findings to be made in respect of what might
be described as
“amenity” or “health and safety” considerations, we
consider that the submissions of both
the Division and the appellants, and the
evidence adduced by them, including on the issue of “primary
purpose”, are not
sufficient to come to a conclusion. In light of our
determination and the need for further evidence to be supplied by the parties
enable a determination of these issues, the Tribunal considers it would be
inappropriate to make any other findings of fact regarding
matters mentioned in
(5) as the further submissions to be made on
“primary purpose” may impinge on the evidence presently before the
regarding the
(5) matters.
41. The appellants each lodged a public interest submission (in virtually
identical terms) in February 2002. These specifically
addressed the criteria
s.116(3)(a)
, (b) and (c) and under
s.116(4)(a)
(4)(f) relate to the provision of other information the Chief
Executive considers relevant and we note that the appellants’
interest submissions reserve the right to make further submissions “by way
of expansion under
Liquor Act 1992
42. The appellants’ public interest submissions did generally address
s.116(4)(g)
, which provides relevantly:
“116 Public interest relevant to applications
In deciding the public interest relating to an application, the Chief
Executive must take into account information about the matters
mentioned in
subs. (3) and must also have regard to─...
... (g) the objects of the Act as mentioned in
and the underlying principle
of this Act as mentioned in
provides relevantly:
“3 Objects of Act
The objects of this Act are─
(a) to facilitate and regulate the optimum development of the tourist, liquor
and hospitality industries of the State having regard
to the welfare, needs and
interests of the community and the economic implications of change; and...
... (c) to provide for a flexible, practical system for regulation of the liquor
industry of the State with minimal formality, technicality
or intervention
consistent with the proper and efficient administration of this Act; and
(d) to regulate the liquor industry in a way compatible
harm arising from misuse of liquor;
the aims of the National Health Policy
on Alcohol; and
(e) to regulate the sale and supply of liquor in particular areas to minimise
harm caused by alcohol abuse and misuse and associated
43. Section 3A provides:
3A Principle underlying this Act for facilitating and regulating the
liquor industry
The underlying principle of this Act in relation to the sale and
supply of liquor is─
(a) a person may obtain a licence to sell or supply liquor as part of
conducting a business on premises; and
(b) liquor may only be sold or supplied on the licensed premises as part of the
person conducting a business, on the licensed premises,
that is the primary
purpose under the licence.
This Act states the primary purpose of
a business that may be conducted under each type of licence.
This Act must be administered in accordance with the underlying
principle of this Act.
In interpreting this Act, a
construction promoting the underlying principle is to be preferred to a
construction that would not promote
44. Section 3A confines the sale and supply of liquor under a licence to the
business that is the primary purpose under the licence.
The subject premises
trade under on-premises (meals) licences. s.73 of the Act
73 Primary purpose of a business under an on-premises (meals)
The primary purpose of a business conducted under an on-premises
(meals) licence is the provision of meals prepared and served to
be eaten on the
licensed premises.
The authority under an on-premises (meals) licence to sell or supply
liquor does not apply unless a business is conducted on the
licensed premises
with the primary purpose as mentioned in subs. (1).
In deciding whether the holder of, or an applicant for, an
on-premises (meals) licence conducts or will conduct a business that complies
will comply with subs. (1), the following are indicators that must be
considered─
(a) the existing or proposed seating and standing arrangements;
(b) the existing or proposed number of staff for preparing and serving
(c) the existing or proposed kitchen arrangements, including, for example, the
hours of operation of the kitchen;
(d) for an existing business, a comparison of the number of meals consumed and
the amount of liquor sold.”
45. The combined effect of s.3A and s.73(1) is to confine the sale and supply of
liquor under an on-premises (meals) licence to that
reasonably incidental to the
conduct of the business of the provision of meals prepared and served to be
eaten on the premises with
or without alcohol and in the context of the level of
service offered by the business. Notwithstanding that pursuant to s.73A, the
licence authorises the consumption of liquor on site by both diners and
non-diners, the sale and supply of liquor under an on-premises
(meals) licence
to non-diners is ancillary to
and conditional upon
the primary purpose of
the business, which is the provision of meals for consumption on the
46. The Division’s public interest report by Mr Reinhold acknowledges that
this is a contentious issue. It states “A
debate has raged in the
industry as to whether the relaxation of casual drinking in On Premises (Meals)
licenses permits restaurants
to become de facto bars. The official position is
that with the removal of the 20% non-dining rule, any licensee must meet the
purpose of its licensed description.”
47. The appellants acknowledged the relevance of the primary purpose requirement
for the applications in their Public Interest Submissions.
Paragraph 3.1 of the
appellants’ public interest submissions states: “The subject
premises operates under an on-premises
(meals) licence with the primary purpose
being the provision of meals. The sale and supply of liquor is ancillary to the
of meals. In the applicant’s extensive experience, the majority
of patrons to the subject premises come for that reason, to
48. However, the Tribunal can detect little in the appellants’ public
interest submissions which clearly addresses the matters
to which s.116(4)(g)
directs attention in relation to the extended trading hours sought. Without
going through the appellants’
public interest submissions in detail, it is
evident that they propose to provide a liquor service to both diners and
potentially
non-diners during the extended trading hours sought. The
submissions supplied no information in respect of the indicators required
s.73(3), to be taken into consideration.
49. In terms of the demand for early morning liquor service, the
appellants’ public interest submissions are ambivalent. On
interpretation, these submissions could be read as suggesting that non-diners
are the patrons seeking the extended trading hours.
At paragraph 3.5 the
submissions state that at “closing time” on Friday and Saturday
nights “... up to 50 patrons
are still on the premises, many of whom ask
the applicant why they can’t be allowed to stay on for another hour or
On the other hand the applicants currently provide meals on a 24
hour basis, including outside their current licensed hours and
during the hours
for which the extended hours permit is sought and have done so for some time.
From information provided to the
Tribunal, one other premises proximate to the
applicants’ premises also trades on this basis. The applicants, in their
interest submissions, identify tourists, patrons of entertainment venues
and shift workers (eg airline staff) as potential diners
who may seek a liquor
service with their meals during the extended hours sought (for example,
paragraphs 3.2, 3.3, 4.22). However,
no clear indication is given in the public
interest submissions of the applicants’ assessment of a demand by diners
early morning liquor services. The Tribunal considers that this
information is relevant in the present case.
50. Given the limited material in the appellants’ public interest
submissions canvassing the likely levels of demand for liquor
by diners and
non-diners, there is little upon which the Division might determine whether
liquor sales to non-diners might effect
a breach of the s.3A primary purpose
requirement.
51. While the issue of “primary purpose” appears now to be relevant
to the Division in the context of these applications,
there is little
information before the Tribunal to indicate what considerations the Chief
Executive takes into account in assessing
observance of the primary purpose
requirement. There appears to be nothing before the Tribunal to suggest that
the Division gave
any indication to the applicants about what the Chief
Executive’s requirements might be. For example, does the Division
only the indicators listed in s.73(3), are other indicators used, and
if so what are they, how does the Division evaluate them, or
what respective
weight is given to them. This is not clear. The comments in Mr
Reinhold’s report that “...if problems
arise in future, then
Compliance Unit should be able to deal with the situation in the appropriate
fashion.” gives no information
as to what may constitute
“problems”, or how these are or should be
52. Section 73(2) of the Act makes clear that it is an ongoing requirement of
the on-premises (meals) licence that the business has
as its primary purpose the
provision of meals for consumption on site. Section 9(11) of the Act specifies
that the standard trading
hours for which an on-premises (meals) licence may be
granted are 10.00am–12 midnight. Parliament no doubt contemplated that
premises trading under an on-premises (meals) licence may have occasions during
those hours when demand for drinks without meals
exceeds demand for drinks with
meals. By its submissions, it is evident that the Division considers that if,
during extended trading
hours, a liquor service is provided primarily to
non-diners, that this may be a contravention of the Act. No submissions were
forward by the Division indicating how it determines whether premises
trading under an on-premises (meals) licence may fail to comply
with the primary
purpose requirement stipulated in s.3A.
53. While the applicants’ material contains deficiencies, there is
nothing in the Appeal Books to suggest that, if the
Division had any concerns
with the applicants (if at
all) prior to the appeals being lodged. Accordingly,
the applicants were never given an opportunity to address these issues or any
deficiencies in their material with the Division at an appropriate stage. On
the material available to the Tribunal, the first time
the “primary
purpose” concern was clearly articulated was in Mr Reinhold’s report
of 9 October 2002 that the Division
sought leave to admit as fresh evidence.
Given that the applications were lodged in February 2002, that the Division had
recently considered applications for 24 hour licensed trading and had a
compliance officer conduct an investigation of the premises
(whose report does
not make mention of this concern), it is difficult to understand why this issue
had not been clearly considered
and sought to be clarified with the applicants
earlier if the potential for non-compliance with the primary purpose
requirements
was of material concern to the Division.
54. Mr Reinhold’s report of 9 October 2002 contended that there would not
be a realistic requirement for sit-down meals in
the CBD after 2.00 am. and
questioned whether an extension of hours would attract the “wrong kind of
patron, namely the late
night drinker that may imperil the premises in adhering
to their primary purpose”. In articulating this view and even up to
time of the Division’s notification of its additional material on 5
November 2002, 8 days before the hearing, the Division
neither sought further
material from the appellants, as it is entitled to do under s.105 of the Act,
nor indicated to the appellants
that it would challenge the material relating to
primary purpose. The Division first gave notice (including to the applicants) of
its intention to raise the issue of compliance with primary purpose requirements
on 4 November 2002, when it sought a further directions
conference in order to
apply to adduce the Division’s public interest report and decision
memoranda as fresh evidence pursuant
to s.35A. This course of events may have
been sufficient in itself, to set aside any otherwise valid decision of the
Chief Executive
to refuse the applications.
55. In response to the Division’s belated airing of primary purpose
concerns, the appellants sought to provide further evidence
regarding primary
purpose in Mr Clair’s statement dated 12 November 2002, which provided
figures for numbers of meals and food
and beverage between midnight and 6.45am
at one premises, Jimmy’s on the Mall, on 8, 9 and 10 November 2002 and
past months’
food and beverage sales for both premises. In addition, at
the appeal hearing, Mr Clair answered Tribunal members’ questions,
supplying some further information in respect of numbers of dry bars and stools
and numbers of staff proposed during the extended
56. While there is no evidence to suggest that the appellants would not conduct
their businesses in accordance with their primary
purpose, the Tribunal must
itself consider all of the relevant matters required under the Act. This matter
has not been fully tested
by the chief executive as would normally be the case,
with an applicant being afforded an opportunity to provide more detailed support
in response to queries from the chef executive as part of the approval process.
Accordingly, given the limited information from
the appellants as to likely
numbers of dining and non-dining patrons presently on site at “closing
time” or likely to
use the subject premises during the extended hours
sought, and other information which might indicate the manner in which the
propose to comply with the primary purpose requirement; and the absence
of information from the Division as to the criteria it considers
in assessing
compliance with primary purpose requirements and any proper consideration of the
applications in the context of that
criteria, the Tribunal is unable to reach a
conclusion as to whether trading by the appellants during the proposed extended
would be in compliance with the primary purpose requirements of their
licenses and so satisfy the requirements of s.116(4)(g).
57. It is considered that both the appellants and Division need to more fully
consider the issue of whether, if the extended hours
permits were granted to one
or both premises, the relevant, or both premises would each comply with the
primary purpose requirements
of the Act. Accordingly, we have determined to make
orders under s.36(1)(b)(ii) of the Act, setting aside the refusals of the
applications
and returning the matters to the Chief Executive for determination
in light of any further evidence the appellants and Division provide.
58. During the appeal hearing, Counsel for the appellants asked the Tribunal for
leave to amend the application lodged by Stargloss
Pty Ltd for two hours
additional trading, from 12 midnight Sunday to 2.00am Monday, as its licence
currently requires it to cease
trading at 12 midnight Sunday. In view of our
decision this is an application that can be made by the appellants directly to
Chief Executive.
59. The Tribunal notes that some of the concerns raised go to the open nature of
the premises. While there is evidence before the
Tribunal regarding the
requirements for the premises to provide pedestrian thoroughfares, we consider
the question of delineation
of the premises and late evening security of the
boundaries by way of some form of light barrier, in the event the permits were
might usefully be explored by the parties with the Council and
60. The appellants first lodged applications for extended hours trading for the
subject premises in July 2001. If the current applications
become the subject
of further appeals, then given that the bulk of the matter for consideration in
the appeals appears to already
be in existence, the Tribunal presently considers
that it would be appropriate for the Tribunal to abridge the time within which
the Chief Executive’s statement of reasons be provided and for the appeals
to be dealt with speedily.
61. The material does not demonstrate that a case has been clearly put or
considered for each premises, particularly with respect
to the issue of demand
for services during the proposed extended trading hours. The Tribunal notes
that the public interest test
is required to be applied in respect of each
individual premises.
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
62. The Tribunal orders:
that the Chief
Executive’s decision refusing the appellants’ applications be set
the applications be returned
to the Chief Executive for prompt determination in accordance with the Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (160 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter