URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCAT/2025/449.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Queensland College of Teachers v Teacher RLT [2025] QCAT 449 (12 November 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Queensland College of Teachers v Teacher RLT
[2025] QCAT
QUEENSLAND COLLEGE OF TEACHERS
(applicant)
TEACHER RLT
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
Occupational regulation matters
DELIVERED ON:
12 November 2025
HEARING DATE:
On the papers
DECISION OF:
Senior Member Aughterson
Member English
Member Holzberger
disciplinary ground in s 92(1)(h) of the
Education (Queensland College
of Teachers) Act 2005
(Qld) (‘the Education Act’)
established.
to s 161(2)(c) of the Education Act,
Teacher RLT is prohibited from
re-applying for registration or permission to teach until 30 November
to s 161(2)(d) of the Education Act, a notation is to be entered in the register
of teachers that should Teacher RLT apply
for registration or permission to
teach after the expiry of the prohibition period, the application must include
an independent psychologist’s
report satisfactory to the Queensland
College of Teachers addressing the following:
(a) an assessment of the teacher’s appreciation of the following:
(i) the legal obligations of teachers;
(ii) differentiating between personal and professional relationships;
(iii) development and maintenance of professional standards when working with
young people and actively determining and implementing
professional boundaries
with individual students;
(iv) personal and social behaviour that would compromise the professional
standing of a teacher and the profession of teaching;
(v) what constitutes inappropriate communication;
(vi) understanding the effects of inappropriate relationships with students
and former students;
(vii) the awareness of the trust and power granted to a teacher; and
(viii) understanding and full adherence to the Queensland College of
Teachers’ Code of Ethics;
(b) the psychologist’s report must also include:
(i) an assessment from the psychologist of the likelihood of Teacher RLT
engaging in a similar type of behaviour in the future;
(ii) an indication from the psychologist about whether the psychologist is
satisfied that Teacher RLT has adequately understood and
addressed the
(iii) confirmation that the psychologist was provided with copies of this
decision and referral under s 97 of the Education Act.
(iv) the duration and frequency of visits and details of any testing that was
undertaken.
RLT must bear all costs of, and associated with, compliance with these
be no order as to costs.
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld), other than to the parties to this proceeding and their legal
representatives and until further order of the Tribunal, publication
prohibited of any information that may identify Teacher RLT, any relevant
student, former student, other teacher, third party,
or school, other than to
the extent necessary for the Queensland College of Teachers to meet its
statutory obligations, particularly
under ss 285, 285AA, 285B, and 287 of the
Education Act, or as necessary for Teacher RLT to comply with any disclosure
requirements
of any regulatory authority or employer
CATCHWORDS:
EDUCATION – EDUCATORS – DISCIPLINARY MATTERS – GENERALLY
– where teacher engaged in inappropriate and/or overfamiliar
with students and inappropriate conversations – where commenced
inappropriate and personal intimate relationship
with former student –
where teacher aware of vulnerability of students – whether teacher’s
conduct satisfies the
standard of behaviour generally expected of a teacher
– whether non-publication order appropriate – determination of
appropriate sanction – where prohibition order made
(Queensland College of Teachers) Act 2005
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Queensland College of Teachers v Armstrong
[2010] QCAT
Queensland College of Teachers v ATL
[2020] QCAT
Queensland College of Teachers v DGM
[2018] QCAT
Queensland College of Teachers v HMJ
[2016] QCAT
Queensland College of Teachers v PPK
[2019] QCAT
Queensland College of Teacher v RTM
[2016] QCAT
Queensland College of Teachers v SGS
[2017] QCAT 383
Queensland College of Teachers v Teacher FDA
[2017] QCAT 224
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
This matter was heard and determined on the papers pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
Background and legislative regime
is a former approved teacher who was first registered as a teacher in Queensland
in 1988. On 26 March 2020 the Queensland
College of Teachers (‘QCT’)
formed the belief that he posed an unacceptable risk of harm to children and
suspended his
teacher registration pursuant to
(Queensland College of Teachers) Act 2005
(Qld) (‘Education
Act’). On 2 June 2020, the suspension was continued by the Tribunal. RLT
did not renew his teacher registration
in April 2021 and was removed from the
register of teachers.
s 97(1) of the Education Act, if the QCT reasonably believes that grounds for
disciplinary action against a ‘relevant teacher’
it must refer the matter to
a ‘practice and conduct body’, which means either the Tribunal or
the Professional Capacity
& Teacher Conduct Committee
[3] Following an
investigation undertaken pursuant to s 98 of the Education Act, on 3 June 2020
the completed report was referred
On 28 July 2020, the
PC&TCC decided to refer the matter to the Tribunal pursuant to s 111A of the
Education Act. The disciplinary
referral was filed in the Tribunal on 16 April
[4] Pursuant to
s 123(4A) of the Education Act, if the PC&TCC refers the matter to the
Tribunal, the QCT must inform the Tribunal
and conduct matter and the facts and circumstances forming the basis for the
grounds. The Tribunal
is then to conduct a hearing and make a decision having
regard to the information provided by the QCT.
[5] Relevant
to the investigation report and findings of the Senior Investigator, which has
been filed in the Tribunal, s 147 of the
Education Act provides:
During the hearing, QCAT may—
(a) receive in evidence a transcript, or part of a transcript, of evidence
taken in a proceeding before a disciplinary body or a
court, tribunal or other
entity established under the law of the State, the Commonwealth, another State
or a foreign country, and
draw conclusions of fact from the evidence it
considers appropriate; or
(b) adopt, as it considers appropriate, decisions, findings, judgements, or
reasons for judgement, of a disciplinary body, court,
tribunal or other entity
that may be relevant to the hearing.
[6] The conduct
subject to this disciplinary proceeding occurred between 2013 and 2018 when RLT
was a registered teacher.
[7] In deciding
whether a ground for disciplinary action is established, the applicable standard
of proof for the Tribunal is the
civil standard, on the balance of
probabilities, with the degree of satisfaction varying according to the gravity
of the facts to
Tribunal is satisfied that a ground for disciplinary action exists, the Tribunal
may take one or more of the actions set
out at s 161 of the Education Act. The
issue of sanction is discussed separately, below.
Grounds for disciplinary action
relation to grounds, the QCT submits that the relevant ground for disciplinary
action is the ground contained in s 92(1)(h)
of the Education Act, which applies
the person behaves in a way, whether connected with the teaching profession or
otherwise, that does not satisfy the standard of behaviour
generally expected of
standard of behaviour generally expected of a teacher is not defined in the
Education Act. However, in
Queensland College of Teachers v Armstrong
was stated:
... the standard expected should be the standard ‘reasonably’
expected by the community at large, as the actions of a
teacher may impact
directly upon the children of the community; and this in turn should reflect the
standard that those in the teaching
profession would expect of their colleagues
Queensland College of Teachers v PPK
, it was stated that the standard is
‘fluid’ and is ‘informed by how the community, including the
teaching profession,
would expect a teacher to
Tribunal has previously observed that teachers are bestowed with a special trust
by parents and the community to act in the
best interests of students and to
protect them from harm and, with that trust, an expectation that it will not be
considering the expected standard it is also appropriate to bear in mind the
objects of the Education Act, which
(a) to uphold the standards of the teaching profession; and
(b) to maintain public confidence in the teaching profession; and
(c) to protect the public by ensuring education in schools is provided in a
professional and competent way by approved teachers.
[14] In summary,
it is alleged that whilst a registered teacher at the relevant school,
(a) between 2013 and 2015, engaged in inappropriate and overfamiliar
interactions with student A, including telling her that she
was his favourite
student; lending her books unrelated to the curriculum and giving her gifts;
giving her feedback and assistance
not provided to other students; and giving
her exam results before other students;
(b) between 2016 and 2018, commenced an inappropriate personal and intimate
relationship with now former student A (completed year
12 in 2015), including
meeting at cafes, telling her that he loved her, and requesting and exchanging
sexualised photographs;
(c) between 2016 and 2018, engaged in an inappropriate personal and intimate
relationship with former student A, including exchanging
sexualised emails;
(d) between 2016 and 2018, engaged in an inappropriate personal and intimate
relationship with former student A, including engaging
in sexual intercourse
with former student A, commencing in March 2017;
(e) On or about 26 May 2013, gave year 11 student B a birthday card, at a time
when they were alone together and requested that student
B not inform any third
party about the card;
(f) Between February and July 2013, engaged in inappropriate and overfamiliar
email communications with student B, including wishing
her a happy
Valentine’s Day, emailing an article about Harry Potter Lego, offering to
lend her a book unrelated to the curriculum,
and giving her his email address
and telling her he would be visiting Sydney in August 2013.
submissions filed on his behalf, RLT accepts the QCT submissions concerning the
factual matrix and accepts that on the material
before the Tribunal the grounds
for disciplinary action pursuant to s 92(1)(h) of the Education Act are
established.
[16] Pursuant to
s 158(2) of the Education Act, in deciding whether there is a ground for
disciplinary action, the Tribunal must have
regard to any relevant previous
decisions of which it is aware. In that regard, in its submissions the QCT
listed several previous
decisions, including the following:
(a) Queensland College of Teacher v RTM
[2016] QCAT 501:
the teacher had
eleven years teaching experience in a high school. He was 35 years old and had a
relationship with a year 11 student
which continued when the student went into
year 12. The relationship escalated after the student’s 18th birthday.
They engaged
in sexual activity and intercourse prior to the student’s
graduation and continued for a further five months after graduation.
registration was cancelled and he was prohibited from re-applying for
registration for seven years and eight months from
the suspension date and
required to undergo a professional boundaries course and provide a
psychologist’s report on re-application.
(b) Queensland College of Teachers v ATL
[2020] QCAT 59:
a teacher with
former Student B. He was aged between
28 and 32 at the material times. The
conduct against Student A started when she was in year 12 and consisted of
electronic communications
and spending time alone with her. While she remained a
student, the teacher had sexual intercourse with Student A on more than one
occasion. The relationship continued after Student A graduated. The teacher also
gave to Student A inappropriate and excessive assistance
with her assessments.
The conduct against Student B commenced in the year after she graduated and
included sexual intercourse. That
relationship lasted about three years. The
Tribunal found that ATL’s ‘propensity to pursue relationships with
and former students is apparent’. The Tribunal cancelled
ATL’s teacher registration and prohibited him from reapplying
registration indefinitely.
(c) Queensland College of Teachers v Teacher FDA
[2017] QCAT 224:
27-year-old teacher with only two years of experience formed a close
relationship with a 17-year-old student. The conduct started
with frequent
social media, telephone and SMS communication shortly before the student’s
school formal. The conduct escalated
to a sexual relationship in January after
the student graduated. There was no direct teacher/student relationship and the
had left the school which the student attended a year before the
relationship commenced. The Tribunal cancelled the teacher’s
registration,
prohibited him from reapplying for registration for four years, and ordered a
notation to be made requiring a psychologist
report should he again seek
registration.
(d) Queensland College of Teachers v SGS
[2017] QCAT 383
’): a 42-year-old teacher engaged in a long-standing
sexual relationship with a 17-year-old student that commenced soon after
teacher was transferred to another school. The conduct included sexualised text
messages, Facebook communication and ultimately
sexual conduct and intercourse.
The teacher continually denied the relationship and the allegations. The teacher
and the student
cohabitated together within three months of her graduating from
school. The precise length of the sexual relationship is unknown,
but it was for
at least 10 months and possibly longer. The Tribunal prohibited the teacher from
reapplying for registration for seven
years (from the end of his provisional
registration) and ordered a notation to be made requiring a psychologist report
again seek registration.
[17] In each of
those cases it was held that the ground for disciplinary action under s 92(1)(h)
of the Education Act, or an equivalent
provision under earlier legislation, had
been established. In broad terms, all of the above decisions can be
characterised as involving
improper or overfamiliar communications and sexual
relationships with students or former students, in circumstance where the
were or had been in a position of authority over the students.
relevant facts in the present matter, including the favouritism given to the
students and the inappropriate and sexualised
communications, which led to a
sexual relationship with the then former student, are such that the Tribunal is
satisfied that a ground
for disciplinary action under s 92(1)(h) of the
Education Act is established. RLT has behaved in a way that does not satisfy the
standard of behaviour generally expected of a teacher.
the agreed facts, relevant to deciding the appropriate sanction, RLT:
(a) engaged in inappropriate and overfamiliar interactions with a student, as
set out at [14](a) above, while she was in years 10
to 12 at school;
(b) after that student graduated, commenced a personal and ultimately sexual
relationship with her;
(c) engaged in inappropriate and overfamiliar email communications with another
year 11 student and, when giving her a birthday card,
requested that she not
inform any third party about the card.
Applicant’s submissions
QCT submits that RLT’s conduct in relation to student A is particularly
serious. RLT took advantage of her admiration
of him and that there was a clear
escalation in his overfamiliarity with her during her final year of schooling,
effectively grooming
the student for the later sexual relationship. The
inappropriate relationship was protracted, commencing in 2013 and not ending
mid-2018. Reference is made to an email communication sent to then former
student A, in which RLT refers to a meeting with her in
the computer room when
she was in year 12 and states that he was staring down her blouse and his sexual
arousal was such that he
had to stay in the computer room for some
submitted that at the relevant time RLT was a mature man with significant
experience as a teacher and should have known
the accepted boundaries for a
teacher. Reference is also made to an incident in 2005 where RLT sought a
romantic relationship with
Student B, in relation to which a warning was given
but no disciplinary action was taken.
further submitted that during his interview, RLT attempted to avoid
responsibility for the sexual relationship, portraying
student A as the pursuer
while he simply wanted to be friends and that ‘it’s a way out for me
It is submitted
that his ‘attempts at obfuscation’, coupled with his conduct over a
number of years, are indicative of
a risk that RLT may again engage in similar
[23] Reference
is also made to an email communication of July 2018 from Student A’s
mother, in which she describes how their
lives have been ‘turned upside
[24] On the
other hand, the QCT notes that in July 2018, though only after his conduct came
to light, RLT sent an email to student
A’s mother, apologising for what he
[25] The QCT
submits that most guidance should be taken from the decision in
[16](d), above), given the comparable ages and experience of the teachers, the
similar circumstances in which the relationships
developed, and that the sexual
relationship did not occur until the teacher/student relationship had
Features that distinguish
from this matter are that in
the sexual relationship was
over an extended period and the teacher did not assist in the investigation,
though he made admissions
during the Tribunal
proceedings.
On the other hand,
with RLT there was disclosure of his pursuit of a relationship with another
former student, in relation to which
he was given a caution, and the present
conduct concerns two students.
[26] Having
noted the QCT had not at that time seen any submissions from RLT, it is
submitted that unless there is some compelling
evidence from RLT that he has
reformed or is likely to change his behaviour, the Tribunal should consider
whether an indefinite suspension
is appropriate. Alternatively, consistent with
the sanction imposed in
, RLT should be prohibited from reapplying for
registration for no less than seven
It is further submitted
that, in any event, there should be an order that a notation be made requiring a
psychologist report should
he again seek registration.
Respondent’s submissions
[27] Submissions
were filed on behalf of RLT by his legal representative. It is submitted that
following the referral of 16 April
2024, RLT filed a response admitting the
allegations and accepting that disciplinary grounds had been established, thus
the need for an oral hearing and the calling of witnesses. It is
further submitted that he has demonstrated remorse and insight through
full responsibility, accepting that there was no excuse for his conduct and
through seeking psychological services of his
own volition. He engaged with his
psychologist on approximately a monthly basis from July 2018 to June 2020. In an
attached report
dated 12 September 2024, the psychologist states that RLT has
been ‘open and honest’ about his disciplinary matter and
‘in our most recent session’, she was happy to hear him ‘own
his behaviour ... and the consequence it had
on the students and school
involved’. Further, RLT stated that he is aware that in his role as
teacher ‘he had a great
deal of responsibility and power’. It was
noted that he ‘took responsibility for crossing boundaries and misusing
position of power’. It was added that RLT expressed ‘great
remorse’ for his actions and their consequences and
made it clear that
‘because he understood his abuse of power and the impact, he would not act
in this manner again’.
[28] In addition
to the decisions noted in the submissions of the QCT, RLT refers in particular
to the decision in
Queensland College of Teachers v HMJ
In that case there were overfamiliar and sexualised communications between the
49-year-old female teacher and a year 12 male student,
including discussions
were not disclosed by the
teacher to the school or the student’s parents.
After the year 12 formal, the teacher and the student engaged in sexual
intercourse.
At that time, the teacher also allowed him to drink alcohol in a
hotel room. The student graduated two days later. At the time, the
teacher had a
sexually transmitted illness (‘STI’), of which she advised the
student. While the student was subsequently
anxious about this, as well as the
fact of intercourse, he did not contract the STI. It was found that the teacher
cooperated with
the investigation process and showed some insight into her
behaviour. She was prohibited from reapplying for registration or permission
teach for a period of six years from the date of the termination of her
employment at the relevant school. The termination followed
the investigation
into her conduct.
[29] RLT submits
that there are similarities as between the present case and the decision in
, in that both teachers were heads of departments and there was a
similar age disparity between them and the students, as well as
similarities in
relation to expressions of remorse and assisting with the administration of
However, in the present
case, the sexual relationship did not occur in circumstances where the teacher
knew that they had a STI.
On the other hand, while RLT did not have sexual
intercourse with the student before she completed year 12, his sexual
relationship
was more protracted than in the case of
[30] In relation
to the decision in
, RLT submits that the distinguishing conduct is
that the teacher consistently denied the allegations and relationship, the
relationship commenced when the student was still at school, albeit a
different school, and at the time of the decision the teacher
was still in a
relationship with the former
On the other hand, it
is accepted that RLT’s conduct involved two separate students, while with
only one student was
[31] RLT submits
that a prohibition of six years is within range in the present matter and that
account should be taken of the delay
by the QCT in bringing the disciplinary
proceedings. It is noted that RLT was initially suspended on 26 March 2020 and
was removed
from the register on 7 April 2021. He has not been able to teach for
a little over four years and seven months.
[32] RLT does
not oppose the placing of an endorsement on the register of teachers requiring a
satisfactory psychological report,
as proposed by the QCT, and, as with the QCT,
also seeks a non-publication order.
relevant conduct in relation to the present matter is indicated above, as are
analogous decisions in relation to sanction.
While very rarely will there be
precise parallels between any two matters, prior decisions can be a useful guide
as to the appropriate
sanction. It remains that there can be some difficulty in
weighing, relative to the present matter, the factors in those other cases
might have indicated a greater or lesser sanction.
[34] However,
significant parallels exist between the decisions in
and the present matter.
of these three matters the respondents were experienced teachers, there were
very significant age differences between the
teachers and students, and there
were inappropriate and overfamiliar interactions between the teachers and the
students while the
latter were still at school. With RLT, the sexual
relationship commenced after the student graduated from school, in
occurred two days before the student graduated, while with
commenced after the student was transferred to another
[35] Significant
differences also exist between these matters. While with RLT and in
there was cooperation with the investigators and displays of insight,
continually denied the relationship and
allegations.
With RLT and in
there was a direct teacher-student relationship, which was not the
present matter there was an earlier relationship with a student, which was not
evident in either
were also the considerations that the teacher had a STI, had not disclosed to
the school or the student’s parents her
knowledge as to the
student’s anxiety, and had allowed the student to consume alcohol in her
[36] In these
circumstances, an order cancelling the teacher’s registration or
permission to teach would have been appropriate
if the teacher were an approved
teacher, rather than a former approved teacher. Accordingly, by s 161(2)(c) of
the Education Act,
the Tribunal is required to make an order prohibiting RLT
from reapplying for registration or permission to teach ‘for a stated
period from the day the order is made or indefinitely’.
Tribunal considers that a prohibition order for a stated period is appropriate.
It also considers that allowance should
be made for any period of suspension or
inability to teach that is attributable to the conduct in question. Otherwise
of suspension would not simply be on account of the relevant conduct,
but would also be impacted by the time taken by the QCT to
commence disciplinary
proceedings. As noted, RLT was suspended on 20 March 2020 and was removed from
the register of teachers in
April 2021. On that basis, he has not been able to
teach for a period of almost 5 years and 8 months.
[38] In all of
the circumstances, we consider that the appropriate order is for RLT to be
prohibited from reapplying for registration
or permission to teach until 30
November 2026. That gives an effective disqualification period of a little over
6 years and 8 months.
An order should also be made pursuant to s 161(2)(d) of
the Education Act that a notation or endorsement about the teacher be entered
the register. The parties agree and this Tribunal considers that a
non-publication order is appropriate to protect any former
student or relevant
third party. Identification of RLT or the school might lead to identification of
those individuals.
following orders are made:
disciplinary ground in
Education (Queensland College of
Teachers) Act 2005
(Qld) (‘the
is established.
to s 161(2)(c) of the Education Act,
Teacher RLT is prohibited from
re-applying for registration or permission to teach until 30 November 2026.
to s 161(2)(d) of the Education Act, a notation is to be entered in the register
of teachers that should Teacher RLT apply
for registration or permission to
teach after the expiry of the prohibition period, the application must include
an independent psychologist’s
report satisfactory to the Queensland
College of Teachers addressing the following:
(a) an assessment of the teacher’s appreciation of the following:
(i) the legal obligations of teachers;
(ii) differentiating between personal and professional relationships;
(iii) development and maintenance of professional standards when working with
young people and actively determining and implementing
professional boundaries
with individual students;
(iv) personal and social behaviour that would compromise the professional
standing of a teacher and the profession of teaching;
(v) what constitutes inappropriate communication;
(vi) understanding the effects of inappropriate relationships with students and
former students;
(vii) the awareness of the trust and power granted to a teacher; and
(viii) understanding and full adherence to the Queensland College of
Teachers’ Code of Ethics;
(b) the psychologist’s report must also include:
(i) an assessment from the psychologist of the likelihood of Teacher RLT
engaging in a similar type of behaviour in the future;
(ii) an indication from the psychologist about whether the psychologist is
satisfied that Teacher RLT has adequately understood and
addressed the above;
(iii) confirmation that the psychologist was provided with copies of this
decision and referral under s 97 of the Education Act.
(iv) the duration and frequency of visits and details of any testing that was
undertaken.
RLT must bear all costs of, and associated with, compliance with these
be no order as to costs.
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld), other than to the parties to this proceeding and their legal
representatives and until further order of the Tribunal, publication
prohibited of any information that may identify Teacher RLT, any relevant
student, former student, other teacher, third party,
or school, other than to
the extent necessary for the Queensland College of Teachers to meet its
statutory obligations, particularly
under ss 285, 285AA, 285B, and 287 of the
Education Act, or as necessary for Teacher RLT to comply with any disclosure
requirements
of any regulatory authority or employer
teacher’ is defined at Schedule 3 of the
Education (Queensland College
of Teachers) Act 2005
(Qld) (‘Education Act’) to mean either an
approved teacher or a former approved teacher.
‘Former approved
teacher’ means a former registered teacher or a former holder of a
permission to teach.
A ‘former registered teacher’, in
relation to a disciplinary matter, means a person who was a registered teacher
the conduct to which the disciplinary matter relates happened and is no
longer a registered
Act (n 1) ss 97(2)(a), (b).
By s 201(2)(a)(ii) of the
Education Act, the written report about an investigation must be given to the
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) CLR 336, 361–362.
[2010] QCAT 709
[33]; see also
Queensland College of Teachers v PPK
[2019] QCAT 59.
[2019] QCAT 59
Queensland College of
Teachers v DGM
[2018] QCAT 194.
Education Act (n 1) s 3.
While in his record of
interview RLT said that the content of this email was effectively a lie, as he
was trying to make his affair
with her ‘as good as it could be’, he
did ‘see down her blouse at her breasts’ but ‘didn’t
record of interview dated 25 July 2019 at 1637.
Record of interview dated
25 July 2019 at 1650.
Applicant’s
submissions filed on 19 August 2024, 10.
Queensland College of
Teachers v SGS
[2017] QCAT 383
[2016] QCAT 447
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (277 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter