URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2025/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Heidelberg Business Park Pty Ltd & Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor [2025] QPEC 14 (11 June 2025)
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT COURT
Heidelberg Business Park Pty Ltd & Ors v Council of the City of Gold
Coast & Anor
[2025] QPEC 14
HEIDELBERG BUSINESS PARK PTY LTD
(ACN 069 000
(first appellant)
SEBASTIEN VANDERJAGENBURG
(second appellant)
ANDREW HENDERSON
(third appellant)
KATE HOWITT
(fourth appellant)
KIM KIMEKLIS
(fifth appellant)
TARA HARLEY
(sixth appellant)
CHRIS RALPH
(seventh appellant)
GRAEME EUGENE MOLINEUX & ALEXANDRA MOLINEUX
WENDY PEARCE
(ninth appellant)
COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GOLD COAST
(respondent)
5POINT PRO1 PTY LTD (ACN 667 923 024)
(co-respondent)
2405 of 2024
Planning and Environment
PROCEEDING:
Submitter appeal
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning and Environment Court, Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
11 June 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
10, 11, 12 & 13 February 2025
Williamson KC DCJ
The appeal is listed for review in the applications
list on 24 June 2025.
CATCHWORDS:
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT – APPEAL – where a submitter appeal
against a decision to approve an application seeking approval
‘other change’ to a development approval – where the changes
proposed include an increase in building
height that exceeds a building height
overlay map in the respondent’s planning scheme – whether the
changed development
complies with a building height uplift provision in the
Strategic framework of the respondent’s planning scheme.
LEGISLATION:
Planning Act 2016
Planning & Environment Court Act 2016
, ss 43 and 45
Abeleda v Brisbane City Council
[2020] QCA 257
(2020) 6 QR 441
Bell Co Pty
Ltd & Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2022] QPEC
Catterall & Ors v Moreton Bay Regional Council
[2020] QPEC 52
[2021] QPELR
McEnearney v Council of the City of Gold Coast
McLucas & Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2024] QPELR 283
S&S No 4 Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold
[2024] QPEC 42
Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns
Regional Council & Ors; Dexus Funds Management Ltd v Fabcot Pty Ltd &
[2021] QCA 95
[2022] QPELR 309
Wilhelm v Logan City Council & Ors
[2020] QCA 273
[2021] QPELR 1321
Mr D Purcell and Mr L Walker for the appellants
Mr K Wylie for the
Mr M Batty KC and Ms M Rodgers for the co-respondent
SOLICITORS:
Mills Oakley Lawyers for the appellants
Corrs Chambers Westgarth for the
Anderssen Lawyers for the co-respondent
Introduction
[1] The co-respondent is constructing a
multi-storey apartment complex on land situated at 107 Jefferson Lane, Palm
Beach (the land).
Construction is well advanced. The development is authorised
by, inter alia, an extant land use approval dated 31 October 2023 (the
development approval). The development approval was subject to code assessment
and authorises the start of a new use of the land,
namely a Multiple dwelling.
Conditions of the development approval require the material change of use to be
carried out in accordance
with approved plans. The plans depict built form up to
9 storeys and 29 metres in height. The height, in metres, complies with the
relevant building height overlay map in Council’s planning
[2] Despite the advanced construction works, the co-respondent
applied to Council to make an ‘other change’ to the development
approval. Several changes are proposed to the approved plans. The contentious
change for this appeal involves an increase in building
height; approval was
sought to increase the height of the built form to 11 storeys and 36.8 metres.
Two consequences flow from this
change to the development approval. First, the
increase in building height alters the level of assessment for the development.
level of assessment changes from code to impact; the height of the building
at 36.8 metres exceeds the trigger for code assessment.
The trigger is stated on
a building height overlay map in Council’s planning scheme; it is 29
metres. Second, the increase
in building height means the success of the
application turns on an assessment against an uplift provision
in s 3.3.2.1(9) of Council’s
planning scheme. The provision
provides an opportunity, in limited circumstances, to secure approval for built
form that exceeds
the height stated on a building height overlay map.
co-respondent’s change application was administered, assessed and decided
as if it were impact assessable. Public notification
attracted 980 submissions,
of which all but three were adverse to approval. Each of the appellants made an
adverse submission. Supplementary
lay witness statements were also prepared and
tendered during the hearing. The adverse submissions and lay witness statements
in clear terms, that the height, bulk and scale of the proposal is
considered unacceptable, and if approved, would lead to adverse
amenity and
character impacts.
[4] The change application was approved by Council on 26
July 2024: Ex.6, attachment 4.
[5] This is a submitter appeal against
Council’s approval.
[6] The submitter appellants identified a number
of reasons to refuse the change application: Ex.2, document 1 and document 5,
3. The reasons narrowed considerably during the life of the appeal. By the
end of the hearing, the appellants’ case focused
on particular parts of
the uplift provision in Council’s planning scheme, namely subsections (b),
(c), (e) and (g). An assessment
against these parts of the uplift provision was
said to be decisive: Ex.4, para 8 and Ex.43, para 8. Non-compliance with the
contentious
parts of the uplift provision was alleged to be established for two
reasons, namely (Ex.43, para 6):
(a) the built form does not have an excellent standard of
appearance; and
(b) the built form will present as overbearing to Jefferson
Lane and the adjoining neighbour to the south.
[7] Council and the co-respondent join issue with the
appellants’ case. Each contend compliance is demonstrated with the uplift
[8] The appeal is a hearing anew: s 43, Planning &
Environment Court Act 2016.
[9] The co-respondent bears the onus:
s 45(2), Planning & Environment Court Act 2016.
The development
[10] The development approval is contained in a decision notice
dated 31 October 2023: Ex.6, attachment 2. The development authorised
approval is identified as ‘a Material change of use (Code assessment) for
Multiple dwelling (8 units)’. The approval
was granted subject to
conditions. Condition 2 requires development to be undertaken and maintained
‘generally in accordance
with’ identified drawings, including any
amendments in red. The approved plans depict, in general terms, a medium rise,
density residential building orientated to take advantage of attractive
views to the ocean and beach.
[11] The approved building has three distinct
components: a basement, tower and roof. The basement accommodates carparking and
areas. The ground floor level contains carparking, service areas and a
lobby. Level 1 contains a single unit and common recreation
space (pool). Levels
2 to 7 each contain a single unit. Level 8 contains a single unit, with private
stair and lift access to level
9. On level 9 there is a bedroom, large ensuite
and entertainment room located towards the eastern edge of the building. Level 9
also provides for common recreation space. This includes a pool, terrace and
sundeck located towards the western edge of the building.
The roof of the
building, which is flat and slopes east to west, partially covers level 9. It
sits above the bedroom, large ensuite
and entertainment room at the eastern end
of the floor. The roof line is stepped. This is to ensure the building does not
an overall height of 29 metres.
[12] The design of the approved
building is modern. A review of the floor plans, elevations and sections confirm
the built form is
articulated and designed to provide visual interest. Each of
the units are designed to maximise an attractive easterly aspect to
and beach. A feature of the design is the hard edges of the floor plates, which
are particularly evident in the roof and
the edge of balconies overlooking the
[13] At street level, the tower is set back from Jefferson Lane. The
intervening space is filled by a batten fence, driveway, carparks,
areas and service cupboards. Vehicle access is obtained centrally to the land.
The distance between the western boundary
of the land and the sealed carriageway
of Jefferson Lane is narrow. The resulting space is unattractive for
pedestrians. In that
space, like many others along Jefferson Lane, the
constructed built form has a dominant visual presence.
[14] The approved
plans depict, in detail, the interface treatment between the approved
development and the southern boundary of the
land. The details reveal the
building is set back from this boundary, with a series of landscaped planter
boxes filling the intervening
space. The landscaped planter boxes soften the
built form below level 2. An acoustic screen is approved on the northern edge of
planter boxes to mitigate noise impacts from the pool at level 1.
change application for the development approval
[15] A development approval
may be changed by making a ‘change application’ as defined in
Planning Act 2016
(the Act). Such an application must be made
to the ‘responsible entity’, who is identified having regard to
the Act. Here, a change application was made to Council in respect
of the development approval. It is uncontroversial Council was
the correct
responsible entity for that application.
[16] The changes proposed to the
development approval are depicted in a bundle of amended plans, which were
exhibit 5. The plans can be read with an agreed table,
which was marked exhibit 35. The table enables the proposed changes to be
appreciated in empirical terms.
[17] In summary, the changes proposed to the
development approval were described by the town planning witnesses as follows
“The changes now proposed to the October 2023
approval are summarised as follows:
(a) an increase in building height from 29 metres to 36.8
metres with a corresponding increase in the number of storeys by two (2)
ten storeys (in part) to twelve (12) storeys;
(b) an increase in the total
number of bedrooms from 33 to 41;
(c) an increase in the number of units from
(d) an increase in residential density from 1 bed/33m2 to 1
bed/26.8m2;
(e) an increase of 2 residential car parking spaces to the
(f) changes to the external architectural elements of the building;
(g) introduction of a lift overrun.”
[18] The changes of primary concern to the appellants are (a)
[19] The changed development is depicted in a bundle of
photomontages and visualisations: Ex.12, 13, 33 and 34. I am satisfied the
photomontages and visualisations are an accurate depiction of the development,
both in its approved and amended form. No expert called
to give evidence
suggested otherwise. Further, as a matter of impression, I am satisfied the
visual aids demonstrate the changed
development is an improved outcome, in
visual terms, when compared to the development approval. This is most evident
when comparing
the photomontages for the two forms of development at viewpoints
VP01 and VP06. The improvement is the product of a combination
changes, namely: (1) the introduction of curvilinear edges that soften the edges
of the tower and roof (see [12]); (2)
the redesign of the upper most part of the
building, which is now taller with curvilinear edges, recessed back from the
floor plates
below and finished with generous landscaping; (3) the introduction
of batten screens to the Jefferson Lane facade, which, in combination
introduction of pronounced slab edging, breaks up the verticality of the
structure; and (4) the introduction of pronounced
slab edging to the balance of
the building at each floor level to provide visual interest, and break up the
verticality of the structure.
[20] The balance of these reasons will refer to
the development for which approval is sought as the ‘changed form of
development’.
Statutory assessment and decision making
[21] The assessment and decision making framework for the change
application is identified by s 82 of the PA. Subsection (2) of this
provision states:
and deciding change applications for other changes
(2) For administering the change application, and assessing and deciding
the change application in the context of the development
approval, the
relevant provisions
(i) the responsible entity were the assessment manager; and
(ii) the change application were the original development application, with
the changes included, but was made when the change application
was made; and
(b) with necessary changes.
(emphasis added)
[22] The phrase ‘relevant provisions’ emphasised
above is defined in s 82(6) of the Act as follows:
(6) In this section—
to (8); and
sections 63
(d) the development assessment rules
[23] Here, to administer the change application as if it were
the original development application inclusive of the changes proposed,
the impact assessment process to be adopted, with necessary changes. The
‘relevant provisions’ of the Act for
this mode of assessment include
ss 45(7), 59(3) and 60(3). Section 45(7) of the Act captures, inter alia, the
key planning scheme
provision in issue, namely the uplift provision in
s 3.1.2.1(9) of the Strategic framework.
[24] Section 82(4) of the Act
declares that the assessment of the change application is to be undertaken in a
particular way. The
provision states, in part:
(4) To remove any
doubt, it is declared that the following matters apply,
only to the extent
the matters are relevant
to assessing and deciding the change application in
the context of the development approval—
(a) the assessment benchmarks;
(d) if the development to which the change application relates requires
impact assessment—any matters the assessment must or
may be carried out
against or having regard to under
(emphasis added)
[25] The phrase ‘to the extent the matters are
relevant’ in s 82(4) of the Act recognises two things. First, that
matters relevant to a change application may differ depending on the
circumstances. Second, that the weight to be afforded to any
matter in the
assessment may vary: McEnearney v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[26] The decision making power here involves the exercise of the
broad discretion conferred by s 60(3) of the PA. The discretion is
approached in a manner consistent with that discussed in, inter alia, Abeleda v
Brisbane City Council
[2020] QCA 257
(2020) 6 QR 441
, Wilhelm v Logan City Council & Ors
[2020] QCA 273
[2021] QPELR 1321
, and Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional
Council & Ors; Dexus Funds Management Ltd v Fabcot Pty Ltd & Ors
[2021] QCA 95
The authorities confirm that: (1) in contrast to its statutory
predecessor, the discretion conferred by s 60(3) of the PA, which
to impact assessment, admits of more flexibility to approve an application in
the face of non-compliance with a planning
scheme; and (2) a planning scheme
remains a reflection of the public interest.
[27] The assessment and decision
making framework for a change application seeking an impact assessable
‘other change’
was recently considered by the Court of Appeal in
McEnearney v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2024] QCA 246.
In the context of
considering the proper interpretation of s 82(4) of the PA, Flannagan JA
(with whom Bond and Boddice JJA agreed)
cited with approval this Court’s
decision in Catterall & Ors v Moreton Bay Regional Council & Anor
[2020] QPEC 52
, at [41] and [42]. At paragraph [42] of Catterall, the following
observation is made about the ‘practical application’
assessment and decision making framework for a change application of the kind
presently before the Court:
“...In practical terms, this means the
assessment and decision making process for a change application under s 82
is founded upon, but not limited to:
(a) an identification of the change/s proposed to the
development approval;
(b) an identification of the planning issues, be they
positive or negative, arising for consideration as a consequence of the change/s
proposed to the development approval; and
(c) an assessment of the planning
issues arising as a consequence of the change/s to the development approval,
having regard to the
requirements of the ‘relevant provisions’, and
assessment benchmarks, to the extent they are relevant.”
[28] The case advanced on behalf of the appellants here is
consistent with this practical approach. Their case focuses on: (1) specific
planning issues arising from the changed form of development (identified at
paragraph [6]); and (2) a relevant assessment benchmark,
which is engaged to
assess the identified planning issues. The appellants are to be commended for
advancing their case in this way.
The planning scheme
[29] Version 10 of
Gold Coast City Plan 2016 (the planning scheme) was in effect at the date the
co-respondent submitted its change
application: Ex.6, para 12. For the purposes
of the planning scheme, the land is: (1) included in the Urban neighbourhoods
designation
for the Strategic framework; (2) included in the Medium density
residential zone; and (3) subject to a number of overlays, including
Building height and Residential density overlays.
[30] Version 11 of the
planning scheme took effect on 6 February 2024. It remains in effect and may be
given weight in the assessment:
s 45(8) of the PA. No party submitted that
version 11 had a role to play in the determination of the change application.
unsurprising given the zoning of the land, relevant overlays and uplift
provision remain unchanged.
[31] Returning to version 10 of the planning
scheme, s 6.2.2 contains the Medium density residential zone code (the zone
purpose of the zone code is to ‘provide for a range and mix of
dwelling types including Dwelling houses and Multiple dwellings
supported by
Community uses and small-scale services and facilities that cater for local
residents’: s 6.2.2.2(1). The purpose
is achieved through a number of
overall outcomes going to, inter alia, land use, character and built form:
s 6.2.2.2(2).
[32] Overall outcome (2)(a) of the zone code deals with
‘Land uses’. The provision identifies the land use mix anticipated
for the zone, which is a ‘mix of dwelling types’, including ‘a
range of medium density residential uses’
to, inter alia, ‘increase
residential density’.
[33] The character of the zone is given express
treatment in overall outcome (2)(c) of the zone code. Subsection (i) of the
envisages urban neighbourhoods that vary from ‘pockets of
detached housing on smaller lots to medium or higher intensity places
medium-rise buildings’. A medium rise building, by definition in the
planning scheme, is 9 to 32 metres and 3 to
8 storeys in height: Ex.10, p.270.
At 36.8 metres, the changed form of development exceeds medium rise. As will be
seen shortly,
Jefferson Lane is not a pocket of detached housing on smaller
lots. It is transitioning to a medium intensity place with medium and
[34] Overall outcome (2)(d) of the zone code identifies planning
considerations particular to built form. Subsection (i) provides
‘Built form...has a building height that does not exceed that indicated on
the Building height overlay map’. The
applicable building height overlay
map 21 indicates the land forms part of an extensive area subject to a building
height of 29 metres.
Ex.20, p.18. The changed form of development has a building
height of 36.8 metres. Self-evidently, this does not comply with overall
2(d)(i) of the zone code. With this non-compliance in mind, one then turns to
examine s 3.3.2.1 of the Strategic framework.
[35] The Strategic
framework sets the policy direction for the planning scheme: s 3.1(1). To
describe the policy direction, the Strategic
framework is structured to include
layers that build upon each other. One of the layers deals with
‘elements’. They refine
and further describe strategic outcomes:
s 3.1(3)(d). Section 3.3.2 of the Strategic framework deals with an
element, namely Urban
neighbourhoods. Section 3.3.2.1 sets out a number of
specific outcomes relevant to this element.
[36] Section 3.3.2.1(8)
identifies the strategic importance of building height as shown on overlay maps
and links this expression
of planning intent to the desired future appearance of
a local area. The provision states:
“The Building height overlay map
shows the building height pattern and desired future appearance for local areas
within urban
neighbourhoods. This map also shows areas where building heights
change abruptly to achieve a deliberate and distinct contrast in
within and between low, medium or high-rise areas.”
[37] The relevant
building height overlay map here (map 21) does not show any ‘deliberate
and distinct contrast’ in built
form from one side of Jefferson Lane to
the other. Each side has the same building height of 29 metres. The overlay
also indicates
that the tallest buildings in Palm Beach are promoted in the
centre at 39 metres, which is to the west of the land and across the
Highway. The 10 metre height differential suggests a stepping down, or
gradation, is anticipated from the Palm Beach centre
to the land east of the
Gold Coast Highway. No such gradation is anticipated (west-to-east) along
Jefferson Lane.
[38] The Building height overlay maps, while important, are
not absolute. The planning scheme conveys an expectation that approval
obtained, in limited circumstances, for development that exceeds the building
height overlay map. This is to be found in s
3.3.2.1(9) of the Strategic
framework (the uplift provision). The provision, which provides planning
flexibility in limited circumstances,
“Increases in building
height up to a maximum of 50% above the Building height overlay map may occur in
limited circumstances
in urban neighbourhoods where all the following outcomes
are satisfied:
(a) the development is not located within The Spit Master
Plan height sensitive area, as identified on the Building height overlay
(b) a reinforced local identity and sense of place;
managed interface with, relationship to and impact on nearby development,
including the reasonable amenity expectations
of nearby residents;
varied, ordered and interesting local skyline;
(e) an excellent standard of
appearance of the built form and street edge;
(f) housing choice and
affordability;
(g) protection for important elements of local character or
scenic amenity, including views from popular public outlooks to the city’s
significant natural features;
(h) deliberate and distinct built form contrast
in locations where building heights change abruptly on the Building height
(i) the safe, secure and efficient functioning of the Gold
Coast Airport or other aeronautical facilities.”
[39] The appellants contend the changed form of development
does not comply with subsections (b), (c), (e) and (g) for the reasons
identified in paragraph [6]: Ex.43, para 7. Whilst the weight to be
attributed to non-compliance with an adopted planning control
is not fixed under
s 60(3) of the PA, turning on the facts and circumstances of each case
(Bell Co Pty Ltd & Ors v Council of
the City of Gold Coast & Anor
, [169]), the parties conducted the appeal on the footing that the
assessment against the contentious parts of the uplift provision
determinative of the appeal. This approach is consistent with the observations
made at paragraphs [56], [57], [59] and [62]
of Bell (Supra).
completeness, it can be observed that the building height uplift provision is
not without limit in the Urban neighbourhoods
designation. Section 3.3.2.1(10)
“Increases in building height, beyond 50% above the Building
height overlay map, are not anticipated in urban
neighbourhoods.”
[41] It was uncontroversial that subsection (10) is
not engaged here. The changed form of development seeks an increased building
height that is less than 50% above 29 metres, as stated on Building height
overlay map 21.
[42] The zone code includes Table 6.2.2-2, which sets out
assessment benchmarks for assessable development. Performance outcome PO5
table is relevant to density. In particular, the provision states that
‘Density does not exceed that shown on the Residential
density overlay
map’. The relevant density map provides that the land is included in an
area with a density of ‘RD6’
(1 bed/33 m2). It was common ground the
changed form of development does not comply with PO5. The density of the change
application
equates to 1 bed/27.1 m2. This non-compliance was not pressed as a
reason for refusal in its own right because, as the appellants’
planning witness Mr Adamson accepted, the changes do not alter its
characterisation. In a planning sense, the development is,
and will remain, a
medium density residential development in the event the changed form of
development is approved. This was a fair
and sensible concession by Mr Adamson.
It was consistent with the evidence of Mr Buckley and Mr Perkins. I accept the
evidence of
the town planning witnesses in this regard.
[43] The town
planning witnesses also helpfully described the existing land use and built form
context of the locality: Ex.20, para
25. The description, which I accept, makes
plain that existing character is not homogenous. It is mixed and in a state of
transition.
It is transitioning from a predominantly low-rise/low density area
to one that is medium density with opportunities for medium rise
and high rise
development. This transition is not complete. It is a transition anticipated,
and promoted, by the planning context
set out above. Reasonable expectations as
to development ought properly take into account these matters, including that
an opportunity provided by the planning scheme, in limited
circumstances, for medium density development to be provided in a high
form. With this in mind, I have little difficulty accepting the following
submission made on behalf of the appellants (Ex.43,
para 22). The submission
correctly conveys what should be a reasonable expectation as to development on
the land. Unfortunately,
the substance of the submission was not given
sufficient recognition in the adverse submissions and lay witness
statements:
“It is not disputed that City Plan intends that the
character of Palm Beach, as a whole, is to change from predominantly low-rise
coastal spine to one that is medium density, with opportunities for high rise
development in limited circumstances, subject to satisfying
criteria...”
The disputed issues
[44] There are four issues to be
determined in the appeal. They can be identified as follows:
1. Whether the built form and street edge of the changed
form of development achieves an excellent standard of appearance?
the changed form of development will present as overbearing to Jefferson
3. Whether the changed form of development will present as
overbearing to the southern neighbour?
4. Whether the changed form of
development complies with subsections (b), (c), (e) and (g) of the uplift
[45] The appellants’ case was advanced on the basis that
the answer to question 4 was the direct product of the answers to the
preceding questions. This has the consequence that the appellants’ case
for refusal will be unsuccessful if the first
three questions are answered
adverse to their interests.
[46] Before dealing with each of the issues in
turn, something needs to be said of the large body of expert evidence and the
of the issues to be determined.
[47] An assessment of the changed form
of development for each of the above questions calls for an evaluative judgment.
fact and degree loom large. To assist, there was, as I have said, a
large body of expert evidence. This evidence was, unfortunately,
within and across areas of expertise. Further, a significant part of the
evidence was directed to describing what can
readily be observed in the visual
aids before the Court. I raised this with Counsel in final addresses. Sensibly,
they all conceded
that the disputed issues can be resolved, in large measure, by
the Court’s own assessment of the visual aids. The aids include
comprehensive bundle of photomontages depicting the changed form of development,
in context. The context includes ‘ghosted’
built form to depict
approved, but not yet, constructed development. The photomontages are of high
quality and provide accurate depictions
of development on the land in its
approved and changed form.
[48] While the visual aids were of considerable
assistance, this is not to say I have disregarded the written evidence of expert
in relation to town planning, visual amenity, landscaping and
architectural matters. Those experts pointed out numerous features
of the design
relevant to the determination of the disputed issues. I was particularly
assisted by the written evidence of one of
the architects, namely Mr Peabody.
His contribution to the architecture joint report was consistent with my
impression of the development
outcome depicted in the photomontages and
architectural visualisations. It was Mr Peabody’s view that the changed
development, including the street edge, exhibited an excellent standard
of appearance and achieved well managed interfaces. For reasons
that follow, I
accept his opinion.
Issue 1: Whether the built form and street edge of the
changed form of development achieves an excellent standard of
appearance?
[49] Subsection (e) of the uplift provision calls for development
to exhibit an ‘excellent standard of appearance’ in
two respects.
First, in terms of built form. Second, in terms of the street edge.
phrase ‘excellent standard of appearance’ is not defined in the
planning scheme. It is, as a consequence, to
be given its plain and ordinary
meaning. All of the parties directed my attention to this Court’s decision
in McLucas &
Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2024] QPELR
at [107] where Rackemann DCJ considered the plain and ordinary meaning of
this very part of the uplift provision. His Honour held
that the phrase, which
does not require perfection, conveys something that has superior merit, is
remarkably good, or of an especially
high standard. I agree and have approached
subsection (e) of the uplift provision in the same manner.
[51] Given the
nature of the outcome sought to be achieved by subsection (e), the assessment
involves an evaluative judgment. The
most helpful evidence to make this judgment
is the bundle of visual aids, comprising architectural plans, photos,
photomontages and
visualisations. The photomontages depict the development
approval and changed form of development in context. As occurred in this
reasonable minds may, and are likely, to differ about matters of impression
drawn from evidence of this kind.
[52] Having regard to the visual aids,
particularly the photomontages and visualisations of the changed form of
development, I am
satisfied the built form and street edge exhibit an excellent
standard of appearance for the purpose of subsection (e) of the uplift
provision. This is so for a combination of reasons set out below. The reasons
are, in effect, descriptions of what is vividly depicted
in Figure NP25 of
exhibit 18, exhibits 33 and 34, and the photomontages for viewpoints VP01, VP02,
VP03, VP04, VP06 and VP07. The
same photomontages also confirm that the standard
of appearance of the changed form of development is superior to the development
approval: see also [19].
[53] As a matter of impression, the
photomontages and visualisations in exhibits 33 and 34 depict a modern and
visually interesting
built form. This is due to its shape; proportions; use of
curvilinear design elements; the use of horizontal and vertical articulation
(recessing and stepping); the use of slab edging to break up the verticality of
the structure; the use of high quality materials;
and the use of an attractive
and modern colour palette. Each of these elements coupled with the superior
design for the uppermost
levels (10 and 11) combine to express an excellent
standard of appearance.
[54] Mr Olsson, the appellants’ architect, was
critical of the use of cladding and white slab edges in the design. The point
made, as I understood it, was to the effect that these features add to the
visual prominence of the building in contrast to its neighbours.
I accept the
cladding and slab edges add to the visual prominence of the building, but I do
not accept this is a negative attribute.
The cladding and slab edges provide
strong horizontal features that break up the bulk and mass of the structure.
They enhance its
visual appearance.
[55] The design of the built form at
levels 10 and 11 is worthy of specific mention. It is these levels of the
building that comprise
the two additional storeys for which approval is sought
by the change application. A review of the design, with the benefit of the
photomontages, demonstrates these levels are recessed from the tower below and
provide a visually pleasing and attractive cap to
the building. The cap is
created by a combination of landscape edges, curved balcony profiles, rounded
corners of the facade and
the use of articulation. All of these features, taken
in combination, exhibit an excellent standard of appearance for the purpose
subsection (e) of the uplift provision.
[56] Mr Olsson was also critical of
the roof design in that it slopes towards Jefferson Lane. This was said to
emphasise its visual
presence. While the roof slopes from east to west, I do not
accept Mr Olsson’s criticism is a fair one. The photomontages for
viewpoints VP01 and VP06 demonstrate that the sloping roof terminates at a point
that is set back from the western edge of the building
and merges into a highly
articulated and landscaped part of the built form. This design outcome does not,
contrary to Mr Olsson’s
view, emphasise the visual presence of the roof,
let alone emphasise the upper parts of the building.
[57] Consideration must
also be given to the ‘street edge’. Here, this is the interface
between the development and Jefferson
Lane. A visualisation of the street edge
is provided in Figure NP25 of exhibit 18. The street edge as depicted in that
image provides
an excellent standard of appearance. It includes an opening for a
driveway and access to the basement. These features do not detract
appearance at street level. Features of this kind are essential and must be
incorporated along the Jefferson Lane frontage.
The design has done so, in my
view, in an appropriate and meritorious way. The result is a street edge that
achieves an excellent
standard of appearance. This is particularly evident when
the changed form of development is contrasted with the existing character
Jefferson Lane.
[58] Jefferson Lane is a narrow one-way road, in the order of
8.2 metres wide near the land. It extends for a considerable length
north/south alignment on the beach side of the Gold Coast Highway within Palm
Beach. It is separated from the beach by a swathe
of land on its eastern side.
This is where the land is situated. Jefferson Lane facilitates rear access to
lots on its western side,
which have frontage to the Gold Coast Highway. The
width of the road reserve provides little to no space for pedestrians on the
verge. It is an unattractive pedestrian space.
[59] The built form character
on both sides of Jefferson Lane is mixed. It comprises a mix of dwelling types,
including Multiple dwellings.
There is a variety of building designs. There is
also variety in terms of building heights, setbacks, materials, building age and
condition: Ex.41.
[60] Two features of the character of Jefferson Lane
warrant particular mention.
[61] First, a feature of the existing built form
character of Jefferson Lane is the juxtaposition of apartment towers with low
dwellings. This occurs with some regularity along Jefferson Lane. The
difference in built form height, bulk and scale is readily
appreciable in these
building-to-building relationships. Such a relationship can be seen on the land
with its immediate neighbours.
The land is being developed with a medium
rise/medium density development authorised by the development approval. Even
allowing for
the presence of scaffolding, visual aids confirm that the built
form under construction (in terms of its height, bulk and scale)
dominates the
low rise residential dwellings immediately adjoining to the north and south. The
photomontages for viewpoints VP01
and VP06 confirm this will not change in the
event the approved form of development is completed.
[62] Aerial photography,
marked up with the location of recent development approvals (Ex.18) confirms
that the juxtaposition of towers
with low-rise dwellings is due to an emerging
character in the strips of land that sleeve either side of Jefferson Lane. The
character takes the form of medium density residential development
provided in tower form. Some of the towers are medium rise, by
definition, in
the planning scheme. Some are high rise by definition and have taken advantage
of the uplift provision. The existence
of this form of development, in
combination with recent approvals granted by Council that are not yet acted
upon, serve to confirm
that the emerging character will persist for the
foreseeable future in Jefferson Lane. This character is consistent with the
planning for the area, which is reflected in, inter alia, the Medium
density residential zone code and applicable overlay maps (building
[63] It will take time to achieve the planned character for Palm
Beach. The aerial photography confirms this is happening at a more
accelerated
rate on the western, rather than eastern side, of Jefferson Lane. While this was
a point laboured in the appellants’
case, for my part, I considered the
distinction between the two sides of the road a distraction. The reason for this
can be easily
stated: the character of Jefferson Lane is not static. The
planning scheme encourages change, and change should be reasonably expected
both sides of the road reserve. In terms of the change in character, the
planning scheme treats both sides of Jefferson Lane in
the immediate locality of
the land the same; they are included in the same zone and subject to the same
building height and density
overlay maps. Further, it can be said that there are
many reasons why one side of the road may be developed at a faster rate than
other. The evidence does not suggest this is the product of any town planning
consideration. In such circumstances, it is unnecessary
to speculate about the
rate at which redevelopment may occur on either side of Jefferson Lane.
[64] Second, the street edge and streetscape on both sides of Jefferson Lane
is fairly described as a ‘mixed bag’. A range
of development
outcomes can be seen on both sides of the road, including limited landscaping,
the presence of driveways, solid masonry
fencing, wire fencing, dilapidated
structures, non-residential buildings and built to boundary service cupboards.
Save for new development,
it is fair to say that the standard of appearance of
the street edge and streetscape along both sides of Jefferson Lane is poor and
disjointed. The western side has the added disadvantage that some of the
existing development has been designed to present a ‘back
to Jefferson Lane.
[65] Against this background, the street edge of the
changed form of development can be considered. The visual aids confirm that the
changed form of development includes a number of design elements at, or close
to, the street edge with Jefferson Lane. The elements
comprise (Ex.19, p.7,
figure 4a): (1) built form (podium and tower); (2) landscaping; (3) a driveway;
(4) solid fencing; and (5)
concealed service cupboards. None of these elements
are incongruous with the existing or emerging character of Jefferson Lane. In
view, the changed form of development will in fact improve the appearance of the
Jefferson Lane streetscape. While favourable,
this does not however resolve the
dispute about subsection (e) of the uplift provision; the street edge must
achieve an excellent
standard of appearance to comply.
[66] I am satisfied
the photomontages and visualisations, read with the architectural and landscape
plans, demonstrate that an excellent
standard of appearance will be achieved at
the street edge. Figure NP25 of exhibit 18 was particularly helpful in this
respect. The
figure provides a clear visualisation of the street edge where
several elements work together to create an excellent standard of
(Ex.19, figures 4a and 5a). The elements are:
(a) the lower part of the building up to level 2, which
provides a podium to create a human scale at street level – when
appreciated
at the pedestrian level this part of the building creates an eyeline
that draws the viewer’s attention down from the tower
above and towards
the curvilinear landscaped awning at levels 1 and 2;
(b) the setbacks
provided from the street edge to the building envelope;
(c) the use of
attractive and generous landscaping in the setback area between the street edge
and the built form;
(d) the articulation of, and vertical batten screens
wrapping around, the fire stair on the south-west corner of the building, which
provide a pleasant backdrop to the landscaping;
(e) the use of batten screens
to conceal building services;
(f) the visual interest provided by the
‘banding’ at each floor level of the tower, created by the edge of
(g) levels 10 and 11 have been set back from the edge of
the tower below and landscaped – Figure NP 26 of exhibit 18 confirms
levels of the built form will be difficult to appreciate from the street edge,
let alone distinguish as built form that exceeds
29 metres in
[67] Mr Peabody is an experienced architect well known to the
Court. He regularly provides evidence to assist with the very matters
consideration. I carefully reviewed his evidence. He concluded that the proposed
development exhibited an excellent standard
of appearance in terms of built form
and street edge. This conclusion was founded on a comprehensive examination of
the proposal
and visual aids. His conclusion was made good by the photomontages.
It is consistent with my own impression of the visual aids. I
Peabody’s evidence.
[68] The appellants’ case in relation to
subsection (e) of the uplift provision commenced from a position of damning the
form of development with faint praise; it was submitted the standard of
appearance is ‘not poor’ but ‘falls short
of excellent’:
Ex.43, para 13. It was said to fall short of excellent because of the
overbearing presentation of the built
form to Jefferson Lane.
appellants relied upon the evidence of Mr Olsson and, to a lesser extent, Mr
Adamson, to establish that the proposed development
will have an overbearing
presentation to Jefferson Lane.
[70] Mr Olsson did not agree that the
changed form of development exhibited an excellent standard of appearance.
Rather, it was his
view that the development would be visually intrusive and
adversely impact on Jefferson Lane. In this regard, Mr Olsson referred
the lack of appropriate setbacks to the street; (2) the service cupboards lining
the lane at the north-west corner of the
site; (3) the proposed concrete planter
at level 1, which is within 0.85 metres of the site boundary; and (4) the
setback and design
(including vertical battens) of the fire stair, which would
be uncommon in the area and emphasise the scale and verticality of the
Mr Olsson also considered the extent of landscaping proposed. He regarded it as
minimal in amount and insufficient to mitigate
the height and scale of the
changed form of development.
[71] Mr Adamson expressed similar views to Mr
Olsson about the visual dominance of the proposed development. While I
appreciate Mr
Adamson’s assistance in this regard, it is unnecessary to
dwell upon his evidence. As I understood it, Mr Adamson deferred
to Mr Olsson in
relation to this issue.
[72] I considered each of Mr Olsson’s
criticisms of the design with the benefit of the visual aids, particularly the
photomontages,
plans and visualisations. Based on that exercise, I do not
accept, as a matter of impression, that the setbacks of the built form
location of service cupboards adversely impact on the appearance of the street
edge or built form. In short, this is because
the setbacks to the built form,
which vary and do not mimic nearby development, are appropriate to ensure the
street edge is not
‘overcrowded’ or overborne. The criticism of the
service cupboards is also unpersuasive. The evidence established they
required to be located on the frontage of the land. The design of the changed
form of development conceals the cupboards in an
attractive and practical
[73] The point made by Mr Olsson in relation to the fire stair is on
stronger ground given its visual prominence in the photomontages,
particularly
viewpoint VP02. That prominence does not, however, detract from the standard of
appearance of the development. In my
view, this part of the design is an
attractive component of the development. This is clear from viewpoint VP02,
which vividly demonstrates
that the element is attractive when read together
with the slab edge banding, which serves to break up the verticality of the
form and batten screens.
[74] I also do not accept the criticisms of
the landscaping design. The deep planting and integrated planning proposed at
level of the building will, as the visual aids demonstrate, contribute
to a positive and attractive relationship with Jefferson Lane
at street level.
It will also serve to soften the built form when viewed from Jefferson Lane.
Contrary to Mr Olsson’s view,
on balance, I am satisfied a landscaping
regime can be conditioned to ensure (in so far as it is able) an excellent
standard of appearance
is achieved for the purpose of subsection (e) of the
uplift provision.
[75] For these reasons, I am satisfied compliance has been
demonstrated with subsection (e) of the uplift provision.
Issue 2: Whether
the changed form of development will present as overbearing to Jefferson
[76] The use of the term ‘overbearing’ in an amenity and
character context typically refers to the visual relationship
between built form
and a potential receptor. The receptor can be a person or other built form. An
overbearing visual relationship
is one characterised by excessive visual
dominance in the light of the relevant circumstances. The relevant circumstances
the existing character of an area, the content of adopted planning
controls, and rights conferred by extant development approvals
that, at the time
of the assessment, have not been acted upon.
[77] I have dealt with existing
and planned character above. Based on this assessment, it can be said, with
confidence, that the existing
character of Jefferson Lane, including in close
proximity to the land, is not homogenous. It is transitioning to a medium
density/medium
rise area. The transitional state of the area means there is a
mix of dwelling types, building designs, boundary setbacks, building
and built form age and condition. A further feature of the local area is the
juxtaposition of new tower developments with
existing low rise land uses. Such
a relationship can already be seen on the land in comparison to adjoining sites.
The adjoining
sites are improved with Dwelling houses. As is clear from visual
aids before the Court, those dwellings are visually dominated by
the built form
under construction on the land. Even allowing for the removal of scaffolding,
the extent of the visual dominance is
significant. It is particularly evident in
Figure 42 of the Architects’ joint report (Ex.16, p.52) and VP01 of the
photomontages.
[78] To examine whether the changed form of
development will present as overbearing to Jefferson Lane, I was greatly
assisted by the
visual aids. When considered in conjunction with the existing
and planned character of Jefferson Lane, I was satisfied, on balance,
changed development will not present as overbearing to the street (i.e. having
excessive visual dominance relative to a
known receptor). This is demonstrated
by viewpoints VP01, VP02 and VP06 of the photomontages, particularly the images
that have ghosted
in approved but not yet constructed development. These images
confirm that the changed form of development will have an excellent
standard of
appearance and an appropriate visual relationship with the street. This, in my
view, is due to the design of the street
edge (including the setbacks and
landscaping), the design of the tower above the street level and the relativity
of the height, bulk
and scale of the built form to nearby development (both
existing and approved). A number of design features at the street edge will
a positive contribution to Jefferson Lane and the streetscape. Two particular
design features are of note, namely:
(a) the distinct components of the tower, when appreciated
as a whole (it is well articulated, recessed at upper levels, and includes
curvilinear components, defining floor edges and a batten screen) create a
visually interesting form that will relate well to the
street; and
setback of the tower from the street in combination with the use of low level
landscaped awnings to create a human scale at
ground level.
[79] With respect to (b), the creation of human scale, this is
an important consideration for the visual relationship to the street.
can be most readily appreciated in Figure NP25 of the visual amenity and
landscaping joint report. The figure is a render
of the street edge. The
following design features are evident, namely: (1) the curvilinear design
features referred to above; (2)
the defining slab edges; (3) generous
landscaping; (4) deep planting; (5) batten screening; and (6) the deliberate
stepping and recessing
of floor plates to create visual interest and reduce the
apparent bulk and scale of the built form. I am satisfied all of these features
combine to create ‘human scale’ at street level and do not result in
an overbearing presentation of the built form to
the street.
[80] That the
relationship is not one of excessive visual dominance is, in my view, confirmed
by the absence of adverse amenity impacts.
In this regard, the appellants
conceded that the proposed development will not give rise to a number of adverse
impacts typically
regarded as indicia of overbearing development. The impacts
falling into this category relate to privacy, overlooking and shadowing.
accepted that impacts of this kind, particularly in respect to privacy and
overlooking, can be appropriately managed by conditions.
I agree. As a
consequence, the changes to the development approval will, in due course, need
to include not just conditions already
imposed by Council but also those offered
up by the appellant to address impacts on privacy and overlooking (helpfully
at paragraph 57 of exhibit 43).
[81] The appellants relied upon Mr
Olsson’s evidence to establish the built form would present as overbearing
to the street.
I will turn to this evidence shortly. This evidence, and indeed
the appellants’ case generally, appeared to be founded on three
assumptions. First, that Jefferson Lane is an important local character element.
Second, that Jefferson Lane in the immediate
locality is visually sensitive
given the large number of people who congregate in the nearby park and patrolled
beach/ surf lifesaving
club: Ex.43, para 47. Third, that in character terms, the
western side of Jefferson Lane is to be treated differently to the eastern
I will deal with these underlying assumptions first.
[82] It can be accepted
that Jefferson Lane is part and parcel of the character of Palm Beach and the
immediate locality surrounding
the land. While the lane may be notorious for
the connectivity it provides throughout the eastern edge of Palm Beach, to
it as an ‘important character element’ is, in my view, to
employ exaggeration. As a starting point, Jefferson Lane has
no such status in
the planning scheme. This is in circumstances where the planning scheme could
have identified, and does, where
relevant, identify local character features of
import. The existing circumstances also do not support a finding that Jefferson
is of local importance to character. In visual terms, it is not prominent.
This is due, in no small measure, to its width, the unattractive
environment it provides and rear lot access function. In my view, the mixed
character of Jefferson Lane is visually disjointed
and, in parts, has an
unattractive streetscape. As a consequence, I have difficulty accepting that the
assessment of visual dominance
in this case should proceed on the footing that
the first underlying assumption can be accepted without significant
qualification.
This adversely impacts the appellants’ case and Mr
Olsson’s evidence.
[83] The appellants contend the immediate local
context to the north of the land means the local area is visually sensitive.
can be accepted to a point. Views to and from the beach and nearby park may
be considered sensitive given they are popular parts
of the public realm. This
does not however mean that built form should not be viewed from the beach or
park. This is clear enough
from the adopted planning controls, which promote
medium rise/medium density development on Jefferson Lane. It is also clear from
the photomontages before the Court. Visually dominant built form, including the
constructed works on the land, can readily be seen
from the park, surf
lifesaving club and beach referred to above. As a consequence, I have difficulty
accepting that the assessment
of visual dominance should proceed on the footing
that the second underlying assumption can be accepted without, again,
significant
qualification. This adversely impacted the appellants’ case,
which, in my view, placed too great a weight on the visually sensitive
the immediate context.
[84] As to the third assumption, it finds support in
the evidence of Mr Olsson. He spoke of building height gradation (downwards)
from the west of Jefferson Lane to the east. This approach to the assessment
ought not be accepted and undermines Mr Olsson’s
evidence. There are three
reasons for this. First, there are existing and approved towers on the eastern
side of Jefferson Lane that
do not support the gradation theory. One development
is a tower of 13 storeys and 42.9 metres in height. Second, the view corridor
along Jefferson Lane is narrow. This has the consequence that built form on both
sides of the road will be in view when appreciating
the character of the street;
the visual contribution of each side of the road readily bleeds to the other
side. The extent of bleeding
is such that the two sides of the road become
indistinguishable parts of a whole. Third, I was not directed to any provision
the planning scheme that supports a gradation theory on Jefferson Lane. This
is unsurprising once it is appreciated the planning
scheme designations in the
immediate vicinity of the land are the same on both sides of Jefferson Lane. The
eastern and western side
of Jefferson Lane receive, for all intents and
purposes, the benefit of the same forward planning, which envisages a medium
character with a mix of dwelling types in tower form.
[85] Turning
to Mr Olsson’s evidence, it was his view that the changed development
would present as overbearing to Jefferson
Lane because of three specific
components. First, Mr Olsson drew attention to the service cupboards lining the
frontage of the site
in its north-west corner. Second, Mr Olsson drew attention
to the concrete planter at level 1 which would be, at its closest point,
metres from the boundary. Third, Mr Olsson drew attention to the fire stair,
which is set back 2.62 metres from the street and
clad with vertical battens. As
I understood his evidence, Mr Olsson was of the view that each of the elements,
in combination, would
be visually intrusive to Jefferson Lane. Mr Olsson did
not consider that this visual impact was properly mitigated by the setbacks
provided to the street and the proposed landscaping.
[86] I do not accept
this part of Mr Olsson’s evidence. It assumes the immediate local area has
a higher degree of visual sensitivity
than it deserves.
[87] Further, a
careful examination of Mr Olsson’s evidence is not made good by the visual
aids. This is particularly so in
the case of the street edge. Figure NP 25 of
the visual amenity and landscape joint report demonstrates the changed
development will
have an excellent standard of appearance. This is due to: (1)
varying setbacks of the built form to the street; (2) the presence
planting at ground level; (3) the landscaped curvilinear slab features above
ground level (podium); and (4) the setback of
the tower and recessed floor plate
above the podium level. These features combine to create a human scale at ground
level. In combination
with the tower above, I am satisfied the built form will
relate to Jefferson Lane in a way that is acceptable; it will not be visually
overbearing. That it will not be visually overbearing is confirmed by the
photomontages for the viewpoints at the beach and park,
looking towards the
[88] Mr Olsson and the appellants’ visual amenity expert, Mr
Butcher, made the point that the batten screen to the fire stair,
which can be
seen at all levels on the southern end of the built form, emphasises its
verticality and contributes to an overbearing
visual relationship to the street.
While the battens are a vertical element, the photomontages and visualisations
show that they
are broken up into sections by horizontal slab edges. The slab
edges, in combination with the articulated floor plates, in my view,
battens are not read as continuous vertical elements. They are broken up at each
level, which provides visual interest
and reduces the verticality of the
structure. Further, the battens provide an attractive background to the
landscaping at ground
level, contributing to the excellent standard of
appearance at the street edge.
[89] Finally, the service cupboards to which
Mr Olsson referred can be seen in Figure NP25. They are concealed in the
proposed boundary
fence. The fence, which will be attractive, reinforces human
scale at street level and will make a positive contribution to the streetscape.
I am satisfied this feature will not present as overbearing to Jefferson
[90] For the reasons above, I am satisfied the proposed development
will not, contrary to the appellants’ case, present as overbearing
Jefferson Lane.
Issue 3: Whether the changed form of development will present
as overbearing to the southern neighbour?
[91] For the purposes of this
issue, I have approached alleged ‘overbearing’ in the same manner as
I have discussed at
paragraph [76]; the allegation involves one of excessive
visual dominance. The allegation for issue 3 is one of excessive built form
dominance from the perspective of the immediate neighbour to the south. On this
land, there is an existing two storey Dwelling house.
[92] The Dwelling house
to the south is orientated to enjoy an aspect to the east (beach). It does not
presently enjoy an aspect to
the north. This is obscured by the building works
constructed on the land. So much is confirmed by Figure 42 of the architecture
joint report and photomontages before the Court.
[93] To assess the visual
relationship between the changed form of development and the immediate southern
neighbour, I had regard
to the visual aids before the Court. I particularly
found exhibits 33 and 34 to be of assistance. They contain visualisations of
boundary interface when viewed from the street, on plan, in elevation and in
section. Figure 2 of exhibit 34 is an architectural
visualisation depicting the
lobby and landscape treatments at, and along, the southern
[94] During Mr Butcher’s evidence, I asked him to explain, by
reference to Figure 2 of exhibit 34, what was unacceptable about
the changed
form of development and its interface with the southern boundary. Fairly, Mr
Butcher said the interface was visually
acceptable provided the landscaping
outcome as depicted in the visualisation was, in effect, guaranteed. From this,
I took Mr Butcher
to be conveying that the landscaping outcome depicted is
critical to the acceptability of the interface design. I agree this is the
this should be the subject of a condition. I am satisfied having regard to the
evidence of Mr Powell and Dr McGowan that a
condition can be imposed to achieve
the landscape outcome depicted in the visualisations, and compliance with such a
condition/s
is a realistic expectation.
[95] On balance, exhibits 33 and
34, in combination with the evidence of Mr Powell, Dr McGowan and Mr Peabody
persuaded me that the
resulting visual outcome at the southern boundary will not
be overbearing or unacceptable. Rather, the interface treatment depicted,
will be conditioned, softens the presentation of the changed form of development
behind a wall of landscaping. This wall of
landscaping, in turn, works to soften
the visual impact of building bulk, height and scale behind it. This is
reinforced by the
appellants’ concession about the absence of amenity
impacts that are treated as indicia of overbearing built form. As I have
observed, the appellants accept that impacts on privacy and overlooking can be
conditioned, and shadow impacts do not call
for the refusal of the change
application.
[96] Relevant to the assessment of the southern interface is
the requirement of the statutory assessment regime that it be considered
‘in the context’ of the development approval. In practical terms,
this means the assessment of the changed form of development
ought take into
account the interface treatment that would be provided in the event the
development approval was acted upon in full.
Architectural sections and
visualisations of the southern interface for the development approval are
contained in exhibits 33 and
34 and can be compared. This exercise is assisted
by Figure 42 of the architecture joint report, which is a photo of the interface
as it is presently constructed.
[97] A comparison of these visual aids
confirms, as the appellants concede, that the changed form of development
includes measures
intended to ameliorate (Ex.43, para 55) the impact of the
approved form of development. The ameliorative measures include a reduction
the height of an acoustic screen adjacent to the pool on level 1 and an improved
landscaping and planter design around the entry
to the building and along the
boundary. These ameliorative measures, in combination with the landscape design
(as depicted in exhibit
34 (pp.1 and 2 particularly)) will result in a superior
development outcome to that depicted in the development approval. This finding
is consistent with the conclusion I have reached at [95].
[98] It can be
observed that the appellants did not contend the overbearing presentation of the
development was due to the two additional
storeys of built form for which
approval is sought by the change application. Rather, in reliance upon Mr
Olsson’s evidence,
attention was directed to two specific parts of the
design at the lower levels of the building. First, the 10 metre long x 5.1 metre
high opaque acoustic screen adjacent to the level 1 pool. This screen is set
back 0.9 metres from the boundary and sits on top of
a boundary wall that runs
parallel to the boundary. The wall provides for landscaped planter boxes.
Second, attention was directed
to the lobby wall, which is 5.8 metres high x 5.3
metres long, setback 0.84 metres from the boundary: Ex.26, paras 17 and 18. Mr
Olsson pointed out that these elements are visually solid, close to the boundary
and 3 times taller than a person who may be standing
in the rear yard of the
property to the south. It is the combined effect of these features that led Mr
Olsson to criticise the southern
interface and characterise it as
overbearing.
[99] I do not accept Mr Olsson’s opinions about the
southern interface. The opinions are not made good having regard to the
aids I have referred to above. Further, Mr Olsson’s opinions appeared to
place significant weight on the fact that acceptable
outcomes in the planning
scheme (for setbacks) were not met on the southern boundary. This is correct in
two locations, but, in fairness,
needs to be considered in context. The relevant
context includes, namely: (1) that the form of development approved by the
development
approval conveys an expectation about the interface that is
acceptable for code compliant development on the land, namely a Multiple
dwelling; (2) the interface provided by the approved development is an
alternative solution to acceptable outcomes in the planning
scheme for setbacks
and is similar, but not identical, in its design to the changed form of
development; and (3) the interface proposed
by the changed form of development
is, for reasons given above, a superior solution to that provided by the
development approval.
In my view, Mr Olsson’s opinions about the southern
interface do not give sufficient recognition to these matters of
[100] For these reasons, I am satisfied the changed development will
not present as overbearing to the immediate southern neighbour.
Further, it is
my view the changed form of development, including its relationship to and
impact on development to the south, is
acceptable in town planning
Issue 4: Does the changed form of development comply with the uplift
[101] The alleged non-compliances with subsections (b), (c) (e)
and (g) of the uplift provision assume the appellants establish one,
or both, of
two points with respect to the changed form of development. The two points are
(Ex.43, para 6):
(a) that the built form does not have an excellent standard
of appearance; and
(b) that the height and built form will present as
overbearing to Jefferson Lane and the southern neighbour.
[102] It was contended that either of these matters sound in
non-compliance with the uplift provision as follows (Exhibit 43, para
“Establishing either of these matters will sound in non-compliance
with criterion (e). Additionally, establishing the second
matter will also
result in non-compliance with criteria (c) on the basis that it will result in
an interface to the southern neighbour
which is not well managed, and (b) and
(g) on the basis that the Lane is important to local identity and sense of place
important element of local character.”
[103] For the reasons
given above, I am satisfied the co-respondent has demonstrated that the changed
form of development will have
an excellent standard of appearance and will not
present as overbearing to Jefferson Lane and the southern neighbour. The
appellants’
case in relation to non-compliance with the uplift criteria is
not, as a consequence, made out on the evidence. This is decisive
of the outcome
in the appeal.
[104] Further, and in any event, I am satisfied the
co-respondent has demonstrated compliance with the disputed aspects of the
provision. This is so for the following reasons.
Subsection (b)
[105] Subsection (b) calls for an assessment of whether the
changed form of development ‘reinforces local identity and sense
place’. This is not a defined phrase in the planning scheme. It is to be
given its plain and ordinary meaning: S&S No
4 Pty Ltd v Council of the City
of Gold Coast
[2024] QPEC 42
, [86]. It was correctly pointed out by the
appellants in this context that the use of the word ‘reinforce’
requires the
strengthening of local identity and sense of place. How this will
be achieved in any given case turns on matters of fact and degree,
including the
extent to which compliance is achieved with other parts of the uplift provision,
such as subsections (c), (d) and (e).
It can be observed that the
appellants’ case did not involve an alleged non-compliance with subsection
[106] The factors that go to make up local identity and sense of place
vary according to the facts and circumstances of the case.
The factors to be
considered are not limited to what exists at the time of the assessment. The
size of the local area to be considered
should not be unduly narrow. The extent
of the local area considered should be informed by existing circumstances, the
adopted planning
controls and extant development approvals that have been
granted but not yet acted upon: Catterall (Supra), [86].
[107] That the
relevant study area should not be unduly narrowed is clear in this case having
regard to the suburb of Palm Beach and
the reference points that define its
edges. The relevant features (which are evident on Figure 2 of the town planning
joint expert
report) that caused me to adopt this approach are: (1) the
elongated and thin nature of the suburb, bookended by Tallebudgera Creek
north and Currumbin to the south; (2) the proximity of the suburb to the beach,
which marks its eastern extent between the
two bookends; and (3) the presence of
the Pacific Motorway, which marks the western extent of the suburb. Local
identity and sense
of place is not however limited by proximity to these
features. The forward land use planning is also relevant to the size of the
study area to be considered.
[108] The relevant zoning map confirms that the
local identity and sense of place of Palm Beach can be considered at a broad
The map indicates that a substantial part of the suburb is included in
the Medium density residential zone: Ex.20, p.15. This is
not limited to
Jefferson Lane or an area in immediate proximity to the land. Save for limited
exceptions, this zone applies to a
large area of land that is east of the Gold
Coast Highway, south of Tallebudgera Creek and north of Currumbin. This is where
land is to be found. There was no dispute that the built form character of
this area is intended to change. As I have already observed,
it is intended to
transition from the existing (predominantly) low-rise built form character to a
medium density area. There are
opportunities within that area for medium rise
development as defined in the planning scheme. There are also opportunities for
rise development, but in limited circumstances. Extant development
approvals demonstrate the transition is underway. Jefferson Lane,
as it exists
today, demonstrates this very point – the character of the street is a mix
of old and new development forms, including
medium and high rise
[109] In terms of building height, the tallest buildings are promoted
in the Palm Beach centre. This is located to the west of the
Gold Coast Highway.
A gradation in building height is intended outwards from the centre. Notably, as
I have already observed, the
building height overlay maps do not suggest
gradation downwards is anticipated, or promoted, from one side of Jefferson Lane
other. Building height, and intended development intensity, is consistent
on the eastern and western sides of the road.
[110] Adopting a broad study
area and defining the local identity and sense of place of that area by
reference to the matters traversed
above, I am satisfied the changed form of
development complies with subsection (b) of the uplift provision. It will
strengthen local
identity and sense of place by reason that it will be
consistent with the planned character of the area. This will occur in
circumstances
where the built form has an excellent standard of appearance; will
contribute to a varied, ordered and interesting skyline; and will
managed interfaces, impacts and relationships with nearby development. That it
will strengthen local identity and sense
of place, in my view, is further
confirmed by two factors, namely that: (1) the changed development will not
detract in any way from
the key features that define the edges of the suburb and
inform the sense of place and identity; and (2) the excellent standard of
appearance (and associated skyline) of the changed form of development can be
achieved absent unacceptable impacts on character and
appellants invited me to adopt a narrower study area, being the immediate
context of the land. It was contended this was
appropriate given a point of
agreement reached between Mr Powell and Dr McGowan. It is correct to say that
these experts agreed the
immediate context ‘is the most relevant’
for determining the local identity and sense of place. While I accept the
area is relevant to the assessment of local identity and sense of
place, the circumstances here suggest that, in planning terms,
local identity
and sense of place is defined by the characteristics of a broader area. That
said, even adopting the immediate area
as the frame of reference for the
assessment does not alter my view.
[112] The local identity and sense of
place of the immediate area is informed by: (1) the presence of the beach and
nearby park; (2)
the mixed character of built form, as described above; (3) the
alignment, width and function of Jefferson Lane; (4) the proximity
immediate area to the Gold Coast Highway; and (5) the forward planning for Palm
Beach as described above. The proposed development
reinforces or strengthens the
local identity and sense of this immediate place because it will be consistent
with the planned and
emerging built form character of the area. This will occur
in circumstances where the built form has an excellent standard of appearance;
will contribute to a varied, ordered and interesting skyline; and will have well
managed interfaces, impacts and relationships with
nearby development. All of
this can be achieved absent unacceptable impacts on character and
[113] The appellants’ case with respect to reinforcing local
identity and sense of place assumed that the changed form of development
adversely affected the built form character of Jefferson Lane (having regard to
setbacks, the street edge and limited high rise development),
overbearing to Jefferson Lane, and would undermine the Lane’s role as an
important contributor to local character:
Ex.43, para 31. I do not accept
this proposition. It is contrary to the reasons I have set out above.
Subsection (c)
[114] It was submitted on behalf of the appellants (Ex.43, para
49) that subsection (c) of the uplift provision requires the co-respondent
demonstrate three things, namely that the changed development has a
well-managed:
(a) interface with nearby development;
(b) relationship
to nearby development; and
(c) impact on nearby development, including
reasonable amenity expectations of nearby residents.
[115] I agree with this submission.
[116] The changed
development has an interface and relationship with the beach, Jefferson Lane and
two adjoining lots.
[117] The interface and visual relationship with the
beach (eastern) will be well managed. This is, in part, due to the absence of
any adverse impact on the beach (such as excessive overshadowing). It is also
due to the design of the changed form of development
which has a significant
rear boundary setback, intervening landscaping and a visually interesting and
attractive built form. The
built form when viewed from the beach is highly
articulated by the use of deep balconies. The presence of the deep balconies,
pronounced curvilinear slab edges, has the effect of reducing the
verticality of the structure. The use of large balconies also provides
the structure, which serves to mitigate the height, bulk and scale of the
structure. Each of these features is evident in
the photomontages for viewpoints
VP06 and VP07. Photomontages for the same viewpoints but further removed (namely
VP03, VP04 and
VP05a and b) also confirm that the changed form of development
will sit comfortably in the mixed character of Jefferson Lane when
viewed from
the beach, surf lifesaving club and park to the north of the land.
appellants did not contend for a contrary conclusion in relation to the
interface with, relationship to, and impact on,
the beach, park and surf
lifesaving club.
[119] The interface with, relationship to, and impact on the
southern boundary will be well managed for the reasons given at [52]
to [75] and
[91] to [100].
[120] The interface with, relationship to, and impact on
Jefferson Lane (west), particularly the street edge, is well managed for
reasons traversed in paragraphs [52] to [90].
[121] The visual relationship
between the changed form of development, existing development and approved
development on Jefferson
Lane can be examined by reference to the photomontages
and visualisations in evidence. Viewpoints VP01 and VP02 enable the changed
of development to be appreciated looking in a southerly and northerly direction
on Jefferson Lane. I found viewpoint VP02 to
be particularly helpful. It
demonstrates that: (1) the changed form of development, in terms of its height,
bulk and scale, will
fit comfortably with the existing character and streetscape
of Jefferson Lane; (2) the changed form of development reinforces the
built form character of the area, being medium density development in an
attractive tower form; and (3) the changed form
of development is consistent
with the emerging character of Jefferson Lane, which is evident in existing
taller buildings and the
content of development approvals granted by Council
that have not been acted upon. Consistency with planned character in the
circumstances
here will reinforce and strengthen local identity and sense of
place, particularly once it is appreciated that the changed form of
development
has an excellent standard of appearance.
[122] It was uncontroversial that
the interface with, relationship to, and impact on the northern boundary will be
well managed provided
conditions are imposed.
[123] The northern interface
can be seen most vividly on the photomontages for viewpoint VP06. The
presentation of this part of the
development to the north has an excellent
standard of appearance. Particular design features of note are: (1) the setbacks
and landscaping
provided at the upper levels; (2) the use of slab edging on each
floor to break up the verticality of the structure; and (3) the
use of high
quality materials to create visual interest and to break up the bulk of the
structure, particularly around the edges
of the balconies.
[124] In addition
to the excellent appearance of this interface, it was accepted that conditions
should be imposed to manage any impacts
on privacy and overlooking to the north.
This concession was a sensible one by the appellants given the evidence of Mr
was also conceded that overshadowing impacts do not warrant refusal.
The absence of impacts, coupled with the excellent standard
of appearance of the
changed form of development when viewed from the north is, in my view, an
indicator that compliance is achieved
with subsection (c) of the uplift
provision. The appellants did not contend for a contrary conclusion in relation
to the interface
with, relationship to, and impact on, land to the north.
[125] For completeness, it can be observed that the appellants contended
that a well-managed interface for subsection (c) of the uplift
requires something more than the bare minimum anticipated by the planning scheme
for a code compliant development. This
point was further developed to suggest
that compliance with subsection (c) requires ‘a superior outcome than what
is provided
by a code compliant approval’: Ex.43, paras 52 and 53. I have
misgivings as to whether this submission should be accepted.
It involves,
impermissibly, reading words into the uplift provision. In any event, to the
extent such an assessment was required,
I am satisfied the design of the
interface of the changed form of development with the southern neighbour is
superior to that provided
by the development approval. This is for the reasons
given at [52], [53] and [97]. With these matters in mind, the changed form of
development is ‘a superior outcome’ to the code compliant
development approval.
Subsection (e)
[126] Subsection (e) requires the co-respondent to demonstrate
that the changed development will have an excellent standard of appearance
(built form and street edge). As I have already said, the use of the word
excellent conveys an expectation that the appearance of
the built form and
street edge will be remarkably good and demonstrate superior merit.
reasons given above, I am satisfied compliance has been demonstrated with
subsection (e) of the uplift provision. Rather
than repeat what has already been
said, I can indicate that the degree of excellence required by the provision is
amply demonstrated
by the visual aids before the Court, read with the
description of the proposal by Mr Peabody in the architecture joint report. The
changed form of development is, in architectural and visual terms, highly
meritorious.
Subsection (g)
[128] Subsection (g) of the uplift criteria calls for the
‘protection’ of ‘important elements of local character
scenic amenity’.
[129] The photomontages, and evidence of the visual
amenity and landscape experts, establish that this case does not involve impacts
on scenic amenity or views (to and from) associated with public outlooks. The
impact alleged for this provision is that the changed
form of development will
not protect an important element of local character, namely Jefferson Lane. This
element is said to be visually
sensitive given the immediate setting, which
includes the beach and a public park: Ex.43, para 47. The relevant impact is
be one of overbearing.
[130] For reasons already given, I do not
accept Jefferson Lane is an important character element. If, however, a contrary
taken, I am satisfied the changed form of development will not be
visually overbearing to Jefferson Lane. Nor will it be overbearing
to the beach
and park to the north. This is evident from the photomontages, which demonstrate
the changed form of development is
a meritorious development outcome. In my
view, they also demonstrate it is superior in its appearance to the built form
by the development approval. This will serve to reinforce the
intended character of the immediate local area rather than detract
from it. It
will also serve to protect Jefferson Lane if it be thought to qualify as an
important local character element.
Conclusion: compliance with the uplift provision
[131] Contrary to the appellants’ case, I am satisfied
compliance has been demonstrated with subsections (b), (c), (e) and (g)
uplift provision.
[132] The co-respondent has demonstrated
compliance with the disputed aspects of the uplift provision. Given the way the
argued by the parties, this finding is decisive. The co-respondent
has discharged the onus.
[133] The appeal will be allowed in due course, with
the change application approved and the development approval amended
accordingly.
The amendments will need to include conditions of approval required
by these reasons for judgment.
[134] I will return the appeal to the
applications list for review on 24 June 2025. The appeal will remain on the
applications list
unless and until a dispute arises about the amendments to the
development approval.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (382 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter