URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLPT/2009/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Thomas [2009] QLPT 13 (7 May 2009)
Legal Services Commissioner v Thomas [2009] QLPT 13 (7 May 2009)
LEGAL PRACTICE TRIBUNAL
Legal Services Commissioner v Thomas
[2009] LPT 13
LEGAL SERVICES
COMMISSIONER
(applicant)
BRYNLY WHYNFORD
(respondent)
BS1878 of 2006
Legal Practice Tribunal
PROCEEDING:
Discipline application
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
18 February 2009
Mullins J assisted by Mr K Horsley and Dr M Steinberg
name of the respondent, Brynly Whynford Thomas, be removed from the roll of
solicitors kept by the Supreme Court of Queensland.
respondent pay the applicant’s costs of the application fixed in the sum
of $10,000.
CATCHWORDS:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – MISCONDUCT, UNFITNESS AND
DISCIPLINE – GROUNDS OF DISCIPLINARY ORDERS –
In general –
where eight charges for determination in discipline application – where no
appearance for respondent solicitor
– where respondent found not guilty of
two charges – where respondent found guilty of unsatisfactory professional
in relation to four charges including of neglect, neglect and delay, and
swearing a false and/or misleading affidavit – where
respondent found
guilty of professional misconduct in relation to two charges including one of
criminal conduct and one in relation
to correspondence with Legal Services
Commission – whether respondent had demonstrated unfitness to practice by
his conduct
and should be removed from the local roll – whether respondent
should pay applicant’s costs of the application
Legal Profession Act
Attorney-General v Bax
[1999] 2 Qd R 9
, considered
Services Commissioner v Madden (No 2)
[2008] QCA 301
Legal Services Commissioner v Podmore
Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee v Tomlinson
, considered
B I McMillan for the applicant
No appearance for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Services Commission for the applicant
No appearance for the
[1] MULLINS J: The discipline application originally filed against the
respondent on 7 March 2006 contained seven charges. On the
application of the
applicant, the application was varied on 18 March 2008 to remove charges 3 and 5
and add new charges 8, 9 and
10. There are therefore eight charges for
determination.
[2] On 18 March 2008 the discipline application was set down
for hearing on 10 and 11 June 2008. On 26 May 2008 the respondent filed
his affidavit sworn on 23 May 2008 addressing the charges. On 2 June
2008 the hearing dates were vacated. The hearing date of 18
February 2009 was
set on 17 November 2008 by order of Byrne SJA. A copy of that order was
personally served on the respondent on
29 November 2008. Two letters
respectively dated 7 and 11 February 2009 (exhibits 1 and 2) were received by
the Chief Justice from
the respondent which were passed to the Tribunal. The
gist of those communications was that the respondent was admitted for and
underwent significant surgery and would be remaining in hospital for some time.
The respondent acknowledged that he had been advised
that the Tribunal may
proceed in his absence and he advised that he had no funds for the purpose of
instructing lawyers to appear
on his behalf.
[3] There was no appearance for
the respondent when the hearing commenced.
[4] The applicant contended that
despite the respondent’s hospitalisation, the history of the proceeding
justified the Tribunal
proceeding in the absence of the respondent, in reliance
Legal Profession Act 2007
(the Act). I decided to proceed in
the absence of the respondent in view of the length of time that the
disciplinary application
had been in progress, that it had elicited a large
amount of correspondence from the respondent and that it would not be in the
interest to adjourn the proceeding.
[5] In the course of submissions,
the applicant referred to the respondent’s affidavit filed on 26 May 2008.
I considered the
content of the respondent’s affidavit in conjunction with
the applicant’s material in relation to the charges.
Respondent’s particulars
[6] The respondent is 64 years old. He
and his wife married in 1980 and immigrated to Australia in 1981. The
respondent was admitted
as a solicitor of the Supreme Court of Queensland in
1981. He ceased in practice as a solicitor on 30 June 2008. He has not
been the subject of a disciplinary proceeding.
respondent’s wife was articled to the respondent who was practising as a
sole practitioner. His wife was admitted as
a solicitor in 1995. In July 1999
the respondent transferred his legal practice to his wife and the practice was
conducted under
the name “The Law Practice Group”. The
respondent’s wife engaged him as a locum tenens during the period 1 July
1999 until 27 April 2001. They separated as a married couple in September 2000.
Thereafter they engaged in contested Family Court
proceedings concerning the
division of their property, in respect of which they did not engage lawyers, but
acted themselves.
[8] From 2 May 2001 until 30 June 2008 the respondent
practised as a sole practitioner under the name “Thomas Solicitors”
at Springwood.
Legislative framework
[9] The discipline application was
filed pursuant to the
Legal Profession Act 2004
(2004 Act). As a result of
and 746 of the Act, the charges that were originally brought in the
discipline application have to be determined in accordance with
the provisions
of the Act. The charges added by the variation of the application must also be
determined in accordance with the
Act which had commenced by the time the
variation application was made.
[10] The concepts of unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct are defined in
of the Act in the same terms as they were defined in ss 244 and 245 of the
2004 Act. To the extent that this discipline application
concerns conduct of
the respondent that was committed prior to the commencement of the 2004 Act,
that conduct must be assessed by
reference to the notions of professional
misconduct and unprofessional conduct or practice that applied for the purpose
of the Queensland
Law Society Act 1952: Legal Services Commissioner v Podmore
[2006] LPT 5 at paragraphs [4] to [9].
Charge 1 – Criminal conduct
[11] The respondent was charged with stalking his wife in the
period between 15 September 2000 and 23 January 2003. On 9 May 2005
pleaded guilty in the District Court to one count of stalking with circumstances
of aggravation which were that some of the acts
of stalking involved violence
and some of the acts of stalking contravened a court order. A temporary
domestic violence order had
been made by the Holland Park Magistrates Court in
May 2001 that was followed by a protection order in December 2002. He was
for the stalking on 29 June 2005 to two years’
imprisonment that was wholly suspended for an operational period of three years.
The prosecution conceded at the sentence that the violence was low level and
that was noted by the sentencing judge.
[12] The applicant relied on the
statement of agreed facts that was tendered by the prosecution, with the
agreement of the respondent,
at the sentence hearing for stalking. Although the
respondent has subsequently disputed that he agreed to that statement of facts,
that was the basis on which the sentencing proceeded. The statement of facts
annexed documents including the correspondence and documents
generated by the
respondent that was relied on by the prosecution as conduct comprising the
stalking. The following summary comes
from the agreed statement of facts.
Before the separation of the respondent and his wife, they had been leading
independent lives.
The separation was effected by the respondent’s wife
moving out of the matrimonial home. In the following month at the office,
respondent approached his wife from behind and put his hands around her throat
and began squeezing her throat. When his wife
took an overseas trip in April
2001, she was locked out of the office on her return. When she attended at the
office on 30 April
2001 to collect documents, the respondent refused to allow
her to leave, they struggled and she suffered a chip fracture of the dorsal
aspect of her ring finger. On a couple of occasions the respondent took the car
that his wife had been using without telling her.
The respondent changed the
locks on matrimonial properties over which his wife was exercising control,
without notice to her.
[13] The respondent sent four to five emails per day
over a period of three months to his wife’s brother suggesting that his
wife needed psychiatric help. The respondent sent three letters to his
wife’s elderly parents suggesting she was in need of
psychiatric help. The
respondent sent letters to the Queensland Law Society complaining about the
conduct of his wife. The complaints
were either baseless or not conduct
appropriate for investigation by the Law Society. The respondent and his wife
had founded the
Wagner Society and he sent a series of letters to committee
members of that Society making allegations against his wife. He purported
enclose a claim and statement of claim issued by him against his wife and other
committee members in the Magistrates Court at
Beenleigh in relation to the
purchase of a ticket for a performance for $275 that he alleged was
misappropriated by his wife. No
such proceeding was actually issued. The letters
were sent on the respondent’s law firm’s letterhead. The respondent
sent a series of letters to a friend of his wife purporting to involve the
friend in pending court proceedings. Some of these letters
were on the
respondent’s firm’s letterhead.
[14] In February 2002, the
respondent’s wife was endeavouring to rent one of the matrimonial
properties. She organised to meet
the prospective tenants at the property, but
when she arrived for the meeting, the respondent was speaking to them and they
intending to move into that property, which adjoined the property
in which she
was living. The respondent sent letters on his firm’s letterhead to the
tenants of the rented matrimonial properties
that were being managed by his
wife. The respondent sent large amounts of correspondence to his wife by
facsimile at her place of
employment. The respondent sent correspondence to his
wife that she found to be offensive, harassing, annoying and embarrassing.
[15] For the purpose of the sentence, the respondent’s treating
psychiatrist provided a report to the court dated 22 June 2005
that was also
tendered at this hearing (exhibit 5). The psychiatrist had been treating the
respondent since October 2002 and noted
a history of undiagnosed bipolar
disorder. The respondent was commenced on anti-depressant medication and a mood
stabilising agent.
The psychiatrist expressed the opinion that the respondent
had improved over the time that he had treated him and that there were
obsessive personality traits. The respondent’s psychiatrist noted that the
respondent was under a significant amount
of stress in relation to the property
settlement with his wife.
[16] The conduct that was relied on to establish
the offence of stalking was committed over a lengthy period of time and involved
a misapplication by the respondent of the resources available to him as a
practising solicitor. The respondent’s stalking was
partly constituted by
the respondent sending letters to various parties on his professional letterhead
that suggested the letters
were sent by the respondent in his professional
capacity as a solicitor, when that was not the case. He also used his
professional
knowledge of court forms to suggest that he had issued proceedings
against his wife and the other committee members of the Wagner
Society. It was
also relevant that one aspect of the circumstance of aggravation was that the
stalking was committed in breach of
a Magistrates Court order. The seriousness
of the respondent’s conduct for the purpose of this application arose from
its persistence
and repetition. It showed lack of judgment on the
respondent’s part in how he conducted himself towards his wife after the
breakdown of their relationship.
[17] Under s 420 of the Act, conduct for
which there is a conviction for a serious offence (which covers stalking) is
capable of constituting
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct. The applicant relied on the decision of the Full Court of the
Court of Western Australia in Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee v
[2006] WASC 211.
In that matter a solicitor’s name was struck
from the roll of practitioners after he had been convicted of stalking his
girlfriend over a period of four months. There was psychological
evidence that the practitioner was suffering a post traumatic stress
disorder in
response to the break-up with his girlfriend from which he had not recovered by
the time of the application before the
Full Court. He had not undergone
treatment after being informed about the psychological evidence of his
condition. The court at
paragraph [22] described the stalking as
“conduct inimical to his capacity to practice (sic) as a legal
practitioner and there
can be no confidence, in the circumstances, that that
capacity will be restored.” In order to protect the public, the
practitioner’s
name was struck off the relevant roll.
[18] The acts
that comprised the stalking in the Western Australian case were more serious
than those of the respondent, but the respondent’s
conduct was committed
over a much lengthier period. The circumstances of the respondent’s
offending conduct justify its characterisation
as professional
misconduct.
Charge 2 – Neglect and delay (Hamilton
[19] In January 2001 Ms Hamilton retained the respondent to act in
a claim for criminal compensation. The respondent received approval
of aid from Legal Aid Queensland, subject to Ms Hamilton making a
co-contribution of $350. Ms Hamilton had paid the total
of $350 by 21 September
2001. Ms Hamilton attended on the respondent on 7 November 2001 for the purpose
of giving further instructions.
Between November 2001 and October 2002 the
respondent took no material steps to progress the matter. On 12 February 2003
the respondent
prepared and delivered a brief to counsel. At no time did the
respondent advise Ms Hamilton of the statutory time limit for bringing
application for criminal compensation. If she did have a good claim, it would
have been statute-barred on 18 February 2003.
Ms Hamilton was subsequently
advised by other solicitors that as the offender was convicted of stalking, and
not assault, she could
not have been successful in a claim for criminal
compensation.
[20] The gist of the complaint that is particularised in the
disciplinary application in respect of the respondent’s conduct
for Ms Hamilton is that, as a result of his failure to maintain reasonable
standards of competence and/or diligence, the
complainant’s claim for
criminal compensation became statute-barred. As there was not a claim that could
be successfully pursued,
the respondent’s conduct did not have the
consequence that is relied upon by the applicant to show lack of competence. The
Tribunal must decide the charge on the basis of the allegations that are made by
the applicant: Legal Services Commissioner v Madden
[2008] QCA 301
. It therefore follows that the respondent must be found not
guilty of charge 2.
Charge 4 – Neglect and delay (Adamson
[21] In November 2002 Ms Adamson retained the respondent to act on
her behalf in the administration of the estate of her deceased
mother. The
administration of the estate required a grant of probate to transfer the
mother’s house property in New South
Wales. Between February and June
2003 the respondent did not take any material step to progress the matter. On 4
June 2003 he wrote
to solicitors in New South Wales about the certificate of
title and those solicitors then advised on 13 June 2003 that a grant of
would be required. Between June 2003 and June 2004 the respondent did not take
any material step to progress the matter.
The grant of probate was obtained
from the Supreme Court on 15 July 2004. The respondent failed to collect the
grant of probate
or deliver it to Ms Adamson until after 16 September
[22] The respondent addressed this charge in paragraphs 89 and 90 of
his affidavit. In relation to the delays in collecting the grant
from the registry of the court, the respondent explained that it was the
registry’s fault, because they put the
grant of probate in the wrong
pigeonhole. In relation to the delays in the administration of the estate, the
respondent blamed difficulties
he had in dealing with the New South Wales
solicitor who was holding the title deed. The gravamen of the complaint was
were at least two periods, each of three months, and one period of
six months where no steps were taken by the respondent to advance
administration of the estate. That was not addressed by the respondent. Such
delays were serious enough to justify a finding
of unprofessional conduct or
practice within s 3B of the Queensland Law Society Act 1952. That makes
the respondent guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
– Neglect (Monaghan complaint)
[23] In February 2004, Mr Monaghan
retained the respondent to act for him in respect of family law property
proceedings. The respondent
attended before the Federal Magistrates Court when
an order was made that the parties attend at a conciliation conference at
Relationships
Australia Queensland on 30 July 2004. A letter was sent to the
respondent’s firm dated 1 July 2004 by the Federal Magistrates
confirming the details of the appointment for the conciliation conference that
was ordered by the Federal Magistrate. Mr Monaghan
attended the conference
without the respondent who had informed him that there was no need for him to
attend the conciliation conference.
The allegation made by the applicant is that
the respondent failed to maintain reasonable standards of competence and/or
by failing to attend the conciliation conference in accordance with
the order made by the Federal Magistrate.
[24] The respondent addressed this
charge in paragraphs 7 to 13 of his affidavit. Although the respondent
explained why he rationalised
that the attendance by him was not essential, he
did not fulfil his obligation in acting for Mr Monaghan in his family law
proceedings. The respondent was wrong when he advised the client that
there was no need for the respondent to accompany him to the
conciliation
conference. He did not appreciate, and failed to take the steps to ascertain,
what the conciliation conference required
both of him and his client. The lack
of competence in the circumstances is properly characterised as unsatisfactory
professional
Charge 7 – Neglect and delay (Arnell
[25] The respondent was appointed the sole executor and trustee of
the last will of Mr Arnell who died unexpectedly on 13 February
2004. Probate
of the deceased’s will was granted to the respondent on 15 July 2004. Mr
Arnell was survived by four children,
one from his first marriage and the other
three from his second marriage. They were the beneficiaries under the will.
acting for the beneficiaries regularly requested information from the
respondent from March 2004. The respondent did not give informative
He wrote many letters to the solicitors for the beneficiaries, but they provided
little information and were not responsive
to the reasonable requests made on
behalf of the beneficiaries. On 21 July 2004 the three younger children applied
for an order that
the respondent be removed as the executor and trustee under
the will. That order was made by Douglas J on 16 August 2004 who found
that there had been unwarranted delay in the administration of the estate by the
respondent and failure to communicate with the beneficiaries.
requested the Registrar of the court to forward the affidavits to the Law
Society for its consideration.
[26] The respondent addressed this charge in
paragraphs 1 to 3 of his affidavit. He relied on the chronology of his file
which showed
his significant level of attendance to the estate. The problem was
his frequent letter writing and other attendances did not advance
the matter in
the usual way and gave rise to the complaints by the beneficiaries that were
found to justify the respondent’s
removal as executor and trustee. Even
though the delays occurred over a period of six months only, the manner in which
they occurred
amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct on the
respondent’s part.
Charge 8 – Breach of duty of candour
(Overton complaint)
[27] Ms Overton retained the respondent in June 2003 to
act as her solicitor in family law proceedings. Ms Overton had been in a
facto relationship and there was a child of that relationship. An application
was made by the grandmother of the child seeking
a contact order. Her former de
facto partner made an application seeking a residence order or, alternatively,
an order for contact.
There was also a property owned jointly by Ms Overton with
her de facto partner to be dealt with. Ms Overton entered into a client
agreement with the respondent that provided for the respondent’s costs and
outlays to be charged on any property transferred
or distributed to her in
consequence of the matter.
[28] In October 2003 Ms Overton moved to Sydney
and informed the respondent of her contact details in Sydney. The respondent
several letters and other telephone calls from the respondent’s
firm at her Sydney address. Apart from the court hearings
at which the
respondent represented Ms Overton, Ms Overton dealt almost exclusively with the
respondent’s articled clerk.
[29] By December 2003 Ms Overton was
concerned with the way her matters were being handled by the respondent and made
a direct approach
to barrister, Mr Laws, on the recommendation from another
person for whom Mr Laws had acted. On 23 December 2003 Ms Overton sent
letter (with no address shown for her) to the respondent instructing him to copy
all filed documents and correspondence to Mr Laws.
The respondent did not do
so. The respondent sent a letter dated 23 December 2003 to the Ms Overton
by facsimile to a New South
Wales number advising that the applications may be
able to be resolved by negotiation and that it may not be necessary to brief
to appear on the hearing date. Mr Laws had drafted a letter for Ms
Overton which she attached to her letter dated 7 January 2004
to the respondent
and expressly adopted the terms of the letter. Ms Overton requested the
respondent to deliver up her files immediately.
When the respondent did not
respond to the further request made by Ms Overton, she advised him on 8 January
2004 that she accepted
his conduct as repudiation of his retainer.
12 January 2004 the respondent filed in the Family Court a notice that he had
ceased to represent Ms Overton. That notice
recited that the respondent had
received notice in writing from Ms Overton on 7 January 2004 and a further
notice in writing from
Mr Laws that the respondent was no longer instructed in
the matter. The notice recited that he was instructed that the future address
for service of Ms Overton was care of Mr Laws. He also advised in the notice
that the last known address of Ms Overton was care of
her father at his address
at Beenleigh. The respondent advised Ms Overton by letter that this notice had
been filed with the court.
Ms Overton also filed a notice of address for service
in the Family Court dated 19 January 2004 that showed her address for service
the address of her father at Beenleigh. Ms Overton did not state in her
affidavit why she nominated to the court the Beenleigh
address as her address
for service. Ms Overton returned to Sydney sometime in January 2004 and
remained there until July 2004.
[31] The respondent sent a bill of costs to
Ms Overton at the Beenleigh address. It was dated 15 January 2004, but Ms
Overton believed
that she did not receive it until well after 20 January 2004.
Ms Overton did not suggest in her affidavit that she contacted the
respondent to
advise him not to treat the Beenleigh address as her address.
respondent issued a claim and statement of claim in the Magistrates Court at
Beenleigh against Ms Overton for the sum of
$22,040.80 for professional
services, as per the bill of costs dated 15 January 2004. The address for
service of Ms Overton was shown
as the Beenleigh address and that is where the
claim and statement of claim were served on Ms Overton’s mother on 23
2004 who accepted service and advised the process server that she would
pass the documents onto Ms Overton.
[33] There was some delay in Ms
Overton’s parents passing the documents that were served on behalf of the
respondent to Ms Overton
and she missed the time limit for filing a defence.
The respondent obtained judgment in default of a defence being filed on 24 March
2004. He obtained an enforcement warrant for seizure and sale of property on 31
March 2004 and that was registered on the respondent’s
interest in the
real property that she owned with her de facto partner that was the subject of a
property settlement between them.
The applicant alleged that the respondent
breached his duty of candour to the Magistrates Court when he obtained default
against Ms Overton, because he did not disclose to the Magistrates
Court that Ms Overton’s last know address was the address
at which he had
corresponded with her in 2003 in Sydney, there was no reason to believe she
resided at the Beenleigh address and
that he had recently corresponded with Ms
Overton at the Sydney address.
[34] The respondent provided an explanation
in paragraphs 14 to 49 of his affidavit for why he used the Beenleigh address in
the Magistrates
Court proceedings. When the respondent’s father came to
pick up Ms Overton’s file on or about 24 December 2003, the
respondent told him that he could not give him the file until he had rendered an
account. The respondent asked Ms Overton’s
father where he should send
the account and Mr Overton told the respondent to send it to the Beenleigh
address, as Ms Overton would
be there until there until the matter with the
child was sorted out. The applicant did not obtain an affidavit from Mr Overton
the purpose of the application.
[35] The respondent explained that he
had telephoned the number that Ms Overton had given him in Sydney and spoke with
who advised him that Ms Overton was not there and that she stayed
with them while she was in Sydney. Although he respondent did
not identify the
timing of that telephone call, it affected his approach, as he had decided the
relative was evasive and he was concerned
that Ms Overton was reluctant to pay
[36] The time for judging whether the respondent breached his duty
of candour was at the time he filed the request for judgment in
the Magistrates
Court. Although paragraph 8.12 of the particulars of charge 8 relied on by the
applicant claims that “at all
material times” the respondent knew,
or ought to have know that Ms Overton’s last know address was the Sydney
that allegation has to be confined to the respondent’s state of
knowledge at the time it is alleged that he breached his duty
of candour.
[37] It is for the applicant to prove the allegation of fact that is relied
upon to establish the charge on the balance of probabilities:
s 649 of the Act.
The respondent had the process server’s report of the acceptance of
service of the claim and statement of
claim and the advice that Mr Overton had
given him about where to send his account. In the absence of evidence from Mr
I am not satisfied that the applicant has established that the
respondent knew, or ought to have known, that Ms Overton’s address
Sydney residence. Ms Overton also seemed to have endorsed the use of her
parents’ address by herself nominating that
to the court as her address
for service. The respondent must be found not guilty of charge 8.
– Swearing false and/or misleading affidavit
[38] Ms Overton filed an
application to set aside the default judgment obtained by the respondent. On 20
August 2004 the respondent
swore an affidavit that was filed in response to the
application. The applicant relied on two passages from the respondent’s
affidavit to support charge 9 that the respondent’s affidavit was false
and/or misleading.
[39] For the same reason that I have not been satisfied in
relation to charge 8, I consider that to the extent that paragraph 6 of
respondent’s affidavit is relied on by the applicant, it cannot be said
that the applicant has shown that the respondent’s
knowledge of Ms
Overton’s address at the time of service of the claim and statement of
claim was other than as set out in paragraph
6. Paragraph 6 did not purport to
deal with the respondent’s knowledge of Ms Overton’s address at all
client was served at her last known address which was in Beenleigh. Her home
address in Beenleigh was the address for
all communication. The Process Server
asked her mother the usual questions in relation to service and she responded in
the affirmative.”
[40] The position in relation to paragraph 9 of the respondent’s affidavit
is different. The relevant part of paragraph 9
that is relied on by the
applicant is:
“References to communication with Sydney
related to a fax number which was given in Sydney and, so far as I am aware,
document, was faxed. After the client gave up her apartment in
Sunnybank all communication was with the address in Beenleigh. The
client’s father attended at the office and advised that all communication
should be made to the Beenleigh address and I note
the client gives the
Beenleigh address as her address for the purpose of this application.”
[41] Although the communications that were sent from the respondent’s firm
to Ms Overton after she moved to Sydney were generated
by his articled clerk, a
perusal of the file would have shown that there were a number of communications
in November 2003 from the
respondent’s firm to Ms Overton in Sydney and
that it was wrong to state that after Ms Overton had left Sunnybank “all
communication was with the address in Beenleigh”. In addition, the
respondent’s facsimile of 23 December 2003 was sent
to Ms Overton at a New
South Wales number. The respondent was reckless in asserting that all
correspondence was sent to the Beenleigh
address. To that extent, the applicant
has proved that the respondent made a representation in his affidavit sworn on
2004 that was false and/or misleading at the time the affidavit was
sworn. In the circumstances, however, that could not be characterised
more then unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Charge 10 –
Correspondence to the Legal Services Commission
[42] The applicant alleged
that the respondent’s correspondence to the Legal Services Commission (the
Commission) between 26
April 2006 and 5 September 2007 was conduct that would
justify a finding that he is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal
practice. In that period the respondent sent 112 letters and facsimiles to the
Commission. The correspondence is exhibited to the
affidavit of Mr Brittan who
is the manager of complaints at the Commission.
[43] In order to properly
consider the submissions made by the applicant based on this correspondence, it
is relevant to summarise
the course of the correspondence. In some instances
more than one copy of the same letter were sent by the respondent by facsimile
to the Commission on the same day. On 26 April 2006 the respondent made a
complaint to the Commission against the prosecutor and
his own defence counsel
in relation to the sentence hearing. On 15 May 2006 the Commission dismissed
the compliant against the defence
counsel. There was a lengthy letter in
response from the respondent dated 16 May 2006. On 17 May 2006 the Commission
the complaint against the prosecutor. On 22 May 2006 the respondent
sent a letter to the Commission to explain that his letter of
16 May 2006 was
“simply correcting the record”. The Commission responded on 23 May
2006. The respondent then wrote
a letter dated 24 May 2006 to the Commission in
respect of both the prosecutor and his defence counsel. On 7 June 2006 the
advised the Commission that he had raised the matter of the
prosecutor’s conduct with senior counsel who gave him advice about
approaching the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Attorney-General.
[44] On 13 June 2006 the respondent wrote directly to the Commission in
response to the Commission’s letter addressed to solicitors
who had been
acting for him in relation to the Overton complaint. The respondent sent
another letter dated 13 June 2006 to the Commission
letter dated 21 June 2006 and two letters dated 22 June 2006 the respondent
raised further matters with
the Commission in relation to the Overton complaint.
On 6 July 2006 the respondent wrote a letter to the Commission inquiring whether
there were any outstanding queries to which he had failed to respond. The
respondent sent another letter on 6 July 2006 seeking
“a copy of the
prosecution material” relating to the disciplinary proceeding. On 7 July
2006 the Commission received
by post a letter from the respondent dated 19 June
2006 about the Overton compliant.
[45] On 4 August 2006 the Commission
replied to the respondent’s letter of 7 June 2006 about the prosecutor,
advising that nothing
had changed the Commission’s previous determination
not to take any further action on the complaint. The respondent sent a
to the Commission dated 14 September 2006 about the circumstances of his plea of
guilty to the stalking charge and that he
considered that he should pursue his
complaint against his defence counsel. The Commission treated that as a
complaint against the
defence counsel and advised the respondent on 19 September
2006 that the matter had been referred to the barrister for a response.
were three letters from the respondent received on 20 September 2006 in response
to that proposal. The respondent then sent
a lengthy letter dated 22 September
2006 on the issue of whether he had intended to plead guilty to stalking with
the circumstance
of aggravation of violence. The Commission then advised the
respondent on 22 September 2006 that his further letter had been forwarded
to the barrister for comment. There were further letters on the same matter
from the respondent dated 29 September and 4 and 9 October
2006. By letter
dated 25 October 2006 the respondent informed the Commission of the further
inquiries that he had been making in
relation to his sentencing and made a
statement in the letter:
is a matter of some alarm that every instrumentality, including even my own
counsel, refuse to investigate the clear evidence
in support of the contentions
raised by me.”
[46] By letter dated 26 October 2006 the Commission advised that it took
exception to that statement in the letter dated 25 October
2006 as the
respondent’s complaint against his counsel was still being investigated by
the Commission. On 1 November 2006
the respondent advised that the
statement had not been directed to the Commission.
[47] On 8 and 15 November
2006 the respondent advised the Commission on the progress of the steps that he
was taking in relation to
the agreed statement of facts that was put before the
court on the sentencing. On 30 November 2006 the Commission advised the
that it proposed to take no further action on the respondent’s
complaint against his defence counsel. The respondent sent
two letters dated 4
December 2006 to the Commission in response.
[48] On 7 December 2006 the
Commission sent a letter to the respondent advising that the Commissioner had
decided to start an investigation
into the respondent’s conduct in
relation to the information that was provided to the Commission during the
investigation of
the respondent’s complaint against his defence counsel.
The respondent supplemented his letter of 4 December 2006 with one
8 December 2006 and responded to the Commission’s letter of 7
December 2006 with letters sent on 11, 13, 19, 19, 20
and 20 December 2006. The
Commission responded to the letters of 19 and 20 December 2006 by letter dated
22 December 2006. That
was received by the respondent on 8 January 2007 and the
respondent sent a letter of the same date requesting a response to the queries
made in his letters of 11, 13 and 19 December 2006. The Commission responded by
letter dated 15 January 2007 to which the respondent
replied on 16 January
2007. The respondent sent a further letter dated 18 January 2007 raising the
issue of legal professional privilege
to which the Commission responded on 22
January 2007.
[49] The respondent sent a letter to the Commission dated 30
January 2007 in response to the Commission’s letter dated 29 January
dealing with the discipline application against the respondent. By letters
dated 8 and 9 February 2007, the respondent informed
the Commission about his
proposed application for a re-hearing of his sentence. The Commission responded
by letter dated 13 February
2007. Further letters about the proposed
application for re-hearing were sent by the respondent to the Commission on 13,
28 February 2007.
[50] By letter dated 4 March 2007 the respondent
addressed matters raised in the Commission’s letter dated 15 January 2007.
The respondent raised the difficulties he had in gathering information for his
application for a re-hearing of his sentence. The
Commission replied on 27
March 2007 to which the respondent responded on 28 and 29 March 2007. The
Commission advised the respondent
on 29 March 2007 that it was proposing to list
the discipline application for mention on 18 April 2007 to which the respondent
on 30 March and 2 April 2007.
[51] On 3 April 2007 the respondent
replied to the Commission’s letter dated 30 March 2007 which had dealt
with the allegation
in the respondent’s letter dated 28 March 2007 against
an employee of the Commission. Another letter on that topic was also
the respondent on 3 April 2007. Further letters were sent by the respondent to
the Commission on 3 and 5 April 2007 relating
to the discipline application.
[52] The respondent updated the Commission on the progress of his
application for a re-hearing of his sentence by letter dated 18
April 2007.
Further lengthy letters from the respondent were sent to the Commission on 19
and 20 April 2007. The respondent sent
a letter to the Commission on
21 April 2007 about the Arnell complaint. There was a further letter from the
respondent on 21 April
2007 and two letters on each of 22 and 23 April
2007. There were two letters on 2 May 2007 and a letter on 4 May 2007 from the
to the Commission about the proposed application for re-hearing of
the sentence. On 14 May 2007 the respondent raised with the Commission
which he said was relevant to his application for re-hearing. The Commission
replied to that letter on 16 May 2007 to which
the respondent replied on 18 May
2007 by two letters. Further letters were sent by the respondent on 25 May 2007
and two letters
on 7 June 2007.
[53] In early July 2007 the Commission
inquired of the respondent about the progress of the application for re-hearing
of the sentence.
The respondent sent letters dated 5, 6 and 7 July
2007 in reply. The Commission requested further information of the respondent
by letter dated 10 July 2007 to which the respondent replied by three letters
dated 11 July 2007. In those letters the respondent
made allegations against
staff of the Commission that provoked a letter from the Commission dated
12 July 2007 describing the respondent’s
letters dated 11 July
2007 as “scandalous and insulting”.
[54] The respondent sent
further letters to the Commission about the proposed application for re-hearing
on 14, 16, 16, 17, 23, 27
and 31 July 2007. The respondent provided the
Commission with further updates on 7 and 22 August 2007. In its letter dated 28
August 2007 the Commission advised the respondent that there was a case
management conference of the discipline application scheduled
for 6 September
2007. The respondent replied on 29 August 2007 by three letters. Two further
letters were sent by the respondent
on 30 August 2007 and three further letters
were sent by him on 31 August 2007. After a letter of reply from the Commission
sent on 31 August 2007, a further letter in reply was sent by the respondent
on 31 August 2007.
[55] In the particulars of charge 10, the applicant
alleged that in the course of his voluminous correspondence with the Commission,
the respondent failed to take all reasonable care to maintain the integrity and
reputation of the legal profession, in that the correspondence
was discourteous,
offensive, unbecoming of a solicitor and likely to bring the legal profession
into disrepute.
[56] Some of the correspondence was responsive to letters
that were sent to the respondent by the Commission. In general terms, however,
the correspondence showed that the respondent lacked judgment in communicating
with the Commission and lacked insight about his behaviour
that had resulted in
the stalking conviction and his inability to treat that episode as finished
after the sentencing and his abandonment,
on legal advice, of his appeal against
the sentence. The way in which the respondent generated multiple letters on the
or in the space of a few days was not a reasonable and professional way
to respond to correspondence from the Commission.
[57] The respondent
addressed this correspondence in paragraphs 83 and 84 of his affidavit filed on
26 May 2008. His explanation
was that he felt he was confronted with an
aggressive attitude from the Commission and he responded in kind:
suspect those letters are being made the subject of the further charges of
writing disrespectful correspondence. I cannot
remember what the letters said.
They were rattled out as thought took me. They were written in anger and in
circumstances of perceived
persecution.”
[58] The correspondence of
the Commission that is properly included in Mr Brittan’s affidavit to give
a complete picture of
the correspondence from the respondent that is the subject
of charge 10 did not exhibit an “extremely aggressive
[59] Paragraph 84 of the respondent’s affidavit
cannot really remember what the dealing with the Commission was, though I am
aware that I wrote some hostile letters to them
and those letters probably
became more hostile after the Commission jumped up and down with glee and told
me that they would use
them against me.”
[60] The applicant submitted that the respondent’s correspondence was
erratic, rude, and offensive and unresponsive to the
Commission’s
correspondence.
[61] No doubt the respondent felt under pressure after the
filing of the discipline application. His reaction to that pressure, revealed
by his correspondence with the Commission, was not professional, showed a
complete lack of judgment and insight about his own conduct,
and confirmed that
he was not fit to practise as a solicitor. The correspondence which is the
subject of charge 10 amounted to professional
misconduct on the part of the
respondent of a very serious kind.
[62] The findings in
respect of each of the charges are:
1 The respondent is guilty of professional misconduct
Charge 2 Not guilty
Charge 4 The respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
Charge 6 The respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
Charge 7 The respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
Charge 8 Not guilty
Charge 9 The respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
Charge 10 The respondent is guilty of professional misconduct
Submissions of the applicant
[63] The applicant relied primarily on charges
1 and 10 to submit that the respondent’s demonstrated unfitness to
by his conduct that resulted in the stalking conviction had not changed
as it was replicated by the course of his correspondence
with the Commission
between April 2006 and September 2007. The applicant therefore submitted that
the only appropriate disciplinary
order in the circumstances was that the
respondent’s name be removed from the local roll. The applicant also
sought an order
for costs fixed in the amount of $10,000, given the lengthy
history of the disciplinary application and the voluminous affidavit
that was required to support it. The applicant submitted that both the delays
in the resolution of the application and
extent of the material generated by the
applicant were due to the conduct of the respondent that was the subject of the
charges and
while the discipline application was
progressing.
[64] The conduct that resulted in the stalking
conviction was committed by the respondent while he was stressed as a result of
breakdown of his marriage and ensuing Family Court proceedings. The
psychiatrist’s report that was relied on at the sentencing
was somewhat
positive about the respondent’s likely future conduct. This was because
the respondent was receiving treatment
from the psychiatrist for his bipolar
disorder and his significant depressive mood swings were a reaction to the
criminal and Family
Court proceedings (which it was anticipated would eventually
resolve). Despite the improvement that was apparent at the time of
preparation of that report for the purpose of the sentence, the cautious
optimism was not reflected in the subsequent behaviour
of the respondent in his
dealings with the Commission that are the subject of charge 10. The obsessional
personality traits that
were noted by the respondent’s psychiatrist
appeared to dominate that correspondence.
[65] The power given by the
Tribunal to remove the name of a practitioner from the relevant role of
practitioners is exercised for
the protection of the public and for the standing
of the legal profession: Attorney-General v Bax
[1999] 2 Qd R 9
, 22. While the
respondent’s conduct that was the subject of the charges 4, 6, 7 and 9
would not, by itself, show unfitness
to practise, the conduct that was the
subject of charges 1 and 10 demonstrated unequivocally the respondent’s
unfitness to
[66] The order that should be made is that the name of
the respondent be removed from the local roll.
[67] Under s 462 of the Act,
the Tribunal must make an order requiring a person whom it has found guilty to
pay costs, unless the
Tribunal is satisfied exceptional circumstances exist. As
the applicant has largely succeeded in proving the charges against the
respondent, but particularly the more serious charges 1 and 10, there is no
reason not to make an order for costs against the respondent.
No doubt the
rationale for the applicant seeking that the quantum of the costs be fixed is to
bring the matter to a conclusion.
Even on a standard basis, I can estimate from
the volume of the material relied on by the applicant on the application in
to the charges that have been proved and the chronology of the steps
required to progress the application (exhibit 3) that the assessed
standard basis of the applicant in respect of this proceeding must be in excess
of $10,000. It is therefore reasonable
and appropriate in the circumstance to
make the order for costs fixed in the sum of $10,000 that was sought by the
[68] The formal orders that will be made are:
1. The name of the respondent, Brynly Whynford Thomas, be removed from the roll
of solicitors kept by the Supreme Court of Queensland.
2. The respondent pay
the applicant’s costs of the application fixed in the sum of $10,000.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (127 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter