URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCAT/2025/444.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pearce v Simpson & Anor [2025] QCAT 444 (5 November 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Pearce v Simpson & Anor
[2025] QCAT 444
MALCOLM PEARCE
(applicant)
VICKI PEARCE
(applicant)
LLOYD SIMPSON
(respondent)
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
NDR070-24; Q3036-23
MATTER TYPE:
Other civil dispute matters
DELIVERED ON:
5 November 2025
HEARING DATE:
25 September 2025
DECISION OF:
Member McLean-Williams
new boundary fence and associated retaining wall are to be constructed between
Number 5 and Number 7 Alphitonia Crescent Sunnybank
Hills, in accordance with an
engineering design obtained from a licensed engineer, to be engaged by the
Applicants. Obtaining any
necessary certification or Council approval is the
responsibility of the Applicants.
associated retaining wall is to be constructed in accordance with the
engineering design required by Order (1) above, using concrete
sleepers and
galvanised steel posts. The boundary fence is to be constructed in Colorbond
steel and is to be affixed atop the associated
retaining wall, and to a height
of 1.8 metres. The Applicants and the Respondents are to each nominate their
preferred colour for
the new boundary fence from the standard Colorbond range,
and are to thereafter attempt to agree between those two colours. In the
of no agreement, the Tribunal mandates that the new fence is to be Colorbond
new boundary fence and associated retaining wall is to be constructed on, or as
near to the surveyed boundary as is practically
achievable.
four golden canes and the mock orange hedge situated on the land at Number 5
Alphitonia Crescent Sunnybank Hills are to be removed
at the sole expense of the
Respondents within 90 days of the date of these orders.
works described in Order (2) above, are not to commence before the expiration of
91 days after the date of these orders.
Respondents are to pay the Applicants one half the cost of the boundary survey
and survey report dated 26 September 2024, as performed
by Hilloc Surveyors,
Planners and Development Consultants (‘Hilloc’) within 14 days of
the Applicants providing the Respondents
with a copy of the Hilloc
costs of any engineering design, council certification, as well as the costs for
necessary materials and construction/labour costs
for the new boundary fence and
associated retaining wall (including foundation materials and any designed
drainage) now required
by Orders (1) and (2) above, are to be borne equally
(i.e. 50:50) by the Applicants and the Respondents. The Respondents are to
the Applicants within 14 days of their being presented with a copy of any costs
invoice by the Applicants.
costs of any necessary preliminary works (including but not limited to any
relocation of sheds, pool fences, paving, etc), and
post-construction
remediation or landscaping costs arising after the erection of the new boundary
fence and associated retaining
wall as described in Order 2 above, are to be
borne on the basis that the Applicants will pay for any such costs arising at
7, and the Respondents will pay for any such costs arising at Number 5.
six (6) weeks of obtaining an engineering design (Order (1), above) the
Applicants will provide the Respondents with two (2)
quotes for the necessary
works (Order (2), above) and the Respondents are at liberty to select between
the provided quotes within
14 days after provision of the quotes. In the event
of no response from the Respondent to the provided quotes the Applicants are
liberty to determine which of the two quotes will be
the event of any non-compliance with these orders by the Respondent the
Applicants and their contractors are at liberty, pursuant
to s 94 of the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
to enter upon the land at Number 5 to carry out the necessary works upon the
giving of at least 7-days’ written notice
to the Respondents. Any costs
incurred by the Applicants in the performance of any works caused by
non-compliance with any of these
orders by the Respondents is a sum that may be
recovered in full by the Applicants from the Respondents.
CATCHWORDS:
DIVIDING FENCE DISPUTE – circumstances wherein adjoining neighbours
unable to reach agreement – circumstances wherein
existing fence no longer
sufficient – further circumstances in which fence constructed atop a
retaining wall – arguments
regarding who has the benefit of (and hence
responsibility for) the retaining wall – Tribunal finding that retaining
wall necessary
for boundary fence for purposes of
Battiato v Clifton
[2025] NSWLEC 1391
Yared v Glenhurst Gardens Pty Ltd
[2002] NSWSC 11
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
Applicants:
Self-represented
Respondents:
Self-represented
REASONS FOR DECISION
Applicants and Respondents (‘the parties’) are adjoining
on Alphitionia Crescent, at
Sunnybank Hills. The Applicants reside at Number 7, and the Respondents are the
owners of Number 5.
[2] On 22 April
2024 the Applicants commenced an Application for a tree dispute under the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(‘the Act’), seeking orders from the Tribunal in relation to the
removal of four mature golden cane palm trees, as well
as a mock orange hedge,
each located within the boundary of Number 5.
Applicants make various complaints about the Respondents’ four golden cane
palms, and mock orange hedge, for purposes
of submitting that Number 7
Alphitonia Crescent is now ‘land affected’ by those trees, for
purposes of
of the Act.
[4] By way of
separate proceedings (Q3036-23), the Applicants had previously commenced a fence
dispute against the Respondents, seeking
orders for the replacement of the
boundary fence and an associated retaining wall between the two properties.
direction made on 30 April 2024, Member Bishop directed that the fence dispute
(case Q3036-23) and the tree dispute (case
NDR070-24) should be heard and
determined together.
[6] Prior to the
commencement of proceedings there has been an extensive and unsuccessful history
of efforts by the parties to reach
an agreement, particularly in relation to
whom should bear the costs associated with tree removal and replacement of the
boundary wall. Although ultimately, the parties are essentially
regarding the condition of the fence, and now concur that the golden
canes and mock orange hedge will need to be removed as a necessary
preliminary
for any fencing works, disagreement remains regarding who should bear the costs
of any works (particularly those in relation
to the retaining wall), and
regarding the colour of the new fence.
Situational Appreciation
[7] Topographically,
Alphitonia Crescent slopes downhill, as it runs in a generally North-Westly
direction, towards Kingman Street.
[8] Although
Number 7 is generally level with the height of the Council footpath at the
frontage of the property, the adjoining land
at Number 5 drops away
approximately one metre below the height of the footpath, as one proceeds
towards the rear boundary at Number
5; such that Number 7 is situated above
Number 5, with the shared boundary fence between the two properties now built
timber retaining wall, three railway sleepers (i.e. approximately 600
mm) high. The side boundary fence between the two properties
is approximately
36 metres long, with the retained section running for approximately 30 metres.
Applicants have obtained a statement from one of the former owners of Number 5,
a Mrs Janice Spear. In that statement, Mrs
Spear indicates that the house at
Number 5 Alphitonia Crescent (Lot 40 on RP 210663) was constructed by Masterman
October 1987 and May 1988, on behalf of Mrs Spear and her
late husband, and that the preparation of the land on Lot 40 for a house
entailed cutting down the land along the full length of the boundary, in order
to make the ground generally level for the
construction of the house.
[10] Mrs Spear
adds that the retaining wall and fence were built along the boundary between
Number 5 and Number 7, as works associated
with her home construction. The
Tribunal now accepts that evidence, and on the basis of Mrs Spear’s
statement, finds that
the fence and boundary retaining wall that are now the
subject of these proceedings were originally constructed about 37 years ago.
[11] Photographs
of the fence and retaining wall that are before the Tribunal reveal both to be
in an advanced state of dilapidation.
These photographs also show the mature
golden cane palms growing very close to the fence and retaining wall; and in
some instances
even leaning on the fence, and growing over the Applicants’
property. Other photographs show the mock orange hedge (agreed
approximately 8-9 metres in length), also in parts growing up against (and
indeed through), the boundary fence.
[12] On the
basis of the photographs, it is easily apparent that both the fence and
retaining wall are in need of replacement, such
that the Tribunal
finds—for purposes of
ss 13(1)(c)(ii)
(1) of the Act—and for
the orders that follow, that there is not at present a ‘sufficient
dividing fence’ between
Number 5 and Number 7.
Orders sought from the Tribunal by the Applicants
light of their not being able to secure an agreement from the Respondents, the
Applicants seek orders from the Tribunal for
the removal and replacement of the
fence and retaining wall, and now seek—for reasons of superior
durability—to replace
the existing timber structures with a concrete
sleeper retaining wall (with hot dip galvanised posts), and a
steel fence, erected atop
the new retaining wall. As part of that, the Applicants submit that the four
golden cane palms and the
mock orange hedge will need to be removed as a
necessary preliminary to any fencing works along the boundary.
[14] On the
available evidence (traversed further, below), and in light of the
Respondents’ concession during the hearing, it
is beyond any serious
contention that the golden cane palms and mock orange hedge will need to be
removed in order to effectuate
any necessary fencing works. The removal of this
vegetation is part of
fencing work
for purposes of
of the Act.
In that sense, any separate orders sought by the Applicants as part of NDR070-24
become unnecessary, as these will be
taken up by orders made by the Tribunal as
part of proceedings Q3036-23.
Respondents’ Contentions
[15] Although
the Respondents agree that the boundary fence has reached end of life, and
requires replacement, and ultimately indicated
that they are amenable to paying
50% of the cost of a 1.8 m high
fence, the Respondents
dispute that their golden cane palm trees contributed towards the degraded
condition of the fence; or that
any of the four golden cane palms, or the mock
orange hedge are now causing any adverse impact on the Applicants’ land
purposes of
of the Act.
[16] Although
the expert evidence before the Tribunal from Mr Angelo Iancu (see further,
below) lends no credence to the Respondents’
contention regarding there
being no adverse impact caused to the fence by their trees, it is unnecessary
for the Tribunal to fully
determine the
point, given that the golden cane
palms and mock orange hedge will need, in all events, to be cleared from the
boundary as part of
fencing works as defined in
of the Act.
Respondents further submit that:
Applicants who have the sole benefit of the retaining wall, such that the
Applicants should be responsible for the cost
of any replacement of the
retaining wall.
Any fencing
works ordered by the Tribunal should include replacement of the adjacent 400 mm
retaining wall on Number 5.
All costs (save
for the retaining wall beneath the boundary fence) including any necessary
removal of trees, sheds, removal and replacement
of pool fencing (etc) and any
remediation of the landscaping at Number 5 should become part of any costs
equally apportioned between
the parties by the Tribunal.
The replacement
fence should be Colorbond ‘Pale Eucalypt’.
Evidence heard before the Tribunal
the Tribunal hearing conducted on 25 September 2025, the Tribunal received
evidence from a structural and civil engineer,
Mr Angelo Iancu of ‘ACCI
Consult Engineering Services’. Mr Iancu has also provided a report dated
14 April 2025 (received
by the Tribunal on 11 September 2025), based on a site
inspection that he had conducted on 18 January 2025.
Iancu’s report and oral evidence indicate that:
Mature trees and
hedges at 5 Alphitonia Crescent that are either adjacent to, or within, the zone
of influence of the retaining wall
and fence have created abnormal moisture
conditions, thus impacting the foundations of the fence and retaining wall.
have destabilised the retaining wall, and fence foundations.
The fence and
retaining wall show advanced signs of decay, including broken fence posts,
rotated fence posts, and displaced sleepers.
The ageing of the timber fence and
retaining wall as well as the deterioration due to the influence of trees/hedges
have placed
these structures past the maximum durability expectancy (expected
service life) for timber structures that are constructed in contact
ground, as specified in technical pamphlets produced by Timber Queensland.
A secondary wall
at 5 Alphitonia Crescent, approximately 400 mm high and running parallel to the
boundary fence, is contributing to
abnormal moisture conditions.
Although the
fence and retaining wall are in very poor condition, there is no evidence to
date that the slab for the dwelling at Number
7 has been adversely impacted.
However, if no action is undertaken to resolve matters, no guarantee can be
offered that the dwelling
at Number 7 will continue to remain free of damage in
the near to medium-term future.
Any replacement
structure should be built in accordance with the specifications of
– Earth Retaining Structures
. Any structure that is erected will
require footings that are at least one metre deep.
[20] In oral
evidence given by Mr Iancu during his examination by the Tribunal in relation to
the content of his written report, Mr
Iancu additionally informed that:
engineering and design perspective, the fence and retaining wall are ‘one
and the same structure’, and it would
not be possible to construct a
sufficient boundary fence without the presence of an appropriate retaining wall.
the parallel
lower retaining wall had no structural role to play as part of the adjacent
boundary fence and is more in the nature
of a landscaping element, wholly within
Pragmatically,
any replacement retaining wall should be constructed from concrete sleepers.
These have a service life of at least
60 years, far exceeding what might be
expected from timber structures.
Tribunal also received evidence from a licensed surveyor, Mr Brian Hillam of
‘Hilloc Surveyors, Planners and Development
Consultants’.
Hillam’s evidence was very brief, and merely confirmed the substance of
the survey report prepared under his signature
and now dated 26 September 2024.
The gravamen of that report is the survey having revealed that the
disintegrating sleeper retaining
wall and associated fence, which has always
been assumed as the boundary between Lot 41 on RP210663 (i.e. Number 7), and Lot
RP 210663 (i.e. Number 5), is constructed entirely within the boundary of
[23] Finally,
the Applicants also called a Mr Jason Short from ‘All Sorts Services and
Trade’. Mr Short is one of a number
of contractors who have provided a
quote to do fencing works between Number 5 and Number 7.
[24] All of the
quotes that have been produced before the Tribunal are now sufficiently aged as
to be expired, such that these are
now only indicative of the likely costs. For
this reason, no definitive reliance will be placed on any of the quotes by the
For present purposes, the significance of Mr Short’s oral
evidence lies in the fact of his emphasising (as an experienced contractor)
the golden cane palms and mock orange hedge do need to be removed from Number 5
in order to create necessary access to be able
to remove the existing fence and
associated retaining wall and erect new structures; and that a fence could not
be constructed until
such time as the retaining wall is first replaced, as a
necessary preliminary to the construction of any new fence. The Tribunal
accepts that evidence.
[25] Relevantly,
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
of fencing work
Fencing work
, for a dividing fence, means—
(a) the design, construction, modification, replacement, removal, repair or
maintenance of the whole or part of the dividing fence;
the surveying or preparation of land, including the trimming, lopping or
removal of vegetation
, along or on either side of the common boundary of
adjoining lands for a purpose mentioned in paragraph (a);
and includes—
(c) the planting, replanting and maintenance of a hedge or similar vegetative
barrier as the dividing fence; and
(d) the cleaning, deepening, enlargement or alteration of a ditch, embankment or
watercourse that serves as the dividing fence; and
(e) obtaining an approval required for fencing work.
not in the original, yet included here by the Tribunal]
for fencing work
(1) If there is no sufficient dividing fence between 2 parcels of land
consisting of adjoining land, an adjoining owner is liable
to contribute to
carrying out fencing work for a sufficient dividing fence.
An adjoining owner may contribute by a payment of an amount or provision of
labour or materials.
(2) If carrying out fencing work includes construction or replacement of a
sufficient dividing fence, the fence must be constructed
or replaced on the
common boundary other than to the extent it is impracticable to do so because of
natural physical features.
(3) However, other than for urgent fencing work, subsection (1) is only
enforceable if—
(a) the adjoining owners have agreed under this chapter about carrying out the
fencing work; or
(b) QCAT has ordered that the fencing work be carried out.
(4) To remove any doubt, it is declared that subsection (1) applies even
(a) there is already a dividing fence other than a sufficient dividing fence;
(b) one or both parcels of land are vacant land.
Contribution
between adjoining owners—generally
(1) Adjoining owners are each liable to contribute equally to carrying out
fencing work for a sufficient dividing fence.
(2) An adjoining owner who wants to carry out fencing work for a dividing fence
to a standard greater than the standard for a sufficient
dividing fence is
liable for the fencing work to the extent that it is greater than the standard
for a sufficient dividing fence.
(1) QCAT may, for an application in relation to fencing work for a dividing
fence, decide and order any 1 or more of the following—
(a) the line on which the fencing work is to be carried out, whether or not that
line is on the common boundary of the adjoining
(b) the fencing work to be carried out, including the kind of dividing fence
(c) the way in which contributions for the fencing work are to be apportioned or
reapportioned or the amount that each adjoining
owner is liable to pay for the
fencing work;
(d) the part of the dividing fence to be constructed or repaired by either
adjoining owner;
(e) the time by which the fencing work is to be carried out;
any other work to be carried out that is necessary to carry out the
fencing work ordered under this section including work for a retaining
(g) that, in the circumstances, no dividing fence is required for all or part of
the boundary of the adjoining lands;
(h) that a fence has been used, or could reasonably be used, as a dividing fence
(i) the amount of compensation payable to an adjoining owner for damage or
destruction to a dividing fence caused by another adjoining
owner or a person
mentioned in
section 26(1)(b)
(j) that an adjoining owner remove a thing attached to a dividing fence and
restore the dividing fence;
(k) the amount of compensation payable to an adjoining owner for the removal of
a fence under
section 33(3).
(2) The occupation of land on either side of a dividing fence, as a result of an
order that fencing work is to be carried out on
a line other than on the common
boundary of the adjoining lands, does not affect the title to, or possession of,
not in the original, yet included here, by the Tribunal]
Tribunal Findings
[26] Already,
in preceding passages of these reasons, the Tribunal has determined for purposes
ss 13(1)(c)(ii)
(1) of the Act that there is not a sufficient fence
between Number 5 and Number 7.
Tribunal accepts the entirety of the statement evidence of Mrs Janice Spear
(former owner at Number 5), as well as the oral
and written evidence of Mr Brian
Hillam (surveyor), and Mr Angelo Iancu (Engineer), and the oral evidence of Mr
Jason Short (trades
contractor). On the basis of that evidence, the Tribunal
(a) The existing boundary fence and retaining wall are
associated works
by reason that the fence relies
the retaining wall for its
support, such that for purposes of
of the Act it is necessary to
replace the retaining wall in order to be able to attend to the condition of the
extant (and obviously
insufficient) boundary fence. The boundary fence is a
property appurtenance that is to the obvious benefit of both Number 5 and
7, and the need for the associated retaining wall is a matter that cannot be
‘parsed out’ from the joint benefit
afforded to each party by the
existence of the common boundary fence;
(b) The extant fence and retaining wall are entirely within the boundary of
Number 5, notwithstanding these being accepted over a
long period as the
‘boundary by convention’.
(c) The fence and retaining wall were built in about 1987–1988, by former
owners at Number 5, as part of works required by
them to construct the house at
number 5. As such the Tribunal concludes that the retaining wall, in
particular, was
intended for the benefit of Number 5 by reason
of it facilitating the maximisation of the use of the land at Number 5, and
Number 5 from landslip.
However, over time, the benefit of the retaining wall has come to be
indistinguishable from the joint benefit to each of Number
5 and Number 7 that
is represented by the fact of the boundary fence that is built on top of it.
(d) The parallel lower retaining wall has no structural association with the
boundary fence and retaining wall.
(e) The four golden cane palms and the mock orange hedge need to be removed as
necessary ancillary works for purposes of
of the Act.
Tribunal determines that a Colorbond steel fence is appropriate for the
replacement fence, being a style of fence commonly
used in Sunnybank Hills and
throughout greater Brisbane.
[29] Given the
evidence before it, the Tribunal further determines that the associated
retaining wall should be constructed using
concrete sleepers and galvanised
steel posts, and should be constructed to the relevant Australian standard,
which Mr Iancu informs
is AS 4678 – Earth Retaining Structures. The
Tribunal will order that there be an engineering design specification for the
replacement retaining wall and boundary fence.
Tribunal Orders
[30] Pursuant
to the powers conferred on the Tribunal by
of the Act, the Tribunal orders
as follows:
new boundary fence and associated retaining wall are to be constructed between
Number 5 and Number 7 Alphitonia Crescent Sunnybank
Hills, in accordance with an
engineering design obtained from a licensed engineer, to be engaged by the
Applicants. Obtaining any
necessary certification or Council approval is the
responsibility of the Applicants.
associated retaining wall is to be constructed in accordance with the
engineering design required by Order (1) above, using concrete
sleepers and
galvanised steel posts. The boundary fence is to be constructed in Colorbond
steel and is to be affixed atop the associated
retaining wall, and to a height
of 1.8 metres. The Applicants and the Respondents are to each nominate their
preferred colour for
the new boundary fence from the standard Colorbond range,
and are to thereafter attempt to agree between those two colours. In the
of no agreement, the Tribunal mandates that the new fence is to be Colorbond
new boundary fence and associated retaining wall is to be constructed on, or as
near to the surveyed boundary as is practically
achievable.
four golden canes and the mock orange hedge situated on the land at Number 5
Alphitonia Crescent Sunnybank Hills are to be removed
at the sole expense of the
Respondents within 90 days of the date of these orders.
works described in Order (2) above, are not to commence before the expiration of
91 days after the date of these orders.
Respondents are to pay the Applicants one half the cost of the boundary survey
and survey report dated 26 September 2024, as performed
by Hilloc Surveyors,
Planners and Development Consultants (‘Hilloc’) within 14 days of
the Applicants providing the Respondents
with a copy of the Hilloc invoice.
costs of any engineering design, council certification, as well as the costs for
necessary materials and construction/labour costs
for the new boundary fence and
associated retaining wall (including foundation materials and any designed
drainage) now required
by Orders (1) and (2) above, are to be borne equally
(i.e. 50:50) by the Applicants and the Respondents. The Respondents are to
the Applicants within 14 days of their being presented with a copy of any costs
invoice by the Applicants.
costs of any necessary preliminary works (including but not limited to any
relocation of sheds, pool fences, paving, etc), and
post-construction
remediation or landscaping costs arising after the erection of the new boundary
fence and associated retaining
wall as described in Order 2 above, are to be
borne on the basis that the Applicants will pay for any such costs arising at
7, and the Respondents will pay for any such costs arising at Number 5.
six (6) weeks of obtaining an engineering design (Order (1), above) the
Applicants will provide the Respondents with two (2)
quotes for the necessary
works (Order (2), above) and the Respondents are at liberty to select between
the provided quotes within
14 days after provision of the quotes. In the event
of no response from the Respondent to the provided quotes the Applicants are
liberty to determine which of the two quotes will be accepted.
the event of any non-compliance with these orders by the Respondent the
Applicants and their contractors are at liberty, pursuant
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
enter upon the land at Number 5 to carry out the necessary works upon the giving
of at least 7-days’ written notice
to the Respondents. Any costs incurred
by the Applicants in the performance of any works caused by non-compliance with
any of these
orders by the Respondents is a sum that may be recovered in full by
the Applicants from the Respondents.
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act
The Applicants express a
preference that the fence colour be one of the lighter shades of grey from
within the standard Colorbond
fencing colour range.
Initially, when before the
Tribunal, the Respondents submitted that there should be a ‘like for
like’ replacement
of the fence. Subsequently, the Respondents indicated
that they were now amenable to a Colorbond fence.
Battiato v Clifton
[2025] NSWLEC 1391.
Yared v Glenhurst
Gardens Pty Ltd
[2002] NSWSC 11.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (263 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter