URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/203.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stella v Griffith University [2025] QCA 203 (24 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Stella v Griffith University
[2025] QCA 203
RICHARD JOSEPH
(applicant)
(respondent)
Appeal No 1851 of 2025
QCATA No 13 of 2024
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Application for Leave
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
ORIGINATING COURT:
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal –
[2025] QCATA 20
Member McGill SC)
DELIVERED ON:
24 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
28 August 2025
Brown and Bradley JJA and Cooper J
to appeal in respect of grounds 2 and 3 is refused.
application for leave to appeal is dismissed.
the applicant wishes to contend for a form of costs order other than that he be
ordered to pay the respondent’s costs of
the application on the standard
basis, he must file and serve written submissions limited to three pages in
support of the costs
order he contends for within 14 days of the date of this
no such submissions are filed, the order as to costs will be that the applicant
pay the respondent’s costs of the application
on the standard
such submissions are filed, the respondent must file and serve any written
submissions in response limited to three pages within
14 days of receiving the
applicant’s submissions.
submissions on costs are filed, the question of costs will be decided on the
CATCHWORDS:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – FREEDOM OF INFORMATION – REVIEW OF
DECISIONS – OTHER STATES AND TERRITORIES – where the
applicant made
two applications to the respondent for access to documents under
Information Privacy Act 2009
(Qld) – where, in response to both
applications, the respondent refused to provide access to certain documents
the applicant sought internal and then external review of the
respondent’s refusal to provide certain documents under both
applications
– where, upon external review, the Information Commissioner affirmed the
respondent’s decision on the first
application and varied the
respondent’s decision on the second application by refusing access on a
separate ground –
where the applicant appealed the Information
Commissioner’s decision to the Appeal Tribunal of the Queensland Civil and
Administrative
Tribunal (‘QCATA’), which was dismissed – where
the applicant appealed the decision of QCATA to the Queensland
Court of Appeal
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(Qld) provided that only a question of law could be appealed
from QCATA to the Court of Appeal, and only where the latter has granted
to appeal – whether the applicant’s grounds of appeal to the Court
of Appeal raised only questions of law –
whether, if the applicant’s
grounds of appeal raised only questions of law, the applicant should have leave
Freedom of Information Act 1992
Griffith University Act 1998
Information Privacy Act 2009
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Right to Information Act 2009
, Sch 2, Sch
Allen v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
Cairns Port Authority v Albietz
[1995] 2 Qd R
[1994] QSC 333
Carmody v Information Commissioner (5)
[2018] QCATA 18
Crime and Corruption Commission v Andersen
Griffith University v Tang
(2005) 221 CLR
[2005] HCA 7
Pivovarova v Michelsen
(2019) 2 QR 508
Queensland Nurses’ Union and Sunshine Coast
Hospital and Health Service; Ramsay Health Care (Third Party)
[2017] QICmr
R v Khazaal
(2012) 246 CLR 601
[2012] HCA 26
Eccleston and Department of Family Services & Aboriginal & Islander
[1993] 1 QAR 60
[1993] QICmr 2
Ridd v James Cook
(2021) 274 CLR 495
[2021] HCA 32
and Griffith
[2023] QICmr 64
Star News Group Pty Ltd and Southern
Downs Regional Council
[2019] QICmr 39
Stella v Griffith
[2025] QCATA 20
Taylor and Department of
[2021] QICmr 64
Thomson v University of London
(1864) 33 LJ Ch 625
The applicant appeared on his own behalf
F J Nagorcka for the
SOLICITORS:
The applicant appeared on his own behalf
McCullough Robertson for the
On 28 August 2025, this Court ordered that leave to appeal from the
decision of the Appeal Tribunal of the Queensland Civil and
Administrative
Tribunal on the proposed ground one of the applicant’s appeal be refused,
on the basis that it involved a mixed
question of fact and law and was therefore
outside the jurisdiction of this Court. I joined in the making of the orders
reasons given by Cooper J.
[2] The question
of whether leave should be granted in respect of proposed grounds two and three
was reserved. I also agree with
Cooper J that the Court should refuse
Mr Stella leave to appeal on his proposed second and third grounds and
agree with the orders
proposed by Cooper J.
[3] BRADLEY
On 28 August 2025, I joined in an order refusing the applicant
) leave to appeal from the decision of the Appeal Tribunal
of the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal (
) on his first
proposed ground of appeal. I did so for the reasons set out by Cooper J.
[4] I also agree
with Cooper J that the Court should refuse Mr Stella leave to appeal on his
proposed second and third grounds.
respondent (the
is a university established by statute
to advance, develop and disseminate knowledge and promote scholarship, with a
focus on study,
research, and recognition in the form of conferring
well-tempered university serves the public interest, including in ways
identified in Schedule 4,
Right to Information Act
). It can promote open discussion of public
affairs, contribute to positive and informed debate on important issues or
serious interest, ensure effective oversight of expenditure of public
funds, allow or assist inquiry into possible deficiencies in
the conduct or
administration of an agency or official, advance the fair treatment of
individuals and other entities in accordance
with the law in their dealings with
agencies, contribute to the protection of the environment, reveal environmental
or health risks
or measures relating to public health and safety, contribute to
the maintenance of peace and order, contribute to the administration
generally or for a person, and contribute to innovation and the facilitation of
[7] Students
share a status as members of the university with the chancellor and others in
administration, and the academic staff
in teaching and research roles. The
relationship between university members has been described as
Its quality may vary
from time to time. It may be at its best when aligned and directed to the
university’s noble objects;
and at its least when splintered or
transactional. The relationship is not that between a customer and a service
Mr Stella’s
analysis of a student as a “client” of a university is wholly
inadequate.
[8] Whatever the
state of the relationship, it is important that university decision-makers can
engage openly with colleagues about
how they should deal with a complaint about
a student’s conduct. Such a decision concerns the interactions
between and amongst
students, staff, and administrators. It affects the
relationship between the members of the university. In Mr Stella’s case,
the complaint involved questions about intellectual freedom – in the form
of critical and open debate and inquiry in a public
forum, and the desire
“to afford others respect and courtesy in the manner of its
Such decisions
call for prudent judgment. They were part of the internal management and
domestic affairs of the University. They
were within the scope of “the
management function” in Item 19 in Schedule 4, Part 3 of the RTI Act.
[9] For the
reasons Cooper J has given, as well as those set out above, a reasonable
expectation of prejudice to such a management
function was an appropriate
consideration for deciding whether disclosure of information would, on balance,
be contrary to the public
interest. Mr Stella’s second ground of appeal
would fail.
[10] I agree
with Cooper J that Mr Stella’s third ground of appeal would also fail.
The RTI Act does not show an intention
that one access application would create
a right to a second application about information generated by the first, and so
infinity, subject only to the applicant being declared
Parliament provided for
internal and external reviews to deal with potential errors in an access
decision, including any possible
misconduct that concerns Mr Stella.
[11] The orders
of the Court should be as Cooper J proposes.
[12] COOPER
On 22 August 2022, the University received a complaint about comments Mr
Stella, a post-graduate student, had made on social media.
Thereafter, the
University conducted preliminary inquiries into whether Mr Stella’s
commentary breached the Student Misconduct
Policy. During those inquiries, Mr
Stella provided a written response to the complaint and engaged in other
written and oral communications
with representatives of the University.
Representatives of the University also discussed the complaint. At the
conclusion of the
preliminary inquiries, the University decided not to proceed
with a formal investigation of the complaint. The University advised
of its decision in a letter dated 6 September 2022. In the same letter,
the University suggested that Mr Stella avoid
engaging in social media
commentary of a similar type in future as a recurrence might result in
misconduct proceedings.
Mr Stella believed that the
comments which prompted the complaint against him did not come within the scope
of the Student Misconduct
Policy and that staff involved in the
University’s preliminary inquiries had themselves engaged in misconduct or
unlawful conduct.
September 2022, Mr Stella applied to the University for access to all documents
University’s handling of that
complaint (
first access application
), on the basis that the documents
contained Mr Stella’s personal
information.
The University
provided access to some documents but refused access to others, either wholly or
in part. Mr Stella then applied
for an internal review of that
On that internal review,
the University decided to grant access to some further information which had
previously been refused but
reaffirmed the decision to refuse access to certain
documents, either wholly or in part.
December 2022, Mr Stella made a second application to the University for access
to all documents created, received or sent
by various named University staff
second access application
). Again, the University granted access to
some documents but refused access to others, either wholly or in part. After Mr
applied for an internal review, the University decided to grant access to
some further information but continued to refuse access
to others, either wholly
or in part.
[15] Mr Stella
then applied to the Office of the Information Commissioner for an external
review of each of the University’s
decisions on the first access
application and the second access
application.
On 7 December 2023,
the Information Commissioner affirmed the University’s decision on the
first access application and varied
the University’s decision on the
second access application, by substituting a different ground for refusing
[16] Mr Stella
appealed the decision of the Information Commissioner to
That appeal was
dismissed on 18 March 2025.
[17] In this
Court, Mr Stella seeks to appeal the decision of QCATA on three grounds. He
requires leave to do so.
to appeal may only be granted if the proposed appeal is “only on a
question of law”.
Court has no jurisdiction to consider an appeal on a mixed question of fact and
Further, although the
exercise of the discretion to grant leave to appeal on a question of law is
unfettered, and exercisable according
to the nature of the case, leave will not
be granted lightly. It will usually be necessary, but not sufficient, that the
for leave persuade the Court that there is a reasonable argument that
there is an error of law to be corrected, which, if corrected
would justify the
claim for relief. In addition, there will generally be some additional
consideration over and above the existence
of a reasonable argument that there
is such an error of law, with such matters
(a) that leave is necessary to correct a substantial injustice;
(b) that the proposed appeal raises a question of law of general or public
importance.
[19] At the
conclusion of oral argument on the application for leave, the Court refused
leave to appeal in respect of ground 1 on
the basis that it involved a mixed
question of fact and law. Following that refusal, the University did not press
an application
to rely on a further affidavit which related to factual issues
raised by ground 1. Mr Stella did not object to the Court receiving
affidavit but sought to cross-examine the deponent on the matters set out in it.
In circumstances where the University did not
press its application to rely on
the further affidavit it became unnecessary for the Court to resolve the
question whether Mr Stella
should be permitted to cross-examine.
reasons explain the basis upon which I joined in the order refusing leave to
appeal in respect of ground 1, before addressing
the application for leave in
respect of grounds 2 and 3. For the reasons set out below, leave to appeal in
respect of grounds 2
and 3 should also be refused. The application for leave to
appeal should be dismissed.
[21] By ground
1, Mr Stella sought to argue that QCATA based part of its decision on documents
which either omitted or obscured crucial
information, or which were lost by the
QCATA registry.
[22] On 18 March
2024, Mellifont J ordered that the parties to the QCATA appeal file
a hearing bundle divided into Parts A and B.
The documents in Part A were
to be those to which Mr Stella had been granted access, including redactions
where access had been
granted to only part of a document. The documents in Part
B were to be those the subject of the QCATA appeal (being the documents
access had been refused, either wholly or in part) in unredacted form. Mr
Stella was not permitted access to the documents
in Part B pending further
of the documents the subject of the QCATA appeal was described in the
parties’ submissions before QCATA, and on the
application for leave to
appeal, as “R11”. Mr Stella was granted access to a partially
redacted form of document R11
on the first access application. That form of the
document is six pages long and has redactions on three of those pages. It
a chain of emails, commencing with an email from Prof. Brown to Prof.
Pietsch (copied to Mr Stella) on 18 August 2022 and concluded
with two emails
sent by Prof. Pietsch to undisclosed recipients on 22 August 2022,
forwarding the earlier emails. In the initial
email, which was sent several
days before the University received the formal complaint about
Mr Stella’s comments on social
media, Prof. Brown advised Prof.
Pietsch of a discussion he had with Mr Stella about concerns having been raised
with, and within,
the University about Mr Stella’s conduct. In that
initial email, Prof. Brown included personal information of Mr Stella, including
his mobile phone number and a description of his emotional state after being
told of the concerns raised about his conduct. Prof.
Pietsch replied to
Prof. Brown (copied to Mr Stella) on 18 August 2022. Later the same evening, Mr
Stella replied to Prof. Pietsch’s
email, setting out his position on the
concerns that Prof. Brown had raised with him and the subject matter addressed
in his comments
on social media. On 19 August 2022, Prof. Pietsch forwarded
Mr Stella’s email to Prof. Evans, the Vice Chancellor of the
University.
In the copy of document R11 to which Mr Stella was granted access,
a section of that email was redacted on the basis that it contained
information. Prof. Evans responded to Prof. Pietsch’s email later the
same day. On 22 August 2022, Prof. Pietsch
sent two emails forwarding the chain
of emails; the first at 3.39 pm and the second at 6.29 pm. In the copy of
document R11 to which
Mr Stella was granted access, the recipients of the first
forwarding email were redacted. The body of that first forwarding email
simply “fyi”. In the second forwarding email, the identity of any
of the recipients and the content of the email
itself were redacted.
[24] In his
primary written submissions before QCATA, Mr Stella relied on what he
characterised as the “concealment” of
document R11 to support a
finding that the Information Commissioner’s decision was affected by
apprehended bias and that the
Information Commissioner had disregarded certain
essential facts. After referring to the redacted form of the two forwarding
sent by Prof. Pietsch on 22 August 2022, Mr Stella submitted as
“It is not possible to say conclusively that these
emails constituted disclosure contrary to Information Privacy Principle 11
without knowing who the recipients were. However,
it transpires that
one or more of the recipients had no legitimate reason to receive the
information – if, for example, they
were [the complainants] or their
supporters among the faculty – failure to release this document would make
the [Information
Commissioner] complicit in concealing evidence of unlawful
activity.” (Italics in original)
[25] In reply
submissions filed with QCATA, Mr Stella went further, arguing that
Prof. Pietsch
disclosed his personal information contrary to
limits imposed by the Information Privacy Principle
That assertion was based on
Mr Stella’s conclusion that the recipients of the forwarded emails
were the persons who had complained
to the University about his social media
comments. However, Mr Stella submitted that QCATA had no need to infer
that fact because
it would be able to inspect the unredacted document and
satisfy itself as to the identity of the complainants and the identity of
recipients of the forwarded emails sent by Prof. Pietsch on 22 August
dismissing the QCATA appeal, the judicial member stated as
to the submission based on the disclosure of an email described as B11,
disclosed but with the identity of the recipients
redacted, the submission was
based on the proposition that the recipients included the complainants (or one
of them). If that were
true, there might be some substance in the proposition
that sending this email to them or any of them involved an unlawful disclosure
of personal information of [Mr Stella]. But this depends on the identity of the
recipients, which was of course known to the Commissioner.
[Mr Stella’s]
argument was based on this assumption and built to the proposition that it
followed that the Commissioner has
suppressed evidence of an unlawful action on
the part of [the University], which in turn was said to show favouritism and
hence apparent
bias on the part of the Commissioner. The problem with this
argument is that the first step is speculative, in that it depends on
content of the redacted information.
Under [s 121(3) of] the IP Act the Commissioner was constrained, in giving
reasons for the decision, not to say anything which would
have the effect of
disclosing the information to which access was refused. I consider that I
am in the same position. It is sufficient
for me to say that I have carefully
considered the submissions made by [Mr Stella], both orally and in writing,
and am not persuaded
that this argument shows either that the finding as to the
inapplicability of [the
, Sch 4 Pt 2 Items 6 or
17] was not open as a matter of law, or that the making of the finding is
evidence of apparent bias on the
part of the Commissioner.”
[27] On the
application for leave to appeal to this Court, Mr Stella submitted that the
language which the judicial member used in
this passage reveals that he could
not, or did not, consider document R11 in its unredacted form; that is, the
Information Commissioner
failed to take a material consideration into account
which is an error of law.
[28] In support
of that argument, Mr Stella referred to the index to the hearing bundle for the
QCATA appeal. In Part A of that index,
titled “documents partially
withheld (redactions applied)”, document R11 was recorded as being six
pages long. In Part
B.3 of that index, titled “documents partially
withheld (redactions marked, not applied)”, document R11 was recorded
being three pages long. From this, Mr Stella argued that what was
contained in Part B.3 of the hearing bundle was the redacted
parts of document
R11 separated from the context of the surrounding unredacted parts. Focussing
on the redacted part of the email
sent by Prof. Pietsch at 6.29 pm on 22
August 2022, Mr Stella submitted that it would not be obvious to a reader
of the redacted
portion, stripped of its surrounding context, that
Prof. Pietsch had included, below that email, the remainder of the email
including his personal information.
[29] Mr Stella
also submitted that the hearing bundle was not part of the case file that the
QCATA registry provided to this Court’s
registry after the application for
leave to appeal was filed. He relied on what he described as the inability of
the QCATA registry
to locate the hearing bundle or to identify whether it was
lost before or after the judicial member considered and determined the
[30] In reply
submissions filed on the application for leave, Mr Stella indicated that he did
not ask this Court to make a finding
of fact as to what, from several
possibilities he submitted would be open, the judicial member was referring to
in the passage extracted
above. These possibilities included that the judicial member only considered
the redacted version of document R11 or, based on the
judicial member’s
description of the document as “B11”, that he was referring to
another document entirely. Mr
Stella submitted that for the purpose of ground 1
“it is sufficient to note the various irregularities and consider them as
a kind of black box.”
[31] Of course,
there is another possibility: that is, the judicial member had the hearing
bundle and considered the three pages of
document R11 included in Part B.3 of
that bundle when he dismissed Mr Stella’s appeal; that these three pages
were the pages
from the email chain which included redactions (as described at
above), but with the redactions
removed to reveal the redacted information; that the judicial member was able to
compare this redacted
information with the redacted version of the email chain
in Part A to consider the redacted information in its full context; and
consequently, the judicial member was aware of the identity of the recipients of
the two emails sent by Prof. Pietsch on 22 August
2022, and that those emails
included the prior emails in the chain which contained Mr Stella’s
personal information. If that
possibility was accepted, ground 1 would
[32] To my mind,
the language the judicial member used in the passage extracted at
above is more consistent with the
scenario just postulated than with the more speculative possibilities raised by
Mr Stella. It
only makes sense for the judicial member to state that he
regarded himself as being constrained not to say anything which would have
effect of disclosing the redacted information if he was aware of the content of
that information and its relevance to Mr Stella’s
[33] It was not
necessary to attempt to resolve this issue to dispose of the application for
leave to appeal in respect of ground
1. It was sufficient to identify that the
proposed ground of appeal could not succeed unless the factual issue –
whether the
judicial member considered the redacted information from document
R11 in its proper context – was resolved in Mr Stella’s
that basis, I was satisfied that ground 1 raised a mixed question of fact
and law and was therefore outside the jurisdiction
of this Court (see
[34] By ground
2, Mr Stella seeks to argue that the judicial member erred in his construction
of the phrase “management function
of an agency” in item 19 of Sch
4, Pt 3 of the RTI Act (
[35] Item 19
identifies a factor favouring nondisclosure of information based on public
interest considerations. It provides as follows:
“Disclosure
of the information could reasonably be expected to prejudice the management
function of an agency or the conduct
of industrial relations by an
[36] Depending
on the circumstances, that factor may be relevant to the consideration of an
application to access information under
s 43 of the IP
However, it is expressly
recorded in the legislation that the Parliament’s intention is that the
grounds on which access to
information may be refused under the RTI Act, as
applied under the IP Act, are to be interpreted
and further, that the
IP Act should be administered with a pro-disclosure
affirming the University’s decision on the first access application, the
Information Commissioner accorded significant
weight to a finding that
disclosure of the withheld information – which included the views and
opinions of University staff
outcomes, and analysis of advice dealing with the complaint – could
be expected to prejudice the University’s management functions
as referred to in Item 19.
[38] On the
QCATA appeal, Mr Stella submitted that, properly construed, the term
“management” in Item 19 should not be
taken to be a reference to all
forms of administration and control. Instead, the inclusion of the phrase
“industrial relations”
in Item 19 means that a “management
function” should be understood as being closely related to industrial
relations and
staff assessment; that is, the phrase should be limited to the
process of human resource management.
dismissing this aspect of the QCATA appeal, the judicial member stated that his
task was not to attempt to formulate the limits
of the concept of a
“management function”, which might vary between different agencies
or different parts of an agency,
but to determine whether the expression
includes, in the case of a university, the process of dealing with student
complaints. The
judicial member was satisfied that it does and that,
considering the range of complaints that a university might have to deal with,
including complaints about staff behaviour as well as student behaviour, that
there was an analogy with industrial relations issues.
Consequently, the
judicial member held that there was no error in the Information
Commissioner’s construction of Item
[40] On the
application for leave to appeal in this Court, Mr Stella accepts that the
ordinary functions of a university include managing
student affairs in general
and student discipline in
particular.
However, he argues
that the judicial member’s interpretation of Item 19 substantially impairs
the right to access personal
information under Ch 3 of the IP Act. There are
three reasons I do not accept this submission.
[41] First,
the argument incorrectly assumes that the various agencies subject to the
legislative scheme have the same management
functions and that those management
functions will be impacted in the same way by any application for access to
personal information.
The argument proceeds as follows: students are
“clients” of the University (by reason of the fact that they are
to pay for the educational services the University provides); from
this, it follows that the effect of the judicial member’s
interpretation
of Item 19 is to place “any document relating to an agency’s
management of a client’s affairs within
the scope of a single factor
favouring nondisclosure”
(i.e. Item 19). I do not accept that is the effect of the judicial
member’s interpretation. To the contrary, I agree with
the observation by
the judicial member that management functions might vary between different
agencies or different parts of an agency.
Regard must be had to those
differences in determining whether a factor favouring either disclosure or
nondisclosure is relevant
in determining whether, on balance, disclosure of the
specific information sought by an applicant would be contrary to the public
The question whether
Item 19 is engaged as “a relevant factor favouring nondisclosure that
applies in relation to the information”
in a particular case cannot be
answered without considering the character of the management function that might
be affected if a
document is disclosed and the nature of that effect on the
relevant function. It is wrong to assume that if, as the Information
Commissioner and the judicial member concluded, the University’s task of
dealing with complaints about student misconduct falls
within the term
“management function” for the purposes of Item 19, the scope of
Item 19 would necessarily extend to
document relating to the
management by
client’s affairs.
determining whether Item 19 was engaged in the circumstances of the present
case, it is important to recognise that interactions
between the people who
study and work at the University – that is, interactions among the student
cohort itself and interaction
between students and University staff – can
have a significant effect upon the quality of the environment in which students
undertake their studies and engage in other aspects of student life and in which
University staff (both teaching and administrative)
are required to work. It is
important that the University properly investigate and resolve complaints about
student misconduct to
ensure relevant interactions are conducted appropriately
and the quality of the University environment is maintained, in terms of
teaching, learning, administration, social and other relevant aspects of the
University’s affairs. If the University’s
ability to properly
investigate and address complaints about student misconduct is compromised, the
University environment might
deteriorate to the detriment of both students and
staff. This supports the conclusion that the investigation and resolution of
is a “management function” for the purposes of Item 19,
and that Item 19 was engaged as a factor favouring nondisclosure
circumstances of this case.
Stella’s reliance upon previous decisions of the Information Commissioner
to support his argument is misplaced. The
decisions he has identified refer to
the public interest factor described in Item 19 as being “usually directed
towards prejudice
to an agency’s function of managing its
or as potentially
applying in circumstances where there is “some impact on [the
agency’s] employment
relationships”
disclosure will “prejudice the employee-employer
relationship”.
statements, and similar statements which Mr Stella has drawn from decisions in
other jurisdictions,
address the
relevance of Item 19 in the particular circumstances of each case; that is, the
nature of the information for which access
is sought, the operations of the
relevant agency that might be impacted by disclosure and the nature and severity
of that impact.
The decisions do not purport to, and plainly could not, limit
the construction or application of Item 19 in the manner Mr Stella
[44] Secondly,
Mr Stella’s submissions do not take proper account of the full text of
Item 19. By its terms, Item 19 is only
engaged as a relevant factor to be
weighed in balancing the public interest if disclosure of the information sought
reasonably be expected to prejudice” the management function
of the relevant agency. It is not enough that the information
sought relates to
the agency’s management function in the manner suggested by Mr Stella. An
agency which seeks to engage Item
19 as a factor favouring nondisclosure
must demonstrate a reasonable basis for thinking that disclosing the information
detrimental to the effective exercise of a particular management
function. Mr Stella’s argument ignores this requirement.
In the present
case, the matters identified at
above provide a reasonable basis to expect that disclosure of the information
sought by Mr Stella would prejudice the University’s
ability to deal with
complaints about student misconduct; but, again, that does not compel the
conclusion that it would be reasonable
to expect that the disclosure of
document relating to the management by
client’s affairs would prejudice the agency’s management
function in the sense required by Item 19. That plainly cannot
[45] Thirdly, Mr
Stella’s argument that the legislature intended the phrase
“management function” in Item 19 to
be limited to the agency’s
management of its personnel or staff faces the difficulty that clear language
was used elsewhere
in Sch 4 of the RTI Act to achieve that effect. This can be
seen in item 3, Pt 4 of Sch 4.
[46] Pt 4 of Sch
4 prescribes factors favouring nondisclosure in the public interest because of
public interest harm in the disclosure.
The relevant parts of Item 3 are
expressed in the following terms:
3 Affecting particular
operations of agencies
Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to cause a public
interest harm if disclosure could—
(c) have a substantial adverse effect on the management or assessment by an
agency of the agency’s staff; or
(d) have a substantial adverse effect on the conduct of industrial relations by
an agency.”
[47] Having
regard to the words used in Item 3(c) above, I accept the University’s
submission that the legislature has used
clear words when it intends that the
concept of management should be limited in the way suggested by Mr Stella. The
legislature
did not use those words in Item 19. This use of different language
in Item 19 supports the argument that the legislature contemplated
although Item 19 will capture the management of an agency’s staff, the
term “management function” is not
limited to that activity and
might, in the circumstances of a particular case, extend to another form of
activity which can properly
be described as a management function. For the
reasons set out above, I am satisfied that the process of investigating and
complaints about student misconduct comes within the term
“management function” in Item 19 for the purposes of Mr
application for access to information held by the
University.
[48] Accordingly,
notwithstanding the expressed legislative intention that the IP Act should be
administered with a pro-disclosure
bias and that factors favouring nondisclosure
in the public interest are to be interpreted narrowly, I am not persuaded that
2 raises a reasonable argument that there is an error of law to be
corrected. That is a sufficient basis to refuse leave to appeal
in respect of
[49] Even if I
was persuaded that there was a reasonably arguable error of law in the judicial
member’s interpretation of Item
19, I would not have granted leave to
appeal in respect of ground 2. Contrary to Mr Stella’s submissions,
establishing such
an error of law would not necessarily mean that the
Information Commissioner was precluded from giving weight to the reasonable
that disclosure of the withheld documents would have a negative impact
on the University’s ability to deal with complaints
misconduct. A person who is required to weigh the public interest in disclosure
of information in accordance with
the process set out in s 49 of the RTI
Act is not limited to considering the factors set out in Sch 4 of the RTI
Accordingly, even if Mr
Stella’s argument about the meaning of the phrase “management
function” in Item 19 was
accepted, the error would only be material if the
impact on the University’s ability to deal with complaints about student
misconduct could not amount to a relevant factor favouring nondisclosure for the
purposes of s 49(3)(c) of the RTI Act. I am not
satisfied that is the
case. Instead, I agree with the Information Commissioner’s
observation
that, in order for
a complaint process to operate effectively, University management must be
able to engage openly with colleagues
with, the impact of the complaint on the University and broader outcomes (which
would include considerations of the type discussed at
above). Consequently, regardless of
the proper construction of Item 19, I do not consider that the Information
Commissioner erred
in giving weight to the potential that disclosure of the
withheld information would negatively impact the University’s ability
deal with complaints as a relevant factor favouring nondisclosure. On that
basis, it would not be necessary to grant leave to
appeal in respect of ground 2
to correct a substantial injustice or to resolve a question of general or public
importance.
[50] By ground
3, Mr Stella seeks to argue that, in determining the QCATA appeal, the judicial
member acted on a wrong legal principle
by “treating as authoritative
obiter dicta
, the substance of which is misconceived and has
never been tested in the courts.”
[51] This ground
concerns documents that were the subject of the second access application. In
reviewing the University’s decision
on the second access application, the
Information Commissioner found that the withheld information comprised internal
documents relating to the processing of the first access application
under the IP Act (
IP Act processing
Although Mr
Stella asserts that this conclusion was wrong, he does not seek to disturb the
finding on the application for leave
to appeal to this
Accordingly, the
question whether leave should be granted must be determined on the factual basis
which Mr Stella now accepts.
Information Commissioner found that the IP Act processing documents fell outside
the scope of the IP Act on the basis that,
by reason of item 7 in Sch 2, Pt 2 of
the RTI Act (
), the University was an entity to which the RTI Act
does not apply in relation to a document prepared or received for the purpose
dealing with an access application. Item 7 provides that “a member of, or
holder of an office connected with, a quasi-judicial
entity, in relation to the
entity’s quasi-judicial functions” is an entity and a function to
which the RTI Act does not
apply (and, consequently, is not an agency for the
purposes of an access application under s 43 of the IP Act).
Information Commissioner held that, because Item 7 applied, the University was
authorised to refuse access to the IP Act
processing documents under
s 47(3)(e) of the RTI Act (which provides that access may be refused where
a document is non-existent
or unlocatable as mentioned in s 52) and
s 52(1)(b)(ii) of the RTI Act (which provides that a document is
non-existent or unlocatable
if all reasonable steps have been taken to find the
document but the document cannot be
[54] As the
judicial member observed on the QCATA
the Information
Commissioner’s reference to s 52(1)(b) of the RTI Act was an
That error would not be
material, however, if Item 7 applies to the University’s preparation or
receipt of a document for
the purpose of dealing with the first access
application. That is because, in applying for access to personal information
the University, Mr Stella was entitled to apply to be given access
to “a document of an
In the IP Act,
the terms “document” and “agency” have the same meaning
given to those terms in the RTI
In the RTI Act, the term
“agency” does not include an entity to which the RTI Act does not
The entities to which
the RTI Act does not apply are identified in Sch 2 of that Act. Pt 1 of Sch 2
identifies those entities to
which the RTI Act does not apply at all. Pt 2 of
Sch 2 (in which Item 7 appears) identifies entities to which the RTI Act does
apply in relation to a particular function. The result is that, if Item 7,
applies to the University’s function of assessing
the first access
application, the University would not be an “agency” for the
purposes of either the RTI Act or the IP
Act and the IP Act processing documents
would fall outside the scope of an application for access to a “document
of an agency”.
concluding that Item 7 applied, the Information Commissioner held that the
second access application made by Mr Stella was
not distinguishable from
observations made by Hoeben J concerning the proper construction of Item 7 in
Carmody v Information Commissioner
the QCATA appeal, the judicial member was not persuaded that the Information
Commissioner made an error of law in concluding
that Item 7 applied to the IP
Act processing documents.
reaching that decision, the judicial member considered Mr Stella’s
challenge to the reasoning of Hoeben J in
, before concluding as
analysis by Hoeben J in
was technically
, but as the
clearly considered view of a Supreme Court Judge sitting as the Appeal Tribunal
it is certainly persuasive. In the circumstances
I consider that I should
follow it unless persuaded that it is wrong. I am not so persuaded by any
of the submissions of [Mr Stella].
On the contrary, I find his Honour’s
reasoning persuasive, and agree with it. It follows that I am not persuaded
Commissioner made any error of law in applying it in the present
[57] On the
application for leave to appeal to this Court, Mr Stella submits that:
(a) the judicial member considered himself bound to follow the reasoning of
Hoeben J in
, even though that reasoning was
(b) in any event, the reasoning of Hoeben J in
[58] The first
aspect of Mr Stella’s argument can be disposed of quickly. The passage
extracted at
above, makes it
clear that the judicial member did not dismiss Mr Stella’s challenge
to this aspect of the Information Commissioner’s
decision on the basis
that he was bound to follow Hoeben J’s reasoning; the judicial member did
so because he agreed with that
[59] However, if
Mr Stella persuades this Court that there is a reasonable argument that
Hoeben J’s reasoning is wrong then
it would follow that he would have
established there is a reasonable argument that the judicial member made an
error of law in following
that reasoning. I turn then to that issue.
understand the context in which Item 7 appears, it should be read with items 1
to 8 of Sch 2, Pt 2 which all concern decision
making bodies in the form of
courts, tribunals or quasi-judicial entities, or persons connected with such
bodies. Those items provide
as follows:
“1 a court, or the
holder of a judicial office or other office connected with a court, in relation
to the court’s judicial
registry or other office of a court, or the staff of a registry or other office
of a court in their official capacity, so far as
its or their functions relate
to the court’s judicial functions
tribunal in relation to the tribunal’s judicial or quasi-judicial
tribunal member or the holder of an office connected with a tribunal, in
relation to the tribunal’s judicial or quasi-judicial
registry of a tribunal, or the staff of a registry of a tribunal in their
official capacity, so far as its or their functions relate
tribunal’s judicial or quasi-judicial functions
quasi-judicial entity in relation to its quasi-judicial functions
member of, or the holder of an office connected with, a quasi-judicial entity,
in relation to the entity’s quasi-judicial
staff of a quasi-judicial entity in their official capacity, so far as their
functions relate to the entity’s quasi- judicial
[61] Carmody
concerned an appeal against the Information Commissioner’s decision
to uphold the determination by the Department of Justice
and Attorney General
) to release documents to a media company over Justice
Carmody’s objection.
A media organisation (
Seven Network
) had made an earlier application
to DJAG for access to documents concerning various events involving judges of
the Supreme Court
during the time that Justice Carmody held the position of
Chief Justice. On that earlier application, DJAG refused access to the
the requested documents. Shortly after that earlier application was determined
by DJAG, Seven Network made another application
to DJAG seeking access to
documents concerning the internal processing by DJAG of the earlier application.
DJAG determined that some
documents should be released over the objections of
Justice Carmody. Justice Carmody sought an external review of DJAG’s
by the Information Commissioner and appealed to QCATA after the
Information Commissioner affirmed DJAG’s decision.
[62] The two
documents in dispute in
were prepared, or received, by the
Director of DJAG’s Right to Information Unit, Ms Edwards, who was the
decision-maker on
Seven Network’s earlier access application. The first
document was a file note prepared by Ms Edwards of her meeting with
the Supreme Court. The second document was a letter Ms Edwards received from
another judge of the Supreme Court. These
documents conveyed the views of the
two judges as to whether documents sought on Seven Network’s earlier
application should
be released.
[63] Justice
Carmody argued that the disputed documents were documents of an entity to which
the RTI did not apply by reason of the
application of Item 7. The appeal was
upheld, but on grounds which did not concern the application of Item 7.
Nevertheless, Hoeben
J considered the argument which proceeded as
(a) when acting as an arbiter between two contending parties, the Information
Commissioner operates in a quasi-judicial
(b) the disputed documents were prepared, or received, by Ms Edwards in her
position as Director of DJAG’s Right to Information
(c) that position was “connected with” the Information Commissioner
because Ms Edwards was required under the RTI Act
to make a decision
regarding the earlier access application, which decision was reviewable by the
Information Commissioner;
(d) the phrase “connected with” has been recognised to be a
relational term capable of wide
(e) the breadth of the exclusion contemplated by Item 7 is enhanced by the use
of the words “in relation to”, which indicates
that something which
is not itself a quasi-judicial function can nonetheless “relate
to” the quasi-judicial function;
(f) these wide connecting words show that the legislature intended things which
were not themselves documents produced in the performance
of quasi-judicial
functions to be within the scope of the exemption effected by Item 7 as
documents “relating to” that
quasi-judicial function;
(g) the disputed documents were the result of Ms
Edwards consulting with the two judges about disclosure of documents sought in
earlier application. The fact Ms Edwards had undertaken those consultations
meant it was not necessary for the Information Commissioner
to repeat the
exercise during the external review of DJAG’s decision on the earlier
application. In effect, Ms Edwards’
consultations were the first
step in the process leading to the performance of quasi-judicial functions by
the Information Commissioner.
Ms Edwards performed the function of
assembling information and making the decision on the earlier access application
which enlivened
the Information Commissioner’s quasi-judicial
(h) in those circumstances, Ms Edwards held an office “connected
with” the Information Commissioner’s quasi-judicial
(determining the rights of Seven Network on its earlier access application) and
the disputed documents were prepared “in
relation to” that function.
[64] Justice
Carmody argued that this construction of Item 7 should be accepted
(a) in circumstances where items 6 and 8 of Sch 2, Pt 2 of the RTI Act already
exclude a quasi-judicial entity and its staff, Item
7 must be intended to
capture something broader than those two categories;
(b) the application of Item 7 to exclude Ms Edwards would avoid endless access
applications. To construe Item 7 otherwise would
mean that every time an agency
decides an access application it might lead to a second access application for
information concerning
the process by which the agency decided the first
application, and a third application for information about the process followed
in the second application, and so on;
(c) if someone who is consulted by the agency’s decision-maker about
disclosure of documents knows that what is said to the
decision-maker can itself
be the subject of an access application then the agency’s decision-making
process, and the operation
of the RTI Act, will be impaired.
[65] Hoeben J
accepted that, although Ms Edwards did not hold an office or position with the
Information Commissioner, she came with
Item 7, given the breadth of the
connecting words “in relation to”. The factual matrix identified by
Justice Carmody
demonstrated the necessary connection between Ms Edwards’
position as Director of DJAG’s Right to Information Unit and
Information Commissioner. This interpretation avoids the prospect of a
potentially continuous succession of access applications.
A contrary argument,
that Item 7 did not apply because Ms Edwards was not acting “on behalf
of” the Information Commissioner,
was expressly rejected.
[66] Mr Stella
now seeks to challenge the correctness of the reasoning in
two principal bases.
[67] First, Mr
Stella argues that reading Item 7 together with Items 6 and 8 does not support
the broad construction that was accepted
. Mr Stella
acknowledges that the description of the entities in Items 6 and 8 indicates
that Item 7 is intended to capture something
broader than those categories.
However, he submits that the limits on the operation of Item 7 is informed by
the legislative history
which preceded the enactment of the RTI Act.
[68] The concept
of excluding the holder of an office “connected with” a
decision-making body from the scope of access
applications appeared in the
Freedom of Information Act 1992
), which preceded
the RTI Act.
[69] When the
FOI Act was first enacted, this exclusion was limited to “the holder of
a judicial office or other office connected
[70] In 2005,
the FOI Act was amended to extend the exclusion to “a tribunal member or
the holder of an office connected with
Further, the
term “tribunal” was defined to mean one of seven identified
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal; the Children Services Tribunal; the Commercial and
Consumer Tribunal; the Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal; the Land and
Resources Tribunal; the Land Tribunal; or the Mental Health Tribunal.
Consequently, the expanded exclusion
only applied to the holder of an office
connected with one of those tribunals.
the time the exclusion was extended in this way, each of the identified
tribunals had statutory power to arrange for persons
who were not tribunal
members or tribunal staff to perform tasks related to the performance of the
tribunal’s judicial or quasi-judicial
functions. The Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal had power to arrange for a solicitor or counsel, or an officer of
the Anti-Discrimination
Commission, to appear at a proceeding to assist the
tribunal, and a person involved an Anti-Discrimination Tribunal proceeding had
right to use an interpreter in that
proceeding.
The Children
Services Tribunal had power to appoint a facilitator to conduct alternative
dispute resolution,
independent inquirer to inquire into and report to the tribunal about a matter
connected with a review.
the Commercial and Consumer
and the Land and
Resources Tribunal
had power to
appoint mediators. The Land Tribunal had power, on behalf of the State, to
engage persons having suitable qualifications
and experience as consultants to
the tribunal.
The Mental Health
Tribunal had power to appoint a person with appropriate knowledge or experience
to assist it in a hearing.
Stella argues that the legislative intention in extending the exclusion to a
“holder of an office connected with a tribunal”
was to exclude
persons appointed to this type of role, who assisted in the performance of the
tribunal’s judicial or quasi-judicial
[72] Items 1 to
8 of Sch 2, Pt 2 of the RTI Act took effect when that Act replaced the FOI Act.
The effect of the inclusion of Item
7 was to extend the exclusion to the holder
of an office connected with a quasi-judicial
In those circumstances,
Mr Stella argues that this further extension should be understood as
applying to persons, other than members
or staff of a quasi-judicial entity,
who were appointed to the type of role which prompted the exclusion of holders
of an office
connected with a tribunal; that is, persons who were appointed to a
role in which they assist the performance of the entity’s
quasi-judicial
functions. Mr Stella submits that an agency access decision-maker does not come
within that description. Such a
person is not appointed by the quasi-judicial
entity and exercises his or her functions independently of that entity.
[73] In further
support of this argument, Mr Stella contrasts what he characterises as
a statutory prohibition on making an access
application for information
held by the Information
Commissioner,
with the absence
of any equivalent prohibition on making an access application for documents
created by an agency’s principal
officer who deals with an earlier
application.
[74] Mr Stella
then argues that if the construction accepted in
is accepted
– that is, an agency access decision-maker is held to be the holder of an
officer connected with a quasi-judicial
entity on the basis that such a person
makes a decision that is subject to review by the quasi-judicial entity –
there would
be no reason why a public official who makes a decision that is
subject to review by a court or a tribunal would not also be excluded
access applications by the operation of Item 1 (as the holder of an office
connected with a court) or Item 4 (as the holder
of an office connected with a
tribunal). Mr Stella submits that this would be a surprising outcome.
[75] Secondly,
Mr Stella challenges the reasons advanced in
in support of the
construction of Item 7.
[76] In response
to the suggestion that the construction avoids the prospect of a potentially
continuous succession of access applications,
Mr Stella submits that the
legislature has already addressed this through provisions which give the
Information Commissioner power
to declare that a person is a vexatious
[77] As to the
suggestion that third parties who are consulted on access decisions might be
reluctant to provide their views if what
they say could itself be the subject of
an access application, Mr Stella relied on statements by the Information
Commissioner in
Eccleston and Department of Family Services &
Aboriginal & Islander
arguments against disclosure on the basis that candour and frankness would be
inhibited “should be disregarded unless a
very particular factual basis is
laid for the claim”; and that the possibility of future publicity
“would act as a deterrent
against advice which is specious or expedient or
otherwise inappropriate”. In any event, Mr Stella contends that the
legislature
has addressed this issue by making explicit provision for the
protection of an individual’s right to privacy among the factors
non-disclosure.
[78] Mr Stella
advanced many of the same arguments on the QCATA appeal. They were considered
by the judicial member but
University’s submissions on the application for leave to appeal endorse
the reasoning of the judicial member and emphasise
additional matters in
response to Mr Stella’s arguments. For the same reasons given by the
judicial member, as amplified by
the University’s submissions, I am
not persuaded that there is a reasonable argument there has been an error of law
in applying
the reasoning from
Carmody No 5
[79] As the
judicial member observed, it can be accepted that (as Mr Stella submits) the
legislature intended that persons appointed
to roles of the type described in
above would be included as the
holder of an office “connected with” a quasi-judicial entity, but
that does not mean the
category of persons coming within the exclusion is
limited to such roles. As the University submits, the term
“quasi-judicial
entity” covers a broader range of entities than
the term “tribunal”. On that basis, it does not follow that the
characteristics which Mr Stella has identified by reference to persons who have
a role in assisting a tribunal are necessary to conclude
that an office is
“connected with” a quasi-judicial entity within the meaning of Item
principal officer of an agency (or that person’s delegate) may have to
obtain the views of a third party about whether
information falls to be
As the facts in
demonstrate (see
above), on an external review of
the agency’s access decision, the Information Commissioner could consider
the third-party
views obtained by the principal officer/delegate without
repeating that exercise. As a participant in an external review, an agency
would be required comply in a timely way with a reasonable request made by the
Information Commissioner for assistance in relation
to the external review, even
if the agency does not bear the onus on the question the subject of
The Information
Commissioner could require the agency to give the access applicant and the
Information Commissioner an additional
statement containing further and better
particulars of the reasons for t
The Information Commissioner could also require an
agency to conduct a further search for
If, at the completion of an external review, the
Information Commissioner was of the opinion that there was evidence that an
officer had committed a breach of duty or misconduct in the
administration of the IP Act or the RTI Act, the Commissioner would be
to bring the evidence to the notice of the principal officer
In these various
ways, the agency (by its principal officer/delegate) assists in the performance
of the quasi-judicial functions
of the Information Commissioner and, at the same
time, is subject to a degree of supervision by the Information
Commissioner.
[81] To my mind,
these features of the principal officer/delegate’s role in the external
review of decisions on access applications
weaken Mr Stella’s argument
that the effect of the construction of Item 7 in
is to bring
any public official who makes a decision that is subject to review by a court or
a tribunal within either Item 1 (as
the holder of an office connected with
a court) or Item 4 (as the holder of an office connected with a tribunal).
Information would
only be excluded from the operation of the RTI Act or the IP
Act by reason of Item 1 or Item 4 if the public official in question
prepared or
received a document “in relation to” the judicial functions of
a court (for Item 1) or the judicial functions
or quasi-judicial functions
of a tribunal (for Item 4). The application of Item 1 or Item 4 would have
to be determined by reference
to the particular facts of each case. It is far
from clear that every time a public official makes a decision that is subject to
review by a court or a tribunal, that person is brought within the
application of either Item 1 or Item 4.
[82] Another
matter which bears upon the construction of Item 7 in the context of documents
prepared, or received, by the principal
officer/delegate in processing an access
application is that an access application is taken only to apply to documents
that are in
existence on the day the application is received by the
I accept, as the
University submits, this means that such processing documents are excluded from
the scope of the access application
to which they relate. Given that exclusion,
it seems unlikely that the legislature intended that those processing documents
be the subject of a later access application.
[83] As I am not
persuaded that there is a reasonable argument there has been an error of law in
applying the reasoning from
Carmody No 5
, I would also refuse leave to
appeal in respect of ground 3.
[84] Even if I
had been persuaded there is a reasonable argument as to error of law, I would
still not have granted leave to appeal.
That is because I am not satisfied that
leave is necessary to correct a substantial injustice or to address a question
general or public importance.
[85] Mr Stella
submits that the effect of the Information Commissioner’s application of
the reasoning in
was that he was refused access to the IP Act
processing documents sought in the second access application without the
Information
Commissioner balancing the public interest by reference to the
factors which favour disclosure against the factors which favour nondisclosure.
He argues that if the reasoning from
was applied in error then
the public interest balancing test should be performed. However, his
submissions do not explain why refusal
of access to the IP Act processing
documents without the public interest balancing test being performed necessarily
causes a substantial
injustice. The only relevant matter he identified in his
oral submissions was the potential for public officials to engage in misconduct
in dealing with an access
application.
He submitted that,
in such circumstances, there could be a legitimate public interest in the
disclosure of documents that were created
or received by a principal
officer/delegate in the process of dealing with an access
application.
However, Mr Stella
was careful to state that he was not suggesting that there was any misconduct in
the manner that the University
dealt with the first access
application,
as distinct from
misconduct in the handling of the complaint made against him (see
[86] On this
point, it is important to note that the Information Commissioner would have seen
the IP Act processing documents during
the external review, and the judicial
member would have seen those documents when considering the QCATA appeal. If
those documents
contained evidence of misconduct in the University’s
handling of the first access application, one would think that the Information
Commissioner or the judicial member would have identified that fact and
commented on it in their
Neither decision
suggests that the IP process documents contain such evidence; nor does any of
the material in the appeal record.
circumstances where Mr Stella does not positively assert that the IP processing
documents contain evidence of misconduct in
the University’s handling of
the first access complaint and there is, in any event, no basis to think that
the documents might
contain such evidence, I am not satisfied that the
Information Commissioner’s decision to refuse access to those documents
without performing the public interest balancing test caused substantial
injustice to Mr Stella.
[88] Finally, I
accept that the Information Commissioner’s refusal to grant access to the
IP processing documents, and the legal
basis for that decision, raises questions
that are important to Mr Stella. However, I am not satisfied that Mr
Stella’s submissions
on the construction of Item 7 raise a question of
sufficient general or public importance to warrant granting leave to
[89] It follows
that the application for leave to appeal in respect of both grounds 2 and 3
should also be dismissed.
[90] During the
hearing of the application for leave, Mr Stella was invited to make submissions
on costs. He was not able to make
submissions at that
As the University has
been entirely successful in opposing the application for leave to appeal, I
cannot presently see why costs
should not follow the event in accordance with
the general rule. Nevertheless, I would accede to Mr Stella’s request to
given an opportunity to make submissions on the issue of costs.
[91] The further
orders I would make are as follows:
to appeal in respect of grounds 2 and 3 is refused.
application for leave to appeal is dismissed.
the applicant wishes to contend for a form of costs order other than that he be
ordered to pay the respondent’s costs of
the application on the standard
basis, he must file and serve written submissions limited to three pages in
support of the costs
order he contends for within 14 days of the date of this
no such submissions are filed, the order as to costs will be that the applicant
pay the respondent’s costs of the application
on the standard basis.
such submissions are filed, the respondent must file and serve any written
submissions in response limited to three pages within
14 days of receiving the
applicant’s submissions.
submissions on costs are filed, the question of costs will be decided on the
Griffith University Act
Thomson v University of
(1864) 33 LJ Ch 625
Griffith University v Tang
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99
, 111 [19].
Ridd v James Cook
[2021] HCA 32
(2021) 274 CLR 495
, 518-519 [30], 529 [64].
RTI Act, s 114.
Information Privacy Act
). References to provisions of the IP
Act in these reasons are to the IP Act as it was in force as at 1 March
IP Act, s 94.
IP Act, s 99.
S41 and Griffith
[2023] QICmr 64.
IP Act, s 132.
Stella v Griffith
[2025] QCATA 20.
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
ss 150(2)(b)
and (3)(b).
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
s 150(3)(a).
Pivovarova v
[2019] QCA 256
(2019) 2 QR 508
, [2]-[10];
Allen v Queensland Building and
Construction Commission
[2024] QCA 24
, [16]-[19].
Crime and Corruption
Commission v Andersen
[2021] QCA 222
Allen v Queensland Building
and Construction Commission
[2024] QCA 24
, [21]-[23].
IP Act, s 27 and Sch 3
Stella v Griffith
[2025] QCATA 20
, [56]-[57] (footnotes omitted).
References to provisions of
the RTI Act in these reasons are to the RTI Act as it was in force as at
1 March 2023.
IP Act, s 67(1).
IP Act, s 67(2)(a).
To similar effect, see RTI Act, s 47(2)(a).
IP Act, s 64(4). To
similar effect, see RTI Act, s 44(4).
S41 and Griffith
[2023] QICmr 64
, [47] and [50]-[51].
Stella v Griffith
[2025] QCATA 20
Appellant’s Outline
of Argument (Updated) filed 27 August 2025, [33].
Appellant’s Outline
of Argument (Updated) filed 27 August 2025, [33].
RTI Act, s 49.
Queensland Nurses’
Union and Sunshine Coast Hospital and Health Service; Ramsay Health Care (Third
[2017] QICmr 6
Star News Group Pty Ltd
and Southern Downs Regional Council
[2019] QICmr 39
Taylor and Department of
[2021] QICmr 64
Appellant’s Outline
of Argument (Updated) filed 27 August 2025, [28]-[29].
See the word
“including” in ss 49(3)(b) and (c) of the RTI Act.
S41 and Griffith
[2023] QICmr 64
S41 and Griffith
[2023] QICmr 64
Appellant’s Reply
(Updated) filed 27 August 2025, [23].
S41 and Griffith
[2023] QICmr 64
, [17]-[23], [53].
Stella v Griffith
[2025] QCATA 20
This was not a case where
the University was unable to locate any documents which might fall to be
disclosed under the second access
application. To the contrary, the Information
Commissioner made a finding that the University located documents which related
its internal processing of the first access application: see
Griffith University
[2023] QICmr 64
IP Act, s 43(1).
IP Act, ss 13 and 17.
RTI Act, s 14(2).
[2018] QCATA 18
Stella v Griffith
[2025] QCATA 20
, [93]-[100].
Stella v Griffith
[2025] QCATA 20
The appeal was made
pursuant to s 119 of the RTI Act.
Cairns Port Authority v
[1995] 2 Qd R 470
R v Khazaal
[2012] HCA 26
246 CLR 601
[45], [47], [52].
s 11(1)(e)(ii).
FOI Act (Reprint No. 8M, as
in force as on 31 May 2005), s 11(1)(fa).
FOI Act (Reprint No. 8M, as
in force as on 31 May 2005), s 11(4).
Anti-Discrimination Act
(Qld) (Reprint No. 6H, as in force on 3 December 2004), ss 184-
Children Services
Tribunal Act 2000
(Qld) (Reprint No. 1D, as in force on 11 April 2005),
Children Services
Tribunal Act 2000
(Qld) (Reprint No. 1D, as in force on 11 April 2005),
Commercial and Consumer
Tribunal Act 2003
(Qld) (Reprint No. 1D, as in force on 22 April 2005),
Land and Resources
Tribunal Act 1999
(Qld) (Reprint No. 2I, as in force on 25 March 2005),
Aboriginal Land Act
(Qld) (Reprint as in force on 25 March 2005),
Mental Health Act
(Qld) (Reprint No. 2C, as in force on 29 April 2005), s 462.
The application of the
exclusion to the holder of an office connected with a court or a tribunal
already having been in place under
the FOI Act and repeated in Items 1 and 4 of
Sch 2, Pt 2 of the RTI Act.
RTI Act, s 26; IP Act,
RTI Act s 114; IP Act,
[1993] QICmr 2
[1993] 1 QAR 60
[132]-[133].
RTI Act, Sch 4 Pt 3 item 3;
Sch 4 Pt 4 item 6(1).
Stella v Griffith
[2025] QCATA 20
, [96]-[99].
IP Act, s 56; RTI Act,
IP Act, s 109; RTI
IP Act, s 112; RTI
IP Act, s 115; RTI
Act, s 102.
IP Act, s 126; RTI
Act, s 113.
IP Act, s 47; RTI Act,
Transcript 1-29:9-12.
Transcript 1-30:39 to
Transcript 1-29:10-11.
The Information
Commissioner’s obligation to bring evidence of a breach of duty or
misconduct by an agency’s officer
in the administration of the IP Act to
the notice of the agency’s principal officer (IP Act, s 126) is
relevant in this regard.
Transcript 1-49 to
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (333 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter