URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2008/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
FAA, Re [2008] QGAAT 3 (11 January 2008)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL, QUEENSLAND
[2008] QGAAT 3
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Application for Authorisation of a Conflict Transaction;
Application for
order about EPA - Personal and Financial;
Application for declaration of
capacity for adult;
Guardianship Application;
Administration
Application.
In the matter of FAA
MATTER NUMBER:
2007/3918 2007/3919 2007/3920
2007/3921 2007/3922 2007/4357
2007/4401 2007/5429 2007/5430
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
DATE OF HEARING:
29 November 2007
DATE OF ORDER:
29 November 2007
DATE OF REASONS:
11 January 2008
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
J Cockerill Presiding Member
J Allen Member
R Clifford Member
CATCHWORDS:
AUTHORISATION OF A CONFLICT TRANSACTION-VALIDITY OF ENDURING POWER OF
ATTORNEY-APPLICATION FOR COSTS.
Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17
[1954] 91 CLR 423
Ranclaud v Cabban
(1988) NSW Conv R 55-383
, (Unreported) QSC 14 October 1998
No.3029 of 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
, Schedule 1 and 3
DECLARATION ABOUT CAPACITY
1(a) That FAA does not have capacity for all
financial and personal matters.
1(b) That FAA had capacity to execute an Enduring Power of Attorney on 3 March
ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
the Enduring Power of Attorney made by FAA on 3 March 2006 is declared valid
pursuant to
Section 113(1)
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
CONFLICT TRANSACTION
RF, AF, SF and LF as the appointed attorneys for FAA, are hereby authorised to
enter into the conflict transactions, namely,
the continuation of the farming of
those areas of the following properties of FAA that was being undertaken on 3
March 2006, rent
free until further order:
property known as “One Farm”;
property known as “Two Farm”;
property known as “Three Farm”;
(iv) Lots 2 and
3 on the property known as “Four Farm” and ;
property known as “Five Farm”.
(i) The property known as “Six Farm”; and
(ii) Lots 4 and 5 on the property known as “Four Farm”.
4. That the attorneys, RF, LF and SF, continue to reside rent free in the
following residences:
(a) RF – at the property known as “Three Farm”.
(b) LF – at the property known as “Seven Farm”.
(c) SF – at the property known as “One Farm”.
RF is authorised to retain the sum of
$5,323.93 plus GST
he charged FAA
for maintaining the properties known as “Seven Farm” and
“Eight Farm”.
RF is directed to refund the sum of
$6,043.75 plus GST
he has charged FAA
for maintaining the properties known as “One Farm” and “Two
That the application in relation to the use of a motor vehicle owned
FAA is approved.
the application by AF for withdrawal of the application for approval of a
conflict transaction in relation to expenses incurred
in managing the affairs of
FAA is granted.
the expenses charged by the attorneys for the management of FAA’s affairs,
other than the $5,323.93 plus GST referred to
in paragraph 5, be refunded to
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION
the application for the appointment of a guardian and the application for the
appointment of an administrator for FAA are dismissed
PLAN OF MANAGEMENT
pursuant to
section 122(1)(d)
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
attorneys are to present to the Tribunal for approval a plan of management that
adequately provides for the current and future
needs of FAA within three (3)
the costs incurred of and incidental to the various applications in the sum of
$67,990.08, calculated in accordance with the
terms of the Costs Agreement, be
paid out of the estate of FAA.
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
[1] FAA is 82 years of age and resides in an Aged Care Facility.
[2] Her late husband, CF, died on 15 June 2002 and appointed his sons and
daughter RF, AF, LF and SF as joint executors.
[3] Under the terms of his will, FAA is the sole beneficiary of his estate. As
the surviving joint tenant, FAA also succeeded to
assets held in joint tenancy
with her husband.
[4] FAA has substantial investments and property interests, both in her own
right, and as a partner in F Enterprises. Documentation
provided to the Tribunal
estimates the value of FAA’s real and personal estate at $22.583M.
[5] The family have been growing fruit for three generations and over this time
CF and FAA accumulated several farming properties.
CF also had other property
interests in partnership with his brothers and sister that derived from the
estate of his late father
called F Enterprises.
[6] As they grew up, RF, AF (until the early 1990s), LF and SF continued to live
on their parents properties. RF and SF continue
to conduct farming activities on
these properties.
[7] On 20 January 2006, FAA was admitted to the hospital suffering from a
fractured neck of her right femur as a result of a fall
at her home. Some ten
years previously, she suffered a stroke from which she appears to have
[8] She was discharged from hospital on 27 February 2006 and admitted to a
Nursing Centre and Hostel.
[9] On 3 March 2006, FAA made an Enduring Power of Attorney appointing RF, AF,
LF and SF, as her attorneys for personal and financial
matters and authorised
any two of her attorneys to make decisions.
[10] FAA was transferred to the aged care facility on 19 June 2006.
[11] The Adult Guardian conducted an investigation into the conduct of the
attorneys in the management of the financial affairs of
[12] The following concerns were raised with the Adult Guardian or identified by
that Office during the conduct of that investigation
which concluded 12
September 2007.
CF’s estate had not been administered;
(b) that FAA is
being requested to make decisions about complex financial matters when she does
not have capacity;
(c) a proposed
profit sharing arrangement for a subdivision of a substantial landholding
belonging to FAA and profits realised from
her interest in F Enterprises;
(d) alleged
loans to FAA’s children;
(e) payment for
services by RF from FAA’s funds;
(f) attorneys
allegedly not consulting with each other;
(g) ongoing use
of a vehicle registered to FAA; and
capacity to execute an Enduring Power of Attorney on 3 March 2006.
[13] The Adult Guardian’s investigation and report into concerns (c) to
(h) have given rise to the applications presently before
the Tribunal. Concern
(a) related not to the actions of RF, AF, LF and SF as attorneys but rather as
executors. Consequently, they
are not within the jurisdiction of this Tribunal
although it is understood that appropriate action had been taken to complete the
administration of the estate. The Adult Guardian found insufficient evidence to
substantiate the allegation referred to in concern
The Issues and the Legislation
[14] The issues for the Tribunal are:
(a) Does FAA
now have capacity for personal and financial matters?
(b) Did FAA
have capacity to make an Enduring Power of Attorney on 3 March 2006?
(c) Is there a
need for a Guardian? If so, who should be appointed?
(d) Is there a
need for an Administrator? If so, who should be appointed?
actions of RF, LF and SF constitute conflict transactions? If so, should the
transactions be authorised or approved by
And as a result of an application made by
Counsel for the applicants at the conclusion of the hearing –
(f) Are the applicants AF and DF entitled to costs of and incidental to the
application?
[15] For the Tribunal to have jurisdiction, it is necessary that the adult have
impaired capacity to make decisions about personal
and or financial matters.
Schedule 4 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
as the ability to:-
(a) understanding the
nature and effect of decisions about the matter; and
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
(c) communicating the decisions in some way.
[16] Essential to the application for an order about an Enduring Power of
Attorney, namely its validity, is the determination of
the capacity of FAA (the
principal) on 3 March 2006, the day it was made.
[17] In this respect, Schedule 3 of the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
in the same terms as the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
also sets out what constitutes an
understanding of the nature and effect of an Enduring Power of Attorney.
41(1) A principal may make an enduring power of attorney only
if the principal understands the nature and effect of the enduring power
(2) Understanding the nature and effect of the enduring power of
attorney includes understanding the following matters-
(a) the principal may, in the power of attorney, specify or limit the
power to be given to an attorney and instruct an attorney about
the exercise of
(b) when the power begins;
(c) once the power for a matter begins, the attorney has power to make,
and will have full control over, the matter subject to the
terms of information
(d) the principal may revoke the enduring power of attorney at any time
the principal is capable of making an enduring power of attorney
giving the same
(e) the power the principal has given continues even if the principal
becomes a person who has impaired capacity;
(f) at any time the principal is not capable of revoking the enduring
power of attorney, the principal is unable to effectively oversee
the use of the
[19] The issues about whether there is a need for a guardian or an administrator
turn on the determination of the question of the
validity of the Enduring Power
of Attorney and, if in the affirmative, whether there has been anything in the
conduct of the attorneys
as to justify their removal.
[20] The issues concerning conflict transactions on the part of the attorneys
relate to the provisions of
Powers of Attorney Act
that require an attorney to avoid a conflict transaction.
[21] This provision, however, only applies if the principal has not authorised
the attorney either specifically or generally to undertake
transactions.
[22] While the statutory form of Enduring Power of Attorney used in this case
does not have specific provision directing the principal
to the question, the
Enduring Power of Attorney of 3 March 2006 does not contain any such
authorisation in that section dealing with
the terms of the attorneys power.
[23] While this application purports to have been brought under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
, in fact all the questions
relate to the actions of the attorneys in terms of the obligations under the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
[24] With respect to conflict transactions the
Powers of Attorney Act
73(1) An attorney for a financial matter may enter into a
conflict transaction only if the principal authorises the transaction, conflict
transaction of that type or conflict transactions generally.
conflict transaction
is a transaction in which there may
be conflict or which results in conflict, between -
(a) the duty of an attorney towards the principal; and
(b) either –
(i) the interests of the attorney or a relation, business associate or
close friend of the attorney; or
(ii) another duty of the attorney.
Section 118
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
enables the
court, among other things, to make an order or declaration about a matter
relating to the Act including the exercise
of an attorney’s power or
another issue involving an attorney’s power.
Section 118
(2) provides further that without limiting subsection (1), if
the court considers it in the best interest of the principal, the court
order and subject to the terms the court considers appropriate, authorise an
attorney, either generally or in a specific
case, to undertake a transaction
that the attorney is not otherwise authorised to undertake or may not otherwise
be authorised to
[27] By virtue of
section 109A
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Tribunal is given the same jurisdiction and powers for Enduring Powers of
Attorney as the court. The Act applies as if references
to the Supreme Court
were references to the Tribunal.
THE PARTIES
[28] FAA, the adult, was not present at the hearing.
Present at the hearing were:
Representative from the Office of the Adult Guardian;
Representative from the Public Trust Office.
Not present at the hearing:
Leave was granted for CH of Counsel, instructed by ML of M Solicitors, to
represent RF, AF and LF.
The Evidence
[29] In addition to the written material contained on the Tribunal file, all of
the parties attending the hearing were given the
opportunity to express their
views. These views, where specifically relied upon by the Tribunal, are
discussed below.
DOES FAA LACK CAPACITY FOR PERSONAL AND FINANCIAL
[30] Medical evidence presented to the Tribunal including nursing notes from the
hospital and the Nursing Centre and Hostel is that
FAA suffered a CVA in 1996
and a fractured R neck of Femur in January 2006. She has congestive cardiac
failure, non-insulin dependent
diabetes mellitus and ischaemic dementia.
[31] Dr B, FAA’s regular medical practitioner, in his Health Professional
Report of 31 January 2007 advised that FAA is suffering
from acquired brain
injury (L CVA) and ischaemic dementia. She has a score of 0/10 for the
orientation and registration part of the
MMSE (Mini Mental State Examination)
and she was uncooperative for the balance of the test. She is totally dependent
on others for
personal care and is not capable of looking after her financial
[32] All parties agreed with this medical opinion and concurred that FAA does
not have capacity to make personal or financial decisions.
[33] The Tribunal finds that FAA does not have capacity to make personal or
financial decisions.
DID FAA HAVE CAPACITY TO MAKE AN ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
ON 3 MARCH 2006?
[34] Nursing records of the Nursing Centre relating to FAA’s care and her
behaviour on or around the date of execution of the
document contain the
following notations with respect to FAA:
Interim Care Plan
Behaviours – verbally disruptive
Progress Notes
28February – Fluctuating cognitive ability, full set up and cooking
with diabetic diet... .......
2/3/06 2100 hrs - Constant attention necessary to prevent noisy
3/3/06 1235 hrs FAA generally lethargic today, difficulty with swallowing
medication consuming small amounts of food. Settled with
attention. Family
visited this PM
At 2000 hrs the records note that FAA was administered Temazepam by the
registered nurse with the reason listed as “
records state that the effect was “
Behaviour assessment
Attention seeking. Yells out for help. Asking for carers, family. Upset
and anxious when family leave. Demands attention when staff
attending to other
resident’s needs.
Behaviour Identification Chart
On 2 March at 2.15pm was calling out loudly “
” and was attended to and settled. At 3.30 pm FAA
continues to yell out loudly
”. At 4.40pm FAA was yelling out
loudly and calling for her husband. It is noted that the
resident’s family visited and settled for a couple of
On 3 March 2006 the chart notes “
resident calling out in a
distressed manner. Tried to understand resident’s anguish. Gave
reassurance, Settled for a short time.
At 5.30 pm calling out “
Reassurance given, settled for a short time.
calling out to staff. Reassurance given. Settled for a short
[35] The Entry Baseline Assessment Date for New Residents completed on 28
February 2006 contains the following notation: - “
comprehension –
variable”; Behaviours – yes- noisy - behaviour frequent loud verbal
intrusion, calling out and screaming
[36] A Mini Mental State Examination conducted by a registered nurse showed a
score of 11/30. The test document states that a score
of less than 22 may
indicate significant impairment.
[37] The Adult Guardian reports that although Dr P, General Practitioner, made
an initial visit to FAA on 2 March 2007 (sic) and
made notes there is no
specific reference to her decision making capacity or any diagnosis of
[38] Information was obtained from GB, Solicitor, who witnessed the document.
The Adult Guardian reported that his response to questions
were as follows:
I can’t recall the specific words or questions I
put to FAA. Initially, she was reluctant to sign the EPA as she thought that
attorneys were not accountable and could deal with her assets with impunity. I
told FAA that this was not the case and that if
she signed off her attorneys
were accountable and if they (the attorneys) were acting improperly the
attorneys could be investigated
by the Public Trustee. I read through the EPA to
her explaining the various provisions to her as I went and in my opinion she
the nature and effect of the EPA and signed off the document.
I can’t recall who approached me about the attorney. It was more
likely that (sic) not a family member or someone from the home
she was moving
into. I don’t believe the approach came from FAA.
To the best of my recollection with FAA and myself were son RF, daughter
LF and son SF.
I satisfied myself as to FAA’s capacity from my observation on the
day and my experience in acting for her over a period of
I didn’t sight or obtain any medical opinion as to FAA’s
capacity as I didn’t believe there was any necessity to
don’t recall taking any notes in the course of witnessing the document.
[39] The Adult Guardian’s report shows that responses were obtained from
others who were present at the time. Extracts from
these responses are as
“I was told by RF to meet him and GB at the nursing home to get the
power of attorney from mum, this was the first I had heard
of it. We went into
mum’s room and GB talked to mum about signing the document he was very
good in the way he approached my
mother. RF, LF and I were also present. RF
explained to mum that we needed her to sign the document so that we had the
pay for her care using her savings. To my surprise mum signed since
she has never trusted RF before. I definitely believe that mum
was not fully
aware of all the powers that an attorney has.”
“Power of attorney was first mentioned in the minutes of meeting
dated 4/02/03 and RF, LF and SF were at various stages from
then on to consult
with our mother to get her to initiate an Enduring Power of Attorney. When my
mother broke her hip, it became
imperative that she have an Enduring Power of
Attorney drawn up as my mother was no longer physically capable to running her
The document was signed in front of GB, attorney for Estate of CF, RF,
LF and SF. At this meeting SF was unhappy because he wanted
At no time since FAA was physically incapacitated by a fall in early 2006
did we bother her with such matters (complex financial matters).
After she was
unable to return to her own home and admitted to a nursing home we requested in
the presence of a solicitor at Mum’s
bedside and she consider setting up a
power of attorney so that her family could take the burden of managing her
complex affairs
realising that life was going to be stressful enough for Mum to
cope with her new physical limitation. It was for Mum’s peace
of mind that
four offspring siblings were nominated to be attorneys.
[40] The Report goes on to say that the Adult Guardian entertains significant
concerns about FAA’s capacity to make an Enduring
Power of Attorney. These
concerns stem from the fact that the document was executed in the presence of
three of the proposed attorneys
and before a solicitor who FAA had raised
concerns about over several years. This scenario is said to be not conducive to
alleviating
any claim of undue influence, however subtle and unwitting it may
be. The Adult Guardian draws attention to FAA being initially reluctant
the document due to concerns about the accountability of the attorneys.
[41] An ACAT assessment including a Mini Mental State Examination was performed
on 12 March 2006. FAA scored 11/30 on the MMSE.
[42] Based on the observations of FAA’s behaviour at the care facility,
the Adult Guardian maintained that FAA’s ability
to understand complex
financial matters relating to her substantial assets appears to be
” by March 2006.
[43] An Enduring Power of Attorney is essentially an appointment of an agent
with the special character that it does not lapse on
the loss of capacity of the
principal. To make a valid appointment, the person must be able to understand
the statutory requirements
section 41(2)
Powers of Attorney Act
which also include the elements involved, at common law, in the
appointment of an agent such as -
nature and extent of the assets to be managed
decisions likely to be made on the principal’s behalf
ability of the attorney to carry out the tasks
Ranclaud v Cabban
(1988) NSW Conv
[44] As to the required level of understanding, the person must be able to
understand the nature of the transaction when it is explained.
[1954] HCA 17
[1954] 91 CLR 423)
[45] The evidence of Dr B is that in his opinion, in December 2005 (i.e. prior
to the fall) FAA was capable of signing an Enduring
Power of Attorney. When he
saw her in June 2006, she was not. He comments
that the ‘piece of the
jigsaw’ re 3
March 06 would lie in the notes of the other
nursing home (Nursing Centre and Hostel)) or the treating doctor’s
[46] As indicated earlier, Dr P, General Practitioner, made an initial visit to
FAA on 2 March 2007 (sic) and made notes. Unfortunately
these are not very
any diagnosis of dementia.
[47] While it is true that FAA had very low MMSE on 12 March 2006, this as some
9 days after the event.
[48] Nursing charts from the hospital show that the fall had a significant
effect on FAA’s cognitive ability. This is quite
a common occurrence in
older people.
[49] However, by 13 February 2006 some 3 1/2 weeks after the fall she appears to
have recovered mentally. An ACAT assessment performed
on that date by a
geriatrician records an MMSE score of 24/30.
[50] This assessment was obtained by registry staff during the hearing and does
not appear to have been previously available to the
Adult Guardian.
[51] In these respects it needs to be kept in mind that MMSE tests are only an
indicator and there can be many reasons why a person
might score poorly and
include the person simply deciding not to participate fully in the exercise.
[52] The nursing notes around the time of the Enduring Power of Attorney do have
disturbing features in so far as her behaviour is
concerned and these can often
be indicators of a person’s lack of understanding of the effect of their
[53] Evidence was given by the family, albeit with some reluctance, that FAA had
a very strong personality, perhaps a controlling
disposition, and didn’t
trust others in matters related to her affairs. The family at the hearing
described a long term history
from their mother of verbal outbursts and physical
display of her displeasure. They indicated their mother’s outbursts at the
nursing home, in their view, was not inconsistent with this past behaviour.
[54] The investigations of the Adult Guardian support this picture of a very
independent woman. Material before the Tribunal shows
that at one time she
engaged private solicitors in an attempt to bring pressure to bear on those
children who were executors of her
husband’s estate. She was unwilling to
accept their explanations for delay even though based on legal and financial
It appears that once she had made the point she did not proceed with
taking further action against them.
[55] RF gave evidence, with which his siblings present concurred, about how he
would bring accounts together with cheques to her
for approval and signature.
This practice he says continued after she made the Enduring Power of Attorney.
Up until she moved to
the nursing centre says that he continued to discuss with
her what was happening on the properties including the development of the
partnership property Eight farm.
[56] The Adult Guardian made submissions about the witness, GB’s failure
to take adequate notes; the extent of his examination
of her knowledge and
understanding in terms of the requirements of the Act, particularly in view of
the very large and complex estate
involved; to interview FAA alone and the
absence of a conflict clause in the document. The point being that these
shortcomings impacted
on the weight that should be attached to his evidence.
[57] GB a very experienced and respected solicitor was unable to give evidence
before the Tribunal as he had another commitment.
The contents of his Email to
the Adult Guardian concerning the execution of the Enduring Power of Attorney
appear above. He acted
for the family since 1988, knew them well and saw FAA on
many occasions since the death of her husband. He is therefore a person
in a very good position to assess her capabilities and understanding. Indeed, he
says that he had no doubt about her capacity.
He saw no necessity to obtain
medical opinion. Clearly, as an experienced solicitor his mind would have been
directed to the potential
issue, given FAA’s circumstances. Furthermore, a
medical opinion would have been readily available had he had any concerns
course of his preparation of the document and his attendance on her.
[58] The situation in this matter is not dissimilar to
(Unreported) QSC 14 October 1998 No.3029 of 1998. Here, Muir J placed
considerable weight on the knowledge and experience of the
solicitor witness and
the process employed by him to satisfy himself of the principal’s
capacity. Indeed, it may well be that
GB’s longstanding association with
FAA could have placed him in a superior position to the witness in the Scanlon
[59] In a situation of a large and complex estate, the law does not require a
person to have the same degree of knowledge as a person
of modest means would
have of their affairs. Also, it is sufficient if the person understands the
terms of the document “
when it is explained
”. GB and the
others present (despite their being interested parties who gave FAA a simplified
version of its purpose) all have
said that he explained the terms of the
document to her and she appeared to understand it.
[60] While the initial reluctance of FAA to make the Enduring Power of Attorney
was considered by the Adult Guardian to be indicative
of her inability to make
the decision freely and voluntarily, it is also consistent with the actions of a
person who is bringing
her mind to bear on the nature and effect of the
[61] Her reaction, rather than being suggestive of coercion, appears to be
consistent with the evidence about her careful or suspicious
nature in relation
to the involvement of others, including her family, in her affairs. Most
importantly, it appears to indicate that
she did understand not only what the
document would enable her attorneys to do but also what safeguards were in place
[62] It needs to be remembered that her late husband had made an Enduring Power
of Attorney some years previously appointing RF,
AF and LF as attorneys. When CF
lost capacity, it was acted upon in relation to the sale of a Home Unit. As RF
She knew how it worked
”. Being the type of person that
FAA appears to have been, it is difficult to see how she would not have had a
good knowledge
of the ramifications of such an appointment.
[63] In so far as GB’s perceived shortcomings are concerned it is
important in this case to distinguish the process from the
competence of the
[64] This still leaves us with the inconsistency between the views of her
solicitor GB and members of the family and assumptions
that might be drawn from
the nursing notes.
[65] Counsel for the applicants invited the Tribunal to consider that there did
not appear to be a “
marrying up
” of the calling out behaviour
with FAA’s level of alertness. She made the point that this behaviour does
not necessarily
correlate with lack of capacity.
[66] The evidence of the Nursing Home charts tell us that FAA was
noisy and disruptive behaviours. She became upset and
anxious when family leave.
This is indeed how she was on the evening of the
3 March, having been described earlier in the day as being “
”. Nursing staff also regarded her as having fluctuating
cognitive ability.
[67] An examination of the nursing notes points to FAA’s periods of low
blood sugar levels – consistent with her condition
of non-insulin
dependent diabetes. As a consequence this may well have contributed to her
having varying levels of lucidity from
time to time.
[68] This may provide some assistance in reconciling any perceived inconsistency
between the medical records and the evidence. The
evidence is such, however,
that it is not possible to completely account for this inconsistency.
[69] SF, who chose not to appear in response to the Notice of Hearing, is the
only person close to FAA to have expressed a negative
view of her cognitive
ability. Faced with this conflict of opinion, the Tribunal prefers the views of
GB and the family. This is
based on GB’s long association with FAA and his
understanding of the legal requirements. In so far as SF and his siblings are
concerned, it is known that there is antipathy between them because of their
refusal as attorneys (quite correctly it would seem)
to advance him a
considerable amount of money from his mothers funds for a private farming
[70] Under the General Principles in Schedule 1 of the
Powers of Attorney Act
an adult (the principal) is presumed to have capacity for a matter; in
this case an Enduring Power of Attorney.
[71] This means that it is not for a principal or, someone on his or her behalf
to prove that they had capacity. Rather, the evidence
must be such as to
establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the principal did not have
capacity to make an Enduring Power
of Attorney. If after examination of all the
evidence and applying this standard, the Tribunal is left with a doubt, then
must be resolved in favour of the person having capacity.
[72] Having regard to all the evidence, the Tribunal finds that FAA had capacity
to make an Enduring Power of Attorney at that time
on 3 March 2006 when it was
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF A GUARDIAN?
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF AN ADMINISTRATOR?
[73] Since the finding of FAA’s capacity leads to a determination that the
Enduring Power of Attorney of 3 March 2006 is valid,
there is no need for the
appointment of a guardian or an administrator, unless there is on the evidence
some conduct on the part
of the attorneys justifying their removal.
[74] This aspect is dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.
DO THE FOLLOWING MATTERS CONSTITUTE A CONFLICT TRANSACTION ON
THE PART OF RF, LF AND SF? IF SO SHOULD THE TRANSACTIONS BE AUTHORISED
APPROVED BY THE TRIBUNAL?
[75] The matters which are the subject of these applications are:
(a) use of farmland by RF and SF;
(b) use of houses by RF and LF;
(c) expenses for the maintenance of the properties known as “One
Farm” and “Two Farm”, the “Seven Farm”
“Eight Farm” by RF;
(d) use of FAA’s motor vehicle;
(e) expenses incurred in managing the affairs of FAA; and
(f) joint venture in relation to the development of “Seven Farm”.
[76] At the hearing the following applications were
(e) expenses incurred in managing the affairs of FAA;
(f) joint venture in relation to the development of “Seven
[77] While a decision of this Tribunal on the applications; (e) and (f) is
therefore not required it is nevertheless appropriate
in the context of
sanctioning the withdrawal to make some observations.
[78] With respect to (e), it is noted that the payment of such fees are not
authorised by the document nor are the applicant attorneys
professional
administrators.
[79] With respect to (f), the material before the Tribunal indicates that that
joint venture involved the use of FAA’s assets
with the net proceeds to be
shared between her and the five children. She had a similar view with respect to
her interest in the
partnership assets. Statements from family members are to
the effect that the proposal arose in 2004/early 2005 and FAA was favourably
disposed to the idea. This is also confirmed by AT, Solicitor, from whom she
sought advice. The proposal did however involve the
use of FAA’s assets.
On the face of it complex questions of law arise particularly since the proposal
was never documented,
a step that would have been required if the interests of
the parties were to be perfected. When documentation prepared by GB was
presented to her she refused to sign, apparently on the basis that this
represented a slight on her integrity.
[80] As the sole registered proprietor of the land in question has now lost
capacity, it is difficult to see how the joint venture
could proceed without the
assistance of the court.
Use of farmland
[81] The applicants outlined a long history of the involvement of a number of
the children in farming the properties dating from
when some were still
[82] Initially the farming of certain parts of the land was conducted in
partnership with their parents with each taking a 1/3 share
in the net proceeds
of the crop.
[83] To illustrate the largely informal way in which the farming business was
conducted within the family, RF gave the following
as an example. From the
evidence given it appears that, save for one exception, as between members of
the family business arrangements
were not formally documented. RF gave evidence
that he started farming on the property when he was 8 years of age.
[84] He told how he and his parents jointly grew fruit on One, Two, Five, Three,
Four and Six Farms. He and his wife took 1/3 of
the profits.
[85] He went on to say that the partnership ended in 1980 when he started
farming his own fruit, on Five, Three, Four and Six farms.
His father continued
to grow his own fruit on these properties.
[86] A similar arrangement occurred with SF who also went into partnership with
his parents around 1981 when he was 16 years of age.
He and his father farmed
Seven, One, Two, Four, and Six farms.
[87] In 1985, RF entered into a 15 year lease agreement with his parents at a
nominal fee of $900. The lease was for the whole of
Five farm. The $900 was
never paid and never asked for. He said that the sole purpose of the lease
agreement was to provide security
for his family.
[88] When the lease expired nothing changed. He kept farming the property.
[89] In 1998, when SF ended the partnership with his parents, the fruit that had
been planted were divided up between him and his
[90] After initially considering a tourism business and then operating a nursery
on one of the properties, in about 2003 SF started
farming vegetables on one of
the properties. Apparently, he continues to do so as it appears to be the denial
by the attorneys of
his request for $300,000 to put in a new crop that has
created antipathy between them.
[91] As age precluded his father from active involvement in the farm, RF grew
his father’s fruit. A charge of $12 per hour
increasing to $20 per hour
was agreed together with a management fee of $1,000 per month for a number of
months in 2000.
[92] His father retained all the profits from the crop.
[93] He continued to farm his father’s fruit until around 2005 due to the
four year cycle of the crop.
Use of Houses
[94] Evidence was given that RF had been living on the property called Three
Farm since February 1973. It appears that it has always
been accepted that this
is his home. He has never paid rent and has carried out renovations and he and
his wife have raised their
children there.
[95] SF is presently living on the One Farm and for ten years prior to that
lived on Seven Farm. It appears that he never paid rent
[96] LF, has been living on Seven Farm since around 1983 and has never paid rent
nor been asked to.
[97] Evidence was also given that AF lived on one of the other houses on Seven
Farm for around four years in the early 1990’s
and never paid rent nor was
he ever asked to.
Expenses for maintenance
[98] RF gave evidence of the justification and reasonableness of his claim for
$6,042.75 plus GST for clearing trees, slashing and
rotary hoeing on the
properties known as One and Two Farms. The purpose of the work was to enable
farming to be continued. Farming
which he carried out on his own behalf.
[99] His claim however did not take into account that he also received the
proceeds of the crop that was planted on these properties.
[100] Clearing was also carried out by RF of Seven Farm ($2,648 plus GST) and
Eight Farm ($2,675.83 plus GST).
[101] The evidence provided to the Tribunal was that the work on Seven Farm was
carried out at on the recommendation of the town
planner and civil engineer
engaged for a proposed subdivisional redevelopment. CF gave evidence undertaking
the work himself resulted
in a saving to his mother – his rate being less
than other contractors.
[102] While this project is now not proceeding, it was appropriate for the
attorney to follow the recommendation. CF gave evidence
of the reasonableness of
his claim when compared to charges made by other contractors.
Use of adult’s motor vehicle
[103] The vehicle in question is valued at $2,000 to $2,500. It is said that it
is used in connection with the attorneys’ management
affairs. It is now proposed to sell the vehicle, so that the application is
related to past use.
Expenses incurred in managing the affairs of FAA
[104] The attorneys intended to make a claim for their time in managing their
mother’s affairs. They have stated that they
were unaware that this
constituted a conflict of interest.
[105] Not being specifically authorised by the principal in this respect, the
attorneys sought leave to withdraw the application.
CONCLUSION (a) and (b)
[106] The nature of the farming business relationship between CF and FAA and
those children who remained on the farm when they became
adults, might appear to
some, unacquainted with the family history, as being peculiar. However, the
evidence before the Tribunal
is that CF and FAA built up their considerable
farming holdings over many years with the express purpose of benefiting their
This was made apparent by the actions of FAA before she lost
[107] CF and FAA appear to have been quite content, indeed there is a strong
indication of active encouragement, for those of their
children who wanted to
stay on the farm to do so. They were very family orientated and wanted their
children to continue on the tradition
of the farming enterprise in which they
had been so successful.
[108] The various properties that made up the farm appear to have been regarded
by them in much in the same way as many parents regard
their family home - as a
place for their children to be able to come home to.
[109] In other rural situations, the notion of a child or children continuing to
work the family property, running their own cattle
and growing their own crops
under very loose, if any, financial arrangements and with only the expectation
being a just inheritance,
is not an unusual concept.
[110] This appears to be the case in relation to the family.
[111] In the same way that an attorney is bound by the General Principles, so is
the Tribunal. These draw attention to the fact that
the regime established by
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
) is essentially a substituted decision making regime
where in terms of General Principle 7(4) the principle of substituted judgement
must be applied.
[112] This means that the Tribunal must endeavour to ascertain from the
evidence, where it is reasonably practical to do so, what
the views and wishes
of the adult would have been in the matter.
[113] The evidence of the past history would seem to suggest that FAA would have
wanted the situation, at least as it applied at
the time she lost capacity, to
continue. Enabling the family to continue the relationship with the farm is
consistent with maintaining
her best interests.
[114] Accordingly, the Tribunal authorises the undermentioned attorneys to
continue farming those areas of the following properties
that was being
undertaken by them on 3 March 2006:
(a) the property known as “One Farm”;
(b) the property known as “Two Farm”;
(c) the property known as “Three Farm”;
(d) Lots 2 and 3 on the property known as “Four Farm” and;
(e) the property known as “Five Farm”.
(a) the property known as “Six Farm”; and
(b) Lots 4 and 5 on on the property known as “Four Farm”.
[115] The Tribunal also authorises the attorneys to continue to reside in the
houses presently occupied by them on the following
properties namely, RF –
“Three Farm”; LF– “Seven Farm” and SF –
[116] It is nevertheless important that the attorneys ensure that use of the
land does not contradict their obligation to act honestly
and with reasonable
diligence to protect their mother’s interests.
[117] The management plan provided by the applicants indicates that more
attention needs to be given to clearly showing that her
financial needs are
catered for.
[118] Accordingly, the Tribunal orders under
section 122
(1)(d) of the
of Attorney Act 1998
that the attorneys present a plan of management that
adequately provides for the present and future needs of their mother for
within 3 months.
[119] This order leaves it open for the Tribunal to review or make other orders
section 122
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
as it may consider
appropriate.
CONCLUSION (c)
[120] The Tribunal is of the view that the work which gave rise to the claim is
part of the cost of producing the crop and therefore
should be borne by CF.
[121] It is therefore directed that CF refund the sum of $6,043.75 plus GST to
[122] The Tribunal approves the claim by RF for $2,648.10 plus GST for clearing
Seven Farm and $2,675.83 plus GST for clearing Eight
CONCLUSION (d)
[123] Given the size of FAA’s estate and the activities required to be
carried out by the attorneys, the use of the car was
seen by the Tribunal as
inconsequential and in any event not inconsistent with their duties. It is noted
that it is now proposed
to sell the car.
CONCLUSION (e)
[124] In the circumstances, leave should be granted to withdraw the application.
CONDUCT OF THE ATTORNEYS
[125] In the course of the proceedings, the conduct of the attorneys raises a
potential question of their fitness to continue as
[126] The evidence and the investigation by the Adult Guardian discloses a
number of breaches of duty on their part.
[127] All of these breaches appear to have been made in ignorance of their
responsibilities and without any malice. Surprisingly,
they do not appear to
have been alerted to the issue despite a fairly close involvement with
solicitors.
[128] Indeed, they were done in the belief that they were enhancing their
mother’s financial position.
[129] The most significant issue in so far as conflict is concerned was the
proposed redevelopment of Seven Farm which the Tribunal
was advised is not now
proceeding. This project also was also designed to benefit the attorneys. There
is evidence to indicate that
some $80,000 of her funds was used in the project
before it was abandoned. It was also her land on which the subdivision was being
carried out.
[130] It is clear that she was involved initially in the planning, albeit at a
fairly high level, but there is no evidence of her
objecting to what was being
proposed merely her aversion to signing any documentation – because she
saw it as a slight on her
integrity. Indeed she had made her views well known
including to her legal advisers that she wanted to divide the property between
her children. All this occurred before any suggestion of her losing
[131] One of the puzzling aspect however is that despite the professional advice
received from a variety of legal, financial, investment
and planning
professionals, none appear to have alerted the attorneys (whose expertise is in
farming) to the significant problems
likely to arise, firstly from her refusal
to sign documentation, their positions as attorneys and later her loss of
capacity. The
family not withstanding their significant assets, operated
historically in a manner of informality and trust. CF senior himself did
execute his simple will until seven months before his death and his partnership
with his siblings again demonstrated the informal
approach to family
[132] As indicated earlier FAA’s estate is very large. It is however
fundamentally a farming enterprise and the element which
largely gave it its
complexity (from the perspective of the attorneys) was the redevelopment. There
is also the partnership enterprise
which needs to be considered.
[133] RF is the attorney who seems to be the family member with the dominant
role in the affairs of his mother. He is also an experienced
farmer as is his
brother SF. The expertise of the others in this respect and in matters relating
to their mother’s affairs
is not known. Suffice to say she saw fit to
appoint any two of them to act on her behalf.
[134] She and her husband obviously had confidence in them. Some years prior to
making her own Enduring Power of Attorney, her husband
had appointed a number of
the children as attorneys under an Enduring Power of Attorney and as executors
of his estate.
[135] The attorneys’ have shown a readiness to seek appropriate advice in
relation to the management of their mother’s
affairs. It could be said
that one of the beneficial aspects of these proceedings has been increased
awareness that the attorneys’
now have as to their duties and
responsibilities.
[136] On the basis of the evidence provided in these proceedings, the Tribunal
considers that it would not be appropriate to overrule
FAA’s intentions
and remove them as attorneys.
[137] Counsel for the applicants made an application for costs of the applicants
in these proceedings.
[138] This raises the question as to whether the Tribunal’s power in this
respect is pursuant to
section 127
Guardianship and Administration Act
section 125
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
[139] The point has significance because under section 127 each party is
required to bear their own costs, whereas under
section 125
costs are at the
Court’s (Tribunal’s) discretion and unless the court otherwise
orders, costs follow the event.
[140] Under
section 8(2)
Guardianship and Administration 2000,
there is inconsistency between the Act and the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
[141] The determination of which provision should apply in this case seems to be
dependent on whether the Tribunal is exercising
Attorney Act 1998
or under the
Guardianship and Administration
[142] Essentially all matters, save for the application for appointment of a
guardian and administrator which was dismissed as a
result of the finding with
respect to the Enduring Power of Attorney, dealt with by the Tribunal related to
the duties and responsibilities
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
The other aspects involving the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
were jurisdictional namely the constitution of the Tribunal and its vesting with
the court’s jurisdiction with respect to
enduring powers of attorney. That
the documentation for these applications was pursuant to the forms under the
Guardianship and Administration 2000
would seem to be merely
procedural.
[143] The Tribunal is of the opinion that the costs question is governed by
section 125
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
. Since the applicants have
been successful they should be granted their costs from the estate of FAA. It is
understood that a costs
agreement has been entered into with their solicitors.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (920 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter