URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLC/2025/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dhar v Valuer-General [2025] QLC 25 (9 October 2025)
LAND COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Valuer-General
[2025] QLC 25
Neil Timothy Dhar
(applicant)
Valuer-General
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
9 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
Submissions closed 7 July 2025
On the papers
JUDICIAL REGISTRAR:
1. The application is refused.
2. The Court does not have
CATCHWORDS:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – failure to appeal to Land Court in time
– no affidavit evidence filed – actual cause of
failure to lodge
– no explanation or evidence pertaining to appeal period – whether
reasonable excuse.
Land Valuation Act 2010
AG Russell v The
(1992-93) QLCR 202
considered.
Body Corporate for Parklands CTS and Anor v. Department of
Natural Resources and Water
2009] QLC 65
, considered.
Department Natural Resources and Water
[2007] QLC 129
The Nominal Defendant
(Qld) No.2 [1964] Qd R, applied.
APPEARANCES:
Not applicable
[1] In this matter the Court must, pursuant to
Land Valuation Act 2010
(the LVA) exercise its discretion and determine whether
there is jurisdiction to hear and determine an appeal against a decision
objection issued by the Valuer-General (the respondent) on 12 March 2025. The
60-day period for filing the appeal expired at 4.30pm
on 12 May 2025.
21 May 2025, correspondence was forwarded from the registry to Mr Dhar (the
applicant) to advise that the appeal period had
expired and that in the
circumstances the Land Court will only have jurisdiction to hear and determine
an appeal if a “reasonable
excuse” is established pursuant to
of the LVA. Extracts of the legislation were attached with the
correspondence.
[3] The subject land is situated within the Whitsunday
Regional Council local government area.
Legislation
Section 157
of the LVA provides:
section 158
, an appeal cannot be started after 60 days after the day
of issue stated in the objection decision notice (the
Section 158
of the LVA provides:
“158 - Late filing
(1) This section applies if a valuation appeal notice is filed after
the appeal period has ended.
(2) The Land Court can hear the appeal only if—
(a) the valuation appeal notice was filed 1 year or less after
the objection decision notice was issued; and
(b) the appellant satisfies the court there was a reasonable
excuse for not filing the notice within the appeal period.
Example of reasonable excuse—
The notice of the valuer-general’s decision or the valuation appeal
notice was lost or delayed in the ordinary course of post.”
The conduct of the proceeding and evidence
[6] The Court
issued the following orders on 26 May 2025:
1. By 4.00 pm on Monday 9 June
2025, the appellant must file in the Land Court Registry, and serve on the
Respondent written submissions
and any affidavit materials regarding the issue
of jurisdiction (late filing).
2. By 4.00 pm on Monday 23 June 2025, the
respondent must file in the Land Court Registry, and serve on the appellant its
submissions and any affidavit materials regarding the issue of
3. By 4.00 pm on Monday 7 July 2025, the
appellant must file in the Land Court registry, and serve on the respondent, a
reply if any.
4. Unless the parties otherwise request in writing, the case
will be determined on the filed material, without an oral hearing not
Tuesday 8 July 2025
5. Any party may apply for further review by giving at
least two (2) business days written notice to the Land Court registry and to
other parties of:
a) the proposed date for review
b) the reasons for the
request; and
c) the proposed directions
[7] On 29 May 2025 a document
referred to as an initial filing was emailed to the registry by the applicant.
The document attaches
correspondence from Singapore Airlines concerning flights
undertaken by the applicant from Brisbane to Singapore on 20 February 2025
return on 14 May 2025.
[8] On 23 June 2025 submissions were filed on behalf
of the respondent opposing a finding of jurisdiction
[9] On 2 July 2025 an
email referred to by the applicant as his filing was received by the
The applicant’s case – initial filing
document initially filed by the applicant asserted the following
• As I was away from Australia during all of this period, the
valuer-generals notice of rejection of valuation objection dated
20th March 2025
was delayed in receipt and I was subsequently able to prepare the response with
files on my computer upon my return
subsequently lodged with the Courts on 21 May 2025).
• The original
appeal deadline was 12th May 2025, and given I was not in Australia and able to
prepare and file the appeal between
the dates of objection rejection (20th March
2025) and appeal filing deadline (12th May 2025); and given that under LVA
(2) (a) one year has not passed since the valuation objection notice was sent, I
respectfully seek the Courts agreement to confirm
The respondent’s case
[11] On behalf of the respondent, submissions
addressing the issue of reasonable excuse were filed on 23 June 2025. A summary
submissions is set below:
• The applicant neither specified the
purpose of his overseas travel, nor provided any details of alternative
arrangements being
in place to attend to matters while he was overseas. Further,
there is no evidence that enquiries were made with the respondent regarding
status of his objection prior to his overseas travel.
• The applicant
lodged his objection online on 23 May 2024. He left in the contact details
section an email address, which was
his address for service. The applicant did
not provide evidence on what arrangements he had made on emails received during
• The statements provided by the applicant seemed to suggest
that he could not access files on his computer until his return
to Australia.
While it is understandable that this could cause some difficulties, a reasonable
course of action would have been to
prepare the documents in anticipation of the
decision on objection being issues during his extended stay overseas or to have
attend to the matter during his time abroad. There is no evidence that
the applicant made arrangements regarding the documents he
needed to lodge an
• The Court should find that the applicant’s first
reason, being travelling overseas during the appeal period does not
amount to or
would satisfy the Court of a reasonable excuse to file his appeal late under the
• The Court should find that the applicant’s second reason,
being having no access on his computer until his return to
Australia, does not
amount to or would satisfy the Court of a reasonable excuse to file his appeal
late under the LVA.
• Accordingly, the Court, after consideration of
the authorities, written submissions and evidence in this appeal should conclude
that a reasonable excuse pursuant to
of the LVA has not been established
and the Court has no jurisdiction to hear and determine the appeal.
applicant’s second filing
[12] On 2 July 2025, the applicant filed an
email referred to as a filing. The relevant text of this document is set out
22 of the respondents reply dated 23 June 2025 states that the appellant
hadn’t specified the purpose of his overseas travel.
am reticent to provide such private details of my health concerning my reasons
for travelling from February 20
until May 14
please see attached two memos from medical specialist doctors in Singapore.
I went to Singapore between February 20
2025, to receive urgent medical attention.
Despite the Medicare system in Australia, unfortunately I could not get a
satisfactory diagnosis and treatment of these conditions
in my local area, and
upon friends recommendation, sought treatment from specialists in Singapore. I
currently remain under the care
of the Singapore doctors for these two
conditions.
22 of the respondents reply dated 23 June 2025 states the claimant hadn't
"provided any details of alternative arrangements being
in place to attend to
matters while he was overseas”.
While I’m reticent to
disclose my personal care and security arrangements, please see a letter
attached (file name, letter 020725)
from my neighbour who looks after my house
if I happen to be travelling, including checking on the house, the mailbox, and
then alerting
me (usually by WhatsApp) if there are any official letters which
might require my immediate attention.
February 2025 and May 14
2025 there were
no such official letters because as it seems the valuer general office didn't
send any written notification by letter
to my home.
I also believe it would be unreasonable for the respondent to suggest that I
should give access to anyone to my personal emails and
my home computer, even
when away for an extended period.
In any case the respondent in para 30 goes on to say, that being away from my
some difficulties".
Para 22 of the
respondents reply dated 23
June 2025 states that "there is no
evidence that enquiries were made with the respondent regarding the status of
his objection prior
to his overseas travel”.
This is not true.
prior to departing 20
February 2025 I logged into the
website from my home computer, and checked on the status of the objection which
showed the objection status was still "under review".
Para 30 of the
Respondents reply dated 23
June 2025 states that a "reasonable
course of action would have been to prepare the documents in anticipation of the
decision on
objection being issued during his extended stay
I find this statement from the respondent unreasonable.
How could any reasonable person anticipate the Valuer-Generals decision, or
whether further information might be requested by the Valuer-General, or on what
grounds any decision might be taken, and when any
decision would be taken, if at
Para 30 of the
respondents reply dated 23
June 2025 states there is "no evidence
that the applicant made arrangements regarding the documents he needed to lodge
an appeal".
This is not true. I downloaded the appeal form on to my
computer before departing February 20
, 2025, but again could not
complete the forms with the necessary details without understanding the basis of
any decisions by the
Valuer-General, and until accessing my home computer upon
my return 14
understand that the courts do not necessarily recognise the concept of equal
treatment of timelines between a claimant and
a respondent, I would like to
respectfully point out that it took the valuer general 222 days to respond to my
land valuation objection
which was submitted on 23
May 2024, while
it took me only 72 days to appeal the disallowed objection which was eventually
disallowed on 12
March 2025.
I believe the
courts might also take into account the number of days of my late lodgement - in
this case the lodgement of the appeal
was due May 12
2025, and was
it sent by email on 20
May 2025, and lodged May 21
2025 which is only 7 business days late, which seems to be a relatively minor
delay in submission, given the overall length of the
objection and appeal
process, which has been continuing now for about 334 days.
I also believe
the courts might take into account the potential seriousness of the appellants
case - I would like here to reassure
the courts that I believe I have a very
solid case for appealing this matter and having the land valuation amended.
Consideration and conclusion
[13] In determining the issue of jurisdiction pursuant to
of the LVA, the Court must consider the relevant facts, circumstances, and
merits on a case-by-case basis. The question of reasonable
excuse must be
considered objectively, and findings made on evidence that is logically
provided for by the orders made on 26 May 2025, no affidavit evidence has been
deposed or filed by the applicant.
[14] The matters pressed by the applicant
in his two filed documents have been considered in order to ascertain whether or
not a reasonable
excuse is established as required by
[15] In Pascoe v The Nominal Defendant (Qld) No.2 No. 2
[1964] Qd R 373
at 378 Mansfield CJ observed:
"What is to be
determined is whether the applicant has shown any cause which can be deemed by
the court to be a reasonable excuse.
I think this means cause which a reasonable
man would regard as an excuse, a cause consistent with are a reasonable standard
of conduct,
the kind of thing which might be expected to delay the giving of
notice by a reasonable
[16] In light of the preceding observations, it has been held
that for a Court to conclude that a "reasonable excuse" exists for a
“there must first be identified an actual cause or causes of the
[17] Attached
to the applicants second filing are two memos provided by the applicants
Singapore based doctors. The memos dated 24
June 2025 state a diagnosis and
confirm that the applicant attended one appointment for treatment on 28 February
2025. No prognosis
was detailed in either memo.
[18] The applicant’s
filings have been considered at length. The documents, although a mix of both
contentions and asserted
facts provide no detail or explanation of any actual
event or circumstance that prevented some inquiry or action by
[19] The Court is satisfied on balance, that the cause of
the notice of appeal not being lodged within the appeal period was the
applicant’s
failure to take any steps to check his email address for
service during the period between 12 March 2025 and 12 May 2025. In the
of any evidence or reasonable explanation for this failure, the Court is unable
to make any finding of reasonable excuse
as required by
[20] The Court has no jurisdiction to hear and determine the proposed
1. The application is refused.
2. The Court does not
have jurisdiction to hear and decide the matter.
Body Corporate for
Parklands CTS and Anor v. Department of Natural Resources and Water
The Nominal
(Qld) No.2 No. 2
[1964] Qd R 373
Hughes v Department Natural
Resources and Water
[2007] QLC 129.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (225 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter