URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRVT/2001/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Schintler, K.C. v Chancellor Park Retirement Village Pty Ltd [2001] QRVT 1 (4 September 2001)
Retirement Villages Tribunal
Retirement Villages Act 1999
REASONS FOR DECISION ---
APPLICATION NO: V001-01
(Applicant):
SCHINTLER Kevin Charles
167/52 University
CHANCELLOR PARK Qld 4556
(Respondent):
CHANCELLOR PARK RETIREMENT VILLAGE PTY LTD
CHANCELLOR PARK Qld 4556
1. This is an application by Kevin
Charles Schintler ("Mr Schintler") against Chancellor Park Retirement Village
Pty Ltd ("the Respondent")
section 170
Retirement Villages Act 1999
") in which he relies upon contraventions of
Section 170
provides as follows:
Resident may apply for
order if given false or misleading documents
This section
applies if-
(a) a scheme operator of a retirement village contravenes
(b) a resident of the retirement village is materially prejudiced by
the contravention
The resident may apply to the chief
executive for an order by a Tribunal to have the resident's residence contract
provides as follows:
misleading documents
A scheme operator must not give the
chief executive or a resident a document containing information the scheme
operator knows is false
or misleading.
Maximum penalty-200 penalty
A complaint against a scheme operator for an offence
against subsection (1) is sufficient if it states the information was false or
misleading to the scheme operator's knowledge.
4. Mr Schintler seeks an
order under
section 193
on the basis that he alleges he is materially prejudiced
by the various contraventions to which he refers in his application.
Section 193
provides as follows:
orders under
section 170
This section applies if a
resident applies for a Tribunal order under
section 170.
setting a contract aside, the Tribunal may make the orders it considers
appropriate including, for example, the following-
(a) an order that the
scheme operator refund to the resident the ingoing contribution or another
amount paid under the contract;
(b) an order that the scheme operator
compensate the resident for damages or loss caused by the
contravention.
6. Mr Schintler seeks an order by the Tribunal that the
Respondent refund to him the ingoing contribution and an order that the
compensate him for the damages or loss caused by the contravention.
The Tribunal is satisfied that Mr Schintler brings this application
on behalf of
himself and Mrs Schintler, who attended both days of the hearing, but did not
give evidence.
7. In relation to the contraventions under
major documents upon which Mr Schintler relies are as follows:
the lease dated 1 September 1997 in
relation to clause 5.01 which refers to 167 units for calculating outgoings
contributions (Respondent's
document No JR
the Respondent's solicitors letter of 29
September 2000 to the Office of Fair Trading regarding the 2000/2001
(Applicant's document
Respondent's letter of 5 October 2000 to Residents' Committee (Applicant's
document No 7);
the Respondent's letter of
14 July 2000 regarding the costs of cleaning on termination (Applicant's
document No 14);
the audited report of
outgoings contributions account to 30 June 1999 (Applicant's document No
the audited report of outgoings
contributions account to 30 June 2000 (Applicant's document No
the annual budget for the year ending 30
June 2000 (Applicant's document No 4);
annual budget for the year ending 30 June 2001 (Respondent's document No
Representation
Schintler represented himself at the hearing and the Respondent was represented
by Mr McHugh, a solicitor from Thompson
Proceedings
9. A hearing was held at Maroochydore
on 2 August and at Brisbane on 9 August 2001. The parties were given an
opportunity to attempt
to settle the matter at Maroochydore and were encouraged
to do so before the matter resumed in Brisbane.
10. Mr Schintler was the
only witness for the Applicant and Mr Rodney Nunn ("Mr Nunn"), the manger of the
village at the relevant
time, and Ms Julie Roberts (“Ms Roberts"), the
former General Manager of the Respondent, were the only witnesses on behalf
the Respondent required by Mr Schintler for cross examination.
11. The parties entered into a written lease
on 1 September 1997. The lease and the schedule to the lease were attachments
statement of Ms Roberts marked JR1. The public information document
which, by virtue of the Retirement Villages Act 1988 ("the repealed
Act"), forms
part of the lease was an attachment to Mr Schintler's statement at document No
12. The Act commenced on 1 July 2000. By section 23 of the Act, the
Act applies to an existing residence contract such as that entered
into by the
parties here. By virtue of Sections 21 and 22 of the Act, the dispute between
the parties constitutes both a retirement
village dispute and a retirement
village issue.
13. All actions by the parties prior to 1 July 2000 were
required to comply with the repealed Act and the Tribunal is not given any
specific powers to deal with matters which arose before1 July
14. In applying section 86, the first
question is whether the document contains information which is false or
misleading. Then
the second question is did the scheme operator know that the
information was false or misleading at the time it was given. The third
question involves determining whether or not the resident was materially
prejudiced by the contravention.
15. The character of the document said to be false or misleading is to be
tested at the date of giving it, not with the benefit of
hindsight. (applying
Bill Acceptance Corporation Ltd. v. GWA Ltd
[1983] FCA 269
(1983) 78 FLR 171).
16. Conduct is misleading or deceptive if it induces or is capable of
inducing error -
Keehn v Medical Benefits Fund of Australia Ltd
v Katies Ltd
Parkdale Custom Built Furniture Pty
[1982] HCA 44
149 CLR 191
at 198 (Gibbs J);
Rhone-Poulenc Agrochimie SA v UMI Chemical Services Pty
12 FCR 477.
By analogy a document is misleading if it induces or is capable of
inducing error.
17. False is defined in the
Macquarie Pocket
as not true or correct, apocryphal, erroneous, fallacious,
unhistorical, untrue, wrong or used to deceive or mislead, bodgie, bogus,
counterfeit, dummy, fake, phoney, sham, not genuine, artificial,
18. Mislead is defined in the same
to lead or guide wrongly, bamboozle, bluff, bull, catch, cheat on, come the raw
prawn, deceive, delude, dupe, equivocate, fast-talk,
fool, fox, gull, handle,
have, have someone on, hoodwink, humbug, lead astray, lead up the garden path,
take for a ride, take in
19. There is an evaluative judgment involved in determining this issue. As
the Full Court said in
SAP Australia Pty Ltd v Sapient Australia Pty Ltd
[1999] FCA 1821
(1999) 169 ALR 1
"The characterisation of conduct as "misleading
or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive" involves a judgment of a notional
and effect relationship between the conduct and the putative consumer's
state of mind. Implicit in that judgment is a selection
process which can
reject some causal connections, which, although theoretically open, are too
tenuous or impose responsibility otherwise
than in accordance with the policy of
the legislation."
20. Where it is necessary, as here, to prove that a
document is knowingly false or misleading, regard should be had to the meaning
intended by the giver if the explanation is not so unreasonable or unrealistic
as to not be fairly open. The critical question
is whether, having regard to
the finding that the document was objectively false or misleading, it was given
deliberately knowing
it to be false or misleading.
21. These two concepts
involve a mental element. The scheme operator giving the document must either
know the document is false if
given but still give it or, realising it may be
wrong, gives it without caring whether it is true or false. If the scheme
asserts it has neither of these states of mind but the true facts are
widely divergent from what has been said, a tribunal of fact
may be persuaded
that the inference should be drawn that one or other of the states of mind
22. The third question involves determining whether or not the
resident was materially prejudiced by the contravention and will depend
resident being able to establish the prejudice and the causal connection.
“Material” is defined in the
CCH Macquarie Concise Dictionary of
as meaning “substantial; significant”.
23. While the phrase “materially prejudiced” is used in
several Queensland statutes it is not defined and does not appear
to have been
judicially considered. However, whether parties have been “materially
prejudiced” has been considered in
several cases involving applications to
proceed after considerable delay and in those cases it is clear that being
“materially
prejudiced” can result from a range of matters and is
not limited to financial considerations (See
Brisbane South Regional Health
Authority v. Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1986) 186 CLR 541)
A similar approach was taken by
the High Court in
The Commonwealth v Verwayen
, (1990) 170 CLR 394, where
“materially disadvantaged” and “detriment” were being
considered and the judges’
statements make it clear that it must be
"material" or "real" although pecuniary loss may not be necessary. Dawson J. at
461-2 observed
that justice cannot always be measured in terms of money. Deane
J. was of a similar view (see 448-9). Applying that logic here
would suggest
that pecuniary loss may not be necessary.
24. The reference to
in section 86
be read widely
as it is not defined as in section 85 to mean a “relevant
document”. That definition is said to apply only to section
Therefore, subject to the surrounding circumstances, any document may
qualify and certainly the documents to which the section refers
are not limited
to the residence contract or the public information document.
lease of 1 September 1997
25. Mr Schintler’s evidence in
relation to the lease involved the fact that it referred to 167 units, plus the
unit, giving 168 units, in relation to the calculation of the
outgoings contributions payable by Mr Schintler. He then directed
Tribunal’s attention to the budgets for the years ending 30 June 1999, 30
June 2000 and 30 June 2001 where the Respondent
used 324, 408 and 404 units for
calculating the outgoings contributions payable by Mr
26. Clause 5 of the lease refers to the Outgoings Contribution
and states at follows:
5. OUTGOINGS CONTRIBUTION
Owner shall notify the Resident prior to the execution of this Lease and prior
to each 1st day of July of the Resident's
fair proportion of the Owner's
estimate of the total operating expenses of the Owner in respect of the running,
maintenance and management
of the Village for the financial year under review.
The Residents proportion of the aforesaid estimate shall be determined by having
there being 167 units
(excluding the Resident Manager’s
in the Village
and taking into account costs and expenses which are
attributable directly or indirectly to the Unit and such other matters as the
Owner considers relevant. The Owner will make available to the Resident, upon
request, full details of how the Resident's fair proportion
of the Owner’s
estimate of total operating expenses was calculated.
(The Tribunal’s
Highlighting)
5.02 For the purposes of this Clause 5 the term
“total operating expenses” shall include:
5.02.1 all rates,
taxes (excluding any income, gift or capital gains tax), charges, duties,
assessments, outgoings and impositions
of any kind properly levied in respect of
the Village by any Government body or department, whether State or Federal, or
authority provided that if the same relate to or include any other
land as well as that comprising the Village, the Owner shall apportion
amount thereof between the Village and such other land on the basis of the
relevant values of the land as adopted by the government
body or department or
the local authority for the purpose of imposing such rates, taxes, charges,
duties, assessments, outgoings
and impositions;
5.02.2 all charges for
water, gas, oil, electricity, light, power, fuel, telephone, sewerage, garbage,
heating, cooking, ventilation
and other services or requirements furnished or
supplied to the common property of the Village, and for the maintenance and
of all electrical, plumbing, filtration and sewerage installations at the
5.02.3 all costs of repairs and maintenance which
are necessary to keep the Village and all buildings, structures, roadways,
improvements,
plant, machinery, equipment, apparatus and appliance on the
Village, the property of the Owner, which is used in connection with
Village, in good order and condition Including provision at the discretion of
the Owner, for future repairs or other contingencies
provided that where an
expenditure is made out of such provision such expenditure shall not be included
in the calculation of operating
expenses for the financial year in which such
expenditure is incurred;
5.02.4 to the extent that such costs are not met
from the Sinking Fund Account of the Village, the cost of such external
repairs, replacements and maintenance as are necessary to keep the
units together with all other buildings, structures and improvements
Village in good order, condition and appearance;
5.02.5 all insurance
premiums payable by the Owner in respect of the Village and the buildings and
other improvements at the Village
and of such of the contents in the buildings
and other improvements as are the property of the Owner against loss or damage
and all premiums for insurance against public liability, workers
compensation and such other insurable risks as the Owner may from
time to time
5.02.6 all management secretarial, legal and accounting
charges reasonably required in connection with the running, administration
maintenance of the Village;
5.02.7 all charges, fees, wages and other
emoluments, including superannuation, paid to contractors, agents, employees and
at any time engaged in or about the conduct of affairs of the
5.02.8 all costs of cleansing and maintenance of buildings and
other improvements in common use by Residents of the Village including
necessary cleansing and maintenance of internal and external passages, rooms,
garages, paths and gardens;
5.02.9 all costs of lawn mowing, gardening,
maintaining and landscaping the common property of the
5.02.10 all costs associated with the provision and maintenance
of any medical, nursing, transport or any security, caretaking or
other service
for the benefit of residents at the Village;
5.02.11 such sum in each
financial year as the Owner may reasonably determine to set aside in the Sinking
Fund Account of the Village
to cover repairs, refurbishing, renovations,
replacements and maintenance of a capital or substantial but irregular or
nature to the Village;
5.02.12 any other expenditure properly
incurred by the Owner in managing, operating or administering the
5.02.13 any items of expenditure carried forward from any
previous financial year,
5.02.14 the costs of any arbitration proceedings
between the residents' committee and the Owner.
5.02.15 all costs of or
in connection with the Owner complying with the requirements of any Government
or statutory authority concerning
the operation, maintenance or management of
the Village including the costs of the annual audit;
5.03 Upon receiving
notice from the Owner of the Resident's fair proportion of the Owner's estimate
of the total operating expenses
for any financial year the Resident thereafter
shall pay to the Owner on the first day of each month during that financial year
outgoing contribution being an amount adjusted to the nearest cent equal to
one twelfth (1/12) of the Resident's fair proportion
of the Owner's estimate of
total operating expenses as notified by the Owner to the
5.04 If the Owner for the time being fails to give to the
Resident notice in writing of the outgoings contribution payable by the
in accordance with the provisions of this Clause 5, the Resident shall pay to
the Owner on account thereof on the due date
the same outgoings contribution as
is payable during the relevant immediately preceding financial year and any
deficiency shall be
payable within fourteen (14) days of request therefore made
by the Owner.
Mr Nunn and Ms Roberts explained the numbers 324, 408 and 404 by saying that the
Respondent was required to calculate the
budget on the basis of a completed
retirement village. Ms Roberts referred to the fact that the Office of Fair
Trading had approved
an increase in the size of the village to 404 units.
28. While the Tribunal accepts that this approval may have been given,
it considers it to be irrelevant to the exercise of calculating
the outgoings
contributions payable by Mr Schintler. Further, the Tribunal considers that
the Respondent’s use of these numbers
resulted from a confusion of two
different obligations. The Respondent has a duty to inform potential residents
in the public information
document of the amount of outgoings contributions they
may expect to have to pay upon entering the village. This is a different
obligation to the Respondent’s duty to realistically estimate the amount
that the residents will be required to pay by way
of outgoings contributions for
the next 12 months. The latter is the purpose of the annual
29. The use of these numbers by the Respondent also ignored the
Respondent’s obligation under Mr Schintler’s residence
contract to
use the number of 168 referred to in that contract. The Respondent provided no
submissions on the law to justify its
submissions that the approval of an
alteration of the size of the village should over-ride the terms of the
residence contract.
30. The Tribunal rejects
the Respondent’s reference to the public information document, provided to
Mr Schintler at the time
the lease was entered into, as justifying an increase
in the number by the Respondent. It does so because the lease refers
specifically
to the calculation of the outgoings contributions by use of 168
whereas the public information document refers vaguely to possible
increases in
that the number of units in the village in the future. The wording in the
public information document is appropriate
to warn of possible future increases
but the wording does not substitute for the specific words of the lease relating
to calculating
the outgoings contributions.
31. However, despite that the
above comments, the Tribunal finds that the document does not contain
information which is false or
misleading. The Respondent’s actions may
have subsequently been incorrect but that does not make the information false or
misleading. It follows that the Tribunal further must find that Mr Schintler
has not proved that the Respondent knew at the time
that it gave him the lease
that it containing information which was false or misleading.
2. The Respondent’s solicitor’s letter of 29
September 2000 to the Office of Fair Trading regarding the 2000 /2001
32. This two and a ½ page letter is fairly wide ranging
and Mr Schintler alleges that it contains information which is false
misleading.
In paragraph 2 it states:
“We would first like
to point out that all moneys paid by residents on account of outgoings are paid
into an outgoing account
which account is used solely for paying outgoings which
is contemplated in the lease.”
33. Mr Schintler gave evidence,
which the Tribunal accepted, that this account was used for paying outgoings in
relation to both the
education centre and the nursery which were not
contemplated in the lease. Mr Nunn confirmed that payments were made in
to the both the education centre and the nursery, but he stated that
all payments had been promptly reimbursed by the owner. On
the basis of the
audited statements for the years ending 30 June 1999 and 2000, the Tribunal is
not satisfied that all payments made
on behalf of the education centre were
reimbursed by the owner. Mr Nunn’s statement at paragraph 20 does not
account for
full reimbursement by the owner which confirms Mr Schintler’s
evidence. Mr Nunn, when questioned by the Tribunal, could not
explain the
discrepancies but simply restated that, in his opinion, all monies had been
reimbursed.
34. Likewise the Tribunal is satisfied that, in relation to
the nursery, the outgoings contributions account was not promptly reimbursed
because Mr Nunn failed to bank a reimbursement cheque before the end of the
financial year ended 30 June 2000.
35. Regrettably, the Tribunal
also finds that the Respondent misled the Tribunal in its response filed in the
Tribunal when it stated
“all moneys have in any event been repaid by 30
June 2000”. The owner may have written out a cheque but the outgoings
contributions account had not received that cheque by 30 June 2000 so the
Tribunal finds that the residents’ account had not
36. The Tribunal finds that this information in relation to the
education centre and the nursery is false and misleading and that,
balance of probabilities, the Respondent knew that it was false and misleading
on 29 September 2000.
37. The next question is whether or not Mr
Schintler has been materially prejudiced by the Respondent’s contravention
Act in this way. There was no evidence before the Tribunal as to when,
or for that matter, if the education centre costs had been
fully reimbursed in
2000/2001, as Mr Nunn had wrongly claimed in regard to previous years. For this
reason, the Tribunal is unable
to conclude that Mr Schintler has been
prejudiced, let alone materially prejudiced. The Tribunal is satisfied that
all known expenditure
on the nursery was reimbursed to the outgoings account by
August 2000 and for that reason the Tribunal concludes that Mr Schintler
been materially prejudiced by the contravention.
38. Further in paragraph
2 the solicitor’s letter states:
“If the residents pay more
than required for a particular item in any particular year, any excess remains
in the outgoings account
and a credit may be applied for that particular item in
then next year’s budget. Likewise, if there is a shortfall for a
particular outgoing in any year then the contributions for the next year may
increase to make up that shortfall. The point is though,
if the years any
excess, it is not paid to our client but remains in the general outgoings
account for the benefit of all residents.”
39. Mr Schintler alleges
that this information is false and misleading and that the Respondent knew that
it was false and misleading
on the basis of its previous behaviour as shown in
its audited statements for the years ending 30 June 1999 and 2000. The audited
statements for the year ending 30 June 2001 were not available to the Tribunal
at the time of the hearing.
40. If the Respondent were to follow the
practice which it has adopted in previous years, the Tribunal would have no
hesitation in
finding that these claims in that the solicitor’s letter
were false and misleading, but in view of the changes which in the
village operators, the Tribunal is not able to find
the information is false and misleading on the basis of the evidence before
41. In paragraph 3 the letter states:
“Pursuant to clause 5.01 of the lease, our client is entitled to
calculate and notify the residents of the residents’
Fair proportion of
the owner’s estimate of the total operating expenses of the village. For
the financial year ended 30 June
2001, each resident’s proportion of the
aforesaid estimate is determined by having regard to their being 404 units in
the village
and taking into account costs and expenses which are attributable
directly or indirectly to each unit and such other matters as the
considers relevant.
Therefore our client is entitled to estimate the
annual rates bill having regard to the there being for 404 units in the village
though the village has not yet been fully completed.”
Tribunal finds that this information to be false and misleading because clause
5.01 of Mr Schintler’s lease clearly
refers to 168 units. The Respondent
failed to put any convincing evidence before the Tribunal in relation to its
contention that
404 should be used to calculate the outgoings contributions for
residents of the village. The Tribunal is unconvinced that an approval
Office of Fair Trading of an increase in the number of units in a retirement
village alters the contractual relationship between
the residents and the
village operator in relation to the method of calculating outgoings
contributions.
43. The Tribunal finds that, on the balance of
probabilities, the Respondent knew that it was false and misleading on 29
Where it is necessary, as here, to prove that a
document is knowingly false or misleading, regard should be had to the meaning
by the giver. The Tribunal finds the explanation is so unreasonable or
unrealistic as to not be fairly open to the Respondent because
of both reference
to 168 units in the lease and the number of actual units existing in the village
on which expenditure was required.
44. The next
question is whether or not Mr Schintler has been materially prejudiced by the
Respondent’s contravention of the
Act in this way.
On page 3 of
the letter it is stated:
“Our client then works backwards and
multiply as the levy per unit by 404 to come up with a total figure of
$423,000.00.”
45. Mr Schintler submits that the figure $423,000
is false and misleading and that the Respondent knew it was false and
misleading.
Mr Schintler provide the Tribunal with Exhibit 1, based on
information he attained from Maroochy Shire Council as to the rates
paid by the
Respondent for the years ending 30 June 1999, 2000 and 2001. Based on that
exhibit, Mr Schintler submitted that the
Respondent paid rates of $127,475 in
the year ending 30 June 1999, $201,289 to the year ending 30 June 2000 and
$346,093.99 to the
year ending 30 June 2001.
46. It is clear from the
evidence that despite paying $127,475 in the year ending 30 June 1999, the
Respondent budgeted for the sum
of $423,000 for the year ending 30 June 2000.
Then having paid $201,289 in the year ending 30 June 2000 budgeted $423,000 the
ending 30 June 2001.
47. On the basis of this evidence, the Tribunal
finds that the figure $423,000 was false and misleading and on the balance of
probability,
the Respondent knew it was false and misleading. Further, the
Tribunal finds that if the rates payable to Maroochy Shire Council
for Lot 1 are
divided by 168 units, Mr Schintler and the other 166 residents in stage one,
would have been required to pay $758.32
to the year ending 30 June 2000 and
$987.65 to the year ending 30 June 2001. The Respondent’s use of the
figure of $423,000
which it divided by 408 and 404 in those two years resulted
in the residents contributing $1,036.76 and $1,047.03 in relation to
those two years.
48. The next question is whether or not Mr Schintler
has been materially prejudiced by the Respondent’s contravention of the
Act. Provided that the Respondent does for what is referred to in its
solicitors letter of 29 September 2000, and credits any overpayments
of rates to
Mr Schintler and the other residents, Mr Schintler will not be materially
prejudiced. The Tribunal is not prepared,
under the circumstance of the Act
coming into effect on 1 July 2000, to find that the Respondent’s prior
behaviour which materially
prejudiced Mr Schintler, and the other 166 residents
of Lot 1, is likely to continue.
49. Mr Schintler submits that the
Respondent’s actions with regard to rates are to avoid the effects of
sections 106 and 107
of the Act.
50. These sections provide as
Increasing general services charges
scheme operator may increase charges for general services for a retirement
village only under this section or as allowed under section
The scheme operator must not increase the general services charge above the
percentage increase in the CPI for a particular year,
unless the increase is
approved by the retirement village residents by special resolution at a
residents meeting.
Maximum penalty-200 penalty units.
retirement village residents, by special resolution at a residents meeting,
approve an increase in the general services charge
for the retirement village
above the percentage increase in the CPI for a particular year, the general
services charge may be increased
only by the amount of the approved
For applying this section, the percentage increase in
the CPI for a particular year is the percentage increase between the CPI last
published before the start of the particular year and the CPI published for the
quarter ending immediately before the residents meeting
In this section-
means the all groups consumer
price index for Brisbane published by the Australian
statistician.
Resident’s responsibility for paying increased
general services charge
A resident is not required to pay a
charge for a general service under a residence contract to the extent that the
charge is more
than that payable under the contract and increased under section
106, unless the excess is attributable to an increase in-
(a) rates, taxes or
charges levied under an Act in relation to the retirement village land or its
(b) the salary or wages of a person engaged in the retirement
village’s operation and payable under an award, certified agreement,
enterprise flexibility agreement, industrial agreement, Queensland workplace
agreement or other industrial agreement made,
approved, certified, or
continued in force under-
Industrial Relations Act 199
(ii) a Commonwealth Act; or
© insurance premiums in relation to
the retirement village or its use;
(d) maintenance reserve fund
contributions.
51. Section 106 caps any increase in the general services
charge to the CPI, “unless the increase is approved by the retirement
village residents by special resolution as the rest at the residents
meeting”. Section 107 provides that “a resident
is not required
to pay a charge for general services under a residence contract to the extent
that the charge is more than that payable
under the contract and increased under
section 106, unless the excess is attributable to an increase” in things
such as rates,
salary or wages or insurance premiums.
important to note that while “rates, taxes or charges” may be
increased beyond the CPI increase without resident
approval, section 107 only
applies to those rates, taxes or charges “levied under an Act”. It
is also relevant to refer
to sub-clause 5.02.1 of the residence contract which
in similar terms states:
“5.02.1 all rates, taxes (excluding any
income, gift or capital gains tax), charges, duties, assessments, outgoings and
impositions
of any kind
properly levied in respect of the Village
Government body or department, whether State or Federal, or any local
authority...” (The Tribunal’s Highlighting)
53. The sum of
$423,000 was not a realistic estimate of what was going to be levied by the
Maroochy Shire Council under and Act “in
relation to the retirement
village land or its use”. Of course, it is only the “retirement
village land” which
is to be included here and the make up of that land
will depend upon the residence contracts. It will not include land owned by
operator for future expansion of the village. On the basis of Mr
Schintler’s residence contract, the village, as defined,
also does not
include land on which subsequent stages of the village have been built, such as
Lots 2 and 3 here.
54. It should be stated here that by virtue of
section 105, the scheme operator must pay its proportion of the general services
That section provides as follows:
General services charges
for unsold right to reside in accommodation
A scheme operator must pay the proportion of the general services charges
relating to the right to reside in an accommodation unit
in the village-
that has not been occupied under a resident contract; or
(b) for which there
is no residence contract in force.
Maximum penalty-200 penalty
55. Mr Schintler submits, and the Tribunal
finds, that the Respondent has increased rates beyond that which will actually
and required to be paid in the year ending 30 June 2001 and, at the
same time, has reduced capped items such as the village running
costs. In the
years prior to 1 July 2000, it would appear that the Respondent’s method
of calculating rates for budget purposes
should have resulted in a significant
credits for the residents for rates but these would appear to have been consumed
by cross-subsidization
of the deficits in other items.
56. Sections 106
and 107, by implication, require operators to present their budgets in such a
way as will separately identify percentage
increases in the uncapped items
referred to in section 107 and the percentage increases in the capped items
referred to in section
106 so that where the latter exceed the CPI,
residents’ approval is required and obtained.
57. The next question
is whether or not Mr Schintler has been materially prejudiced by the
Respondent’s contravention of the
Act. Once again, the Tribunal is not
in a position to make a finding since the commencement of the Act, because the
may avoid any material prejudice to Mr Schintler and the other 166
residents by giving them credits for any amounts over budgeted
3. The Respondent's letter of 5 October 2000 to Residents'
58. While Mr Schintler is a resident and the giving of
this letter to the Residents' Committee may have resulted in him being given
copy, section 86 only refers to a document being given to “the chief
executive or a resident” and because it attracts
a monetary penalty and,
by virtue of section 170 and 193, may result in the residence contract being set
aside, the Tribunal is of
the opinion that the section must be interpreted
59. For this reason the Tribunal finds that the giving of the
document to the Residents' Committee, in these circumstances, does not
contravene section 86.
4. The Respondent's letter of 14 July 2000
regarding the costs of cleaning on termination
60. Mr Schintler
alleges that this information is false and misleading and that the Respondent
knew that it was false and misleading.
61. The Tribunal finds this
information to be false and misleading because of Mr Schintler’s public
information document and,
on the balance of probabilities, that the Respondent
knew this information to be false and misleading at 14 July 2000. Mr Robert
Sandes, gave evidence in regard to this issue on behalf of the Respondent and
the Tribunal is satisfied that the Respondent corrected
the false and misleading
information by issuing a Notice on 10 July 2001.
62. Mr Schintler
has not been materially prejudiced by the Respondent’s contravention of
the Act because he has not terminated
his lease and the false and misleading
information, therefore, has not been put into effect.
5. The audited
report of outgoings contributions account to 30 June 1999
actions by the parties prior to 1 July 2000 were required to comply with the
repealed Act and the Tribunal is not given any
specific powers to deal with
matters which arose before1 July 2000.
6. The audited report of
outgoings contributions account to 30 June 2000
64. This document was
prepared after 1 July 2000 and given to the residents after that date. Mr
Schintler alleges that the information
in relation to street lighting is false
and misleading and that the Respondent knew that it was false and
misleading.
65. Mr Nunn gave evidence that the annual financial
statements were prepared by and audited by the auditor and that the amount shown
for street lighting was higher than it should have been. This, of course, means
that some other item (or items) in the accounts
was less than it should have
66. On 2 August 2000, Mr Nunn gave evidence that he first became
aware of this error the day before the annual meeting and that he
discussed this
with Ms Roberts and because the Respondent would look bad and because it was too
late to cancel the meeting, the Respondent
had to proceed with the meeting.
Because of the significance of what he had to say, it is setout in full
What happened then was that there was the AGM, I researched this
matter that afternoon, I went and immediately across to Head Office
and saw, ah,
I produced some written notes obviously. Just to substantiate what I had
found, and I went straight across and I saw
Mrs Roberts and I saw Mrs Poulsen at
the same time. Mrs Poulsen being the Accountant, and the Staff Accountant. I
left the matter
in her hands immediately to check out because there was an
obvious challenge there with one Accountant talking to another and professional
ah matters and so forth.
And I expressed at that stage fact that the whole
company would look like a damn fool, with something like this being put in front
of the residents.
What actually occurred with that meeting was that I
spoke to Mrs Roberts on the afternoon when I got those accounts, which was
approximately
That was the day before the meeting
, and we had two
options. One was to continue with the meeting, and the other one was to call
it off. Calling it off was not really
an option, because at that time of
afternoon there was no way of notifying a large retirement village, with people
all in their homes
at that time of day,
so we decided to proceed with it
(The Tribunal’s highlighting)
What then happened was I met, while I was
away getting those accounts, I had a message go out to the Residents Committee
many of them as were available in. The Residents Committee than
came in, I met with them, I showed them the Budget. I showed
them the papers,
I said ‘There hot off the press, I haven’t had time to go through
them”, I gave them each a copy.
In fact I was talking to them while the
copies were being printed, I pinned a copy on the Notice Board outside. We
printed copies
so that the residents coming to the meeting next day could get
them. The residents were already upset in relation to matters of
GST etc., so
they were justifiably angry before this occurred.
It could only be
described as a pretty hostile meeting, and after that Mrs Roberts instructed me
to make myself available for residents
to come and talk to. I put a notice up
for the residents, saying they could come and talk to me, and I would sit down
and explain
what had happened to them. I would give them, try to answer all of
their queries. If I could not answer their queries I would
questions and get answers provided for them.
67. It is also clear from
his evidence that the Respondent did not make what the Tribunal would regard as
full and proper disclosure
of the errors, but he said that he did acknowledge
that the accounts were not accurate if the residents asked. Mr Nunn was asked
by Member Toohey:
Excuse me. If I just interrupt. Did you tell them
though that you acknowledge the accounts were not accurate? Was that
acknowledgement
To which Mr Nunn replied:
If they asked the
question. Yes.
68. On 9 August 2000, Mr Nunn gave different evidence in
that he said he first became aware of this error the afternoon after the
statements were presented to the residents at the Annual General Meeting.
69. Mr Nunn’s evidence of 2 August 2001 was delivered by Mr Nunn
as set-out above as a little monologue and it was all entirely
consistent. He
was not led or interrupted. The Tribunal considers that this evidence was more
reliable than his evidence of 9 August
2001, which the Tribunal rejects.
70. On the basis of Mr Nunn’s evidence, the Tribunal finds that
the document, i.e. the audited statement, was false and misleading
basis of Mr Nunn’s evidence of 2 August 2001, the Tribunal finds that the
fact that this information was false and
misleading was known to the Respondent
before the audited statements were given to the residents, including Mr
Schintler, at the
annual meeting. The Tribunal is of the opinion that this was
a very serious breach of the Respondents obligations to all of the
residents of
the village.
71. This giving of a document to Mr Schintler, as one of the
residents, differs from the giving of the document to the Residents Committee
because here the Respondent was required to comply with the Act. While a
document given to the Residents Committee should not contain
information which
is false and misleading, it is not specifically given in compliance with the Act
and the document does not come
within section 86 for the reasons given
72. Mr Nunn blamed the auditor for the mistake and attempted to absolve
himself and, by implication, the Respondent of blame for the
misleading audited statements. In the High Court in
Esanda Finance
Corporation Limited v Peat Marwick Hungerfords (Reg)
, 18 March 1997, McHugh
J. discussed the role of the auditor and the client and said:
... the accounts are ordinarily prepared by the client and, in any event,
are that person's
responsibility
(Bily 834 P 2d 745 at 762 (1992)).
Each case must be judged on its own facts. But it would have to be an
exceptional case for the client and all its servants and agents
to be innocent
of fraud or negligence in relation to the publication of accounts that are false
or misleading.
73. In this regard, the Tribunal notes with surprise, Mr
Nunn’s evidence that the Respondent’s directors were not required
certify the accuracy of the financial statements presented to the residents at
the meeting. The Tribunal rejects the suggestion
that the certification of the
auditor absolves the Respondent from liability for giving the residents false
and misleading financial
statements.
Mr Nunn, in evidence, frequently
referred to the auditor’s certification of the accounts when he could not
explain a difficulty
arising from them. It was clear to the Tribunal that the
Respondent relied upon the auditor’s certification to deflect criticism
how it dealt with the residents’ financial affairs. Also, it is clear
from Mr Nunn’s evidence to the Tribunal that
he was aware of how the
auditor’s certification of false financial statements would leave the
Respondent exposed to criticism.
74. The Tribunal finds that Mr
Schintler has been materially prejudiced by the Respondent’s contravention
of the Act because
he was denied the benefit required by the Act of having
audited statements, which could be relied upon. Further, because of the
Respondents failure to make full and proper disclosure of the errors, he was
denied the opportunity to properly question the scheme
operator about the
accounts. This also has relevance to the payments required by the Budget for
the year ending 30 June 2001.
75. The fact that the meeting is required
to be held by the Act and is only required to be held once each year is
significant for
Mr Schintler’s rights. The annual meeting is the only
formal opportunity where Mr Schintler and the other residents have the
statements given to them by the Respondent, when the Respondent is then
available to publicly respond to questions in relation
to the statements. The
resident’s ability to realistically assess the Budget depends upon the
expenditure actually incurred
and the income actually received in the previous
year. Once the budget is presented, and approved, where that is required under
section 106, that is the one and only time Mr Schintler had an opportunity to
formally question the Respondent in relation to the
Budget at a public meeting.
It is the denial of Mr Schintler’s rights in all of these regards that the
Tribunal considers
amounts to material prejudice.
76. If further proof
was necessary of the material prejudice suffered by Mr Schintler in relation to
the presentation of these false
and misleading financial statements, it comes
from the Respondents refusal to hold another annual meeting when requested by
the residents
77. Mr Schintler, therefore, was denied his one
and only opportunity to exercise his rights in a meaningful way by the
Respondent’s
contravention of the Act. The prejudice was substantial and
significant and resulted directly from being given the false and misleading
document by the Respondent when it knew it was false and
misleading.
78. The problem with the presentation of the annual financial
statements arose in August 2000 because of the Respondent’s failure
comply with sections 113 and 131 of the Act. Those sections provide as
Annual financial statements
operator must ensure a financial statement showing the following particulars
is given, on request, to a
resident within 5 months after the end of each financial year—
income and expenditure during the financial year, including income and
expenditure of the capital replacement fund and the maintenance
(b) amounts received for insurance claims relating to the village
during the financial year;
(c) assets and liabilities relating to the village
as at the end of the financial year;
(d) interests, mortgages and other
charges affecting the village’s property as at the end of the financial
Maximum penalty—200 penalty units.
The statement
must be audited and an audit report issued under Australian Auditing Standards
by either of the following—
(a) a member, who holds a public practice
certificate, of—
(i) the Australian Society of Certified Practising
Accountants; or
(ii) the Institute of Chartered Accountants in
(b) a registered company auditor.
Maximum penalty—200
penalty units.
The scheme operator must give a copy of the
statement to the chief executive within 5 months after the end of each financial
Maximum penalty—200 penalty units.
In each year, a scheme operator must call an
annual meeting of the residents of the retirement village as soon as reasonably
practicable
after the annual financial statements mentioned in section 113 are
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units.
the scheme operator must give each resident at least 21 days written notice of
the meeting.
The annual meeting may not be held simultaneously
with a meeting that must be held under another
The meeting may not be held simultaneously with
a meeting that is required under the
Body Corporate and Community Management
The scheme operator must present the statements to
the meeting.
Maximum penalty for subsection (4)—100 penalty
79. The combined effect of these two sections is that the scheme
operator “as soon as reasonably practicable after the annual
statements mentioned in section 113 are available” must call an annual
meeting. In relation to the annual financial
statements for the year ended 30
June 2000, the Respondent called the meeting before the statements were
available and by so doing
denied the residents the period of 21 days in which to
request the financial statements prior to the annual
80. It is clear from Mr Nunn’s evidence,
that the result of the Respondent’s failure to follow the requirements of
Act resulted in the Respondent also having insufficient time to examine the
annual financial statements. This resulted in the Respondent
presenting annual
financial statements at the meeting which were false and misleading. Likewise
the Respondent’s failure to
follow the requirements of the Act resulted in
the residents being denied a reasonable opportunity to request the annual
statements prior to the meeting and, therefore, a reasonable
opportunity to prepare for that meeting.
7. The annual budget for
the year ending 30 June 2000
81. All actions by the parties prior to
1 July 2000 were required to comply with the repealed Act and the Tribunal is
not given any
specific powers to deal with matters which arose before1 July
8. The annual budget for the year ending 30 June
82. With regard to the information to be contained in the Budget
and the timing of its presentation to residents it is appropriate
to once again
look to Mr Schintler’s lease at clause 5.01 which states:
Owner shall notify the Resident ... prior to each 1st day of July of the
Resident's fair proportion of the Owner's estimate
of the total operating
expenses of the Owner in respect of the running, maintenance and management of
the Village for the financial
year under review.
83. The Respondent, at
least in regard to the Budget for the year ending 30 June 2001, did not present
the Budget to residents until
17 August 2000 at the annual meeting and in doing
so the Tribunal finds that the Respondent has again failed to comply with its
contractual
obligations.
84. Sections 103 to 108 all relate to charges
for general services and sections 106 to 108 inclusive, all relate to increasing
general services charge. Section 107 imposes a liability on the scheme
operator to show in the Budget that any increase is validly
payable under the
contract or is valid under section 106. If the scheme operator fails to do so
the resident is not required to
pay the increase in the charge.
85. The Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s submission that the general
services charge did not exceed the CPI increase for the
year ending 30 June
2001. That submission is only true if you compare the Budget with the previous
year’s Budget. If you
compare the Budget with the actual expenditure for
the previous year the increase is 43 per cent.
86. Because of the way
in which the Budget was presented by the Respondent to residents, easy
comparison with either the previous
year’s Budget or actual expenditure
was not possible and the increase of 43 per cent would not have been readily
The Respondent did not make the audited financial statements
available until after 4pm on 16 August, the day before the annual meeting
August, which commenced at 9 am that day. The Budget was provided to residents
at that meeting and not prior to 1 July as
required by the Mr Schintler’s
residence contract.
87. The Respondent’s Budget increased wages by
49 per cent, superannuation by 80 per cent, Workcover by 109 per cent and rates
by 110 per cent. Because of the considerable increases in these expenditure
items covered by section 107, without explanation for
the magnitude of the
increases, it is impossible to make any realistic assessment of whether or not
the Budget required resident
approval under section 106.
Tribunal accepts Mr Schintler’s evidence, confirmed as it was by Mr Nunn,
that the residents requested that the Respondent
hold a further meeting 21 days
later to approve the Budget. Under these circumstances, natural justice
required the holding of another
annual meeting where the Respondent complied
with its obligations under the residence contracts and the Act and the meeting
have been held. This also would have given the Respondent the
opportunity to overcome the problem it created by the presentation
of the false
and misleading audited accounts.
89. The Tribunal accepts Mr Nunn’s
evidence that the residents were justifiably angry with the Respondent’s
at this meeting and in relation to the accounts.
the course of the hearing, the Tribunal formed the view that the Respondent
continually denied any wrong doing until the
wrong doing was proved. The
proving of wrong doing by a scheme operator is considerably difficult if the
operator is able to deny
the residents access to the supporting documents behind
the accounts and to obfuscate by presenting accounts and budgets in the way
which this Respondent has done over the years ending 30 June 1998 to 30 June
2001, which were placed before the Tribunal.
91. The Tribunal has already
made findings above in relation to the issue of rates which were significantly
overestimated by the Respondent
in this Budget. It cannot make any findings on
the increases in wages, superannuation and Workcover because it simply does not
if the increases are justified under section 107.
92. The Tribunal
finds this information in the Budget to be false and misleading and, on the
balance of probabilities, that the Respondent
knew this information to be false
and misleading at 17 August 2000 when it gave it to Mr Schintler and the other
93. The next question is whether or not Mr Schintler has
been materially prejudiced by the Respondent’s contravention of the
regard to the Budget document. Once again, the Tribunal does not have the
2000/01 audited statements. While, the Respondent
may avoid some of the
material prejudice to Mr Schintler and the other 166 residents by giving them
credits for any amounts for which
it over budgeted, the question still arises as
to whether or not he has been materially prejudiced. The Tribunal is aware that
residents of retirement villages are on limited and fixed incomes. For
this reason any contribution beyond that which is legally
justifiable, even if
it results in a credit for the next year may result in hardship or
“prejudice”.
94. If the actual expenditure for
1999/2000 had been used for the purpose of the Budget, would the annual
outgoings contribution required
to have been paid by Mr Schintler and the other
residents have been affected? Given that the actual expenditure of $511,911
to the units then built on the entire village (i.e. Lots 1, 2 and 3)
the Budget will depend on how many units this involved. The
Tribunal rejected
the Respondents use of 404 and has no way of calculating the cost to each of the
168 units in Lot 1.
95. According to the Quantity Surveyor’s Report
from Graham Lukins Partnership Pty Ltd of 20 July 2000 there were “320
completed independent living units” at that time. On this basis, and
using the expenditure attributable to Lots 1, 2 and 3,
it would appear to the
Tribunal that this number could be reliably used to calculate a realistic
estimate of expenditures for the
year ended 30 June 2001. If further units are
completed in the year, any expenditure will be paid for either by the scheme
or the new resident.
96. Dividing $511,911 by 320 results in an
annual outgoings contribution required to have been paid by Mr Schintler and the
residents of $1,599.72. Even allowing for the residents’
contribution to the Maintenance Reserve Fund of $30.50 each and,
where their
residence contracts provided for payments to the Capital Replacement Fund under
sub-section 94(1)(d), which the Tribunal
assumes the Respondent to have
correctly calculated ( there was no evidence on this point), at $8.50 per
resident, that would result
in an annual outgoings contribution required to have
been paid by Mr Schintler and the other residents of $1,638.72 for the year
ending 30 June 2001. According to the Respondent’s Annual Budget for the
year ending 30 June 2001 (Document RN3) residents
were required to pay $1,857.05
for that year. That is residents were required to pay $209.82 more than appears
justified by a reasonable
method of assessing the contribution. This is 12.8
per cent more than the amount which the Respondent was entitled to charge.
97. Section 106 of the Act sets the CPI as a reasonable increase which
does not warrant resident approval. On this basis the Tribunal
finds that the
increase of 12.8 percent resulted in Mr Schintler (and the other residents)
being materially prejudiced as a result
of the Respondent giving him the false
and misleading Budget document. The Tribunal considers that the prejudice to Mr
is such that even if he is credited with the amounts of any
over-budgeted items that he has still been materially
prejudiced.
Problems arising from the Format of the
98. During the course of the hearing several other issues
were raised that relate to the efficient and proper functioning of a retirement
99. The Tribunal has commented on the
fact that there was no consistency between the headings for Budget purposes and
the Audited
Statement headings or between budget headings from year to year.
The Budget document for the year ended 30 June 2001 did not show
income received and expenditure incurred in the previous year or the budget for
the previous year. In fact, it did not
show any anticipated income. It also
failed to show any total percentage increase let alone comply with the
requirements of sections
106 and 107 as referred to above.
100. Even the
Notes to the Audited Statements for the year ended 30 June 2000 did not use the
same headings as were used in the Audited
Statement making cross referencing
difficult. It was obvious from Mr Nunn’s evidence that he had no idea to
which headings
the auditor allocated some expenditure and monies expended on
behalf of the scheme operator were not considered sufficiently significant
warrant similar identification on the income side of the ledger. While the
Respondent was wrong in paying for expenses for which
the owner was liable e.g.
the Nursery and the Education Centre, preparing the accounts in this way may
have ensured that the scheme
operator reimbursed the Outgoings Contributions
account, in the same financial year, and that the residents could see that this
101. The apparent lack of availability to the residents
of an Assets Register for assets purchased by and for the residents of the
village is also causing difficulties when the Respondent owns 4 villages and
assets, especially equipment, appear to be moved to
and used at other villages.
102. The Tribunal is aware that it is necessary
for scheme operators and village residents to have an on-going relationship and,
that reason, wherever possible it attempts to improve rather than exacerbate
that relationship by its orders. However, here the
relationship has broken down
entirely. On the basis of the evidence the Tribunal has seen and heard of the
Respondent’s inappropriate
behaviour as referred to above and for the
reasons set-out above the Tribunal accepts that the setting aside of the
residence contract
is the appropriate remedy. The Tribunal accepts that Mr
Schintler has satisfied the requirements of sections 170 and 86 and intends
exercise its discretion to make the orders available to it under section
103. While the Tribunal can only make orders binding the parties to
this application, it is acutely aware that the Respondent’s
inappropriate
behaviour also impacts upon the other residents of the village. An order
requiring that the Respondent comply with
the Act should be unnecessary but is
made for clarity and completeness. The Tribunal is unaware as to when the
Respondent intends
to hold the annual meeting required under section 113. On
the assumption, that the meeting is held before 4pm 28 September 2001,
Tribunal’s order setting aside Mr and Mrs Schintler’s residence
contract takes effect, the Tribunal makes the
following order:
that Chancellor Park Retirement Village
Pty Ltd in relation to the next annual meeting of
ensure that the financial
statements for 2000/01 and the budget for 2001/02 comply with the requirements
of the residence contracts
ensure that the financial statements
are available, as required by section 113 of the Act, before the annual meeting
notices are sent
out under section
provide the residents with a budget for
2001/02 which also shows, on the same document, the budget for 2000/01 and the
actual income
and expenditure for
ensure that all of the figures in
the budget for 2001/02 are realistic estimates of the amounts which will be paid
or received by
the village over the period
104. The Tribunal, in making this order, is aware
that if the annual meeting occurs after 4pm 28 September 2001, some parts of it
may have no binding effect but hopes that, even then, it may have persuasive
105. For the above reasons the Tribunal makes
the following orders:
That the residence contract between Mr
and Mrs Schintler and Chancellor Park Retirement Village Pty Ltd dated 1
September 1997 be
set aside with effect from 4pm 28 September 2001; and
that Chancellor Park Retirement Village Pty
Ltd refund to Mr and Mrs Schintler the ingoing contribution in the sum of
$95,882.00 paid
under the contract. Such sum to be paid to Mr and Mrs Schintler
by 4pm 28 September 2001;
that Chancellor
Park Retirement Village Pty Ltd compensate Mr and Mrs Schintler for damages or
loss caused by the contravention in
a sum to be agreed or assessed by the
Tribunal and leave is given for either party to approach the Registry for a
further Tribunal
hearing for that
that Chancellor Park Retirement
Village Pty Ltd immediately advise Mr and Mrs Schintler of Mr and Mrs
Schintler's fair proportion
of the Chancellor Park Retirement Village Pty Ltd's
estimate of the total operating expenses of Chancellor Park Retirement Village
Pty Ltd in respect of the running, maintenance and management of the Village for
the year ending 30 June 2002 as it was required
to do by his residence contract
by 1 July 2001.
that Chancellor Park
Retirement Village Pty Ltd certify that the only funds which were paid out of
the outgoings contributions account
for the village for the year 2000/01 were in
relation to expenditures for residents as provided for under their residence
and the Act.
That this decision
and its reasons be published.
Chancellor Park Retirement Village Pty Ltd in relation to the next annual
meeting of residents:
ensure that the
financial statements for 2000/01 and the budget for 2001/02 comply with the
requirements of the residence contracts
ensure that the financial statements
are available, as required by section 113 of the Act, before the annual meeting
notices are sent
out under section
provide the residents with a budget for
2001/02 which also shows, on the same document, the budget for 2000/01 and the
actual income
and expenditure for
ensure that all of the figures in
the budget for 2001/02 are realistic estimates of the amounts which will be paid
or received by
the village over the period
RETIREMENT VILLAGES
Barry Cotterell Joan Petherick Peter Toohey
Chairperson Member Member
Dated: 4 September 2001
GJUE:\Decision\2001-dec\Retirement
Villages\V001-01D04-09-01.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (195 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter