URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2024/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stone v Belmore Bulk Materials Pty Ltd & Ors [2024] ICQ 23 (17 January 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Stone v Belmore Bulk Materials Pty Ltd & Ors
STONE, MARK DOUGLAS
(Appellant)
BELMORE BULK MATERIAL PTY LTD
Respondent)
SEARLE, TIMOTHY FRANCIS
(Second Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Appeal against decision of Industrial Magistrate
DELIVERED ON:
20 December 2024
HEARING DATE
25 August 2023
Hartigan DP
Appeal is allowed.
orders as to costs made on 4 May 2023 is set aside.
question of costs is remitted to the Industrial Magistrates Court to be heard
and determined according to law by an Industrial
Magistrate other than
Industrial Magistrate Kennedy.
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATES – APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE INDUSTRIAL
MAGISTRATE AS TO COSTS –
PARTICULARS – SUFFICIENCY
OF REASONS – where
the appellant commenced proceedings seeking orders convicting the respondents of
breaches of the
Mining and Quarrying Safety and Health Act 1999
– where the respondents were acquitted of all charges – where the
Industrial Magistrate ordered the appellant to
pay the respondents' costs
– where costs were awarded under
Justices Act 1886
(Qld) – where it was determined that the case was one of
‘special difficulty, complexity or importance’ and a higher
of costs was ‘just and reasonable’ under
Justices Act 1886
(Qld) – where these costs were set at $394,361.05
– where expert evidence was relied upon – where admissibility
evidence was objected to – whether costs were ‘just and
reasonable’ – whether the Magistrate’s reasons
fully disclose
the basis for the calculation of quantum – whether the quantum of costs
were properly calculated with regard
had to the scale under the
(Qld) sch 2 – whether adequate reasons given
– where Industrial Magistrate found to not have provided sufficient
– where Industrial Magistrate found to not have properly dealt
with objection to expert evidence – where reasons provided
not indicative
of matter being one of ‘special difficulty, complexity or
importance’– where appeal is granted –
matter remitted to the
Industrial Magistrates Court.
LEGISLATION:
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Relations Act 2016
Justices Act 1886
Justices Regulation 2014
r 19, sch 2
Mining and Quarrying Safety and Health Act 1999
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld), r 702
Cullinan v McMahon
[2014] QDC 120
Clark v Ryan
[1960] HCA 42
103 CLR 486
Drew v Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2009] QCA 66
Hickey v Crime and Misconduct Commission
Interclean Industrial Services Ltd v Auckland Regional Council
[2000] 3 NSWLR 489
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
[2010] 1 CR App R 23
[2005] QCA 472
[2006] 2 Qd R 69
R W Miller and Co Pty Ld v Krupp
(Australia) Pty Ltd
(1991) 34 NSWLR 129
Schloss v Bell; Bell v
[2016] ICQ 017
Senior Constable
Sheehan v Leo
[2016] QDC 131
Whitby v Stockair Pty Ltd & Anor
APPEARANCES
Mr G. Rice KC and Ms R. Kirk counsel instructed by the Office of the Work
Health and Safety Prosecutor
Mr R. Perry KC instructed by Herbert Smith
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
[1] Mark Douglas
Stone ('the Appellant') appeals against an order for costs issued by an
Industrial Magistrate.
Appellant commenced a prosecution against Belmore Bulk Materials Pty Ltd ('the
First Respondent') and Mr Timothy Searles ('the
Second Respondent), the site
senior executive, for offences under
Mining and Quarrying Safety
and Health Act 1999
(Qld) (‘MQSH Act') following an incident at Jacks
Quarry which resulted in a fatal injury to a worker.
[3] After a four
day trial, before the learned Industrial Magistrate, the First and Second
Respondents (‘the Respondents’)
were each acquitted of the charges.
The Respondents sought their costs of the prosecution proceeding and the learned
Industrial Magistrate
subsequently ordered the Appellant to pay the Respondent's
costs in the amount of $394,361.05. The Appellant contends that the Industrial
Magistrate erred in the awarding of costs.
[4] Relevantly,
the Appellant seeks, on appeal, to set aside orders 3 and 4 of the orders issued
by the Industrial Magistrate on 10
May 2023 which are in the following terms:
3. The Complainant is to pay the Defendants costs in the amount of
$411,476.75, made up of:
a. $394,361.05 in relation to the costs of the proceedings; and
b. $17,115.70 in relation to the Defendants' application for costs.
4. The Complainant is to pay the Defendants the amount of costs specified in
3 above within two months of the date of this order.
The grounds of appeal
[5] On appeal,
the Appellant contends
Industrial Magistrate erred in:
(a) holding that the opinions expressed in the affidavit of Mr Graham Robinson
was admissible evidence on the question of costs and
subsequently accepting
those opinions in determining what costs were just and reasonable (‘appeal
ground one’);
(b) holding that the test of “special difficulty, complexity, or
importance” set out under
Justices Act 1886
Justices Act
') had been satisfied (‘appeal ground
(c) failing to have regard to the scale set out in the
Justices Regulation
Justices Regulation
as a guide to the
proper exercise of discretion for the purposes of
Justices Act
(‘appeal ground three’); and
(d) the exercise of discretion by awarding costs in favour of the Respondents
that was not just and reasonable (‘appeal ground
Appellant’s written submission identifies that ground four is encapsulated
in previous grounds. Consequently, no further
regard will be had to appeal
ground four.
[7] The matters
raised in the appeal grounds require consideration of the operation of the
relevant statutory provisions.
Relevant Statutory Provisions
[8] The objects
of the MQSH Act
are the protection
of the safety and health of persons who may be affected by operations, by
requiring the risk of injury or illness
to be an acceptable level.
[9] Offences
against the MQSH Act are prosecuted
Industrial Magistrates Court is a product of the
Industrial Relations
(Qld) (‘the IR Act’) and its jurisdiction
is identified by s 506 of the IR Act which relevantly states:
Magistrate’s
(1) A magistrate has jurisdiction—
(a) to exercise powers conferred on, or jurisdiction given to, magistrates by
this Act or another Act; and ...”
[11] Section
234(1) of the MQSH Act confers jurisdiction upon the Industrial Magistrates
Court as envisaged by s 506(1)(a) of the
[12] Section 569
of the IR Act is contained in Chapter 11, Part 7 entitled,
“Offence Proceedings” and relevantly provides:
569 Where offence proceedings are to be heard and decided
(1) Proceedings for an offence against this Act are to be heard and decided
by the court or a magistrate, within the limits of the
magistrate’s jurisdiction.
Proceedings before a magistrate are to be heard and decided summarily
Justices Act 1886
, but the Industrial Magistrates
Court where the proceedings are started must be constituted by a magistrate
sitting alone. ...”
(emphasis added)
reference in s 569 to a “magistrate” is a reference to an
Industrial Magistrate.
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(Qld) provides that the
Justices Act
applies to prosecutions against the MQSH Act as follows:
44 Summary proceedings
(1) In an Act, a provision of the type mentioned in subsection (2) means that
a proceeding for an offence, or a specified offence,
against the Act is a
summary proceeding under the
Justices Act 1886
(2) Subsection (1) applies to provisions of the following type—
(a) a provision to the effect that a proceeding for the offence is to be heard
and decided summarily;
(b) a provision to the effect that a proceeding for the offence is to be heard
and decided by or before justices or a magistrate
Division 8 of the
Justices Act
sets out the power of an Industrial
Magistrate to award costs.
[16] Relevantly,
Justices Act
provides that when a Magistrate makes an order
dismissing the complaint they make an “order that the complainant shall
to the defendant such costs as to them seem just and reasonable.”
identifies various
considerations which must be taken into account before an award of costs may be
made against an unsuccessful complainant.
It provides,
relevantly:
158A Exercise of discretion in relation to an award of costs
(1) Despite
section 158(1)
, justices who dismiss a complaint may make an
order for costs in favour of a defendant against a complainant who is a police
or public officer only if the justices are satisfied that it is proper
that the order for costs should be made.
(2) In deciding whether it is proper to make the order for costs, the
justices must take into account all relevant circumstances,
including, for
(a) whether the proceeding was brought and continued in good faith; and
(b) whether there was a failure to take appropriate steps to investigate a
matter coming to, or within, the knowledge of a person
responsible for bringing
or continuing the proceeding; and
(c) whether the investigation into the offence was conducted in an appropriate
(d) whether the order of dismissal was made on technical grounds and not on a
finding that there was insufficient evidence to convict
or make an order against
the defendant; and
(e) whether the defendant brought suspicion on himself or herself by conduct
engaged in after the events constituting the commission
of the offence; and
(f) whether the defendant unreasonably declined an opportunity before a charge
(i) to explain the defendant’s version of the events; or
(ii) to produce evidence likely to exonerate the defendant;
(g) whether there was a failure to comply with a direction given under
(h) whether the defendant conducted the defence in a way that prolonged the
proceeding unreasonably; and
(i) whether the defendant was acquitted on a charge, but convicted on another.
(3) If an order for costs under
section 158
is made against a complainant who
is a police officer or public officer (within the meaning of this subsection),
the clerk of the
court is to give to the defendant a certificate signed by the
clerk showing the amount of costs awarded.
(4) Subject to subsection (5), the defendant is entitled to be paid by the
State the amount shown in the certificate within 2 months
after payment is
(5) If an appeal against an order for costs is made under
(a) payment of the amount shown in the certificate is stayed until the appeal is
decided; and
(b) payment is to be made of the amount (if any) ordered or confirmed by further
order made on the appeal.
(6) In subsection (3)—
public officer
does not include—
(a) an officer or employee of the public service of the Commonwealth; or
(b) an officer or employee of a statutory body that represents the Crown in
right of the Commonwealth; or
(c) an officer or employee of a local government.
operates to limit the discretion to award costs,
operates to limit
the quantum of costs which may be awarded. It provides:
158B Costs for division
(1) In deciding the costs that are just and reasonable for this division, the
justices may award costs only—
(a) for an item allowed for this division under a scale of costs prescribed
under a regulation; and
(b) up to the amount allowed for the item under the scale.
(2) However, the justices may allow a higher amount for costs if the justices
are satisfied that the higher amount is just and reasonable
having regard to the
special difficulty, complexity or importance of the case.
[19] Finally,
Justices Act
provides that costs must be ordered in the following
159 The sum allowed for costs to be specified in the conviction or
The sum so allowed for costs shall in all cases be specified in the
conviction or order or order of dismissal, or order striking out
a complaint for
want of jurisdiction.
[20] The scale
to be applied when calculating the quantum of a costs order for the purpose of
Justices Act
is contained in Schedule 2 of the
[21] Relevantly,
Schedule 2,
, item 1 of the
Justices Regulation
identifies that the
scale set out amounts up to which costs may be allowed. Item 1 relevantly
1 Scale sets out amounts up to which costs may be
This scale sets out—
(a) the only items for which costs may be allowed for
(b) the amount up to which costs may be allowed for each item.
A higher amount for costs may be allowed under
[22] Item 2
confirms that an item listed in Part 2 covers all legal professional work, even
if the work is done by more than one lawyer.
[23] Item 3
provides that only necessary and proper costs may be allowed as follows:
3 Only necessary or proper costs may be allowed
A cost is to be allowed only to the extent to which—
(a) incurring the cost was necessary or proper to achieve justice or to
defend the rights of the party; or
(b) the cost was not incurred by over-caution, negligence, mistake or merely
at the wish of the party.
[24] Schedule 2,
Justices Regulation
identifies what costs may be allowed for legal
professional work.
is relevantly in the following terms:
Work for hearing of complaint up to and including day 1
Instructions and preparation for the hearing, including attendance on day 1
of the hearing
up to $1,500.00
After day 1
For each day of the hearing after day 1
up to $875.00
Other court attendances
Court attendance, other than on the hearing of the complaint
up to $250.00
[25] Schedule 2,
Justices Regulation
identifies the disbursements that may
be allowed to be claimed as follows:
- Disbursements (including disbursements to witnesses
and interpreters)
5 Disbursements, other than to witness for attending
Court fees and other fees
and payments (other than allowances to witnesses to attend proceedings)
including allowances to interpreters,
and travelling, accommodation and other
expenses of a lawyer acting as advocate, may be allowed to the extent they have
been reasonably
incurred and are paid or payable.
6 Disbursements as allowance to witness for
attending—defendant’s witnesses
An allowance paid, payable or that will be paid by
the defendant to a witness to attend a proceeding may be allowed up to an amount
equal to the amount of any comparable prosecution witness allowance that would
be payable to the witness if the witness were a prosecution
witness attending
court to give evidence in a criminal proceeding.
7 Disbursements as allowance to witnesses for
attending—prosecution witnesses
Costs allowed to the complainant may include an
amount up to the amount required to reimburse a payment by the State of a
prosecution
witness allowance paid or that will be paid to prosecution witnesses
attending the proceeding.
[26] Section 243
of the MQSH Act provides:
243 Orders for costs
(1) This section applies in relation to a proceeding for an offence against
(2) A Magistrates Court may award a represented party for the proceeding
costs of the representation.
(3) If a court convicts a person of an offence against this Act, the court
may order the person to pay the reasonable costs incurred
investigating, and preparing for the prosecution of, the offence.
(4) This section does not limit the orders for costs the court may make.
(5) In this section—
represented party
for a proceeding, means a party to the proceeding, or a person ordered or
permitted to appear or to be represented by a lawyer, who is represented by
Schloss v Bell; Bell v
His Honour, Deputy
President O'Connor (as he then was) considered the application of the discretion
conferred by the
Justices Act
to order costs, in the following terms:
[28] The power
to award costs in respect of a summary hearing in the Industrial
Magistrates
Court are found in
Justices Act
Latoudis v Casey
, Mason CJ, McHugh and Toohey JJ wrote:
"...there will be cases in which, when regard is had to the particular
circumstances, it would not be just and reasonable to order
costs against the
prosecutor or to order payment of all the defendant's costs. If, for example,
the defendant, by his or her conduct
after the events constituting the
commission of the alleged offence, brought the prosecution upon himself or
herself, then it would
not be just and reasonable to award costs against the
prosecutor."
[30] In response
Latoudis v Casey
Justices Act 1886
was amended to insert
which placed a fetter on
[31] McPherson
MacPherson v Commissioner of Taxation
in dealing with
"In making his determination as to costs, the magistrate applied
Justices Act
(the Queensland Act). That section was enacted shortly
after the decision of the High Court in
Latoudis v. Casey
[1990] HCA 59
, in which their Honours reviewed the principles governing the
discretion to award costs in respect of unsuccessful proceedings for
that was conducted summarily. On the appeal before us, s.158A was, on both
sides, accepted as being a direct and speedy
legislative response by State
Parliament to the decision of the majority of their Honours in that case. The
object evidently was
to replace the principles adopted in
Latoudis v.
with a series of statutory provisions amounting to a virtual
codification of the leading factors to be considered in deciding whether
should be awarded against a police officer or a public officer whose complaint
is dismissed by justices."
Section 158
Justices Act 1886
(Qld) provides for the general power to award "just and
reasonable" costs in favour of a defendant when a complaint is
fetters the discretion in relation to a public officer such that a costs
order may be made "only if the justices are satisfied that
it is proper that the
order for costs should be made". In determining whether it is proper to make the
costs order,
provides that the trial magistrate "must" take into
account "all the relevant circumstances".
[34] Davies JA
spoke similarly about the limitation on the discretion in
where his Honour said:
"There is no doubt that
applied to this case because the complainant
was a police officer. Under that section despite
the magistrate may
make a costs order such as the applicant says should have been made only if he
is satisfied that it is proper
that such an order should be made; and in so
deciding he is obliged to take into account all relevant circumstances including
not limited to those enumerated in subsection (2).
Section 158A
plainly, a limitation on the discretion which
permits to order costs
against a complainant."
(Citations omitted)
[28] As noted
Justices Act
permits an uplift of costs above the
amount allowed under the scale, if the justices are satisfied that the higher
amount is “just
and reasonable” having regard to the “special
difficulty, complexity or importance of the case.”
construction of
section 158B(2)
was considered in
In that matter, Farr
SC DCJ relevantly observed:
There is no doubt that it was a matter that had a degree of difficulty and/or
complexity attached to it. The question however is whether
it amounted to
special difficulty or complexity.
“Special” is relevantly defined in The Macquarie Dictionary as
“extraordinary; exceptional; exceptional in amount
or degree.”
The Macquarie Dictionary Online defines it as “distinguished or
different from what is ordinary or usual”.
[30] His Honour
had further regard to the provision in
Cullinan v McMahon (No
as follows:
That submission ignores the actual words used in
Justices Act
, namely “just and reasonable having regard to
the special difficulty, complexity or importance of the case”. The
“special” does not apply to, or restrict, the words
“just and reasonable”. They apply to “difficulty,
or importance”. Properly construed, the discretion to award a higher
amount for costs as provided for in the statutory
provisions, is enlivened
where: (a) special difficulty, complexity or importance exists; and (b) it is
just and reasonable to make
a higher award having regard to the identified
special difficulty, complexity or importance.
Senior Constable
Robertson DCJ considered
the meaning of “special difficulty” as follows:
Although her Honour’s reasons referred to above are somewhat equivocal
I agree with the appellant
that in stating that the
issue takes “it somewhat out of the realm of
the ordinary”, her Honour misdirected herself as to the threshold that was
required by reference to authority. It may be unusual for a
defence to be
raised in the Magistrates Court, but, in this case the issue was greatly
simplified by the approach of the parties.
The trial lasted less than a day. The
prosecution evidence took 9 minutes. Dr Georgious gave evidence for 59 minutes
most of which
was in cross-examination. There were no objectively especially
difficult aspects of the case. “Unusual” is not synonymous
“difficulty” and, in any event, this was not a case that involved
special difficulty, including having regard to
the reversal of onus issue that
does arise from time to time e.g.
s 129(1)(c)
Drugs Misuse Act
the then Deputy President O’Connor
“special difficulty, complexity or importance” by reference to,
Whitby v Stockair Pty Ltd &
Whitby v Stockair Pty Ltd & Anor
SC DCJ had to consider a conclusion by the Magistrate that the case against each
defendant was of special importance because
the defendants' reputations "were on
the line" and "at stake" and that a finding of guilt would have caused
"immeasurable damage"
to their reputations. Farr SC DCJ affirmed his earlier
decision in
Cullinane v McCahon
where he said:
"... I accept that this case was important to the appellant, as no doubt
every criminal case is to every defendant. To invoke special
importance however,
the case must involve more than the charge merely relating to a defendant in
his/her professional capacity. 'Special
importance' is clearly a reference to
the importance of the case generally, in terms of questions of law or public
interest (this
list is not exhaustive) and is not intended to refer to the
subjective assessment of a defendant as to whether the case is important
[33] His Honour
also considered the case of
Interclean Industrial Services Ltd v Auckland Regional
in the context of
considering the phrase “special difficulty, complexity or
importance”.
His Honour relevantly
the Court in determining the phrase "special difficulty, complexity or
importance", the Court was referred to the often
Interclean Industrial Services Ltd v Auckland Regional
"). In that matter, the Auckland Regional
Council sought higher costs after Interclean Industrial Services Ltd pleaded
guilty to two
criminal charges under the
Resource Management
1991. As with the present case, an award of costs in excess of
scale was sought on the basis of "special difficulty, complexity or
importance".
On appeal, the High Court held that there was no special difficulty or
complexity in the case, the defendant had pleaded
guilty and the issues raised
by both the prosecution and defence did not go significantly beyond those raised
in prosecutions generally.
Randerson J said:
"As observed by Tipping J in
T v Collector of Customs
Court, Christchurch, AP 167/94, 28 February 1995) at p2:
'The use of the word "special" when applied to the concepts of difficulty,
complexity and importance means that it is not enough simply
to say that the
case was difficult, complex or important. The necessary difficulty, complexity
or importance must be such that it
can be said to be significantly greater than
is ordinarily encountered. Similarly the focus on the case itself means that it
enough for the applicant to be able to say that by dint of its features
the case had special importance to him.'"
(citations omitted).
[34] Accordingly,
to be satisfied that s 158B(2) is enlivened, the Court must be satisfied that
special difficulty, complexity or
importance exists and that it is just and
reasonable to make a higher award having regard to the identified special
difficulty, complexity
or importance. For a case to be found to be one involving
special difficulty, complexity or importance, those factors must be greater
ordinarily encountered.
The decision of the Industrial Magistrate
[35] The hearing
with respect to costs was held before the learned Industrial Magistrate on 22
October 2022 and an
judgment was delivered on 4 May 2023.
[36] The issues
to be determined by the Industrial Magistrate included,
inter alia,
whether costs should be awarded pursuant to
Justices Act
considering whether to award costs against a prosecutor, the Industrial
Magistrate must have regard to
Justices Act
considering the quantum of the costs to be awarded, the Industrial Magistrate
must have regard to
Justices Act
[37] Particular
to this matter, the Industrial Magistrate was also required to determine the
Appellant’s objection to the admissibility
of the evidence of Mr Graham
Robinson, cost assessor, relied on by the Respondents.
[38] At the
commencement of his reasons, the Industrial Magistrate correctly identified the
relevant statutory provisions that he
must have regard to in consideration of
the matter:
It is appropriate here to consider the relevant
Justices Act
provisions, that
section 158
. I will read these. I know you have gone through
them. But, I
am sorry, I have to tell you what I consider to be the
relevant parts:
158 Costs on dismissal
(1) When justices instead of convicting or making an order dismiss the
complaint, they may by their order of dismissal order that
the complainant
shall pay to the defendant such costs as to them seem just and reasonable.
158A Exercise of discretion in relation to an award of costs
(1) Despite
section 158
(1) , justices who dismiss a complaint may make
an order for costs in favour of a defendant against a complainant who is a
officer or public officer only if the justices are satisfied that it is
proper that the order for costs should be made.
(2) In deciding whether it is proper to make the order for costs, the
justices must take into account all relevant circumstances,
including, for
(a) to (i), and I have gone through them already, so I won’t bore you
any further. And, as I have just sort of suggested, it
is noted that this list
is not exhaustive, so there is (a) to (i) plus whatever else is a relevant
circumstance.
158B Costs for division
(1) In deciding the costs that are just and reasonable for this division,
the justices may award costs only—
item allowed for this division under a scale of costs prescribed
a regulation; and
the amount allowed for the item under the scale.
(2) However, the justices may allow a higher amount for costs if the
justices are satisfied that the higher amount is just and reasonable
regard to the special difficulty, complexity or importance of the case.
Schedule 2 of the
Justices Regulation
is also relevant here. But I
won’t read this in full, but see
disbursements and it says at says at 5:
5 Disbursements, other than to witness for attending
Court fees and other fees and payments (other than allowances to witnesses
to attend proceedings) including allowances to interpreters,
and travelling,
accommodation and other expenses of a lawyer acting as advocate, may be allowed
to the extent they have been reasonably
incurred and are paid or payable.
So such costs have to be “just and reasonable” section 158
subsection (1), only ordered “if it is proper”
158A(1), and
considering section 158A(2) factors and all relevant circumstances and if it is
“just and reasonable having regard
to the special difficulty, complexity,
or importance of the case”, that is section 158B(2). I have read numerous
cases including,
and I will give you the citations because it is proper: Bell v
Townsend and Ors
[2014] QMC 30
; Bell v Hendry & Ors
[2014] ICQ 18
Stockair Pty Ltd & Jackson
[2015] QDC 79
; Fletcher v Demag Cranes and
Components Pty Ltd
[2020] QMC 9
; Seiffert & Ors v Commissioner of Police
[2021] QCA 170
; Guilfoyle v Kouzoukas
[2022] QDC 8
; Stone v Thomas[2022] ICQ 30.
Together with referring to those cases referred to in the reply’s
submissions on costs on behalf of the complainant and contained
affidavits of Mr Graham Robinson. So that is all those cases that I have
considered.
Industrial Magistrate then proceeded to refer to each of the decisions cited in
the above passage and quoted from relevant
extracts of those decisions in his
[40] However,
other than the recitation of the extracted passages, no further analysis of
those cases or the relevant principles derived
from them was conducted or
applied to the circumstances of the matter.
[41] His Honour
then turned to consider whether the case was one of “special difficulty,
complexity or importance.” His
Honour did so by firstly listing features
of the hearing as follows:
Importance of the case
Few cases refer directly to “special difficulty or complexity”.
In our case, Adam Malone died. There were 14 witnesses,
45 exhibits, a four day
trial, and Senior Counsel for the defence and two juniors for the complainant
but then one of whom became
Senior Counsel between then and October last year.
[42] His Honour
then made the following
And in all the circumstances, I am satisfied that due to the special
importance of the case and dare I say, complexity and special
difficulties, I
find that a higher amount of costs is proper and just and reasonable. I say here
that my mind did not turn to “the
guilty party” until all the
evidence, exhibits, and submissions were considered and then only after a great
deal of consideration.
In other words, it did not pop into my mind straightaway
that here we have got separate parties, let’s go with it that way.
it took a huge amount of time and effort to get this done in the first instance
in April last year.
In other words, the final decision took a great deal of effort due to special
importance, difficulty and complexity.
objection to the receipt of Mr Robinson’s report into evidence was not
directly dealt with. Rather, His Honour admitted
Mr Robinson’s affidavit
into evidence as follows:
With respect, I quote Magistrate Preston at paragraph 45:
I consider that Mr Robinson is experienced and expert in legal costs law
assessment and taxation.
And accordingly, I admit his affidavit sworn on the 8th of July 2022 and the
exhibits thereto and it is marked exhibit 1.
[44] It is not
apparent from the terms of the reasons what decision the quote from Magistrate
Preston is extracted from.
[45] The learned
Industrial Magistrate then proceeded to awards costs to the Respondents on the
following basis:
I will adopt some of Mr Robinson’s headings.
The Level of Counsel Briefed
I accept that it was both necessary and proper to brief senior counsel and
note that the complainant briefed two junior counsel, and
as I have already
said, one became senior between the hearing in October 2022.
Counsels’ Fees
Mr Robinson considered the Victorian Supreme Court Scale and he said why he
did that in 8 October last year. The scale of $9060 per
day for senior counsel
and suggested that $8000 per day as invoiced by Mr Perry was:
Generally considered to be allowable on a standard basis for work
conducted by Senior Counsel in Queensland.
The total of $171,540. 35
Experts’ Fees
Without going over Mr Robinson’s reasoning on pages 8 to 10 of his
report, I accept that there [sic] “reasonably incurred
and are paid or
payable” in the sum of $60,665. 40
Travel and Accommodation Etcetera
The total involved is 34,471.85 and I agree with that.
Solicitors’ Fees
And then you see Mr Robinson reported at pages 11 to 17, the total involved
by him was 127,684.20. In Mr Robinson’s opinion,
the appropriate
allowances are solicitor’s fees 127,684.20. Disbursements, counsels’
fees $171,540. Expert’s fees,
$60,665. Travel etcetera, 34,471.85, a total
of $394,361.05. Now, I also agree with his figure for the cost of the
application to
$17,115.70. The orders will therefore be the complaints against
Timothy Francis Searle and Belmore Bulk Material Pty Ltd are struck
dismissed. The complainant pay the defendant’s costs in the sum of
$394,361.05. And plus the cost of the application
of $17,115.70. Anything else?
MR PERRY: The only correction I would make is just at the end there you said
$394. $394,000.
HIS HONOUR: Did I say 394?
MR BALLARD: You did, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: Sorry, $394,361.
MR PERRY: That’s it.
HIS HONOUR: And 5 cents.
Adequacy of reasons
[46] As will
become apparent in the analysis of the grounds of appeal, there is also a
contention throughout the Appellant’s
submissions that the Industrial
Magistrate erred in failing to provide adequate reasons.
Appellant’s submissions with respect to the adequacy of the reasons
included the following:
12. The learned magistrate ruled that Mr Robinson's evidence was admissible,
apparently on the basis that he was an 'expert in legal
costs law assessment and
taxation'. Every opinion expressed by Mr Robinson must have been accepted in its
entirety since the award
of costs was in complete accordance with those
13. However, his Honour did not state a conclusion, either generally or with
respect to individual amounts, that would satisfy the
requirement of s 158(1)
that the amounts awarded must be just and reasonable in his view. His honour did
not manifest that he had
undertaken an independent exercise of determining what
was just and reasonable. Rather, he merely recited Mr Robinson's opinions
what the 'appropriate allowances' in each category were.
(citations omitted).
[48] For the
reasons identified further below, I have found that the learned Industrial
Magistrate failed to provide adequate reasons
and consequently was in error.
[49] This error
alone results in the Appellant being successful on appeal. However, I have also
found that the appeal succeeds on
other grounds.
Appeal Ground One
[50] As noted
above, ground one contends that the Industrial Magistrate erred in holding that
the opinions expressed by Mr Robinson
were admissible evidence on the question
of costs and subsequently accepting those opinions in determining what costs
were just and
reasonable.
Appellant approached ground one by dividing it into the following components:
(a) ground 1(a) – admissibility of Mr Robinson’s opinions; and
(b) ground 1(b) – reliance on Mr Robinson’s opinions.
Relevant principles with respect to the admissibility of expert evidence
[52] A number of
principles have been developed with respect to the receipt of expert evidence.
[53] Relevantly,
an expert will not be permitted to give evidence of matters which the tribunal
of fact could determine for themselves
or to formulate the expert’s
empirical knowledge as a universal
The onus of establishing
the conditions of admissibility of such material rests on the tendering
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v
summarised the following principles with respect to the tendering of expert
[85] In short, if evidence tendered as expert opinion evidence is to be
admissible, it must be agreed or demonstrated that there
is a field of
“specialised knowledge”; there must be an identified aspect of that
field in which the witness demonstrates
that by reason of specified training,
study or experience, the witness has become an expert; the opinion proffered
must be “wholly
or substantially based on the witness's expert
knowledge”; so far as the opinion is based on facts “observed”
the expert, they must be identified and admissibly proved by the expert, and
so far as the opinion is based on “assumed”
“accepted” facts, they must be identified and proved in some other
way; it must be established that the facts on which
the opinion is based form a
proper foundation for it; and the opinion of an expert requires demonstration or
examination of the scientific
or other intellectual basis of the conclusions
reached: that is, the expert's evidence must explain how the field of
“specialised
knowledge” in which the witness is expert by reason of
“training, study or experience”, and on which the opinion
“wholly or substantially based”, applies to the facts assumed or
observed so as to produce the opinion propounded.
If all these matters are not
made explicit, it is not possible to be sure whether the opinion is based wholly
or substantially on
the expert's specialised knowledge. If the court cannot be
sure of that, the evidence is strictly speaking not admissible, and, so
it is admissible, of diminished weight. And an attempt to make the basis of the
opinion explicit may reveal that it is not
based on specialised expert
knowledge, but, to use Gleeson CJ's characterisation of the evidence
HG v The Queen
(at 428 [41]), on “a combination of
speculation, inference, personal and second-hand views as to the credibility of
the complainant,
and a process of reasoning which went well beyond the field of
expertise”.
Chesterman J
observed as follows:
[43] Mr Jones was a properly qualified clinical psychologist. He was,
relevantly, an expert whose opinion might be admitted into evidence.
could be accepted, however, the factual basis for the opinion had to be
explained to the court. Mr Jones had to recount
the facts on which he based his
opinion. To do that he had to give in evidence the history he took from the
complainant about his
symptoms and what led up to them. Mr Jones’
rehearsal of those facts would not prove them but once he had said what he
the facts to be on which he formed his opinion that opinion could be
provisionally admitted into evidence. If the facts were proved
by someone who
had knowledge of them, in this case the complainant, the opinion would be
admitted unconditionally. It the facts were
not proved the condition on which
the admission depended would be unsatisfied and the opinion could not be acted
on by the tribunal
application of these principles will be considered further with respect to
grounds 1(a) and 1(b).
Ground (1)(a) – admissibility of Mr Robinson's opinions
[57] The only
evidence tendered on behalf of the Respondents on the costs application was an
affidavit of Mr Robinson which had annexed
to it several cost assessment reports
prepared by Mr Robinson.
[58] Before the
Industrial Magistrate, the Appellant challenged the admissibility of Mr
particular, the Appellant contended that Mr Robinson's reports were inadmissible
on the basis that:
(a) he did not have the requisite expertise to assess and determine costs in a
criminal matter under the
Justices Act
and failed to have regard to the
discretion required by the
Justices Act
(b) he advanced his opinion on the extent to which the legal standard of whether
the costs were ‘just and reasonable’
had been met in circumstances
where the court is equipped to draw its own conclusion on this matter.
Appellant accepted Mr Robinson’s expertise with respect to the assessment
of costs in taxation and civil matters. However,
the Appellant objected to Mr
Robinson’s expertise insofar as it was contended his expertise did not
extend to determining costs
in criminal matters under the
[61] It was
submitted by the Appellant, that the determination of costs in criminal matters
Justices Act
is fettered in various ways not evident in civil matters.
In this regard, it was submitted that the use of the words ‘just
reasonable’ in
Justices Act
and the requirement to have
regard to the
Justices Regulation
Scale as a guide, even when the uplift test
applies, distinguishes the two areas with respect to costs. The Appellant
further submitted
that Mr Robinson's failure to have regard to such requirements
exposed his lack of expertise in this area.
[62] During the
course of cross-examination before the Industrial Magistrate, Mr Robinson
accepted that he had conducted one other
matter which could be said to be
similar to this matter insofar it was an assessment of costs under the
[63] Accordingly,
one of the matters to be determined before the Industrial Magistrate was whether
Mr Robinson's expertise as a cost
assessor in a criminal matter applying the
Justices Act
Justices Regulation
could be accepted in circumstances where it
was objected to by the Appellant on the grounds identified above.
[64] A second
matter to be determined by the Industrial Magistrate was the objection made by
the Appellant to the opinion expressed
by Mr Robinson within the report.
Relevantly, the Appellant contends that Mr Robinson sought to advance his
opinion on the extent
to which the legal standard had been met and in doing so
swore to the issue. It was further contended by the Appellant that Mr Robinson
misapplied the relevant test under the
Justices Act
[65] The extent
to which the learned Industrial Magistrate dealt with the objections to the
admissibility of Mr Robinson's evidence,
as identified above, was as
With respect, I quote Magistrate Preston at paragraph 45:
I consider that Mr Robinson is experienced and expert in legal costs law
assessment and taxation.
And accordingly, I admit his affidavit sworn on the 8th of July 2022 and the
exhibits thereto and it is marked exhibit 1. I will adopt
Robinson’s headings.
Industrial Magistrate proceeded to admit both of Mr Robinson's affidavits
including the two reports into evidence.
admissibility of Mr Robinson's evidence, in whole or in part, was a matter
identified by the parties below as requiring the
Court’s consideration and
determination.
Industrial Magistrate’s reasons reveal no analysis or consideration of
each of the objections to Mr Robinson’s
evidence raised by the Appellant.
Further, there was no consideration of the application of the principles,
identified above, relevant
to the admissibility of expert evidence.
[69] In such
circumstances, it is appropriate to consider what constitutes the giving of
adequate reasons. In
Drew v Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd
Muir JA (with whom
Holmes JA and Daubney J agreed) stated as follows:
rationale for the requirement that courts give reasons for their decisions
provides some guidance as to the extent of the
reasons required. The requirement
has been explained, variously, as necessary: to avoid leaving the losing party
with "a justifiable
sense of grievance"
not knowing or understanding why that party lost;
facilitate or not frustrate a right of appeal;
an attribute or incident of the judicial process;
afford natural justice or procedural fairness;
provide "the foundation for the acceptability of the decision by the parties and
the public" and to further "judicial accountability".
[59] The extent to which a trial judge must expose his or her reasoning for
the conclusions reached will depend on the nature of the
determination and "the function to be served by the giving of reasons."
that reason, what is required has been expressed in a variety of ways. For
example, in
Soulemezis v Dudley
Holdings) Pty Ltd
Mahoney JA said:
"... And, in my opinion, it will ordinarily be sufficient if – to adapt
the formula used in a different part of the law ...
by his reasons the judge
apprises the parties of the broad outline and constituent facts of the reasoning
on which he has acted."
[60] McHugh JA's view was that reasons sufficient to meet the above
requirements do not need to be lengthy or elaborate but "... it
is necessary
that the essential ground or grounds upon which the decision rests should be
articulated."
Strbak v Newton
"...What is necessary, it seems to me, is a basic explanation of the
fundamental reasons which led the judge to his conclusion. There
requirement, however, that the reasons must incorporate an extended intellectual
dissertation upon the claim of reasoning which
authorises the judgment which is
[62] Woodward J, in
Ansett Transport Industries (Operations) Pty Ltd
that the decision maker:
"...should set out his understanding of the relevant law, any findings of
fact on which his conclusions depend (especially if those
facts have been in
dispute), and the reasoning processes which led him to those conclusions."
[63] Meagher JA in
Beale v Government Insurance Office of
stated these propositions:
"...there are three fundamental elements of a statement of reasons, which it
is useful to consider. First, a judge should refer to
relevant evidence. There
is no need to refer to the relevant evidence in detail, especially in
circumstances where it is clear that
the evidence has been considered. However,
where certain evidence is important or critical to the proper determination of
and it is not referred to by the trial judge, an appellate court may
infer that the trial judge overlooked the evidence or failed
consideration to it:
North Sydney Council v Ligon 302
(1995) 87 LGERA 435.
Where conflicting evidence of a significant nature is
given, the existence of both sets of evidence should be referred to.
Secondly, a judge should set out any material findings of fact and any
conclusions or ultimate findings of fact reached. The obvious
extension of the
principle in
North Sydney Council
is that, where findings of
fact are not referred to, an appellate court may infer that the trial judge
considered that finding to
be immaterial. Where one set of evidence is accepted
over a conflicting set of significant evidence, the trial judge should set out
his findings as to how he comes to accept the one over the other. But that is
not to say that a judge must make explicit findings
on each disputed piece of
evidence, especially if the inference as to what is found is appropriately
Selvanayagam v University of the West Indies
[1983] 1 All ER 824.
Further, it may not be necessary to make
findings on every argument or destroy every submission, particularly where the
advanced are numerous and of varying significance:
(Court of Appeal, 6 September 1991, unreported).
Thirdly, a judge should provide reasons for making the relevant findings of
fact (and conclusions) and reasons in applying the law
to the facts found.
Those reasons or the process of reasoning should be understandable and
preferably logical as well."
[64] Whilst, in my respectful opinion, it would be inconsistent with
authority to apply the three "fundamental elements" rigidly,
and I do not
understand his Honour to be suggesting otherwise, they provide useful guidance
for a determination of the sufficiency
of reasons in the general run of
[70] Whilst this
was not a matter involving a conflict of expert evidence, it was a matter
wherein the expert evidence was challenged
on several bases during the hearing.
Industrial Magistrate does not identify the reasoning behind the adoption of the
quote from Magistrate Preston and, further,
the logic of the decision is not
apparent, including the reasoning for the decision in the context of the
objection to Mr Robinson’s
expertise in costs assessment of criminal
matters under the
Justices Act
Industrial Magistrate’s reference to Magistrate Preston’s
observation that he considered Mr Robinson as experienced
and an expert in legal
costs law assessment and taxation does not assist. It is not apparent whether
Magistrate Preston made such
a determination in respect of a challenge to Mr
Robinson’s expertise to assess costs under the
Justices Act
putting aside the failure to cite the relevant authority from where Magistrate
Preston’s quote originated, there
is no analysis or consideration of Mr
Robinson’s expertise in circumstances where Mr Robinson’s expertise
and the opinions
expressed had been objected to. In the absence of such
consideration and analysis, the relevance of Magistrate Preston’s finding
that Mr Robinson is an expert in costs assessment is of limited value.
[73] Further,
the reasons do not address the objection to the opinions expressed by Mr
Robinson as to why he contends the costs referred
to in his report are
‘just and reasonable’ in circumstances where it was contended before
the Industrial Magistrate that
Mr Robinson misapplied the relevant test under
Justices Act
objection to Mr Robinson's expression of opinion was twofold. Firstly, it was
objected to in circumstances where it was submitted
that Mr Robinson swore to
the issue to be determined by the Court.
[75] Secondly,
the admissibility of Mr Robinson's opinion was objected to on the basis that he
erred in his conclusion as to what
amounted to ‘just and reasonable’
costs and did not have proper regard to the Court’s discretion to award
as set out in the
Justices Act
and the limitations imposed on the exercise
of the discretion to award costs having regard to policy considerations with
to costs in the criminal jurisdiction.
[76] In this
regard, the Appellant admitted that costs may only be awarded to the extent that
the Industrial Magistrate finds it ‘just
and reasonable’ to do so.
The Appellant contends that this is the relevant test or legal standard to be
determined by the Court.
It is incumbent upon the Court to draw its own
conclusion with respect to the relevant legal test or standard. It was
that this requirement is manifest not only by the requirement to act
judicially but by the express words of
section 158
Justices Act
permitting only an award of “such costs as to seem just and
reasonable”. It was further submitted that the determination
must be based
on evidence before the Court informed by the applicable law, here being
Justices Act
and the policy considerations referable to the
awarding of costs in criminal
Robinson’s report ultimately concludes that the costs sought for
solicitors’ professional fees was ‘just
and reasonable’. He
does so by giving the words ‘just and reasonable’ their ordinary
meaning and concludes that
the words ‘necessary and proper costs’ as
referred to in r 702 UCPR costs, are also just and reasonable costs.
Appellant contends that Mr Robinson’s reasoning misapplied the statutory
test as to what is ‘just and reasonable’
Appellant contended that it was for the Industrial Magistrate to conclude
whether the awarding of costs was ‘just and
reasonable’. In support
of its position in this regard, the Appellant referred to the following passage
R W Miller and Co Pty Ld v Krupp (Australia) Pty
The law attempts rules confining the giving of opinion evidence. One such
rules has been expressed in the terms that the expert may
not give an opinion
upon an ultimate fact in issue. It is almost impossible for a rule in those
terms to be applied, there are many
cases in which an expert has given such an
opinion, and a rule in those terms has been doubted in the High Court: see
Murphy v The Queen
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR 94
at 110, 126-127. A lesser
restriction has been recognised, that the expert may not give an opinion on an
ultimate issue where that
involved the application of a legal standard –
for example that the defendant was negligent, that a risk was reasonably
foreseeable,
that a testator possessed testamentary capacity, that a
representation was likely to deceive or that a publication was obscene. This
view has been particularly espoused by Glass JA, judicially in
Australian Motorists & General Insurance Co Pty Ltd
[1976] 1 NSWLR 669
at 657-676 and
[1981] 1 NSWLR 209
at 214, and extra-judicially
in for example, Glass, “Expert Evidence”
(1987) 3 Aust Bar Rev 43
[80] Consequently,
the Appellant’s objection to the admissibility of Mr Robinson’s
opinion, on the basis that it was swearing
to the issue, was a matter that was
required to be determined by the Industrial Magistrate.
Appellant contended that proper regard had not been had by Mr Robinson to the
policy considerations relevant to the exercise
to award costs in the criminal
accepted that the legislature has limited discretion to award costs to
successful defendants in criminal prosecutions as
a matter of
[83] Accordingly,
the Industrial Magistrate was required to consider the objections to the
expressions of opinion contained in Mr
Robinson's report including the objection
to the opinion he expressed as to whether the costs were just and reasonable in
circumstances
where the Appellant contended that proper regard had not been had
to the relevant policy considerations.
[84] In such
circumstances, the failure to address and deal with the separate challenges to
Mr Robinson’s opinion raised by
the Appellant provides no indication as to
whether the Industrial Magistrate considered each of the separate objections
raised, let
alone reveal his analysis and reasons for seemingly dismissing the
objections.
[85] Put simply,
it is not apparent from the reasons why the challenges to Mr Robinson's
expertise and the opinions he expressed within
the report were dismissed. The
reasons consequently were insufficient. This was an error.
Ground 1(b) – reliance on Mr Robinson's opinions
Appellant contended that distinct from the question of the admissibility of Mr
Robinson’s evidence, there were errors
involved in the learned
Magistrate’s acceptance of Mr Robinson’s opinions with respect to
various categories of costs.
relevant categories of costs identified by the Appellant were solicitors’
fees, Counsel’s fees, expert’s
fees and disbursements.
Appellant’s complaints with regard to these categories of costs can be
summarised as follows:
(a) the learned Magistrate did not use the scale in the
Justices Regulation
guide in the calculation of quantum; and
(b) the learned Magistrate did not have evidence before him to form an
independent view as to allow the Court to determine if the
particulars claimed
for costs were just and reasonable.
Solicitors’ fees
[89] For ease of
reference, the passage of the reasons in which the Industrial Magistrate dealt
with the claim for solicitors’
Solicitors’ fees
And then you see Mr Robinson reported at pages 11 to 17, the total
involved by him was 127,684.20. In Mr Robinson’s opinion,
the appropriate
allowances are solicitor’s fees 127,684.20.
Disbursements,
counsels’ fees $171,540. Expert’s fees, $60,665. Travel etcetera,
34,471.85, a total of $394,361.05. Now,
I also agree with his figure for the
cost of the application to $17,115.70. The orders will therefore be the
complaints against Timothy
Francis Searle and Belmore Bulk Material Pty Ltd are
struck out or dismissed. The complainant pay the defendant’s costs in
sum of $394,361.05. And plus the cost of the application of $17,115.70. Anything
(emphasis added)
apparent from the reasons that the Industrial Magistrate had regard to Mr
Robinson's opinion with respect to what he considered
to be the appropriate sum
for solicitors’ fees. However, after referring to Mr Robinson's opinion,
the Industrial Magistrate
does not then undertake his own independent assessment
with respect to solicitors’ fees. Relevantly, the learned Industrial
Magistrate does not express his own opinion as to the appropriate allowance of
solicitors’ fees. It is left to assume the Industrial
Magistrate accepted
Mr Robinson’s opinion as to the quantum to be awarded for
solicitors’ fees. The quantum of solicitors’
fees and the method
adopted to assess those fees was a matter that was required to be determined by
the Industrial Magistrate. As
such, this passage also suffers from a failure to
properly disclose the leaned Industrial Magistrates reasons with respect to the
assessment of solicitors’ fees.
[91] Further,
given the Industrial Magistrate ultimately awarded a quantum amount for
solicitors’ fees which is the same as
the amount calculated by Mr
Robinson, it is assumed, given the particular way in which Mr Robinson
calculated those fees, that the
Industrial Magistrate relied on Mr
Robinson’s methodology for calculating the quantum of
methodology for the assessment undertaken by Mr Robinson is stated in his report
as follows:
8.20. The appropriate scale in this case is the Magistrates Court scale for
amounts over $50,000.00. For attendances by a solicitor
involving skill or legal
knowledge, the hourly rate is $258.00 (excluding OST). I have sought and been
provided with the number of
hours worked on this file by all solicitors
regardless of level within the firm. The answer is 707 hours (rounded)
8.21. Multiplying the number of hours (707) by the scale rate applicable to
attendances in the Magistrates Court per hour ($258.00)
yields the result of
$182,406.00. By adopting this approach, any influence of unduly high rates being
charged by the solicitors is
completely eliminated. Although one cannot be
certain unless the file is assessed on an item by item basis, in the usual case,
remains after adopting this procedure are costs which comply with the
qualification that they be "necessary or proper" costs to qualify
to be allowed
of Schedule 2 of the Regulation.
8.22. There is still one further calculation to be made in recognition that
this sum of $182,406.00 would be the amount charged
to the Defendants if
scale rates are applied. The final calculation is to reflect the fact that on a
standard (party and party)
assessment, some items would be disallowed or reduced
because they would be regarded as solicitor and client items. In over 35 years
of experience of practising in the law of costs, I have found that an
appropriate multiplier to effect this moderation is 70%. The
end result of these
adjustments is, in my view, quite conservative when it is borne in mind that had
this litigation been conducted
in the Supreme Court, an allowance of some 25% to
30% would have been added for general care and conduct. I have not applied any
uplift for general care and conduct, consistently with taking a quite
conservative approach.
8.23. The resulting amount is $127,684.20. A check may be made by comparing
the figure of $127,684.20 which I have calculated with
the amount of $392,120.2
6 actually paid by the Defendants to their solicitors. The answer is 32.6% of
8.34. If the submissions above which contended that the sum of $126,059.00
represented the costs incurred which were
“necessary or proper”
to defend the Defendants’ rights, then giving the ordinary meaning to
reasonable”
leads to the inexorable
conclusion that an amount of $126,059.00 as the allowance for solicitor’s
professional fees is the
appropriate sum.
(citations omitted).
[93] From the
above, it is apparent that in proposing that an amount of $127,684.20 be awarded
for solicitors’ fees, Mr Robinson:
(a) proposed an amount be awarded for solicitors’ fees higher than the
amount allowed pursuant to the scale in the
Justices Regulation
(b) did not use the scale in the
Justices Regulation
as a guide, even
when applying the uplift;
(c) allowed for costs by using the Magistrate Court Scale for civil matters for
amounts over $50,000;
(d) sought and subsequently accepted, the information provided by the
Respondent’s solicitors that the number of hours worked
by solicitors on
the file equated to 707 (rounded) hours; and
(e) concluded that the words ‘necessary and proper’ in terms of the
costs that were incurred equated to the ordinary
meaning of ‘just and
reasonable’.
[94] Even in
circumstances where the Court has determined that it is just and reasonable to
award a sum in excess of the scale, the
scale in the
Justices Regulation
used as a guide in the calculation of the quantum of costs above the
[95] Typically,
the courts have done so by applying a multiple to the amount disclosed under
Justices Regulation
scale. In this matter, Mr Robinson did not adopt the
approach typically taken by the courts. Rather, Mr Robinson adopted the
Court Scale above $50,000 as the basis for the costs awarded. Given
the quantum that was awarded for solicitors’ fees, it is
assumed that the
Industrial Magistrate accepted Mr Robinson’s adoption of the Magistrates
Court Scale for civil matters above
$50,000 as a basis to calculate the
Solicitor’s fees.
explanation is provided by the Industrial Magistrate as to why he considered the
adoption of the Magistrates Court Scale for
an amount over $50,000 to properly
reflect what is just and reasonable having regard to the special difficulty,
complexity or importance
[97] It was an
error to adopt Mr Robinson’s methodology of using the Magistrates Court
Scale for an amount over $50,000 in these
circumstances.
[98] In addition
to the error to the approach taken, there is no indication that the Industrial
Magistrate had regard to or considered
the items under the scale that were
allowed for in
, Sch 2 of the
Justices Regulation
for legal work. As a
consequence, the Industrial Magistrate has not had regard to the scale as a
guide in the assessment of costs.
[99] The failure
to consider these matters is exacerbated as the Industrial Magistrate has
seemingly accepted that the 707 hours claimed
to be worked on the file by the
Respondent’s solicitors was proper and necessary. However, other than Mr
Robinson asserting
in his report that those number of hours were the hours
provided to him by the Respondent’s solicitors and were necessary and
properly incurred, there is no admissible evidence that the work claimed was
undertaken.
[100] In the
absence of having any evidence before him as to the nature of the work
undertaken in the 707 hours claimed, the Industrial
Magistrate was unable to
form a view based on evidence as to whether the costs were necessary and
properly incurred.
[101] Whilst Mr
Robinson undertook a process in which he described to be ameliorating any
potential unduly high hourly rate charged
by the Respondent’s solicitors
he, however, operated on the assumption that 707 hours were appropriately
[102] Consequently,
there was no admissible evidence before the Industrial Magistrate which supports
the claim for solicitors’
fees. As noted above, Mr Robinson asserts that
he was provided information from the Respondents’ solicitors that 707
were worked on the file. This information, or any other information in
support of the claim, was not sought to be proved and consequently
there was no
admissible evidence before the Industrial Magistrate with respect to the claim.
[103] It is not
the case that the Industrial Magistrate needed an itemised bill of costs before
him, but there should be some admissible
evidence before the Court supporting
the claim. Typically, a party making a costs application will seek to rely on a
solicitor’s
affidavit setting out the factual matters relevant to the
costs application.
result, there was no independent assessment undertaken by the Industrial
Magistrate, using the scale as a guide, to determine
whether the number of hours
claimed for legal work was necessary and properly incurred (see item 3 of
Schedule 2).
[105] Finally,
Mr Robinson conflated the words ‘necessary and proper’, with the
words ‘just and reasonable’.
In doing so he relied on the
coincidence of language between
Schedule 2 of the
with r 702(2) of the UCPR.
[106] However,
item 3(a) as noted above, operates in the context of the application of the
scale and ensures a cost is to be allowed
only to the extent to which incurring
the costs was necessary or proper to achieve justice or defend the rights of the
702(2) prescribes that when assessing cost on a standard basis a costs assessor
must allow all costs necessary a proper
for the attainment of justice or for
enforcing or defending the rights of the party whose costs are being assessed.
[108] This is a
distinct consideration to determining whether awarding an uplift is “just
and reasonable having regard to the
special difficulty, complexity or importance
of the matter.”
consequence, the learned Industrial Magistrate erred by relying on Mr
Robinson’s flawed method of assessment.
Counsel’s fees, expert’s fees and
disbursements
[110] Secondly,
the Appellant contends that the learned Industrial Magistrate erred in the
acceptance of Mr Robinson’s opinions
with respect to the quantum of costs
for Counsel fees, experts’ fees and disbursements, in the absence of
evidence supporting
the sums claimed.
[111] In this
regard, at the conclusion of his first report, Mr Robinson set out the
information and documentation which had been
provided to him from the
Respondent's legal representatives. Mr Robinson lists 23 separate categories of
information and documentation
including, but not limited to, invoices for legal
fees, Counsel fees, experts' fees, transcript costs, brief to Counsel, brief to
the various experts and brief to Mr Robinson.
[112] Relevantly,
the list provided did not included invoices for travel, accommodation, and other
expenses although these categories
may have been included in the brief to Mr
documents and information listed by Mr Robinson were not attached to his expert
report nor was there any other attempt,
including by way of a solicitor's
affidavit, to put the evidence of the information regarding those costs before
the Industrial Magistrate.
[114] Specifically,
with respect to Counsel’s fees there was no evidence before the Industrial
Magistrate as to the basis upon
which the fees amounted to the total claimed.
Whilst the Appellant acknowledges that the learned Industrial Magistrate had
of Counsel’s appearances before the Court for the four day
hearing, the total claimed for Counsel’s fees appear to have
gone beyond
those appearances.
Robinson referred to the following table as to the rates and amounts charged by
Queen's Counsel:
Date of Tax Invoice
Amount of Invoice (Excluding GST)
07.05.202 I
$171,540.00
Robinson expresses the following opinion with respect to Counsel
5.3.4. From my experience in working in the law of costs in Queensland for
over 35 years, I have concluded not only that it was “
necessary or
” to brief Queens Counsel but that the rates charged were
reasonable and reasonably incurred.
[117] It appears
the Industrial Magistrate accepted Mr Robinson’s opinion despite Mr
Robinson providing no explanation for the
quantum of the total of the invoice.
Relevantly, Mr Robinson’s expresses a view about the rates charged as
being reasonable
but says nothing about the number of days claimed or the legal
work performed. In any event, it was incumbent upon the Industrial
Magistrate to
form an independent view based upon admissible evidence about such matters and
also that such costs are just and reasonable
having regard to the special
difficulty, complexity or importance of the matter. He failed to do so and
consequently, was in error.
Respondent sought to recover the costs of disbursements including the costs
associated with engaging experts.
[119] As noted
above, Sch 2,
of the scale deals with disbursements and what may be
allowable under the scale. The Industrial Magistrate has not considered the
operation of Sch 2,
in the context of the disbursements claimed in this
awarding disbursements, the Industrial Magistrate did not commence his
assessment by using the scale as a guide and, as above,
accepted Mr
Robinson’s assertion as to what disbursements were claimed.
assertions made and relied on by Mr Robinson, and subsequently, the Industrial
Magistrate were not proved in admissible
form. Relevantly, there is no evidence
before the Court as to who engaged in the relevant travel and when that travel
respect to the expert’s fees, it appears from the cross-examination of Mr
that in forming his
opinion he had regard to the briefing letter provided by the Respondent’s
legal representatives. The briefing
letter was also not in evidence before the
Industrial Magistrate.
Robinson referred to the following table of fees paid to the experts engaged by
the Respondents as follows:
Name of Expert
Rate per Hour (Excluding GST)
Amount Paid (Excluding GST)
Dr Paul Carnavas
George Rechnitzer & Assoc Pty Ltd
[124] Other than
the recording of the payment of the invoices to the experts, the Industrial
Magistrate had no particularised information
or admissible evidence as to the
sum claimed for experts.
[125] Finally,
with respect to the claim for other disbursements, the relevant invoices,
particularly with respect to the travel component
of that claim, which totalled
$20,271.94, was not before the Court nor were there any other attempts to put
that evidence before
the Industrial Magistrate. Whilst it was noted by Mr
Robinson that the claim included accommodation, car hire, air transport no
attempt to particularise or itemise the claim was made.
Robinson included a table of the disbursements said to be incurred and
subsequently paid as follows:
7.4. The total of disbursements under this head is $33,829.46. Particulars
appear in the schedule below.
Description
(including accommodation, car hire, taxis etc)
Transcripts
(including cost of obtaining transcript of another relevant case)
of Scanhub hiring spheres for 3D laser scan
Government application under Rig ht to Information provisions
and copying court documents
of three hard drives
photocopying
Robinson expresses an opinion that each of the disbursements were reasonably
incurred and should be allowed on a standard
basis of assessment. He does so in
general terms having regard to the following matters:
7.1. I refer again to the provisions of the Regulation from which I have
quote at paragraph 6.1.
7.2. The quarry at which the incident which gave rise to these prosecutions
occurred was some 18 kilometres south of Collinsville.
It was necessary for
solicitors, counsel and experts to visit the site. The relevant proceedings were
conduct in the Magistrates
Court at Bowen. The major contributions to costs
under this head were:
Air transport
(usually to Mackay);
Hire of car to
travel to the quarry or Bowen;
Accommodation
and meals; and
Transcripts etc.
[128] There was
no attempt by the Industrial Magistrate to engage with Sch 2,
, Item 6 and
whether the disbursements claimed were allowable under the scale. Again, the
scale was not used as a guide in the assessment
[129] Whilst it
appears that Mr Robinson had additional information before him which he based
his opinion on, that information was
not put before the Industrial Magistrate in
admissible form. For the reasons identified above, the Industrial Magistrate
accepting and relying on the evidence of Mr Robinson.
[130] Accordingly,
for the foregoing reasons, the Appellant succeeds on appeal ground one.
Appeal Ground 2 – special difficulty, complexity or
Appellant submits that the Industrial Magistrate erred in finding that the
uplift test set out in the
Justices Regulation
, Sch 2 had been
Appellant further submits that the Industrial Magistrate did not identify the
basis for a finding that the case was one
of special difficulty, complexity or
importance.
[133] Such a
finding is necessary in order for
Justices Act
to be applicable.
[134] As noted
above, a number of authorities
have considered the phrase “special difficulty, complexity or
importance”.
following principles are able to be distilled from those summaries:
(a) ‘special importance’ refers to the importance of the case
generally, for instance in terms of questions of law or
public policy, rather
than the importance of the case for the individual parties involved;
(b) the difficulty, complexity or importance must be ‘special’
meaning that is distinguished from what is ordinarily
or usually encountered;
(c) the discretion to award a higher amount for costs as provided for in the
scale, is enlivened where:
difficulty, complexity or importance exists; and
just and reasonable to make a higher award of costs having regard to the
identified special difficulty, complexity or importance.
Honour’s finding that the case was one involving “special difficulty
complexity or importance” and the
reasons for that finding are included in
full at paragraphs 40 and 41 above. In summary, His Honour found that he was
satisfied “due
to the special importance of the case and dare I say
complexity and special difficulties, ... that a higher amount of costs is proper
and just and reasonable”
for the following, summarised reasons:
(a) that the case involved a fatality;
(b) there were 14 witnesses, 45 exhibits and a four day trial;
(c) Senior Counsel was briefed for the Defendant;
(d) that His Honour did not turn his mind to “the guilty party”
until after he had considered all of the evidence, exhibits
and submissions; and
(e) it took a huge amount of time and effort to hear the trial.
[137] The fact
that the prosecution was with respect to fatality does not on its own take this
case outside the realm of the ordinary
in the jurisdiction in which it was
recitation of the procedural components of the hearing including by listing the
number of days (4), witnesses (14) and exhibits
(45) does not identify the basis
upon which it can be concluded the case was one of special difficulty,
complexity and importance.
Indeed, these procedural components are not, at least
without further consideration, out of the ordinary or usual in a hearing of
[139] Whilst is
might be the case that briefing Senior Counsel is an indication that the matter
is one involving complexity or difficulty,
the mere fact of it, without further
consideration, does not support a conclusion that the case was one involving
special difficulty
or complexity. It may equally have been open to conclude,
that engaging Senior Counsel was a preference made by a corporate defendant
defending a charge under the QMSH Act.
[140] The fact
that His Honour did not turn his mind to “the guilty party” until
after hearing of the matter, or that
the matter took time and effort to
complete, does not take it out of the realm of the ordinary or usual. It is
expected that a judge
will approach each hearing with an independent and
impartial mind and not form a concluded view until after the hearing of the
It is also the case that for those involved, including the court, it is
ordinary and usual for the hearing of a matter to take time
and effort.
[141] None of
the matters identified by His Honour, without consideration or identification of
further matters, support a conclusion
that the case was one of special
importance. His Honour did not identify a factor such as a question of law or
public policy, that
supports such a conclusion.
[142] From the
above, the reasons identified by His Honour do not support a conclusion that
s 158B(2) was enlivened.
[143] During the
course of submissions, Senior Counsel for the Respondent identified, in some
detail, matters in addition to those
stated by the Industrial Magistrate in his
reasons, which the Respondent relied on to contend that the case was one
involving ‘special
difficulty, complexity or
importance’.
[144] The issue
here, however, is that the Industrial Magistrate did not identify those matters
and consequently, those matters were
not relied on in the finding.
relevance of the basis for the finding is that the nature of either the special
difficulty, special complexity or special
importance of the case will then
inform whether the costs are just and reasonable.
[146] In these
circumstances, His Honour’s finding that the case was one involving
special difficulty, complexity and importance
is in error. The Appellant
succeeds on appeal ground two.
Appeal Ground 3 – the
Justices Regulation
Appellant contends that His Honour failed to use the
Justices Regulation
guide to the calculation of quantum in cases where an over scale award is being
contemplated.
[148] As noted
above, the construction of s 158B(2) requires the scale be used as a guide in
the assessment of costs beyond the amount
provided for in the scale. Also for
the reasons identified above, appeal ground three is allowed.
Disposition of the Appeal
[149] Ordinarily,
the Industrial Court on an appeal, has the power to hear and determine costs.
However, there are insufficient factual
findings to enable such a determination
to be made in this matter. Further, for the reasons identified above, there is
of evidence that is necessary to make such a determination.
Consequently, the case will need to be remitted to the Industrial
Magistrate’s
[150] During the
course of oral submissions, Senior Counsel for the Respondent properly concluded
that if I were to form a view that
insufficient evidence was before the
Industrial Magistrate, then for the same reasons, there would be insufficient
evidence before
the Industrial Court to determine the matter.
Appellant submitted that if I were to consider remitting the costs matter to the
Industrial Magistrate then such a remitter
should be accompanied by a direction
that the matter be heard and determined by another Magistrate on the basis that
His Honour has
already formed a view that the quantum of the costs awarded were
just and reasonable.
[152] Whilst
there is some weight to be given to the Respondent’s submissions that
because Industrial Magistrate Kennedy heard
the matter at first instance it
would be more efficient for the matter to be remitted to him, there are factors
that also weigh against
that course.
[153] Relevantly,
given the Industrial Magistrate has formed a view that the costs ordered were
‘just and reasonable’,
I consider an appropriate direction should be
issued that another Magistrate hear the remitted costs application.
[154] Should the
Appellant wish to apply for costs of this appeal, any application should be made
within 28 days of the date of this
[155] I make the
following orders:
Appeal is allowed.
orders as to costs made on 4 May 2023 is set aside.
question of costs is remitted to the Industrial Magistrates Court to be heard
and determined according to law by an Industrial
Magistrate other than
Magistrate Kennedy.
Applicant's application to
appeal filed on 25 May 2023.
Mining and Quarrying Safety and Health Act 1999
Section 158A was enacted in
1992 by the
Justice Legislation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1992
in response to the High Court’s decision in
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534.
Regulation 2014
(Qld) r 19.
[2016] ICQ 17
[2014] QDC 120
[2014] QDC 17
, 40, per Farr SC
[2016] QDC 131
[2015] QDC 79
[2000] 3 NSWLR 489
Transcript of Decision
Stone v Belmore Bulk Material Pty Ltd & Ors
(Magistrates
court, MAG-00111537/19(4), Magistrate Kennedy, 4 May 2023), 4, 28 - 5, 43.
Ibid 5, 43 – 20, 37.
Ibid 20, 39 – 44.
Ibid 21, 1 – 11.
Ibid 21, 11 – 17.
Ibid 21, 17 – 22, 21.
Clark v Ryan
[1960] HCA 42
103 CLR 486
[2010] 1 CR App R 23, 113.
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
[2005] QCA 472
[2006] 2 Qd R 69.
Transcript of Proceedings,
Stone v Belmore Bulk Material Pty Ltd & Ors
(Magistrates court,
MAG-00111537/19(4), Magistrate Kennedy, 27 October 2022),2, 23-36; 8,
[2009] QCA 66
[2009] 2 Qd R
Hickey v Crime
and Misconduct Commission
[2008] QDC 340
, 13 citing
Lewis v Utting ex
parte Utting
[1985] 1 Qd R 423
(1991) 34 NSWLR 129
130-131 per Giles J.
Hickey v Crime and Misconduct Commission
[2008] QDC 340
(n 6) 53-56. See also [27] above.
Transcript of Decision,
Stone v Belmore Bulk Material Pty Ltd & Ors
(Magistrates court,
MAG-00111537/19(4), Magistrate Kennedy, 4 May 2023), 21, 46 – 22, 8.
Hickey v Crime and Misconduct Commission
[2008] QDC 340
Transcript of Proceedings,
Stone v Belmore Bulk Material Pty Ltd & Ors
(Magistrates court,
MAG-00111537/19(4), Magistrate Kennedy, 27 October 2022), 22, 30; 23, 40.
see [29] – [33]
Transcript of
Stone v Belmore Bulk Material Pty Ltd & Ors
(Magistrates
court, MAG-00111537/19(4), Magistrate Kennedy, 4 May 2023), 21, 1-3.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (694 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter