URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTMH/2009/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:33:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tamahori v Roofley Pty Ltd [2009] QCCTMH 9 (15 May 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
TAMAHORI V ROOFLEY PTY LTD
[2009] CCT MH015-08
TAMAHORI Vera
ROOFLEY PTY LTD
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
15 May 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
11 March 2009
DECISION OF:
Mr Stephen Sheaffe
CATCHWORDS:
Manufactured Homes -
Manufactured Homes (Residential Parks) Act
- Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
REPRESENTATION:
RESPONDENT:
Mr Kidston of Counsel
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Tamahori (“the applicant”) filed an application on 14 July 2008
against Roofley Pty Ltd (“the respondent”)
seeking the provision to
her of a written site agreement pursuant to
Manufactured
(“MHRP Act”) and a refund of
visitors fees.
The respondent maintains that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to hear
and determine the application on the basis that the
structure in question is not
a manufactured home as defined in the MHRP Act, and that even if the structure
was a manufactured home,
the Tribunal still does not have jurisdiction.
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear and determine this dispute is being
determined as a preliminary issue.
Legal representation
the Tribunal previously refusing the respondent legal representation, it
attended the hearing with counsel. At the outset,
I refused counsel a right to
be heard, but it quickly became apparent that neither the applicant nor Mr
Woolnough who appeared for
the respondent had the necessary knowledge to present
their respective cases to the Tribunal. Both indicated that they did not wish
to present their respective cases to the Tribunal.
submissions the respondent consented to Mr Franks representing the applicant and
the applicant consented to counsel representing
the respondent.
applicant resides in and is the owner of a structure (the structure) located on
site 25 of the Caboolture Caravan Park, 26 Burnett
Road, Caboolture in the State
of Queensland (“the park”). The respondent is the park owner.
to 1997 a dilapidated squareline, 40 feet by 9 feet caravan (the caravan) was
positioned at site 25. A statement outlining how
and when the caravan was left
at the site has not been provided, though it can be inferred that the caravan
was towed and left there.
All the alterations, additions and changes to the
caravan occurred subsequently. The then owner made changes to the caravan,
the partial removal of a wall, the addition of an annex, removal of
the wheels and the placement of the caravan on concrete bricks.
or about early August 1997 Mr Tamahori undertook a pre-purchase inspection of
the caravan with Mr Willis. Mr Tamahori said to
Mr Willis; “
thing leaves much to be desired Keith. It’s dilapidated and the annex
will have to be removed. The angle-iron underneath
has rusted through and
it’s propped up with scatterings of besser blocks and metal
Mr Tamahori asked Mr Willis about applying to the Council
for building permits and Mr Willis replied “
the Council has not (sic)
like as long as you do it
according to the building regulations and stay within
the site’s boundaries”
. A builder, Mr Stephens, also inspected
the caravan with Mr Tamahori
15 August 1997 the applicant and her husband purchased the dilapidated caravan
with the annex and attachments with the intention
of renovating it. Mr Tamahori
enquired about a lease and was told by Mr Willis that they did not need one.
After renovations were
carried out Mr Tamahori asked for the structure to be
classified as a manufactured home. This was refused on the ground it was a
caravan site and not a manufactured home site and the structure was a still a
caravan as it was situated on a bogey with a tow bar
Over time the applicant improved the structure. The annex was rebuilt and the
boardwalk was replaced with a deck with the owner’s
permission. In his
statement Mr Tamahori said;
“Peter Stephens a certified builder gave me
a hand and inspected everything as did Keith. Bob Burnt (Robert) a retired
the drain laying. The wiring was done by Rob (Robert) Richmond
an electrical
The renovations included the addition of verandahs to the
front and rear which were later enclosed and a deck replaced the board walk.
caravan was improved with the permission of Mr Willis and during the time when
the renovation work was being undertaken Mr Willis
often came to visit while
walking his dog and sat down for a cup of coffee.
9 November 2005 the respondent delivered a lease for a moveable dwelling with
the term described as periodic. The applicant did
not sign this document.
in 2005 the applicant asked for a form 1 & 2 lease but the managers, John
and Jackie Woodward, refused.
15 December 2006 the Council wrote to the respondent requesting the non
compliant deck be removed and on 27 January 2007 the respondent
forwarded a
letter to the applicant also requesting the deck be removed.
5 January 2008 the applicant was charged visitors fees for the first time, $10
per adult and $7 per child per night as they say
they are permitted to do so
under the terms of the unsigned caravan rental site agreement.
3 July 2008 the current park managers, Mr and Mrs Reynolds, handed the applicant
an eviction notice.
Reynolds confirmed there were 113 sites at the park with only 15 used for
relocatable or manufactured homes. He said that since
he has been manager, the
applicant and Mr Tamahori were charged as a permanent caravan site occupier as
opposed to a manufactured
Mr Hoskin’s report
Roy Hoskins, a structural and civil engineer, inspected the home on 28 February
2008 and prepared an inspection certificate dated
29 February 2008. This report
did not consider all the components of the structure, what it was made of, how
and the extent of its
fixation to the land and whether it was able to be
relocated or not.
The report considered the structural adequacy of the structure and it begins as
This is to certify that the manufactured home
standard 13.0 length and ancillary annexes as completed as described and
constructed
is deemed structurally adequate for its intended purpose as viewed
by the writer on 28.02.08 and after review of the original construction
considered adequate as existing for its intended purpose.
(1) the application is for the construction of a manufactured home 7.4 length
and ancillary (manufactured home 13.01 m long x 2.7
wide annex 13.0 m x 3.6
long – 2.2 – 2.3 High and framed roof covering pitched) as erected
at ‘Caboolture Shire
Council’ site 25 Burdett Road, Caboolture
authority area – Caboolture Shire Council.
(2) Components certified:
Manufactured
chains and turn buckles to concrete
pads 16 blocks.
built framed construction fixed grip or hoop strap/saddles tek screws to van
skillion 13.0 L x 3.6 W 2.2 – 2.3 H hardwood framed wall hardiplank
doors, windows casements.
roof bearer 100 x 45 head – 100 x 50 joists at 1.4 C/C 70 x 40 battens at
40 joists at 450 2/100 x 75 bearers, 19 structure ply floor 4 chains to concrete
pads 16 block supports, 4 chains to cone
100 x 50 head 70 x 40 joists at 1.4 C/C battens 70 x 38 at 900 Sandeck
Report of Saint Consulting Engineers
Saint conducted an inspection of the home on 27 October 2008. In the course of
this inspection he took a number of photographs
and observed that there were
four separate structures erected on the site: a carport converted into an
enclosed garage, with a workshop
and tool shed area; a main structure for food
preparation, dining, lounge, study, main bedroom, bathroom and laundry; a shed
a second bedroom, a roof and a timber floor deck; and a deck with
retaining walls on the riverbank.
Saint said the shed was used as a garage workshop and as a tool shed. It was
originally a carport that had been enclosed to form
an enclosed lock-up garage,
workshop and tool shed. It is a stand alone structure and is not attached to
any other structure on
the lot. The area between this structure and the main
structure has been concreted.
main part of the structure has four separate components; the caravan, a
permanent annexe, a front extension over the bull bar
at the front of the
caravan and a sunroom off the side of the caravan.
next part of the structure is a steel shed with an additional area to the rear.
He says the shed appears to have been a “Titan”
or similar type
shed, it was constructed on a concrete slab with metal clad walls, the internal
walls and ceilings are sheeted and
plaster set. The additional area on the
riverside of the shed consists of a roof that extends over a shot edged timber
deck floor,
attached to a concrete footing at one end and bearer attached to the
post at the other. Mr Faint says that the only way the structure
could be moved
was to dismantle, involving the complete destruction of the internal lining and
the disconnection of the frame from
final component of the structure was a deck and lower retaining wall. The
decking timber is attached to a concrete footing at
one end and a bearer
attached to the post at the other. The posts that support the deck are connected
to the ground and also double
as a vertical support for the retaining wall. The
horizontal part of the retaining wall is constructed from sleepers which are
by the deck posts. Mr Saint says the structure cannot be moved
without complete demolition and rebuilding.
Applicant’s submissions
applicant is the owner of the structure situated at site 25 of the park for
which she entered into a site agreement with the previous
park owners in 1997.
The applicant asserts the structure constitutes a manufactured home for the
purposes of the MHRP Act and as
a consequence the respondent is required to
enter into a written site agreement of the kind contemplated by Part 5 of the
The applicant asserts that the principal structure occupying the site
is a manufactured home for the purposes of the MHRP Act and
the secondary
structures, such as the annex, the sunroom and side porch are removable.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the structures on the site including the caravan, the
annex, the sunroom and front room including the
garage and shed as well as the
riverside deck are permanently integrated within the principal structure being
the caravan and do
not constitute a manufactured home as defined in section 10
of the MHRP Act.
respondent’s position in relation to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is
two-fold. Firstly the structures either separately
or together are not a
manufactured home as the term is defined in section 10 of the MHRP Act and
consequently the Tribunal has no
Secondly, even if the structures, either separately or together, are found to
a manufactured home for the purposes of the MHRP Act, there is no
site agreement dispute as defined in the MHRP Act and consequently
the Tribunal
does not have jurisdiction.
respondent submits that the structure is not designed to be able to be moved
from one position to the other and is permanently
attached to the land.
Relevant legislation
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act 2003
Act”) expressly provides:
“8 Jurisdiction of tribunal
(1) The tribunal has jurisdiction to deal with the matters it is empowered to
deal with under this Act or an empowering Act.”
dictionary in section 2 of the CCT Act defines “empowering Act” to
include the MHRP Act.
8 of the MHRP Act relevantly provides:
“8 Who is a home
(1) Each of the following is a
(a) a person
who owns a manufactured home that is positioned on a site in a residential park
under a site agreement;
(b) a person
who intends to position a manufactured home on a site in a residential park
under a site agreement for use by the person
as the person’s principal
place of residence;
(c) a person
who obtains an interest in a site agreement as the personal representative, or a
beneficiary of the estate, of a deceased
individual who immediately before the
individual’s death was a person mentioned in paragraph (a) or
(d) another
successor in title of a person mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b).
(2) A person mentioned in subsection (1)(a) is a
person occupies the home as the person’s principal place of residence;
(b) a tenant
of the person occupies the home.”
10 of the of the MHRP Act provides:
“10 What is a manufactured home
manufactured home
is a structure, other than a caravan or
tent, that—
(a) has the character of a dwelling house; and
(b) is designed to be able to be moved from one position to
another; and
(c) is not permanently attached to land.”
14 of the MHRP relevantly provides:
“14 What is a site agreement
site agreement
is an agreement between a park owner and a home
owner that—
(a) provides for—
rental by the home owner of particular land in a residential park; and
positioning on the land of a manufactured home; and
communal facilities; and
(b) includes provision about anything else required or permitted by this Act
to be in the agreement.
Example for paragraph
provision about how site rent may be increased”
140 of the MHRP Act provides:
“140 Site agreement dispute
If there is a site agreement dispute, either party to the dispute may
apply to the tribunal for an order, and the tribunal may make
any order it
considers appropriate, to resolve the dispute.”
2 of the MHRP Act relevantly defines “caravan”, “site
agreement disputes” and “Tribunal”
as follows:
Residential Tenancies Act
section 3A.
“site agreement dispute
means a dispute between the
parties to a site agreement about the parties’ rights and obligations
under the agreement or this
means the Commercial and Consumer Tribunal
established under the
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act 2003
Residential Tenancies Act
relevantly provide:
“11 References to agreements
In this Act (other than
, division 24), a reference to an agreement
is a reference to a residential tenancy agreement to which this Act
“12 Reference to lessors and tenants
In this Act (other than in
, division 2), a reference to a lessor or
tenant is a reference to a lessor or tenant under a residential tenancy
agreement to which
this Act applies.”
“10 Act applies only to certain residential tenancy agreements
(1) This Act applies only to residential tenancy agreements and
(a) lessors,
tenants and their respective rights and obligations under residential tenancy
agreements; and
(b) premises
under residential tenancy agreements; and
tenancy under a residential tenancy agreement.
(2) However, this Act does not apply to all residential tenancy
agreements.
(3) For example, under part 4, this Act, or some of its provisions, do not
apply to certain residential tenancy agreements.
of residential tenancy agreements to which the Act does not apply—
section 16, this Act does not apply to a lease given by the State under certain
other Acts.
regulation under section 20 may declare that this Act does not apply to an
section 21, this Act does not apply to an agreement giving a right of occupancy
for holiday purposes.
section 22, this Act generally does not apply to an agreement if the tenant is a
boarder or lodger.
section 23, this Act generally does not apply to an agreement for premises that
are part of an educational institution, hospital,
nursing home or retirement
section 24, this Act does not apply to certain agreements under which the tenant
is being supplied with temporary refuge accommodation.
section 25, this Act does not apply to agreements under the
Manufactured Homes
(Residential Parks) Act 2003
is a trailer—
(a) designed
principally for residential purposes; and
(b) designed
to be attached to and towed by a self-propelled vehicle; and
(c) that, as
originally designed, was capable of being registered under a law of the State
(2) Also, a
is something—
fitted with wheels; and
designed for permanent attachment to land but designed for attachment to a motor
vehicle and for use for residential purposes.
(3) In addition, a
is a self-propelled
designed to be used both as a vehicle and for residential purposes; or
designed to be used solely as a vehicle but has been modified to be suitable for
use both as a vehicle and for residential
purposes; and
(b) that, as
originally designed, was capable of being registered under a law of the State
Observations and findings
issue to be considered is whether the tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and
determine the application. The Tribunal, in its jurisdiction
conferred by the
MHRP Act, can only hear and determine an application if the structure is a
manufactured home as defined in section
10 of the MHRP Act. The applicant says
it is and to the contrary, the respondent says it is not. Further, the
respondent submits
that even if the structure is a manufactured home the
tribunal does not have jurisdiction to order the respondent deliver a signed
manufactured homes agreement.
first issue is whether the structure is a manufactured home as defined in
section 10 of the MHRP Act. To be a manufactured home
it must be other than a
caravan or tent, have the character of a dwelling house, is designed to be able
to be moved from one location
to another and is not permanently attached to the
was not asserted that the structure does not have the character of a dwelling
house. The structure has rooms, has all the facilities
of a dwelling house and
has been occupied by the applicant as her home for many years. It clearly has
the character of a dwelling
issue is whether the structure was designed to be able to be moved from one
position to the other and is or is not permanently
attached to the land.
was submitted that the issues to be considered by the Tribunal involved a
resolution of the conflict between the evidence of the
two experts, Mr Hoskins
and Mr Saint. It is noted that the report of Mr Hoskins considered the
structural adequacy of the structure
and not the facts concerning the issues
that are raised in section 10 of the MHRP Act. Further, many aspects of his
report were
challenged during cross-examination and Mr Hoskins conceded many of
the matters raised and acknowledged there were errors. However,
importantly his
report did not consider the issues that are raised in section 10 that have to be
considered by me. For these reasons,
I do not place any weight on Mr Hoskins
report and where it is in conflict with the report of Mr Saint I accept the
evidence of Mr
Curyer V Monte Carlo Caravan Park Pty Ltd [
2006] QCCTMH 3
the caravan
owner cut a large structural opening in the wall of the caravan and an annexure
was constructed adjacent to it. The
learned member had to consider whether the
structure was a caravan or a manufactured home. It was found that the caravan
annexe must be considered as one structure and was therefore not a
caravan. It was held that the structure was not a caravan but
a manufactured
structure had the character of a dwelling
house, was designed to be moved from
one location to another and was not permanently attached to the land. Therefore,
this case is
distinguishable from the facts before me as it was conceded that
the other elements of section 10 were satisfied, but in the matter
these issues are to be decided.
Meyer Abarvo Pty Ltd & PBS Property Pty Ltd
[2008] QCCTMH 1
applicant sought a provision to him of a site agreement under the MHRP Act. In
this case the applicant had constructed an annexe
to his caravan and a covered
carport with the park owners consent. Member Spender found that the original
structure of the caravan
remained in tact, and if the wheels and tow bar were
refitted, the free standing posts and roof over the caravan and the adjoining
carport were removed the caravan could be towed away. The member also found
that the annexe floor had been constructed with concrete
and ceramic tiles, the
steel posts that supported the annexe walls, the free standing roof and the
carport steel posts were all set
in concrete. Member Spender found that the
annexe and the carport were not designed to be able to be removed from one site
and were permanently attached to the land. Consequently, it was
found that the structure did not fall within the definition of a
manufactured
the matter before me I accept the evidence of Mr Saint that the structure had 4
distinct parts: a carport converted into a garage;
the main structure; a shed
containing a second bedroom with a roof, timber floor; and a deck and retaining
walls near the river embankment.
find that the original carport has been converted into an enclosed garage, with
a workshop and tool shed area, and it is a stand
alone structure and not
attached to the rest of the house. The original carport was constructed with
steel posts set into a concrete
slab that extended over the entire floor area of
the carport. The carport was renovated and extended at both ends and was made
an enclosed garage with the installation of wall sheeting. The carport was
extended at the front by 1200 mm and fitted with a roller
door and was extended
at the rear with timber posts mounted onto steel stirrups concreted into the
ground. The roof consists of
three separate parts; over the original carport is
of a skillion design roof with decromasitic sheeting and over the extensions at
the front and the rear a gable iron roof with corrugate sheeting was installed.
Saint’s opinion was to the effect that the shed was not designed to be
able to be moved from one position to the other and
is attached permanently to
the ground. I accept his opinion and find that the garage was not designed to be
able to be moved from
one position to another and is permanently attached to the
land. The floor of the garage is made of concrete, the posts are secured
ground by concrete and the entire shed was constructed to be a permanent
main part of the structure consists of the original caravan, an annexe, an
extension at the front of the caravan and a sunroom
off the side of the caravan.
I find that the caravan has had its wheels removed and is supported by a pile of
concrete bricks or
blocks that are not mortared together or otherwise affixed
together or to the land. This method of supporting the caravan is described
dry stacking and was used so the caravan can easily be made ready for removal.
I also accept the evidence that the chassis of
the caravan is attached to a
number of chains, and at the other end of these chains some were secured to a
mass of concrete and others
were not secured and were not attached to anything.
The caravan was significantly altered with a part of the wall removed to allow
better access to the annexe and a part of the opposite wall removed to allow
access to the sunroom.
gentle “A” frame roof has been constructed over the top of the
caravan, the annex and the front room. A ridge cap, facias,
guttering, soffits
have all been installed. I am satisfied that the roof over the structure was
permanently applied and they were
not designed to be removed from one position
to another.
annex consists of a lounge room, bedroom, laundry and a bathroom. It is of
timber construction, with timber floor and hardie-plank
walls. Also around
various parts of the annex are located sections of brickwork which are mortared
and set into concrete footings.
Furthermore, cyclone rods and cyclone straps
have been installed to render the structure secure from the vagaries of the
and to create a more permanent and secure structure. The cyclone rods
are placed through the bearers and into a concrete footing
in the ground.
front room built over the draw bar of the caravan was of similar construction to
the annex. It is of timber construction and
is supported to the rest of the
structure. I accept the evidence of Mr Saint that this room is permanently
attached to the caravan
and the annex and is not able to be removed without
being demolished.
the sunroom is attached to the caravan on the opposite side of the annex. It is
permanently secured to the ground by timber
posts secured into a concrete
footing. I accept the evidence of Mr Saint that it can only be removed by its
demolition.
I am satisfied that the main part of the structure was not designed to be able
to be removed from one location to the other and is
permanently affixed to the
next part of the structure to be considered is the steel shed with an open but
covered area at the rear. I accept the evidence
of Mr Saint that this shed was
constructed onto a concrete slab with metal clad walls, the internal walls were
sheeted with plaster
and the area outside was a timber deck area under an
extended roof. This deck area is attached to a concrete footing at one end
a post at the other. Again, I accept the evidence of Mr Saint that this area
was not designed to be able to be moved from one
location to another and was and
is permanently attached to the land.
the area described as the deck and retaining wall is considered. Mr Saint says
that these structures were inadequate and
I accept the evidence that these
structures are unsound. They are structures that are clearly permanently
affixed to the ground.
applicant and Mr Tamahori lived at this site for many years and have looked
after the structure with tender loving care. The
many photographs tendered as
exhibits at the hearing reveal a well maintained and well cared for property,
like the best house in
a suburban street. However, I have to decide whether the
structure satisfies the definition of manufactured home as defined in section
of the MHRP Act. The evidence is overwhelming against the proposition that it
is a manufactured home as defined. I am not satisfied
that the structure was
designed to be able to be removed from one location to the other and I find that
it is permanently attached
to the land.
respondent also submitted that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to order a
park owner to provide a site agreement to a home
owner as there was no express
power contained in the MHRP Act and section 140 could not apply as the
definition of a site agreement
dispute was not satisfied. In
Monte Carlo
Caravan Park Pty Ltd v Curyer & Curyer [
2006] QCA 363
, Keane J at
paragraph 18, expressed the view that this jurisdiction issue was certainly
arguable but did not decide the point. In
view of my finding that the structure
is not a manufactured home it is not necessary to consider this submission.
application is dismissed for want of jurisdiction.
______________________________
MR S SHEAFFE
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (941 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter