URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLPT/2009/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Chadwick [2009] QLPT 16 (6 August 2009)
Legal Services Commissioner v Chadwick [2009] QLPT 16 (6 August 2009)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Legal Services Commissioner v Chadwick
[2009] LPT 16
LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER
(applicant)
COLIN CHADWICK
(respondent)
9698 of 2008
Legal Practice Tribunal
PROCEEDING:
Discipline Action
DELIVERED ON:
6 August 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
1 June; 29 July 2009
PRACTITIONER PANEL MEMBER
Mr K Horsley
LAY PANEL MEMBER
Ms K A Keating
The respondent is guilty of two counts of professional misconduct;
The respondent is publicly reprimanded pursuant to
s. 456(2)(e)
Profession Act
3. The respondent must continue such medical treatment as his
treating doctor, or another appropriately qualified medical practitioner
recommend, for a period of 5 years; and
a period of 5 years, the respondent authorises the Legal Services Commission to
seek and obtain information (in writing or otherwise)
from his treating doctor
(or any future treating doctor) in a manner sufficient to inform itself as
(a) No more frequently than monthly - the respondent’s attendance at
appointments, and compliance with medication and treatment
as prescribed;
(b) No more frequently than yearly the respondent’s health and
treatment status generally;
14 days the respondent is to produce and provide to the Legal Services
Commission a risk management plan. The plan is to detail
the implementation of
measures by the respondent to ensure the satisfactory running of his practice in
the event he is not able to
attend to the running of his practice; and
14 days the respondent is to provide to the Legal Services Commission the name
of a suitably qualified person whom the respondent
proposes is suitable to
provide professional guidance and mentoring to the respondent in the course of
the respondent’s continuing
legal practice; and
respondent is to submit to a twice–yearly external audit of the practice
of which the respondent is a Director, for the
next 12 months; and
9. Should the applicant become aware of non-compliance on the part of
the respondent with any part of these orders, the applicant
has liberty to apply
to the Tribunal for the matter to be relisted for further hearing.
respondent pay the applicant’s costs in the sum of $2,500.00 by the end of
the calendar year, 2009.
CATCHWORDS:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – GENERALLY –
where respondent
solicitor on two occasions created without authority, letters purporting to be
from his employer – where applicant
submits the respondent intended to use
the letters to assist a personal finance application – where letters
contained false
or misleading representations – where the applicant did
not actually send or utilise the letters – where applicant asserts
suffering from a medical condition at the time of the alleged misconduct –
whether applicant is guilty of professional
misconduct or unsatisfactory
professional conduct – what is the appropriate penalty in the
circumstances
Legal Profession Act
Queensland Law Society Inc
[1990] 1 Qd R 498
A-G v Carberry
[2000] QCA 450
Legal Services
Commissioner v Sorban
[2009] LPT 5, cited
Legal Services Commissioner v Ramsden
[2006] LPT 10, cited
Lane S L for the applicant
SOLICITORS:
Legal Services Commission for the applicant
Gilshenan & Luton Legal Practice for the respondent
[1] The respondent, Colin Chadwick, faced two charges under
Legal Profession Act 2007
(“the Act”)
alleging behaviour which constitutes professional misconduct or in the
alternative unsatisfactory professional
[2] The first charge was
that on or about 22 August 2006 Mr Chadwick, without authority, created a letter
purporting to be from his
then employer, MacDonnells Law
(“MacDonnells”) and he intended to use the letter, which contained
representations that
were false and misleading, to assist his personal
application for finance. The second charge was of similar behaviour on 29
[3] The parties filed an agreed statement of facts which shows
that the respondent cooperated in the determination of this matter.
been no previous adverse findings made about him by a disciplinary body. The
facts set out below came from the agreed
statement of facts and from affidavit
material which had been filed.
[4] Mr Chadwick was admitted to practice on 6
December 1998 as a solicitor of the Supreme Court of Victoria. He does not hold
a Queensland
Practising Certificate but has practised in Queensland on an
interstate practising certificate since admission. He is therefore
Australian lawyer as defined by
of the Act.
[5] Mr Chadwick
commenced working as a law clerk in Mildura in 1983. He then worked as law
clerk in Perth and Melbourne before returning
to work at another legal firm in
Mildura, during which he undertook a five year articles programme. He became a
partner in that
firm in 1999 following his admission as a solicitor in December
1998. He continued in partnership in the firm, Martin Irwin and
Richards until
a partnership dispute in 2006 led to his leaving Victoria and relocating to
Queensland where he obtained employment
and hoped to buy a house and have his
family join him.
[6] From 4 August to 8 September 2006, when he was dismissed
from his employment, he was an employed solicitor at MacDonnells Law.
September to 6 October 2006 he was an employed solicitor at CBD Lawyers and
Corporate Advisors. He then returned to Mildura.
He did not work for about a
year because of ill health. He recommenced practice in Mildura in November 2007
at Chadwick Lawyers
& Associates, before returning to Queensland in
September 2008.
[7] Apart from his brief period of employment in 2006, when
he engaged in the conduct the subject of these charges, he has practised
Queensland on his own account. From 1 October 2008 to 30 April 2009 he was a
sole practitioner at the firm McKoy Chadwick Lawyers
and from 1 May 2009 to the
present he has been a director of the incorporated legal practice, Winchester
Young & Maddern.
[8] The behaviour the subject of the charges occurred
when he was an employed solicitor at MacDonnells Law.
[9] On 31 July 2006, Mr
Chadwick signed a contract of employment with MacDonnells, which contract
included the following terms:
(a) The employee’s position was
“solicitor”;
(b) The employment was on a probationary basis for
up to six months, meaning that the probationary period would or could expire as
late as 31 January 2007;
(c) His gross salary was $109,000 per
(d) A salary review would occur at the expiration of the probationary
period and thereafter on an annual basis; and
(e) His position would be
reviewed after the expiration of the probationary period and would be assessed
against key performance indicators.
At that time Mr Chadwick might be elevated
to a more senior role within the firm, for example, to that of Associate.
[10] The contract of employment had not been changed at the time he engaged
in the behaviour the subject of the charges, which occurred
within one month of
his employment, when he had entered into a contract to purchase a house subject
to finance.
[11] The conduct the subject of charge one occurred on or about
22 August 2006 when Mr Chadwick prepared and printed a letter addressed
Chris McDougall at the Wesptac Banking Corporation Limited entitled “Re:
Confirmation of terms of employment”
and signed with MacDonnells’
electronic signature. The letter contained the following
representations:
(a) Mr Chadwick’s probationary period would expire on
or before 30 September 2006;
(b) Upon the completion of his probationary
period his income would increase to $170,000 gross per annum;
(c) He would
thereafter be promoted to Senior Associate; and
(d) The letter had been
signed by an authorised representative of MacDonnells.
[12] The first three
representations were false or misleading as they did not reflect the terms of
his employment contract. Further
the representation that the letter had been
signed by an authorised representative of the firm was false or misleading as
was not written by or approved by an employee of MacDonnells who was
authorised to verify particulars of employment. Mr Chadwick
knew, or at least
ought to have known, that the representations made in that letter were false or
misleading. He created the letter
without authority from his employer and he
prepared the letter on the basis that it could be utilised to assist a personal
application
for finance.
[13] The second charge related to a letter prepared
and printed by Mr Chadwick on or about 29 August 2006 addressed “To whom
it may concern” and purporting to be from MacDonnells. The letter
contained the following representations:
(a) That Mr Chadwick had no
probationary period;
(b) That his income was $120,000 gross per
(c) His salary would be reviewed quarterly; and
(d) The letter had
been authorised by MacDonnells.
[14] The first three representations were
false or misleading as they did not reflect the terms of his employment contract
final representation was false or misleading as the letter was not
written by or approved by an employee of MacDonnells who was authorised
verify particulars of employment. Mr Chadwick knew, or ought to have known,
that the representations were false or misleading.
He created the letter
without authority from his employer, MacDonnells, and prepared the letter on the
basis that it could be utilised
to assist a personal application for
[15] The matters the subject of the disciplinary application were
brought to the attention of the Legal Services Commissioner (“the
Commissioner”) following a complaint by MacDonnells dated 31 August 2006.
An investigation was conducted during which Mr Chadwick
advised that he was
suffering from a medical condition at the time of the conduct.
[16] On 15 May
2009, Mr Chadwick’s legal representative provided a report by Dr Pollock
to the applicant. That report was dated
8 June 2007 and was addressed to the
Commissioner, but was not provided to the Commissioner for a period of some two
years. No explanation
was provided for that delay. Mr Chadwick subsequently
provided an updated report by Dr Pollock dated 22 May 2009.
[17] The letters
from Dr Pollock reveal that Mr Chadwick became a patient of hers in March 2007
following a hospital admission.
[18] Mr Chadwick said in his affidavit filed
on 28 May 2008 that he was first diagnosed with a medical condition in 2002 and
between then and 2006 he experienced various symptoms of ill health. He
deposed that he saw Dr Millard in 2004. He says that he
was prescribed
medication and was advised to reduce his workload. He was not able to reduce
his workload and did not comply with
his medication regime strictly.
Pollock said that Mr Chadwick had not been receiving appropriate treatment for
his condition after his initial diagnosis in
2002 and that it was likely that at
the time of the offences committed in Queensland his medical condition was quite
unstable as
a result. She stabilised him on a regime of medication.
[20] Dr Pollock says that as at June 2007 during his period of convalescence
he was not doing his usual work. She continued her assessment
and treatment
over the 18 month period until September 2008 when he returned to Brisbane. She
said that over that period his condition
stabilised. He was on a regular regime
of medication, and he had stable blood levels of medication. He attended to see
regularly for review. His condition remained relatively stable and
he was able to return to work.
[21] Dr Pollock anticipated that he would
remain well with ongoing appropriate management of his condition and to this end
him for ongoing treatment in Brisbane. Her opinion was “a
diagnosis of a medical condition is no barrier to employment as
a solicitor
provided his condition is stable and adequately monitored and treated by a
professional clinician. To date regular counselling
and medication have been
effective but the long term details of his treatment would be at the discretion
of his treating physician.”
[22] Mr Chadwick said that after he moved
to Queensland in September 2008, he endeavoured to commence consultations with a
medical practitioner to continue his treatment but was unable to do
so until recently. He said that he recently began seeing a medical
practitioner
and proposed to continue to see him at least monthly or as required.
deposed that he is now following a stable and regimented medication regime and
that he has now recovered from his illness
and believes himself to be entirely
competent to practise as a solicitor.
[24] Given the agreed statement of
facts, the issues for determination in these proceedings are whether Mr
Chadwick’s conduct
amounts to professional misconduct or unsatisfactory
professional conduct and what the appropriate penalty should be. The term
“professional
misconduct” is defined in
of the Act as
“(1) Professional
misconduct includes –
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner,
if the conduct involves a substantial or consistent failure
to reach or keep a
reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, whether happening in
connection with the practice of law or happening otherwise than
in connection
with the practice of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice.
(2) For finding that an Australian legal practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice as mentioned in subsection
(1), regard may be
had to the suitability matters that would be considered if the practitioner were
an applicant for admission to
the legal profession under this Act or for the
grant or renewal of a local practising certificate.”
[25] In Adamson v Queensland Law Society Inc
[1990] 1 Qd R 498
Thomas J applied
the following test at 507:
“The test to be applied is whether the conduct
violates or falls short of, to a substantial degree, the standard of
professional
conduct observed or approved by members of the profession of good
repute and competency.”
[26] The term “unsatisfactory professional conduct” is defined in
of the Act as follows:
“Unsatisfactory professional conduct includes
conduct of an Australian legal practitioner happening in connection with the
of law that falls short of the standard of competence and diligence
that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably
Australian legal practitioner.”
[27] The behaviour in this case has less to do with competency and diligence and
is more concerned with whether or not the practitioner
is a fit and proper
person. His behaviour in creating the documents was dishonest and so
constitutes professional misconduct. It
was dishonest because he created
documents on two different dates containing false details of the terms and
conditions of his employment
purporting to be from his employer and the
documents were intended to advantage him financially. He was however unwell at
and the documents were not actually used.
[28] The next question to
be determined is the appropriate penalty. As was held in QLS v Carberry; A-G v
[2000] QCA 450
“It is now trite to
say that the primary role of proceedings such as those before the Tribunal is to
protect the public from
persons not fit to be held out as officers of the court
and as a proper person to be entrusted with the duties and responsibilities
the solicitor:
Harvey v Law Society of New South Wales
(1975) 49 ALJR 362
Ziems v Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR
Adamson v Queensland Law Society Incorporated
[1990] 1 QdR 498.
was pointed out in
Attorney-General v Bax
[1999] 2 QdR 9
at 21 by Pincus
JA, there is a subsidiary purpose in the public interest and that is to deter
other practitioners who might otherwise
engage in professional
misconduct.”
[29] There is no element of punishment in the penalty imposed. The penalty is
to protect the public.
[30] There have been other cases where solicitors have
created false documents to cover up an error that they, or staff working under
them, have made: Legal Services Commissioner v Sorban [2009] LPT 5 and Legal
Services Commissioner v Ramsden [2006] LPT 10. Neither
of those cases involved
any intention by the practitioners to advantage themselves financially and both
expressed contrition and
remorse. In Sorban the Tribunal said of the
“The respondent
accepts that there was no excuse for fabricating the e-mail. In summary, the
respondent created a false document
and sent it with the intention of deceiving
his clients and the financier’s solicitor about the date when the e-mail
had originally
This creation and sending of the false email was not done for direct
pecuniary gain. What the respondent does say in his affidavit
was that he did it on the spur of the moment and that it was as a result of
pride and embarrassment and concern
not to convey the wrong impression to his
clients. He also noted at the time that he had an exceptionally large
... Because of the dishonesty involved in the conduct, it amounts to
professional misconduct and I so find.”
[31] At the hearing of this matter the Tribunal expressed some concern because
of the lack of information provided as to the incorporated
legal practice of
which Mr Chadwick is a director and in particular whether his fellow director
was aware of these proceedings.
Mr Chadwick did not himself attend the
disciplinary hearing so the matter was adjourned for his legal representatives
to make further
submissions. His legal representative made the following
submissions:
“These further submissions address the issue
raised by the Tribunal at the hearing of this matter on 1 June 2009, concerning
the position of Mr Chadwick’s co-director at his firm, Winchester Young
The Respondent is currently a legal practitioner director of Winchester Young
& Maddern, an incorporated legal practice pursuant
Profession Act
(‘the Act’).
His fellow director in this practice is Mr Glen Young, a Queensland solicitor
admitted in 1976. Mr Young was previously the sole
principal of Winchester
Young & Maddern prior to its acquisition by McKoy Chadwick Lawyers (the
respondent’s previous firm)
on 1 May 2009.
Since that time, Mr Young and Mr Chadwick have together been the legal
practitioner directors of Winchester Young & Maddern.
It is intended though
that Mr Young will soon resign as a legal practitioner director of the firm, and
simply continue in the practice
as an employee. This will result in Mr Chadwick
being the sole legal practitioner director of the practice. The Respondent
that this arrangement was always intended, and that Mr Young’s
directorship of the firm was a transitional arrangement agreed
as part of the
merger of the two firms. It is expected that Mr Young’s resignation as a
director will be effective within
the next couple of weeks.”
[32] It is significant for the appropriate penalty that the behaviour the
subject of these charges occurred in 2006 when the respondent
was suffering from
untreated illness; he subsequently obtained treatment and removed himself from
practice while he undertook treatment
and rehabilitation. He has subsequently
returned to legal practice and according to his affidavit has maintained
treatment and medication.
There have been no other complaints against him since
that time. He has apologised for that behaviour and in his affidavit assured
the Tribunal that he is acutely aware of the need for his condition to be
carefully managed and he is very attentive to the necessity
of taking his
prescribed medication without fail. It is of concern, however, to the Tribunal
that it does not appear that Mr Chadwick’s
fellow director knows of these
matters and no references have been provided in support of Mr
[33] Such a chronic illness is not, however, a reason for a legal
practitioner not to practice, even on his or her own account, so
long as the
illness is or has been treated successfully and does not interfere with his or
her capacity to practise honestly and
competently.
[34] The Commissioner
initially asked for the following orders:
the respondent be publicly reprimanded pursuant to
s 456(2)(e)
of the Act;
(2) That the respondent pay a penalty in the order of $2,000 to $5,000
pursuant to
s 456(4)(a)
of the Act.
The Commissioner submitted that the following additional orders would be
appropriate given Mr Chadwick’s medical condition:
(a) Mr Chadwick must continue such treatment as his treating doctor, or
another appropriately qualified medical practitioner, may
recommend for a period
of at least 12 months; and
(b) The respondent must obtain a report from his treating doctor, or another
appropriately qualified medical practitioner, and provide
that report to the
applicant within the next 12 months.
[35] Such a condition is appropriate but the Tribunal is not minded to impose
such a condition unless it has a current report from
his treating doctor as to
the treatment that the respondent is currently receiving and his agreement to
provide another report on
the applicant’s condition within the next 12
[36] In addition the Commissioner has submitted, in response to a
query from the Tribunal about the lack of supervision of the respondent,
can and would undertake a twice-yearly external audit of the practice of which
Mr Chadwick was a director for the next two
years. This would form a further
condition of an order to be made by the Tribunal.
[37] The Tribunal was
prepared to make an order in the terms sought but required a current report from
his treating doctor as to the
treatment that the respondent is currently
receiving and his agreement to provide another report on the applicant’s
within the next 12 months, before it made any final
[38] Further directions were given and the matter set down for further
hearing. As a result of matters canvassed during that hearing
the parties
proposed a detailed order that the Tribunal is prepared to make. It recognises
both the seriousness of the behaviour
and that the practitioner is nevertheless
presently a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice but also ensures
interest by imposing conditions which ensures that he will remain a
fit and proper person to engage in legal practice.
[39] It is not necessary
or desirable to set out all of those conditions in these reasons because of the
terms of some of those conditions
however their imposition will, in the
Tribunal’s view, protect the public interest.
[40] However, for the
purposes of the public record the Tribunal records the following orders made by
The respondent is guilty of two counts of professional misconduct;
The respondent be publicly reprimanded pursuant to
s. 456(2)(e)
Profession Act
3. The respondent must continue such medical treatment as his
treating doctor, or another appropriately qualified medical practitioner
recommend, for a period of 5 years; and
a period of 5 years, the respondent authorises the Legal Services Commission to
seek and obtain information (in writing or otherwise)
from his treating doctor
(or any future treating doctor) in a manner sufficient to inform itself as
(c) No more frequently than monthly - the respondent’s attendance at
appointments, and compliance with medication and treatment
as prescribed;
(d) No more frequently than yearly the respondent’s health and treatment
status generally;
14 days the respondent is to produce and provide to the Legal Services
Commission a risk management plan. The plan is to detail
the implementation of
measures by the respondent to ensure the satisfactory running of his practice in
the event he is not able to
attend to the running of his practice; and
14 days the respondent is to provide to the Legal Services Commission the name
of a suitably qualified person whom the respondent
proposes is suitable to
provide professional guidance and mentoring to the respondent in the course of
the respondent’s continuing
legal practice; and
respondent is to submit to a twice–yearly external audit of the practice
of which the respondent is a Director, for the
next 12 months; and
9. Should the applicant become aware of non-compliance on the part of the
respondent with any part of these orders, the applicant
has liberty to apply to
the Tribunal for the matter to be relisted for further hearing.
the respondent pay the applicant’s costs in the sum of $2,500.00 by the
end of the calendar year, 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (84.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter