URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLPT/2009/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Atkins [2009] QLPT 10 (1 May 2009)
Legal Services Commissioner v Atkins [2009] QLPT 10 (1 May 2009)
LEGAL PRACTICE TRIBUNAL
Legal Services Commissioner v Atkins
[2009] LPT 10
LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSONER
(Applicant)
BARRY EDWARD ATKINS
(Respondent)
Legal Practice Tribunal
PROCEEDING:
Discipline Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
31 March 2009
LAY PANEL MEMBER:
PRACTITIONER PANEL MEMBER:
Byrne SJA assisted by
Ms K A Keating
Mr P J Mullins
On charge 6:
That the respondent:
publicly reprimanded;
a pecuniary penalty of $1,000 within three months;
the applicant’s costs fixed at $1,000.
CATCHWORDS:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – SOLICITOR AND CLIENT –
DUTIES AND LIABILITIES TO CLIENT – DEALINGS WITH
PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT AND UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT – where
respondent acted for the vendor in a
conveyancing transaction – where
respondent found not guilty of professional misconduct or unsatisfactory
professional conduct
– where respondent seeking an order that the
applicant pay costs on an indemnity basis – whether “special
circumstances”
to warrant the making of an order for costs – where
respondent admits to a charge of unsatisfactory professional conduct –
whether private reprimand available in substitution for public reprimand
Chaina v Alvaro Homes Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 353
Di Carlo v Dubois & Ors
[2002] QCA 225
Legal Services Commissioner v Hansen (No. 2)
[2008] LPT 10
Smits v Tabone; Blue Coast Yeppoon Pty Ltd v Tabone
[2007] QCA 337
Thiess v TCN Channel Nine Pty Limited
[1994] 1 QdR 156
ss 456(2)(e), 462(4), 462(5)(b)
Legal Profession Act
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
Mr W Sofronoff QC for the applicant
Mr J Ganim (solicitor) for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Services Commission for the applicant
Hopgood Ganim Lawyers for the respondent
Forge Complaint
[1] The Tribunal’s reasons delivered on 6 February 2009
set out the circumstances of the sixth charge. That charge is
[2] The circumstances involved a lack of diligence. Mr Atkins, as
he acknowledges, put the file to the bottom of his work pile.
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
[3] There is, however, no suggestion of
any dishonesty or other inappropriate conduct. And despite the considerable
delay in rectification
of the register, the client suffered no loss. Moreover,
Mr Atkins, who was contrite, paid another solicitor to attend to rectification
of the register, cooperated with the Legal Services Commission in its
investigation, and acknowledged at an early stage that his
conduct was not of an
appropriate standard.
[4] At the time, the solicitor’s capacity to
deal with his work was adversely affected by sleep apnoea – a condition
has since resolved through treatment.
[5] Mr Atkins has previously been
dealt with by a disciplinary body.
[6] In September 1999, the
Solicitors’ Complaints Tribunal found Mr Atkins guilty of professional
misconduct in respect of nine
charges. Five related to breaches of trust
account legislation, two concerned borrowing money from clients, one related to
a false and misleading letter to a client, and another concerned a
failure to honour an undertaking given to the Solicitors’
Tribunal. That Tribunal ordered that he pay a penalty of $12,000 and that he be
suspended from legal practice for two
years, subject to a proviso that the
suspension not become operative unless he defaulted in payment of the penalty or
in honouring
undertakings given to the Tribunal. These included completing the
trust account module of the Queensland Law Society’s Practice
[7] Mr Atkins accepts that there ought to be a reprimand, although he
prefers that it be private. A reprimand must be a public reprimand,
there are special circumstances to justify a private reprimand:
s 456(2)(e)
Legal Profession Act 2007
(“the Act”). There are none here.
[8] In view of the earlier disciplinary proceedings and to mark disapproval
of the departure from proper professional standards, Mr
Atkins should:
1. be publicly reprimanded;
2. pay a pecuniary penalty of $1,000 within three
3. pay the applicant’s costs of $1,000.
Steep Complaint
[9] Mr Atkins seeks an order that the Legal Services
Commissioner (“the Commissioner”) pay his costs, on an
basis, in respect of the six charges arising out of the Steep
complaint. One of those charges was withdrawn on 12 November 2008.
of the Act, an order requiring the Commissioner
to pay costs may only be made if the Tribunal is satisfied that:
“(a) the...practitioner...is
not guilty; and
(b) the [Tribunal] considers that special circumstances warrant the making
of the order.”
[11] Mr Atkins has been found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct on
the Forge complaint. But it is not suggested that
the joinder of the Forge
charge means that
s 462(4)(a)
is not satisfied. So the question is whether
“special circumstances” warrant making an order for costs in respect
the unsuccessful prosecution arising out of the Steep complaint.
attempt to demonstrate that there are such “special circumstances”
involved a variety of arguments.
Withdrawn Charge
[13] In respect of the
withdrawn charge, the essential contention is that, by about mid-August 2008,
the Commission had information
demonstrating that the charge could not succeed.
It is said that, in those circumstances, the Commissioner should have accepted
the August 2008 invitation of the solicitors for Mr Atkins to withdraw the
charge well before that was eventually done six days before
the hearing began.
[14] Mr Atkins contends that he had to prepare to meet the charge until a
week before the hearing, which involved him in unnecessary
expense for the three
months or so between the request to withdraw the charge and when the decision to
do so was communicated.
[15] By the time of the request to withdraw the
charge, the Commission, it seems, knew facts indicating that the charge would
And there is no explanation for the delay in communicating the decision
to withdraw it.
[16] On this basis, such expense as Mr Atkins may have
incurred in defending the charge from mid-August to 12 November 2008 was
[17] The breach of fiduciary duty charge had
nothing to do with whether Mr Atkins had misled Mrs Patterson or Ms Ansell, even
innocently.
It concerned Mr Atkins’s continuing to act for Mrs Patterson
after he had offered to buy her property.
[18] In a Statement of Agreed Facts
filed on 4 November 2008, the Commissioner acknowledged that Mrs Patterson had
obtained other
legal advice about the sale to Mr Atkins. It was not suggested
that the independent solicitor was unsuitable or that his advice
inappropriate. And at the hearing of the Discipline Application, it was not
alleged that it mattered that Mr Davies, the independent
solicitor, and Mrs
Patterson did not know that the Steep transfer was in the office of Mr Atkins.
[19] On that approach, by 4 November 2008 at the latest, the Legal Services
Commission (“the Commission”) knew facts to
show that this charge
had no real prospect of success.
[20] If, after 4 November 2008, Mr Atkins
incurred expense in defending this charge, again, that too should have been
avoided by timely
abandonment of the charge.
Charge Four
allegation concerning inadequate office systems was unsupported by evidence and
always a hopeless contention. Mr Atkins
ought not to have been put to the
trouble and expense of defending against it – an exercise which included
adducing the evidence
of Mr Heilbronn.
[22] The second ground of complaint,
as it was argued, presupposed that Steep could have settled by 5.00pm on the due
[23] On the afternoon of the first day of the hearing, it was
admitted for the Commissioner that the funds Mr Steep had transferred
credit union to Ms Moriarty’s trust account were not cleared funds before
5.00 pm on 14 May 2003. That concession
should have resulted in
abandonment of this charge. But it was persisted in.
Cleared Funds
[24] In 2003, Mr Steep complained that conduct of Mr Atkins had cost
him the land. Mr Atkins, who always doubted that Ms Moriarty
had the money
to tender, thought it critical to his defence to know whether Ms Moriarty had
cleared funds before 5.00 pm on 14 May
For Mr Atkins supposed that, if she did not, his client was entitled to rescind,
which would have meant, as Mr Atkins saw things,
that no conduct of his caused
Mr Steep’s purchase to go off. That view overlooked the circumstance
that, through no fault
of Ms Ansell, Mr Atkins could not deliver a signed
transfer when completion fell due. It does, however, explain why the cleared
funds issue assumed such significance for Mr Atkins during the investigation of
the Steep complaint.
[25] The investigation was in the hands of the
Queensland Law Society (“QLS”) by 2004.
[26] On 5 July, Ms Ansell
wrote to Mr Inch, a QLS investigator, enclosing a “Trust Account
Report” that disclosed a deposit
of $44,809.02 on 14 May 2003. This
report, created on 15 May 2003, did not indicate whether the money was available
as cleared funds.
In her letter, however, Ms Ansell asserted that the report
“indicates that the funds” to settle the Steep purchase “were
available...on the due date for settlement.”
[27] On 23 August 2004,
Mr Steep wrote to the Commission complaining about having lost the purchase.
His letter included a statement
that “[o]n the morning of 14th May, 2003 I
transferred our funds to our solicitor’s trust account which she received
at 9.15 am.”
[28] In an affidavit sworn in September 2004, Ms Ansell
swore that on the morning of 14 May 2003: “I had confirmation of the
being in [Ms Moriarty’s] trust account.” But she did not supply any
detail of the “confirmation”.
The affidavit also explained the
omission to tender the balance price. Her settlement clerk, she deposed,
settlement agents to be told that, although they had
instructions to settle, they did not have transfer documents to exchange. Ms
Ansell swears:
I had not received any response from [Mr Atkins] with regard to the transfer
documents and settlement could not be effected
without them we did not attend at
[settlement].
[29] The investigation dragged on.
[30] On 7 October 2005, Mr Atkins wrote
to the QLS asking to be supplied with evidence from Ms Moriarty’s trust
account revealing
the “precise time that the funds for Steep were able to
be drawn on.”
[31] That same day, Mr Foote, a QLS officer
investigating the Steep complaint, sent Mr Atkins copies of the report received
Ansell in July 2004 and a facsimile from Mr Steep attaching a transfer
authority from the Bananacoast Community Credit Union Ltd
(“Bananacoast”) “indicating”, Mr Foote wrote, that
“the transfer was completed at 9.15 am on the 14
[32] On 18 October, Mr Atkins wrote to Ms Moriarty asking her to authorise
the QLS to trace with her bank “the actual time of
funds...”, describing this “factual issue” as
“crucial”. He got no reply.
[33] On the same day, he wrote
twice to Mr Foote. One letter inquired whether there was evidence on Ms
Moriarty’s file to show
that she knew before the 3.50 pm
that the funds needed to pay the balance
purchase price had been “received to” the trust account. The other
that the QLS had apparently concluded that the contract had been
invalidly terminated because Steep’s solicitors had the funds
to settle on
14 May 2003. The letter then referred to the transfer from Bananacoast and a
listing in Ms Moriarty’s trust account
which showed a credit on 14 May 2003 of the funds required to complete. The
letter continued:
“An essential and crucial issue of fact needed
for the Society to properly investigate the complaint is whether in fact the
funds were received to Moriarty’s trust account in time for Steep to
effect settlement on 14 May 2003...
I do not believe Steep was in a position to settle on 14 May 2003. It is
crucial and essential that the factual issue of the actual
time of receipt to
Moriarty’s trust account is ascertained AS A MATTER OF
[34] The letter requested a “trace” from the bank at which Ms
Moriarty maintained her trust account “to identify
the actual time of
receipt of Steep’s money.” It also explained Mr Atkins’s
reasons for suspecting that the settlement
funds were not available on 14 May
2003. He described his understanding of procedures at Bananacoast. He asserted
that the funds
Steep transferred would have been first forwarded to Credit Union
Services Creditlink; that staff of that organisation had said that
transfer would have been sent to the receiving bank; and that the bank’s
clearing house would have processed the transfer
at 8.00 pm that night. On this
basis, Mr Atkins claimed, “it is highly improbable that the money was
received” by 3.55
pm on 14 May. He reiterated his request that the QLS
urgently “put a trace on Moriarty’s trust account receiving bank
ascertain the actual time of receipt of Steep’s funds.”
Atkins remained fixated on the cleared funds question. On 31 October, he wrote
to the QLS President enclosing a letter from
Ms Veronica Lane, Executive
Assistant to the CEO of Bananacoast. Ms Lane wrote:
the receipt of instructions to transfer funds prior to 3.00 pm on any
business-banking day the transaction is electronically
transferred to our
service provider Creditlink in Brisbane at 3.00 pm. Creditlink then
electronically transfers the funds to Westpac
at 5.00 pm and then Westpac
settles with the other financial institutions at approximately 7.00 pm or
whenever the other banks pick
up their electronic files. These funds would
normally then be received in the payee’s bank the following business
Members are always advised that a transaction can take from between 24 to 48
hours to reach an account following transfer under normal
processes.”
Mr Atkins claimed that:
“This evidence from Bananacoast proves that
Steep could not (and did not) have the balance of purchase monies...in time to
before 5.00 pm on 14 May...this evidence also proves that the without
prejudice letter from Steep’s solicitor to Atkins at
3.50 pm on 14 May
2003, wherein they state that they are in a position to settle, is false and
misleading. The other solicitor has
lied to me in that letter and it is
apparent that the Society relies upon the (alleged) truth of that statement in
its investigation
of the complaint by Steep against me.”
[36] On 31 October, Ms Moriarty wrote to Mr Foote enclosing an account details
report relating to her trust account, a trust account
receipt (apparently dated
15 May 2003) for the $44,809.02, and a Commonwealth Bank statement for May 2003
“confirming”,
as she put it, “deposit of funds on 14 May 2003
by John Steep.”
[37] On 2 November, Mr Foote wrote to Mr Atkins. His
letter acknowledged Ms Lane’s letter “indicating the funds
transferred
to his solicitor’s trust account would not normally be
received by the buyer’s solicitor’s bank until the following
day.” The letter continued:
the buyer’s solicitor’s trust bank statement shows the receipt of
those funds on the 14 May 2003 (contrary
to the advice from the Credit Union);
the only remaining issue being the clearance of those funds on that day –
the Society’s
investigations on this point are continuing.”
[38] The bank statement, however, was not given to Mr Atkins with the letter.
Mr Atkins promptly wrote to Mr Foote asking for a
copy. Three years would go by
before Mr Atkins was given the statement.
[39] Mr Atkins attached so much
importance to the cleared funds question that he telephoned Ms Moriarty, asking
her to agree to a
trace on the Steep funds. Ms Moriarty would not co-operate.
Indeed, on 9 November, she wrote to the Commissioner complaining about
approach by Mr Atkins.
[40] On 10 November, Mr Foote wrote to Ms Moriarty
saying that Mr Atkins had requested the Society to arrange a trace of funds
by Mr Steep to her trust account. Ms Moriarty was informed that her
consent was needed. She was asked to contact Mr Foote. When
she had not done
so by 21 November, he wrote to Ms Moriarty asking her:
you can provide the Society with confirmation that Mr Steep’s funds of
$44,809.02 (deposited to your trust account
on 14 May 2003 via a transfer from
[Bananacoast]) were cleared funds on that day.
you cannot provide the Society with this confirmation, are you prepared to
arrange for your bank to trace those funds, at the cost
of the Society, to
determine if and when those funds were cleared on 14 May
[41] On 28 November, Mr Steep asked the Commissioner to take over the
investigation. In the letter, he claimed:
“Our funds were in
Mrs Moriarty’s trust account but [Mr Atkins] still called the deal
[42] On 7 December, Ms Moriarty informed Mr Foote that she would not provide any
information or assistance concerning trust account
activity involving Mr
[43] Ms Ansell had deposed in September 2004 to some unspecified
“confirmation” on 14 May that the funds were available
balance purchase price. The QLS investigators doubted that this was true; and
with good reason. On the day for completion,
Ms Ansell had proposed an
extension until the next day. She gave as her reason for the request that the
funds to pay the price would
be “through tomorrow”. There had not
been a tender. Ms Moriarty would not assist in the bank trace. And the
information
from Ms Lane made it seem highly unlikely that the funds were
cleared on 14 May 2003.
[44] On 14 December 2005, the QLS wrote to the
Commissioner saying that the Society had completed its investigation,
most serious allegation is that Mr Atkins preferred his own interests by
arranging to purchase this property for himself
on the 13 May 2003 (the day
prior to the settlement date of Mr Steep’s contract), and then terminating
the contract on the
14 May 2003 when he was not in a position to do so. The
matter becomes complicated as Mr Steep also was not in a position to effect
settlement on the 14 May 2003 as his purchase funds, although received to Ms
Moriarty’s trust account on that day, were
apparently not cleared funds
– however, the Society has been unable to clarify this point with Ms
Moriarty...
It is the Society’s view that Mr Atkins was not entitled to rescind the
contract, as this right was dependent upon his preparedness
to produce the
signed transfer at the place of settlement on the 14 May 2003. Further, he
breached his fiduciary duty to Ms Patterson
by deliberately dealing with her and
profiting from that transaction, notwithstanding his referral of Ms Patterson to
independent
legal advice.”
[45] The Commission received the QLS file. It held all the correspondence
mentioned and Ms Ansell’s affidavit.
[46] In the Commission’s
hands, Mr Atkins’s conduct was called into question in new respects. The
different emphasis
was on the false statements to Mrs Patterson and Ms Ansell
[47] Mr Atkins remained
concerned about the cleared funds issue.
[48] On 18 September 2006, Mr
Atkins’s solicitor wrote to the Commission in response to an invitation to
comment on draft charges.
The letter sought particulars of paragraph 3.4:
the facts and circumstances relied upon to found the allegation implicit in
paragraph 3.4 that the purchasers were in
a position to affect (sic) settlement
on 14 May 2003”,
and went on:
“That issue is crucial...our client strongly believes that,
notwithstanding the facsimile referred to in paragraph 3.3 of the
draft charges,
the purchasers were not in a position to settle on 14 May 2003.”
[49] The Commission’s response was to say that the case relied on the 3.50
pm “without prejudice” fax, which included
the claim about being in
a position to settle.
[50] The Discipline Application was filed on 22
December 2006. It contains allegations to which the cleared funds issue was
Paragraph 4.5 alleges that, by 3.50 pm on 14 May 2003, Mr Atkins was
“clearly aware that the purchasers were in a position
settlement”, echoing the words in the “without prejudice” fax.
Paragraph 4.7(b) also implicitly asserts
that Steep was ready, willing and able
to complete on the day fixed for settlement.
[51] On 6 December 2007,
lawyers for Mr Atkins emailed the Commission’s case officer asking whether
the Commission held a copy
of the trust account receipt for the settlement
funds. Mr Brittan, the Commission’s Manager Complaints, responded about a
week later, enclosing a copy of the account details report that showed the
transfer authority from Bananacoast to Ms Moriarty’s
trust account at 9.15
am on 14 May and a debit of the amount of the settlement funds on 15 May.
[52] The respondent’s new solicitor, Mr Ganim, commenced to act in
late March 2008.
[53] On 29 April, Mr Atkins delivered his statement in
defence of the Application. In response to paragraph 4.5, he said that he
“of the honest belief that the purchasers were not in a position to
settle” and does not know it to be a fact that
they could have completed.
The defence to paragraph 4.7 referred to Steep’s “failing to
undertake that required by the
purchaser to complete”.
[54] On 12 May,
Mr Ganim spoke to Mr Brittan, urging that the Commission investigate the cleared
funds issue, explaining that, to
shorten the process and save money, he was
anxious that the parties work towards a statement of agreed facts covering
as could be agreed”. Mr Ganim’s letter to Mr Brittan
two days afterwards said:
you provide evidence to our satisfaction that the funds were available for
settlement on 14 May 2008 (i.e. cleared and in
the trust account), then we
don’t see a problem with including any such admission on the Agreed
Statement of Facts...”
[55] The request to investigate the cleared funds issue was ignored. Ms
Moriarty had not been interviewed by the QLS investigators.
The Commission did
not speak to her. And despite the QLS impression that the funds were not
cleared and the powerful reasons to
doubt Ms Ansell’s claims in her
affidavit and in the “without prejudice” fax, the Commission was not
disposed to
further investigate the issue. So Mr Ganim set about doing
[56] On 15 October 2008, Mr Ganim wrote to Ms Lane, asking about the
likelihood that Ms Moriarty had cleared funds on 14 May 2003.
On 16 October, Ms
Lane replied:
“Firstly I would like
to confirm the details as set out in my letter of the
October, 2005 for transfer of electronic
I also confirm the following:
60/40 form (which is an internal form used by BCU and not usually provided to
members) was signed by Melissa from our Port Macquarie
branch confirming that
the transfer was actually completed by her at 9.15 am on Wednesday 14/5/03.
This in no way advises that the
funds would be received by the recipient at that
is no possible way that the funds could have been received by the recipient on
the same day because of the facts as set out
in my previous letter of the
25/10/05. The earliest the funds could possibly have been received would have
been the next day, the
my 30 years of employment with BCU I have often found that members mistakenly
believe that once the transfer is effected that
the funds are received instantly
by the recipient. Because we are a Credit Union and use Indue (previously
Creditlink) as our service
provider and they then transfer the funds through our
clearing bank, being Westpac, to the receiving bank there is no possible way
this can happen using the normal EFT method.”
[57] On 23 October, Mr Ganim emailed Ms Moriarty, asserting that cleared funds
were not in her trust account at 5.00 pm on 14 May
2003. He alleged that she
knew that the information provided to the Commission about cleared funds was
misleading but that it was
nonetheless being used to prosecute Mr Atkins.
Telling Ms Moriarty that “all we seek is the truth”, Mr Ganim asked
to furnish credible evidence if she were disposed to refute his
assertions.
[58] Ms Moriarty retained solicitors. On 29 October, they told
Mr Ganim that she would not communicate with him and that his correspondence
with her had been forwarded to the Commission.
[59] On 29 October, Mr Ganim
wrote to Ms Sarah Lane, the Commission’s case officer, advising her that
his investigation had
confirmed that the funds were not cleared on 14 May 2003.
He also argued that Ms Moriarty’s refusal to provide information
have led to a full investigation to ensure that the charges against Mr Atkins
were not founded on misleading information.
His email continued:
we understand that the prime thrust of the prosecution of our client relates to
whether or not he was aware the transfer
was in the office prior to 4.56 pm on
14 May 2003, the proof of cleared funds in the Trust Account of Ms Moriarty is
relevant with respect to the events of 14 May 2003 and indeed
the material you have filed supports the assertion that cleared funds
indeed there and available for settlement.
We have asked Ms Moriarty to provide the accurate information to you, but
from my discussion today with you, it is apparent she has
not contacted you. We
would respectfully suggest that the LSC should investigate this issue urgently
and if amended material is
to be filed, provide advices to us as soon as
possible in this regard.”
[60] The reference to “the material you have filed” is to an
affidavit of Ms Ansell sworn on 21 October 2008, which exhibits
her September
2004 affidavit and swears that its contents are true.
[61] Ms Lane responded
on 30 October, by which time Mr Ganim’s email to Ms Moriarty had not
reached the Commission. Ms Lane
said that the Commissioner would decide whether
to make enquiries once the Commission had considered the evidence “you say
you have obtained.”
[62] The next day, the Commission received the
information Mr Ganim had sent to Ms Moriarty, including Ms Veronica Lane’s
of 16 October explaining why the funds could not have been available on 14
[63] Still no investigation was conducted by the Commission; and Mr
Atkins continued to confront a case that the funds were cleared.
affidavit of Mr Brittan filed five days before the hearing exhibited the bank
statement for the trust account. This was the
document Mr Atkins had sought
three years earlier.
[65] Finally, Mr Atkins’s solicitors could
identify the bank where Ms Moriarty had maintained her account. Mr Ganim
for a subpoena to issue for the bank records. The bank promptly
confirmed that the funds were not cleared on 14 May 2003.
November, the day before the hearing was to begin, the solicitors for Mr Atkins
filed an affidavit of Ms Veronica Lane
deposing to facts which meant that the
funds could not have been cleared on 14 May 2003.
[67] In those
circumstances, the Commissioner might have been expected to concede the cleared
funds issue. But it remained alive.
[68] When the hearing began, Ms Wilson
read the entirety of Ms Ansell’s affidavit filed a fortnight earlier. And
when Mr Bell
QC said that there was a dispute about whether the funds were
cleared, Ms Wilson did not disagree. Even after it became clear during
Ansell’s testimony that she did not know, and had merely assumed, that the
funds were cleared,
the issue remained. On the
afternoon of the first day, however, it was eventually conceded that the funds
were not cleared until
[69] In the Application proceedings, it ought
never to have been alleged that the funds were cleared. When that Application
material the Commission had from the QLS showed that there was no
reasonable likelihood of succeeding in proving that the funds were
5.00 pm on 14 May.
[70] The QLS investigation had revealed that the funds
were “apparently” uncleared when completion fell due. The only
information to the contrary came from Ms Ansell: in her “without
prejudice” fax asserting that she was in a position
to settle, and in her
2004 affidavit. Although there was every reason to doubt what she had said, the
receiving bank was not asked
by the Commission to say when the funds were
And it is not suggested that the
Commissioner’s investigative powers were inadequate to ensure that the
question - which obviously
loomed large in the practitioner’s appreciation
of the case and was made relevant by more than one allegation in the Application
– was properly investigated.
Deceit Charges
[71] Mr Atkins contends
that the circumstances are sufficiently special to require an order for costs on
the footing that information
the Commissioner had, or which proper investigation
would have bought to his attention, revealed that there was no reasonable
of a finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct. In particular, Mr Atkins
argues that the Commissioner
should have entertained such doubt about the
reliability of the evidence as to have led him to decline to prosecute the case.
[72] Mr Atkins highlights several inconsistencies and improbabilities in Ms
Ansell’s version of events. As to Ms Hines, inconsistency
between her
2003 statutory declaration and her affidavit as to when Ms Parkyn found the
transfer is accorded prominence; and it is
said that the reliability of Ms Hines
was called into question by a complaint she lodged with the Commission that Mr
Atkins had impersonated
Mr Ganim. Complaint is also made of the failure to
interview Ms Moriarty. In contrast, it is said for Mr Atkins that, through
advanced by his various solicitors and in his Statement to Discipline
Application, Mr Atkins gave consistent, acceptable accounts.
was, however, a fairly arguable circumstantial case concerning the
misrepresentations to Mrs Patterson and Ms Ansell.
[74] Mr Atkins had seen
the transfer and the accompanying letter on 9 May, as his post-it note and date
stamp on the accompanying
letter revealed. His defence to the deceit charges
was, in short, that he had not read the letter nor noticed that the transfer
concerned Mrs Patterson’s sale, consistently with habitual practice. For a
solicitor of ordinary competence and care at any
rate, that does not sound
likely. Moreover, once Mr Atkins discovered that he had deceived his client and
Ms Ansell, he did not
tell either the truth. Instead, leaving them in ignorance
of facts that meant that Ms Patterson had no right to rescind, he lodged
transfer to himself for registration. And there were other peculiarities with
potential to implicate Mr Atkins in deceit.
[75] All considered, the problems with the reliability of Ms Ansell, Ms
Parkyn and Ms Hines were not such as to suggest that there
was no reasonable
likelihood of establishing charges 1, 3 or 5.
[76] Delay in bringing
the Application to a hearing is also relied on as a “special
circumstance” warranting a costs order,
alone or, as Mr Ganim put it, in
conjunction with other circumstances.
[77] The delay is very considerable.
Mr Steep made his complaint more than five years before the Application was
heard. Almost two
years elapsed between when it was filed and the hearing
[78] There is no explanation for the delay. However, there is no
suggestion that the delay prejudiced Mr Atkins in his defence of
the charges.
Nor was a case advanced that the delay increased his costs.
[79] In the
absence of a demonstrated connection between the delay and the trouble or
expense of defending the Application, the delay
does not afford an adequate
foundation for a conclusion that there are “special
circumstances...”.
Special Circumstances...
[80] The mere fact that
a Discipline Application fails, or that a particular factual allegation is not
sustained, cannot establish
“special circumstances...”. After all,
the general rule is that a practitioner found not guilty is not entitled to
[81] But if a charge has no substantial prospect of success, and that
ought reasonably to have been appreciated by the Commissioner,
“special circumstances” do arise. Similarly, a practitioner ought
not be vexed with the trouble and expense of
defending an allegation of
important fact that the Commissioner, as he ought to have realised if properly
advised, had no real prospect
of establishing.
[82] When the Application
was filed, the Commissioner already had information showing that there was no
substantial chance of proving
to the requisite standard that cleared funds were
available on the date for completion. Moreover, the investigation for which Mr
Atkins had been pressing for many months before the Application was brought,
would - presumably at little expense to the Commission
- have demonstrated that
the cleared funds contention was baseless.
Absence of Reasonable Likelihood
[83] In the result, the deceit charges 1, 3 and 5 had a
sufficiently substantial prospect of success to have justified their prosecution
before the Tribunal. But the cleared funds issue should never have featured in
the Application; charge 4 should not have been brought;
the withdrawn charge
should have been abandoned about three months before it was; and charge 2 should
not have been prosecuted beyond
the stage where agreed facts inevitably meant
that there was no longer a substantial prospect of an adverse finding against Mr
[84] The circumstances are sufficiently special as to warrant
an order for costs.
[85] Where an order for costs is for an
unstated amount, as in the circumstances presented here it must be, the order
must “state
the basis on which the amount must be
[86] There is more than
one way to fix such a basis.
[87] It might be by reference to
But hearing time spent bears no
obvious relationship with any particular factual question, which is no doubt
also true of work done
in preparing for the contest. So it could not be right,
for example, to give Mr Atkins half his costs just because three of the
charges either were not, or should not have been, prosecuted to a hearing.
There is another complication. One issue of primary
fact – whether the
funds were cleared – has, it seems, impacted heavily on the expense of
defending the charges. Does
this mean that the costs should be allowed in
respect of the cleared funds issue; and on charges 2, 4 and the withdrawn charge
the dates when they should have been abandoned?
[88] Perhaps; but an
assessment by reference to issues may well be inconvenient, difficult and
productive of further disputation.
If a more robust approach were attractive to
the parties, subject to what they may say, substantial justice might be achieved
the Commissioner to pay one-third of the costs Mr Atkins incurred in
defending the Application.
Basis of assessment
[89] The “special
circumstances” that warrant the costs order involve the notion that, at
various times before the hearing,
the Commissioner, appropriately advised,
should have recognised that there was no reasonable likelihood of success on the
charges or the cleared funds allegation. On this basis, there is a
proper foundation for the costs to be assessed on an indemnity
Disposition
[90] The Tribunal
will entertain submissions on the forms of order.
The only funds to which Ms Ansell had recourse to pay the price was the money
transferred from Mr Steep’s credit union on
the day for completion.
See Reasons of the Tribunal disposing of the Discipline Application, para
A reference to
the report generated on 15 May 2003.
Because otherwise Ms Moriarty would not have been pressing for settlement on 14
May, Ms Ansell surmised.
Mr Atkins and his lawyers could not have further investigated the matter
without knowing which bank maintained the account: a fact
not disclosed until a
few days before the hearing.
Legal Services Commissioner v Hansen (No. 2)
[2008] LPT 10, [19].
See Reasons [54] – [61].
Legal Profession Act
s 462(5)(b).
Thiess v. TCN Channel Nine Pty Limited (No. 5)
[1994] 1 QdR 156
UCPR r 684(1).
Di Carlo v Dubois
[2002] QCA 225
, [36]-[40];
Tabone; Blue Coast Yeppoon Pty Ltd v Tabone
[2007] QCA 337
, [44]-[46];
Chaina v Alvaro Homes Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 353
, [106]-[113]. It was not
argued that indemnity costs should not be ordered if a charge or the cleared
funds contention had no reasonable
likelihood of success.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter