URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2025/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Body Corporate for 62 Pacific Community Titles Scheme 45586 & Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor; Sexton v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor [2025] QPEC 13 (9 June 2025)
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT
OF QUEENSLAND
The Body Corporate for 62 Pacific Community Titles Scheme 45586 &
Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor; Sexton
v Council of the
City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2025] QPEC 13
THE BODY CORPORATE FOR 62 PACIFIC COMMUNITY TITLES SCHEME 45586 AND
MICHAEL JOHN SPARKSMAN
(Appellants)
COUNCIL OF THE
CITY OF GOLD COAST
(Respondent)
LGDC MCINNESVILLE PTY LTD (ACN 657 430 923)
(Co-respondent)
MICHAEL EDWARD SEXTON
(Appellant)
OF THE CITY OF GOLD COAST
(Respondent)
LGDC MCINNESVILLE PTY LTD (ACN 657 430 923)
(Co-respondent)
Planning and Environment
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning and Environment Court, Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
9 June 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
14 May 2025, 19 to 23 May 2025 and 28 May 2025
Kefford DCJ
(a) the appeal is allowed;
(b) the decision of the Respondent to approve the Co-respondent’s
development application is set aside; and
(b) the Co-respondent’s development application is refused.
CATCHWORDS:
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT – APPEAL – where the Co-respondent
seeks approval of a development permit for a material change
of use for a
multiple dwelling – where the Respondent approved the development
application subject to conditions – where
the Appellants commenced two
appeals against the Council’s decision which were heard together –
where the appeal focuses
on a building height uplift provision – whether
the proposed development complies with s 3.3.2.1(9) of City Plan –
the proposed development meets the necessary outcomes to allow for the
departure from the quantitative building height standard –
whether the
proposed development reinforces local identity and sense of place –
whether the proposed development achieves a
well managed interface –
whether the proposed development contributes to a varied, ordered and
interesting skyline –
whether the proposed development achieves an
excellent standard of appearance of the built form and street edge –
whether the
outcome of housing choice and affordability is satisfied –
whether the Appellants’ additional reasons for refusal are
material to the
outcome – whether there are relevant matters that support approval –
whether the proposed development
should be approved in the exercise of the
LEGISLATION:
Planning Act 2016
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
Planning Regulation 2017
Abeleda & Anor v Brisbane City Council & Anor
[2021] QPELR 1003
Archer & Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Ors
[2022] QPEC 59
; [2024] QPELR 387, approved
Ashvan Investments Unit Trust v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[2019] QPEC 16
[2019] QPELR 793
Bell Co Pty Ltd & Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2022] QPEC 32
[2023] QPELR 1160
Brisbane City Council v YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
Chiodo Corporation Operations Pty Ltd v Douglas Shire Council
Council of the City of Gold Coast v DVB Projects
[2023] QCA 213
Grosser & Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast
(2001) 117 LGERA 153
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
Murphy v Moreton Bay Regional Council & Anor; Australian National
[2019] QPEC 46
[2020] QPELR 328
Tricare (Bayview) Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2023] QPELR 1073
Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council & Ors;
Dexus Funds Management Limited v Fabcot Pty Ltd & Ors
[2021] QCA 95
[2022] QPELR 309
Wilhelm v Logan City Council & Ors
[2020] QCA 273
[2021] QPELR
E Morzone KC and D Whitehouse for the Appellants
S Hedge for the
C Hughes KC and J Bowness for the Co-respondent
SOLICITORS:
TelcoTech Legal for the Appellants
HopgoodGanim Lawyers for the
Hickey Lawyers for the Co-respondent
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
the southern end of the Gold Coast, adjacent the coast and extending from Tugun
Beach in the north to Kirra Beach in the south,
there is a relatively narrow
band of land containing urban development. Within this coastal strip, at the
south-eastern corner of
Pacific Parade and Archer Street, Bilinga, is a
prominent site that is ripe for redevelopment. It is located at 66 Pacific
and 2A Archer Street, Bilinga (“
the subject land
Presently, it is improved by two older buildings of no notable architectural
merit and that are of a height, bulk, scale
and density that is far less than
that encouraged by Gold Coast City Plan 2016 (“
Co-respondent, LGDC McInnesville Pty Ltd, seeks to re-develop the subject land
for a 10-storey residential apartment building
the proposed
development
”). To that end, it made a development application to the
Respondent, the Council of the City of Gold Coast (“
”), seeking a development permit for a material change of use
for a multiple dwelling (“
the development application
development application was impact assessable and required public notification.
The public notification attracted many properly
made submissions, including
submissions by each of The Body Corporate for 62 Pacific Community Titles Scheme
45586, Michael John
Sparksman and Michael Edward Sexton, the Appellants. The
Appellants have residences near the subject land.
[4] The Council
approved the development application subject to conditions.
Appellants commenced these two appeals against the Council’s decision.
The appeals raise the same key issues for consideration
and were heard together.
The issues focus on a building height uplift provision found in the specific
outcome in s 3.3.2.1(9) of
[6] The building
height uplift provision permits flexibility to depart from the quantitative
building height standard in City Plan
provided that eight outcomes are achieved.
The Appellants contend that the proposed development does not meet five of them.
The Appellants’
case calls for consideration of issues related to the
local identity and sense of place, interface management, the skyline, the
of appearance of the built form and street edge, and housing choice and
affordability.
McInnesville Pty Ltd and the Council join issue with the reasons for refusal
advanced by the Appellants.
McInnesville Pty Ltd bears the onus of establishing that the proposed material
change of use should be approved:
Planning and Environment
Court Act 2016
What is the
character of the subject land and the locality in which it sits?
subject land is comprised of Lot 1 on RP118329 and Lots 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 on
BUP688. It is rectangular in shape. It has frontages
of approximately 20 and
50 metres to Pacific Parade and Archer Street respectively, and an area of
1,009 square metres.
topography of the subject land is generally level, with a gentle fall from its
north-east corner adjacent Pacific Parade
to its south-west corner. The surface
of the land is below RL 5.0 metres Australian Height Datum.
[11] Currently,
the subject land is improved by a two- to three-storey multiple dwelling at 66
Pacific Parade and a two-storey multiple
dwelling on the Archer Street frontage.
Neither building exhibits any notable architectural merit. The subject land has
areas of hardstand and a dearth of landscaping. Each building is
presently accessed via crossovers on Archer Street.
[12] As the
subject land is a corner lot, it immediately adjoins neighbouring residential
uses on only two of its boundaries. Adjoining
the subject land, at 64 Pacific
Parade, is an older style highset fibre cement sheet and weatherboard dwelling
house that is elevated
on a brick-enclosed ground storey. On the Archer Street
frontage, the subject land adjoins a five-storey multiple dwelling located
Archer Street.
[13] Across
Pacific Parade are Joe Doniger Park and North Kirra Beach. There is a
two-storey dwelling house on the opposite corner
of Pacific Parade and Archer
Street, beside which sits a one-storey dwelling house fronting Archer
subject land is in Bilinga. It forms that part of the coastal strip that lies
at the southern end of the Gold Coast between
Tugun to the north-west and
Coolangatta to the south-east. The subject land, and the nearby area, is mapped
as part of:
” on Strategic framework Map 1 –
Urban areas;
Urban neighbourhoods
” on Strategic framework Map 2
– settlement patterns;
Coastal tourism/urban strip
Investigation for future light rail
” on Strategic framework
Map 5 – focus areas for economic activity;
(d) an area served by “
High frequency public transport
Coastal pedestrian and cycle
Specialist centre – Airport
Strategic framework map 6 – integrated transport; and
Consolidation area
” on Strategic framework map 9
– consolidation and expansion areas.
[15] The narrow,
elongated band of urban development surrounding the subject land is comprised of
seven predominantly residential
blocks, which are:
(a) mapped as part of the Medium density residential zone in City Plan, apart
from a small area at the corner of Lang Street and
Golden Four Drive that is in
the Neighbourhood centre zone; and
(b) designated on City Plan’s Building height overlay map as
23 metres, but which may reasonably be anticipated to be developed
buildings up to 34.5 metres in height if there is compliance with
s 3.3.2.1(9) of City Plan; and
(c) designated on City Plan’s Residential density overlay map as
RD6 – up to 300 bedrooms per net hectare (1
[16] This band
of urban development is wedged between Pacific Parade to the east, Golden Four
Drive to the west and Musgrave Street
to the south-east.
[17] Pacific
Parade is a wide esplanade road that runs parallel to the open space of the
North Kirra Beach foreshore, including Joe
Doniger Park, and the ocean. The
eastern side of Pacific Parade contains no residential development. It is lined
by a row of mature
Norfolk pines in a wide, grassed esplanade with a walking and
cycle path adjoining coastal dunes and a wide, sandy beach.
[18] To the
west, Golden Four Drive runs parallel to the Gold Coast Highway, beyond which
lies the Gold Coast airport. Golden Four
Drive functions as a service road,
providing bus stops and extensive on-street parking.
[19] Musgrave
Street is a wide road that is divided by a median street. It crosses from
Coolangatta Road and curves around the southern
end of the area that has a
designated height of 23 metres. South of Musgrave Street is designated on
City Plan’s building
height overlay map as 29 metres. That area to
the south has a different character, with residential buildings of greater
bulk and scale.
[20] The area
designated on City Plan’s building height overlay map as 23 metres
terminates in the north at Mills Street. Between
Mills Street and Musgrave
Street are six short cross streets that connect Golden Four Drive and Pacific
Parade. They are George,
Graham, Cahill, Johnstone, Archer and Lang Streets.
The cross streets provide important perpendicular entry points to the parkland
and foreshore.
[21] Pacific
Parade, Golden Four Drive and Musgrave Street provide a clear and logical
demarcation of the eastern, western and southern
boundaries of the local area in
which the subject land sits.
[22] There is
not a single, readily appreciable feature that provides such a demarcation for
the northern boundary of the local area.
[23] To the
extent that the height demarcation shown on City Plan’s maps is not
readily perceivable from the existing built
form near Mills Street, it can
reasonably be assumed that the change in character will be perceptible in the
future as the area south
of Mills Street is redeveloped.
[24] North of
Graham Street, the band of urban development narrows from 100 metres to
60 metres. As such, the lots within the two
residential blocks between
Graham Street and Mills Street having a more compressed depth than those located
further south. This
influences the form of development on those lots and their
contribution to the character of the area.
[25] There is a
bend in Pacific Parade at Cahill Street. As it is only slight, the proposed
development will be visible from north
of Cahill Street. Its visibility
diminishes as one approaches Graham Street because of the intervening street
[26] Regardless
of whether one considers the northern extent of the local area to be defined by
Mills Street, Graham Street, or Cahill
Street, the overall impression of the
existing character of the local area is the same. It is informed by the
aggregation of the
individual features and traits of the existing development,
the infrastructure and the natural environment context in which that
variance in height of the existing built form significantly contributes to the
sense of place and local identity.
[28] The local
area contains a mix of residential building types and styles. There are
modest-scale dwelling houses and two and three-storey
apartment buildings with
an older appearance interspersed among more contemporary large dwelling houses
and multi-storey buildings.
The taller, contemporary buildings range between
seven and 11 storeys in height.
contribution that built form makes to the sense of place and local identity is
not homogenous. Parts of the local area have
less variation in the building
height, such as in the area between Cahill and Graham Streets. In that part of
the local area, building
heights are predominantly low.
[30] In the
immediate locality to be examined in this case, the sense of place and local
identity is influenced by buildings on Pacific
Parade and Golden Four Drive that
have a range of heights, including some that are greater than 23 metres.
[31] Although
there are differences in the amenity experience of Golden Four Drive and Pacific
Parade, the taller built form along
Golden Four Drive contributes to the
character of the immediate locality. From viewing locations in Pacific Parade,
Joe Doniger
Park, the foreshore and the beach, the development on Golden Four
Drive provides a backdrop to that located in Pacific Parade.
distant locations, such as the beach, the building form on Golden Four Drive and
Pacific Parade merge into a single layer
and one cannot readily identify their
precise location. In addition, from more distant viewpoints, the buildings in
Golden Four
Drive appear similar in height to buildings of lesser height on
Pacific Parade. That is because of the angle of view from such locations.
said, as one moves closer to the buildings in question, the parallax diminishes
and the building forms and relative heights
are more evident.
[33] Although
the height of built form is a defining characteristic of the sense of place and
identity of this local area, it is not
the only relevant contributor. The
architectural design of the built form in the locality makes an important
contribution to its
[34] Given the
mix of building types, styles and ages in this local area, the built form can
generally be described as having a mixed
character. Closer consideration
reveals that, despite this mix, there are three evident unifying features in
their design.
[35] First, the
built form in this locality is generally characterised by a design that seeks to
take advantage of the views and breezes
afforded by their coastal location.
There is a predominance of buildings with balconies oriented towards Joe Doniger
Park and the
beach. As is evident on the many photographs before me, this
design feature is not only prevalent in those buildings that front
Parade. It is also a feature of those buildings that take their access from
Golden Four Drive, and those that take their
access from the short cross streets
between Pacific Parade and Golden Four Drive: see, for example, the photographs
at Exhibit 4
pp 31, 40, 43, and 55 and Exhibit 7, pp 6 and 7.
[36] Second, the
contemporary multi-storey developments in the locality incorporate deep
recesses, steps, angles and other forms of
modulation in their street-fronting
facades: see, for example, the photographs at Exhibit 6 pp 12-7 and Exhibit 9
[37] Third, the
taller buildings in the local area incorporate visually recessed or contracted
upper floor levels: see, for example,
the photographs at Exhibit 6
[38] Overall,
the existing character of the local area is that of a coastal, predominantly
residential area that is in transition
to a greater intensity of built form. It
contains buildings of varying height, which adopt a design that is generally
characterised
(a) prominent balconies oriented towards the coast;
(b) pronounced modulation in the street-fronting facades in the form of deep
recesses or stepping or both; and
(c) visually recessed or contracted upper floor levels on taller buildings.
[39] As I have
already mentioned, the local area is in the Medium density residential zone and
is designated on the Building height
overlap map as having a height of
[40] The extent
to which taller buildings, including those greater than 23 metres in
height, inform the character of the local area
can reasonably be expected to
change as City Plan’s intentions for the area are realised.
[41] Presently,
there are many seven-storey buildings in the local area. Between Cahill Street
and Musgrave Road there is also six
buildings with a height greater than
23 metres. A further five sites have effective development approvals that
authorise multi-storey
residential buildings more than 23 metres tall. In
addition, there are several approvals for buildings of around seven storeys and
23 metres in height.
[42] I attribute
no meaningful weight to the approval to develop land at 90-92 Pacific Parade for
a 10-storey tall residential building.
Its potential contribution to the
character of the local area is far less certain given it is currently the
subject of an appeal
to this Court.
the existing built form, the approved development is characterised by a design
that includes:
(a) balconies oriented towards the coast;
(b) pronounced modulation in the street-fronting facades in the form of deep
recesses or stepping or both; and
(c) visually recessed or contracted upper floor levels on taller buildings.
What does the proposed development
proposed development involves a new use of the subject land for a multi-storey
building containing 27 units. There are nine
units with two bedrooms, 17
units with three bedrooms and one penthouse unit with three bedrooms.
[45] The units
will be served by 52 carparks located in two basement levels, which will be
accessed via a double vehicle crossover
from Archer Street at the western end of
the subject land. The driveway ramp to the basement is along the south-eastern
[46] There is
visitor parking and communal open space of about 140 square metres located
at the ground level. Communal pedestrian
access is proposed from both Pacific
Parade and Archer Street. The ground floor apartment also has a private access
from Pacific
[47] The ground
floor contains an entrance and provides approximately 140 square metres of
communal open space in the form of a small
courtyard area with a modest
proposed development has three apartments per level. There are two long narrow
apartments with the short side oriented to
the beach and ocean and a third
apartment across the full width of the building at the south-western end
(adjacent 4 Archer Street).
[49] The living
rooms of the narrow apartments are oriented towards the street and coastal
views, with balcony spaces of about 18
square metres that can accommodate a
small dining setting. The balcony for the smaller apartment in the western part
of the building
is 13 square metres. It angles out from the building to
enable better views towards the
north-east.
design features of the proposed development inform its built form
appearance?
proposed development is ten storeys and approximately 31.8 metres in
height. To the extent that aspects of final design
are not resolved, such as
the air conditioning plant on the roof, LGDC McInnesville Pty Ltd says that the
conditions of any approval
can ensure that the height does not exceed
32 metres. I agree.
proposed development is a long, narrow building. It is approximately
40 metres long and 15 metres wide. One of the narrow
of the building faces towards Pacific Parade, the esplanade, foreshore and
beach. The other addresses the adjoining
development at 4 Archer Street. The
longer facades address Archer Street and the adjoining development at 64 Pacific
[52] According
to the dimensions on the plans, the building is set back
approximately:
(a) four metres, measured to the balcony edge, from the boundary with
Pacific Parade;
(b) 3.5 metres from the boundary with Archer Street;
(c) 3.5 metres from the boundary with 64 Pacific Parade; and
(d) four metres from the boundary with 4 Archer Street.
[53] The main
bulk of the building is comprised of eight uniform floor plates sitting above a
recessed ground floor and capped by
a tenth floor with a slightly reduced floor
eight floors that comprise the tower have a site coverage of 53 per cent
(approximately 534 square metres). The site coverage
of the top floor is
slightly less at 49 per cent (approximately 494 square metres).
proposed development adopts a contemporary design that utilises a combination
(a) a textured concrete finish that is painted with a soft palette of neutral
colours, with subtle differences between the colours;
(b) clear and opaque glazing, with opaque glazing limited to those areas where
its use is required to address potential privacy and
overlooking impacts;
(c) clear balustrading to balconies, other than on level 1 where a solid
balustrade is provided to address privacy;
(d) on the long facades facing Archer Street and 64 Pacific Parade, bronze-look
batten screening devices with expanding aperture
angled towards the beach;
(e) bronze look aluminium and stone tile fencing; and
(f) crazy pavement.
is identified in the architectural plans, the building adopts a broadly
rectilinear form with minimal shaping to achieve a
bold architectural form. The
shaping is limited to:
(a) a subtle curve to each of the corners of the building;
(b) a concave recessive form to the full width cantilevered balconies on the
Pacific Parade elevation;
(c) a slight angle to the façade presenting to 4 Archer Street;
(d) two small, curved recesses in the longer facades, one of which accommodates
a landscape planter box at each level to create the
appearance of a green spine;
(e) a very slight recessing for the half of the floorplate on the top floor that
is closest to Pacific Parade;
(f) a roofline that is slightly setback from the line of the balconies fronting
Pacific Parade.
minimal shaping contributes to the proposed development having not only a bold
architectural form but also a solid and bulky
appearance. The appearance of
bulk is mitigated, to a small degree, by the design of the balconies, which
create a feathered profile
on the corners of the building and the Pacific Parade
building’s solid appearance is reinforced by the wall treatments
on three of the facades, being those other than the
Pacific Parade façade. For three facades, the proposed development
a largely flat façade treatment comprised of full height glazing
panels adjoining painted textured concrete panels. The glazing
and concrete
panels are interspersed and arranged vertically and horizontally in a single
plane. This provides little relief to
the visual bulk, particularly as they do
not render any shadows. Although three colours are used on the concrete panels,
very similar and do little to reduce the appearance of bulk. The two
long façades have some vertical sun screening, but it
is limited in its
each façade, the floor line extrudes from the face of the building by
to create any material
perception of recess, shadowing or modulation. It does not offset the
impression that each of the facades,
other than the Pacific Parade
façade, involves an elongated built form arranged on a single plane.
recessing of the top floor is minimal. In addition, the colour treatment of the
textured concrete panels on the top floor
is only subtly different to the
colours on the balance of the building. The differences in setback and colours
are so slight that
they are not readily perceived at first glance: the design
does not present as incorporating any material physical or visual recessing
the top floor.
[61] Overall,
the interspersing of glazing with concrete panels, coupled with the colour
variations, recesses and bronze-look batten
screening, enhance the appearance of
verticality. Further, when coupled with the balconies, those design features
assist to erode
the appearance of bulk, but the extent to which they do so is
minimal and generally ineffective. Collectively, these design elements
insufficient to create an impression of modulation or recessing of the built
What are the landscape design
features of the proposed development?
landscape design for the Pacific Parade frontage incorporates a private
courtyard entry to the ground floor unit and an access
to the ground floor
communal open space. The entry location for each is identified by an awning.
proposed development uses vertical, bronze-look aluminium blades interspersed
with solid columns to create a fence along
Pacific Parade. The fence blades are
closely spaced adjacent the courtyard for the ground floor unit to ensure
communal space, particularly proximate the pool, there is
greater spacing to provide clear views of the contiguous lush screen planting.
Landscaping is proposed in recesses, on columns and spilling through the fence.
[64] Near the
street corner, the proposed development incorporates a pool and lush screen
planting, including feature palms. The
line of the open-style fence is within
the subject land, weaving amongst the landscaping.
open-style fence continues around the corner of the subject land into Archer
Street and weaves amongst lush landscaping on
that street edge. It ends at a
point that is approximately one-third of the way along the Archer Street
façade. At that
point, as one travels towards the centralised pedestrian
entry, there is a section of solid fence that is treated with stone tile.
pedestrian entry is covered by an awning with a landscaped roof.
[66] The balance
of the Archer Street frontage, which accounts for about 40 per cent of its
length, incorporates infrastructure such
as the driveway, fire booster cabinets
and the transformer. This type of infrastructure is essential for multi-storey
development
and is generally required to be located on the street edge. The
proposed development incorporates this essential infrastructure
at a logical
location and pays careful attention to its visual treatment. Planter boxes
containing trailing plants are proposed
on top of the fire booster cabinet and
vertical bronze-look battens are to be fixed to its face.
building will be marginally cantilevered over the driveway. Beyond this, along
the boundary with 64 Pacific Parade, a one-metre-high
trellis flanked by planter
boxes containing climbing plants will be visible. Those parts of the driveway
and visitor parking bays
that stand clear of the building will be covered by a
vegetated arbour extending to the boundary with 4 Archer Street.
[68] Overall,
my review of the landscape plans and the architectural elevations and sections
reveals that, at the ground floor, the
proposed development has an animated
interface that adopts a visual pleasing combination of materials, finishes and
lush screen
is the applicable framework for the decision?
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
, subject to
and (5), the appeal proceeds by way of hearing anew. The Court
has a broad discretion in determining the appeal. It is to be exercised
judicially and subject to the limitations in the relevant statutes. The
statutory framework in the
Planning and
Environment Court Act 2016
Planning Act 2016
(Qld) provides
relevant guidance in that respect.
[70] The Court
must assess the development application under
as if it were the assessment manager:
Planning and Environment
Court Act 2016
The Court’s decision is governed by
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
and informed by
Planning Act 2016
Sections 45(5)(a)(i)
and (7) of the
Planning Act 2016
mandate assessment against the
assessment benchmarks in a
categorising instrument
that was in effect when the development application was properly made. Version
8 of Gold Coast City Plan
”) is such a
categorising instrument:
Planning Act 2016
. The correct
approach to the construction of planning schemes was recently confirmed in
Chiodo Corporation Operations Pty Ltd v Douglas Shire Council
[72] Weight can
be given to amendments to City Plan:
Planning and
Environment Court Act 2016
Planning Act 2016
The parties agree that there are no relevant amendments to be considered in this
[73] Pursuant to
Planning Act 2016
ss 31(1)(f)
and (g) and
Planning Regulation 2017
(Qld), the assessment must also be
carried out having regard to, amongst other things and to the extent that they
are relevant:
(a) any development approval for, and any lawful use of, the premises; and
(b) the common material for the development application.
assessment and decision-making process is to be approached consistent with the
Court of Appeal decisions of
Brisbane City Council v YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
[2021] QPELR 987
Abeleda & Anor v Brisbane City Council
[2020] QCA 257
[2021] QPELR 1003
Wilhelm v Logan City
Council & Ors
[2020] QCA 273
[2021] QPELR 1321
Trinity Park
Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council & Ors; Dexus Funds Management
Limited v Fabcot Pty Ltd & Ors
[2021] QCA 95
[2022] QPELR 309.
[75] Collectively,
those cases confirm the approach articulated in
Ashvan Investments Unit Trust
v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[2019] QPEC 16
[2019] QPELR 793
. That approach is also consistent with that described in
Moreton Bay Regional Council & Anor; Australian National Homes Pty Ltd v
Moreton Bay Regional Council & Anor
[2019] QPEC 46
[2020] QPELR 328
is explained in those authorities:
(a) the ultimate decision called for when making an impact assessment is a
broad, evaluative judgment that admits of flexibility
to approve an application
in the face of non-compliance with a planning scheme;
(b) the exercise of the discretion under
Planning Act
is subject to three requirements, including that it be based upon the
assessment carried out under
Planning Act 2016
Planning Act 2016
does not alter the characterisation of a
planning scheme as a document that reflects the public interest.
determining issues of compliance with assessment benchmarks, the Court is
entitled to make its own assessment of all the evidence.
It is not obliged to
act on the opinions proffered by the experts:
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705.
The Court should make its
own assessment and form its own conclusions based on the available evidence. In
some instances, the determination
of the issues may call for value-laden
judgments about which reasonable minds may differ. One example is where the
issue relates
to visual amenity and character impacts. In those instances,
findings may be based on the Court’s own assessment of evidence
photos, plans, elevations, sections, landscape design plans, visual
representations, and photomontages:
Council of the City of Gold Coast v DVB
[2023] QCA 213.
[78] With that
framework in mind, I now turn to identify the issues in
are the issues in dispute?
issues in dispute have evolved over the course of preparation for hearing,
including by reason of minor changes made to the
development application. After
each party closed its case, the Appellants further confined their allegations.
I commend Mr Morzone
KC and Ms Whitehouse for their sound
forensic judgment in that regard.
remaining issues raised by the Appellants in support of their case for refusal
involve allegations of non-compliance with
the assessment benchmarks
(a) the strategic outcome in
and the specific outcomes in
ss 3.3.2.1(5), 3.3.2.1(8), 3.3.2.1(9)(a) to (e), and 3.8.3.1(1) of the
Strategic framework;
(b) the overall outcomes in ss 6.2.2.2(2)(b)(iv), (vi) and (vii) and
(d)(i), (iii), (iv) and (v) and performance outcomes PO1(a)
and (c), PO2(b), (c)
and (d), PO3, and PO5 of the Medium density residential zone code;
(c) the overall outcomes in ss 9.3.14.2(2)(a), (c) and (f) and performance
outcomes PO3(a) and (c), PO4(b), (c) and (e), PO5, PO10(d),
(e), (g) and (h),
and PO16 of the Multiple accommodation code; and
(d) the overall outcomes in s 9.4.4.2(2)(a) and performance outcomes PO2(e)
and PO4 of the General development provisions code.
[81] That said,
if LGDC McInnesville Pty Ltd demonstrates compliance with ss 3.3.2.1(9)(a)
to (e) of City Plan, the Appellants concede
that the other alleged
non-compliances are not determinative.
McInnesville Pty Ltd and the Council concede non-compliance with the overall
outcome in s 6.2.2.2(2)(d)(i) and performance
outcomes PO3 and PO5 of the
Medium density residential zone code. LGDC McInnesville Pty Ltd and the Council
otherwise join issue
with the allegations of non-compliance. LGDC McInnesville
Pty Ltd contends that, to the extent that the proposed development does
fully comply with s 3.3.2.1(9) of the Strategic framework, any such
non-compliance would not warrant refusal. It says this is
because the
non-compliance would be minor and technical and able to be ameliorated by the
imposition of lawful development conditions.
[83] Each party
also raises relevant matters in support of their respective positions.
[84] Although
the question of compliance with many assessment benchmarks is put in issue, all
parties agree that an assessment of
the proposed development against each of
them is unnecessary. According to the parties, the outcome of the appeal will
findings with respect to compliance with the outcomes in
ss 3.3.2.1(9)(a) to (e) of City Plan. I agree. I commend the parties for
their responsible
do the relevant assessment benchmarks with respect to height
Plan contains assessment benchmarks against which development in the Gold Coast
local government area is to be assessed.
[86] City Plan
uses 23 zones to organise the local government area in a way that facilitates
the location of the preferred or acceptable
land uses. The subject land is
included in the Medium density residential zone. Relevant assessment benchmarks
are included in
the Medium density residential zone code, the purpose of which
“... to provide for a range
and mix of dwelling types including Dwelling houses and Multiple dwellings
supported by Community
uses and small-scale services and facilities that cater
for local residents.”
purpose is to be achieved through the overall outcomes, which include,
relevantly:
“(d) Built form (excluding Dwelling houses on
small lots) –
(i) has a building height that does not exceed that indicated on the
height overlay map
[88] Performance
outcome PO3 of the Medium density residential zone code is one of the
performance outcomes that achieve the overall
outcomes. It, relevantly,
Building height and structure height does not exceed that shown on the
Building height overlay map
Building height overlay map includes the subject land within an area designated
for a height of 23 metres.
[90] The height
of the proposed development is 31.8 metres. As such, the proposed
development does not comply with the overall outcome
in s 6.2.2.2(2)(d)(i)
and performance outcome PO3 of the Medium density residential zone code.
[91] Before
considering the significance of those non-compliances, it is necessary to assess
the proposed development against the
specific outcome in s 3.3.2.1(9) of
the Strategic framework.
“(9) Increases in building
height up to a maximum of 50% above the
Building height overlay map
occur in limited circumstances in urban neighbourhoods where all the following
outcomes are satisfied:
(a) a reinforced local identity and sense of place;
(b) a well managed interface with, relationship to and impact on nearby
development, including the reasonable amenity expectations
of nearby residents;
(c) a varied, ordered and interesting local skyline;
(d) an excellent standard of appearance of the built form and street edge;
(e) housing choice and affordability;
(f) protection for important elements of local character or scenic amenity,
including views from popular public outlooks to the city’s
significant
natural features;
(g) deliberate and distinct built form contrast in locations where building
heights change abruptly on the
Building height overlay map
(h) the safe, secure and efficient functioning of the Gold Coast Airport or
other aeronautical facilities.
Note: Where the Building height overlay map shows both storeys and metres,
the lesser of the two shall apply, and any fraction which
results from the
calculations shall be rounded down to the nearest floor or partial
provision, and other assessment benchmarks in City Plan about building height,
have been addressed by this Court on numerous
occasions. This Court has
considered the context of the assessment benchmarks and the degree of importance
that City Plan attaches
to them. I adopt the analysis in
Tricare (Bayview)
Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2022] QPEC 31
[2023] QPELR
at 1096—1101 [86]—[116];
Bell Co Pty Ltd & Ors v Council
of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2022] QPEC 32
[2023] QPELR 1160
1167—8 [31]—[36] and 1169—73 [45]—[62];
Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Ors
[2022] QPEC 59
QPELR 387 at 446—9 [285]—[295], 450—2 [299]—[302] and
[305]—[309], 469—74 [392]—[414].
None of the parties
challenge the relevant analysis of City Plan in those cases.
[93] In this
case, the Appellants submit that there is non-compliance with five of the eight
outcomes, namely the outcomes in ss 3.3.2.1(9)(a),
(b), (c), (d) and (e).
With respect to s 3.3.2.1(9)(e), the Appellants have abandoned reliance on
affordability and now only put
housing choice in
evidence was adduced by the parties about the remaining disputed issues?
[94] Although
the ultimate issues in dispute are confined in nature, I had a copious amount of
evidence to assist me with their determination.
evidence includes, amongst other things:
(a) the plans that form part of the changed
development application, including:
(i) an aerial photograph annotated with key features in the locality;
(ii) a height analysis, which identifies the location of multi-storey
developments of five or more storeys that are built, under
construction,
approved, subject to appeal and not yet effective, or the subject of a
development application only;
(iii) a representation of the developments that are built, under construction
and approved in the form of a contextual coastal elevation;
(iv) a site analysis that identifies prevailing winds and onshore breezes;
(v) an analysis of development density;
(vi) images depicting the design inspiration and proposed materials;
(vii) a description of the considerations that inform the development of the
design, such as the shaping of the building to create
a bold architectural
(viii) dimensioned plans for each level that detail information such as the
layout of the units; the location of walls, glazing,
sliding doors, and balcony
areas; and setbacks;
(ix) elevations for each façade that record the materials used in each
façade’s composition;
(x) sections through the building;
(xi) details about the design of each boundary interface;
(xii) a height diagram depicting the extent of the building that is over
23 metres in height; and
(xiii) a shadow study;
(b) the landscape plans that form part of the changed development application,
which record:
(i) relevant aspects of site context;
(ii) the design vision;
(iii) details of the landscape design for the ground floor, level 1 and typical
apartment levels and level 9;
(iv) details of the planting character to be adopted at the ground floor;
(v) the proposed landscape for sections through the subject land;
(vi) details of planting profile depth and the planting palette;
(c) several Certificates of the Chief Executive
Officer of the Council provided under
Local Government Act
(Qld), which attach development approvals for 21 multi-storey buildings
in the local area. The development approvals include detailed
layout plans,
elevations, sections and some visual representations of those developments;
(d) many photographs of existing development and
views in the surrounding locality; and
(e) expert opinion evidence, including photomontages, from Mr Zac Petersen,
who is a landscape designer and arborist with specialist
expertise in
architectural visualisations.
[96] At the
commencement of the hearing, the parties arranged a site inspection of the local
area. My observations on the site inspection
do not form part of the evidence.
That said, it enhanced my appreciation of the photographic evidence and my
understanding of those
plans relating to approved and constructed developments.
accuracy of the evidence identified in paragraph
above was not challenged, and I
[98] The parties
also adduced expert opinion evidence from:
(a) Mr Leslie Curtis, Mr Peter Richards and Mr Malcolm Middleton,
the architects retained by LGDC McInnesville Pty Ltd, the Council
Appellants respectively;
(b) Mr Nathan Powell, Dr Nicholas McGowan and Mr Dean Butcher,
the visual amenity and landscape experts retained by LGDC McInnesville
the Council and the Appellants respectively;
(c) Mr David Perkins, Mr Leo Mewing and Mr Shane Adamson, the
town planners retained by LGDC McInnesville Pty Ltd, the Council and
Appellants respectively;
(d) Mr Gavin Duane, an economist retained by LGDC McInnesville Pty Ltd, who
gave evidence about housing affordability and choice;
(e) Dr Jennifer Stubbs, a social planner retained by the Appellants, who
gave evidence about housing policy, land economics and affordable
[99] In this
case, the experts’ reports provided many photographs of the area. The
evidence of the experts also assisted me
to analyse the evidence identified in
Relevantly:
(a) the architects’ evidence helped me understand the architectural design
devices used in the design and their intended impact
on building appearance;
(b) the evidence of the visual amenity and landscape architect experts:
(i) assisted my comprehension of:
relationship between proximity and visual dominance;
aspects that inform prominence;
(C) the impact
of parallax on views; and
(D) available
view angles from adjoining developments; and
(ii) clarified the nature and extent of landscaping that can be supported in the
proposed planter boxes; and
(c) the evidence of the town planners assisted by identifying:
(i) the key aspects of the development approvals that will inform the future
character of the local area;
(ii) key provisions of City Plan that inform the planning intention for the
addition, I have
statements from Ms Catherine
Hanley, Ms Lynne Moore, Mr Michael Sparksman, Mr Tony Whittrod
and Ms Patricia Bolster. They each reside
in the local area. The
statements include photographs of the area and describe its attributes. I also
have the submissions that
form part of the common material, some of which
provide photographs and describe attributes that the authors say inform the
area’s character.
determination of each issue calls for value-laden judgments about which
reasonable minds may differ. My factual findings
in these reasons are not
attributable to the evidence of one or more of the experts. Rather, unless I
state otherwise, my findings
are based on my own assessment of the unchallenged
evidence identified in paragraph
[102] With those
general observations in mind, I now turn to consider the issue of compliance
with s 3.3.2.1(9) of City
there compliance with s 3.3.2.1(9) of City Plan?
summary, for the reasons explained below:
(a) the evidence does not demonstrate full compliance with the outcomes in
ss 3.3.2.1(9)(a), (c) and (d);
(b) the partial non-compliance with the outcomes in ss 3.3.2.1(9)(a), (c)
and (d) manifests in adverse planning impacts, namely visual
amenity and
character impacts;
(c) when considered both in isolation and in combination, the nature and extent
of non-compliance with the outcomes in ss 3.3.2.1(9)(a),
(c) and (d)
attract significant weight in the exercise of the discretion; and
(d) although I am satisfied that there is compliance
with the outcomes in ss 3.3.2.1(9)(b) and (e), the weight to be given to
extent of non-compliance with the specific outcome in s 3.3.2.1(9) of
City Plan is not materially increased or decreased in this
case by reason of the
extent of compliance.
[104] Before
addressing the question of compliance with the outcomes in s 3.3.2.1(9) of
City Plan, there are several general observations
that can be made about the
design of the proposed development that underpin my assessment of it against
consideration of the plans of the proposed development and photomontages,
assisted by the expert evidence, reveals fix positive
attributes to the design.
[106] First,
the proposed development adopts a contemporary design that utilises a
combination of materials.
[107] Second,
the full width cantilevered balconies of a concave recessive form on the Pacific
Parade elevation:
(a) create a feathered profile;
(b) provide modulation through deep recesses;
(c) contributes visual interest to the Pacific Parade façade.
[108] Third, the
design addresses interface issues well in that:
(a) the setback of those levels up to and including the sixth storey (level 5)
is greater than that anticipated in acceptable outcome
AO1 of the Medium density
residential zone code. As such, it provides greater building to building
separation at the levels of primary
visual interface with 4 Archer Street and 64
Pacific Parade;
(b) there are sufficient treatments to the lower-level balconies and
fenestration to avoid inappropriate overlooking and unacceptable
(c) the layout of the apartments avoid inappropriate overlooking and
unacceptable privacy impacts as the living areas and balconies
are oriented away
from the neighbouring properties and towards coastal views;
(d) there is an absence of unacceptable overshadowing impacts;
(e) the building is angled in a way that opens up views from those balconies at
the corner of 4 Archer Street;
(f) the arbour supporting climbing plants over the driveway softens the outlook
from the balconies of 4 Archer Street: see, for example,
Exhibit 6 Figure
(g) the proposed planter boxes along the boundary with 64 Pacific Parade provide
a landscaped interface at and above ground level,
which is capable of supporting
screening plants, including palms up to six or seven metres tall and giant bird
of paradise between
three and six metres tall; and
(h) the landscaping in the planter boxes coupled with the arbour along that
boundary, softens the peripheral outlook from the rear
of 64 Pacific Parade:
see, for example, Exhibit 6 Figures NP19b and NP20b.
[109] Fourth,
the proposed development has an animated ground storey interface that adopts a
visual pleasing combination of materials,
finishes and lush screen planting.
[110] Fifth,
there are no unacceptable traffic impacts occasioned by the proposed
development.
[111] Sixth,
like other development in the local area, the proposed development has been
designed to take advantage of the views afforded
by its coastal location.
[112] I have
taken these positive features into account in my assessment of the proposed
development against the outcomes in ss 3.3.2.1(9)(a)
to (d) of City Plan.
That said, they are not the only design attributes of relevance to the
assessment of the proposed development
against the assessment benchmarks. There
are significant deficiencies in the design that are also relevant.
the Archer Street façade and the corresponding long façade
adjoining 64 Pacific Parade are longer than the
building is high. Consequently,
as was explained by Mr Richards, articulation is necessary to break up the
length of the building
and provide an appearance of vertical bulk form.
Although attempts have been made in this regard, they are largely
unsuccessful.
[114] As I have
already explained, the proposed development adopts a largely flat façade
treatment addressing Archer Street.
It is comprised of clear glass panels
adjoining painted textured concrete panels arranged vertically and horizontally
in a single
plane that renders little shadow. It also adopts minimal variations
in the colour treatment of the concrete panels. The central
recess creates a
green spine that splits the length of the façade in two. However, it
does not meaningfully detract from
the overall flatness of the
façade has high visual exposure. It is visible from Pacific Parade, the
North Kirra Beach foreshore (including
from the pedestrian path), Archer Street
and Golden Four Drive.
[116] Mr Middleton’s
evidence about the appearance of the Archer Street elevation and façade
accords with my analysis
and, for that reason, I accept it. Mr Middleton
relevantly opines that, unlike the street-fronting facades of other development
in the local area, the Archer Street façade is not an actively expressed
façade. He explains that it delivers a flat
architectural expression
that is not effectively relieved by any overall façade variation, apart
from on the top floor. He
identifies that the top floor has a small setback
with some landscape treatment for the front part of the building.
[117] Mr Butcher
gave evidence to similar effect. He additionally opines that the proposed
development differs from existing built
form because of the absence of a
significant upper-level recess or the use of recessive colours to reduce the
prominence of the additional
height. Mr Butcher says that the extent of
the roofline setback from the balcony lines below is so minimal that it will not
discernible. Further, in his view, the top floor is not defined by
recessive colours or notable landscaping treatment. Mr Butcher
cogent explanations in support of his opinions. Both are consistent with my
findings and, as such, I accept them.
[118] Apart from
at the ground floor, the visual appearance of the Archer Street façade is
replicated on the opposite façade,
which presents to 64 Pacific Parade.
It is reasonably exposed to external views, although those from the foreshore
are partly obstructed
by the Norfolk pines. There are two matters that inform
the extent of exposure. The first is the height of the building, particularly
that part that exceeds 23 metres. The second is the low-rise form of the
adjacent building at 64 Pacific Parade, which does little
to obscure the
proposed development. There is a reasonable prospect that redevelopment of the
adjoining premises at 64 Pacific Parade
will diminish the extent of this
façade’s visual exposure in the future.
[119] The narrow
façade adjoining 4 Archer Street is highly exposed. Most of it is
visible from along the opposite side of
Archer Street and locations on Golden
Four Drive near the intersection with Archer Street. The visual exposure of
this façade
is a function of:
(a) the generous front setback and 5-storey height of 4 Archer Street; and
(b) the extent to which the proposed development exceeds 23 metres in
height: see Exhibit 28 with the line marking the approximate
[120] The extent
of visual exposure of the narrow façade adjoining 4 Archer Street might
diminish with time. However, that
is unlikely in the foreseeable future
(a) the adjoining site at 4 Archer Street presents as improved by a
well-maintained, contemporary building, and not as a site that
is ripe for
redevelopment;
(b) the width of Archer Street is such that the redevelopment of sites further
along it are unlikely to restrict the extent of the
visibility; and
(c) there is no vegetation in Archer Street that will grow to restrict views of
the façade.
façade adjoining 4 Archer Street has an even flatter, more solid and
austere appearance than the Archer Street façade.
It is almost entirely
comprised of adjoining textured concrete panels painted with two very similar
[122] Overall,
in my view, the negative attributes of the design materially overwhelm the
positive features. The culmination of all
attributes is a built form that is
far from excellent in its appearance. Because of this, the proposed development
will adversely
impact the visual amenity and streetscape character of the
immediate locality. The proposed development’s high degree of exposure
heightens the significance of this adverse impact.
[123] Each of
Mr Curtis, Mr Richards, Mr Powell, Dr McGowan,
Mr Perkins and Mr Mewing ultimately conclude there is compliance with
the outcomes in ss 3.3.2.1(9)(a), (c) and (d) of the Strategic framework.
Those conclusions are founded on their assessments of
the visual impression
created by proposed development’s design attributes. Their assessments
differ from mine. As such, I
do not accept their ultimate conclusions. That
said, aspects of their evidence accord with my analysis of the evidence in
above and, consequently,
I accept those parts of their evidence. I identify those aspects below.
[124] With those
general observations in mind, it is convenient to now turn to my assessment of
each of the outcomes.
there compliance with the outcome in s 3.3.2.1(9)(a) regarding a reinforced
local identity and sense of place?
Appellants allege that the proposed development does not comply with the outcome
in s 3.3.2.1(9)(a) of the Strategic framework.
That outcome is expressed
a reinforced local identity and sense of place
[126] The terms
local identity
sense of place
not defined in City Plan. They are concepts that call for consideration of the
locality’s existing attributes and
planned outcomes.
[127] This issue
was addressed by each of the architects, visual amenity experts and town
planners. There is a significant degree
of overlap in their evidence, which is
only partially attributable to the town planners summarising the evidence of the
other expert
disciplines. The overlap extends to the experts’ extensive
descriptions of what is depicted in the photographs, aerial photographs,
and photomontages that I have before me.
[128] I have
undertaken my own assessment of those documents and the development approvals
for the existing and approved (but currently
unconstructed) buildings. In doing
so, I was particularly assisted by:
(a) Mr Powell’s evidence about dominance, prominence and the effect
of parallax;
(b) Mr Perkin’s collation of the key details of those buildings
greater than 23 metres with corresponding visual images of
them: Exhibit 16
(c) the experts’ identification of key design features of existing
multi-storey developments in the area during their cross-examination
Mr Morzone KC; and
(d) Mr Petersen’s representations of the approved development in the
photomontages, which depicted those developments that
are yet to be constructed
as grey block forms that show the approved stepping and recesses in wall and
floor planes.
[129] I have
read each of the submissions while undertaking my assessment. Those averse to
approval express concern about building
height, sub-standard appearance, site
cover, setbacks, building bulk, density, loss of privacy, interruption of views
and breezes,
shadow impact, inadequate landscaping, and adverse impact on public
car parking.
[130] Aspects of
the submissions that express views about the proposed development must be
approached with caution. The submissions
relate to an iteration of the
development application that has since been changed. They were also made
without the benefit of the
photomontages.
[131] Nevertheless,
I was assisted by the photographs of the area provided in the submissions and
the statements from the residents.
Collectively, they provide helpful evidence
Bilinga. Relevantly, many residents consider Bilinga to have a
low-key, coastal village feel and are concerned that the proposed
development,
by reason of its height and bulk, will erode that sense of place.
[132] Having
regard to the limited number of tall buildings that exist in Pacific Parade near
the subject land, I can appreciate the
views expressed by the residents.
However, as I have already observed, an assessment of the “
sense of place
” calls for
consideration of the
existing attributes
in the locality
planned outcomes
[133] In this
case, the planned outcomes are evident from City Plan. They are also informed
by the details of the many approved,
but not yet constructed, buildings.
[134] When one
considers the planned outcomes, it is not difficult to conclude that Bilinga is
an area in transition. While the low-key
village character may not yet be
appreciably diluted by taller buildings along Pacific Parade, that situation is
not planned to persist.
The area is intended to accommodate medium density
residential development including multiple dwellings up to 23 metres, and
certain circumstances up to 34.5 metres, in height. Many such buildings
have recently been approved in this local area: see Exhibit
Exhibit 16 pp 11-6.
[135] Having
regard to my review of City Plan and recent development approvals, I accept the
opinion of Mr Perkins that the local
identity is transitioning towards a
planned character of buildings consistent with the Medium density residential
zone and the opportunities
for increased height afforded by s 3.3.2.1(9) of
City Plan. As is observed by Mr Perkins:
“Bilinga is
not a quiet, low key coastal retreat. Rather it is part of the City’s
coastal tourism spine, close to the
Coolangatta major centre, within the walking
catchment of the planned light rail extension, and nearby an international
airport with
its regular passenger jet arrivals and departures adding to the
sense of energy and activity.”
[136] Although I
do not adopt Mr Perkins view that Bilinga
not a quiet, low key
coastal retreat, I accept that it is transitioning away from such a character.
I also accept the opinion of
Mr Mewing in this regard. He says that,
because of recently constructed and approved taller buildings, the area is
transitioning
into a built form context that achieves urban consolidation with
taller buildings as intended by the planning designations.
[137] I have
described the integers that inform the existing and planned character, and the
local identity and sense of place in paragraphs
[138] At first
blush, one might conclude that the proposed development reinforces the local
identity and sense of place. Such a conclusion
is attractive if one:
(a) adopts a general description of the existing built form as one comprising a
mix of building ages, types and styles; and
(b) focuses on the planned transition to buildings of greater height and
[139] This is
the approach adopted by Mr Curtis, Mr Richards, Mr Powell,
Dr McGowan, Mr Perkins and Mr Mewing.
[140] In my
view, that approach does not give sufficient recognition to the unifying design
features to which I refer in paragraphs
above. Important features of the
built form that are present in the locality are:
(a) the extensive provision of balconies on facades oriented towards the beach;
(b) the incorporation of pronounced modulation and recesses in the
street-fronting facades; and
(c) the recessing of upper levels of taller buildings, such as through visible
stepping or setbacks or the use of recessive colours.
[141] In my
view, those finer-grained aspects of the existing building form are not only
evident in the immediate locality: they significantly
contribute to the local
identity and sense of place. The extensive provision of balconies reinforces
the locality’s coastal
aspect. The pronounced modulation and recesses in
the street-fronting facades and the physical and visual recessing of upper
reduce the visual scale and bulk of the taller buildings. In
combination, these design features ensure that the experience of the
the public realm near development of substantial height, bulk and scale is not
overwhelmed or overborne by the height and
scale of the built form.
[142] These
finer-grain design features were identified by Mr Powell. In the Further
Visual Amenity & Landscaping Joint Experts’
Report, he opines that the
factors that influence local identity and sense of place are:
(a) the wide range of building heights in the local area, being from one to 11
storeys (including buildings of eight to 11 storeys
that are more than
23 metres in height);
(b) the beachfront location and the north-east orientation of the land holdings,
which invite large balconies facing towards the
(i) at the front of buildings along Pacific Parade;
(ii) at the rear of buildings fronting Golden Four Drive; and, sometimes,
(iii) along the entire façade of the building or at corners of a building
to direct views slightly more east or north; and
(c) the upper level or levels of mid-to-high rise buildings of various heights
(i) physically recessed via stepping; or
(ii) visually recessed via the use of a finer grain or recessive colour or
material; or
(iii) both physically and visually recessed.
(d) the location of the viewer to the various buildings. As Mr Powell
explains, the extent to which a building is experienced as
dominant is largely
informed by the proximity of the viewer to the building. From more distant
viewpoints, like the beach, taller
development can appear as a cluster and may
not be readily perceived as located on different streets.
[143] Mr Powell
explains his views by reference to annotated photographs. His explanations are
cogent and compelling. They accord
with my own analysis, and, for that reason,
I accept that evidence.
[144] To an
extent, the contribution made by these finer-grained building design attributes
were also recognised by Mr Curtis in the
Further Architecture Joint
Experts’ Report, wherein he opines that:
(a) the characteristics that primarily contribute to its identity include:
“the design of the built form that responds to the setting and
sub-tropical climate with private outdoor space and fenestration
views, sunlight, and breezes.”
(b) important aspects of the local sense of place include:
“The built form that responds to the setting and sub-tropical climate
with private outdoor space and fenestration to access
views, sunlight, and
breezes to support a lifestyle that is engaged with the setting.”
[145] I accept
Mr Curtis’ opinion to that extent. It accords with my independent
assessment of the characteristics of the built
form in the locality. That said,
I do not share Mr Curtis’ view that this important attribute is
reflected in the design of
the proposed development.
[146] As is
observed by Mr Adamson, the existing developments in Pacific Parade that
exceed 23 metres in height are generally sleeved
by other built form. The
façade that they present to Pacific Parade contains significant
articulation. Mr Adamson opines
that the same is not true of the proposed
development. He describes the proposed development as having a long and linear
form that is primarily comprised of floor to ceiling glass with no
balconies, other than at the ends. Mr Adamson also observes that
proposed development has an elongated shape and extensive presentation to Archer
Street and the nearby open space. He describes
the presentation to Archer
Street as different from other developments in the locality because it has
little articulation and utilises
a significant amount of glass. He considers
this difference to be significant because the proposed development is on a
corner and its Archer Street façade is exposed to views from
the public open space, including the beachside parkland to the
[147] I accept
Mr Adamson evidence in this regard. It accords with my own analysis of the
evidence identified in paragraph
[148] In the
circumstances, I am not persuaded that the proposed development achieves the
outcome in s 3.3.2.1(9)(a) of City Plan.
To the contrary, approval of the
proposed development is inconsistent with the achievement of this outcome. The
extent of discord
is more than technical. It is material in both its extent and
significance.
there compliance with s 3.3.2.1(9)(b) regarding a well managed interface?
Appellants allege that the proposed development does not comply with the outcome
in s 3.3.2.1(9)(b) of the Strategic framework.
That outcome is expressed
“a well managed interface with, relationship to and impact
on nearby development, including the reasonable amenity expectations
residents”.
[150] It is not
disputed that the proposed development adequately addresses interface issues
associated with privacy, overlooking
and shadowing. Nevertheless, the
Appellants contend that the proposed development fails to achieve the outcome
with respect to a
well managed interface because of:
(a) inadequate setbacks at the top of the building;
(b) the flat, unarticulated presentation of the facades; and
(c) the minimal extent of the landscaping at the street edge and the limited
community open space.
[151] Given the
findings that I have made in paragraph
above, it is unnecessary to address
these issues at length. It is sufficient to make a few observations about each
of these issues.
respect to the first issue, the Appellants contend that the proposed development
will have an unacceptably overbearing
impact on 4 Archer Street and 64 Pacific
Parade, particularly their outdoor living and external spaces. The impact is
occasioned by the proposed development’s height coupled with
its inadequate setbacks at the upper levels.
[153] This issue
was comprehensively addressed by Mr Powell. He provides an analysis that,
coupled with my own assessment, persuades
(a) although the top four storeys of the proposed development are not within the
stepped setbacks anticipated by the acceptable outcome
AO1 of the Medium density
residential zone code, there are greater setbacks at the lower levels where
there are direct interfaces
with the adjoining neighbours;
(b) views of those parts of the proposed development exceeding that
23 metres in height are limited from the balconies at 4 Archer
because of that building’s intervening rooflines and overhangs;
(c) from the ground level outdoor spaces at 4 Archer Street, the upper levels of
the proposed development do not materially add to
the impact otherwise caused by
the levels below 23 metres;
(d) the sightlines from internal spaces at 64 Pacific Parade are limited;
(e) the view line from external spaces at the ground level of 64 Pacific Parade
would strike the proposed development at the slab
edge for level 9 and the sense
of overbearing caused by the height above 23 metres is not substantially
different to the impact of
the built form below that height; and
(f) the adoption of greater setbacks at lower levels permits a landscape area at
the interface with 64 Pacific Parade that is sufficient
to incorporate plant
species of a height and spread that will reduce the perceived building bulk at
the lower levels.
[154] The second
issue raised by the Appellants relates to the proposed development’s flat,
unarticulated facades. The Appellants
rely on the evidence of Mr Middleton
in this respect. He opines that a better outcome would be achieved
(a) the proposed development provided adjustable screening; and
(b) the structure of the building had greater variation; and
(c) the facades incorporated more external treatments.
[155] Even if
that was the case, it fails to demonstrate that the interface is not well
managed: it only demonstrates that it could
be more attractive. This argument
is unpersuasive.
[156] I do not
find the third issue persuasive as:
(a) the Appellants do not identify a relevant relationship between interface and
the extent of community open space; and
(b) for reasons provided elsewhere, I am satisfied that the landscaping at the
street edge is excellent.
[157] Overall, I
am persuaded that the proposed development satisfies the outcome in
s 3.3.2.1(9)(b) of the Strategic
Is there compliance
with the outcome in s 3.3.2.1(9)(c) regarding a varied, ordered and
interesting local skyline?
Appellants allege that the proposed development does not comply with the outcome
in s 3.3.2.1(9)(c) of the Strategic framework.
That outcome is expressed
a varied, ordered and interesting local skyline
achievement of a varied, ordered, and interesting local skyline is a matter that
calls for a value judgment. It is a matter
experts all opine that the proposed development would achieve the outcome about
a varied and ordered skyline. Having regard
to the photomontages, I agree. It
will introduce a building of a different height to, but in general alignment
with, other tall
buildings on Pacific Parade and Golden Four Drive.
[161] The real
issue is whether the proposed development achieves the desired outcome with
respect to its contribution to an interesting
local skyline.
[162] Mr Curtis
opines that the step in the roofline relative to the line of the storeys below
is a design feature that varies its
form and allows a fringe of landscaping
along the two sides of the top floor plate. In his opinion, this differentiates
the appearance
of the upper storey and assists to “
building’s appearance. According to Mr Curtis, this provides visual
interest to the skyline.
[163] Mr Richards
expresses a similar opinion. He considers that the proposed development makes
an interesting contribution to the
skyline by reason of:
(a) its cantilevered balconies that create feathered edges and a very
interesting silhouette; and
(b) the setback of the top level of the building and the incorporation of a
strip of landscaping along the two sides of the building
between the Pacific
Parade elevation and the landscaped recess on the side of the building.
[164] Mr Middleton
disagrees with Mr Curtis and Mr Richards because the detail for the
services on the roof is not finally resolved.
[165] I do not
share Mr Middleton’s concerns about unresolved final design. I also
do not accept the opinions of Mr Curtis
and Mr Richards. They do not
accord with the other evidence that I accept, such as the plans and
photomontages.
[166] On my
review of the plans and photomontages, the variation of the top floor and
roofline is minimal and insufficient to have
a material visual impact. I have
set out my relevant findings in that regard in paragraphs
above. In my view, when seen as part
of the skyline, the proposed development generally presents as a broadly
rectangular building
of a largely uniform appearance with a flat roof structure.
[167] Although I
am persuaded that the proposed development contributes to a varied and ordered
skyline, I am ultimately not convinced
that its contribution is interesting.
there compliance with the outcome in s 3.3.2.1(9)(d) regarding an excellent
standard of appearance of the built form and street
Appellants allege that the proposed development does not comply with the outcome
in s 3.3.2.1(9)(d) of the Strategic framework.
It is expressed as
an excellent standard of appearance of the built form and street
standard of appearance of the proposed development is another matter about which
reasonable minds may differ. It involves
matters of impression and judgment.
[170] I have
detailed my assessment of the design features that inform the built form
appearance in paragraphs
[171] I accept
the opinion of Mr Richards that the appearance of a building is not
necessarily defined by focussing on individual
features or elements that cause a
building to stand out from others. A range of architectural elements are
employed in the design
of a building. Individually, each element might not be
particularly special. It is the way the elements are arranged or combined
form an ensemble that informs its visual impression.
[172] Regarding
the arrangement, and consequent visual impression, created by the proposed
development’s design features, Mr
Richards opines that the recesses
in the longer facades break up the length of the wall. He says this allows the
building to be
read as three connected elements. According to Mr Richards,
the verticality is enhanced by the full height solid and windowed walls,
create vertical striping through the façade that counterbalance the
horizontal expressed slabs.
[173] I accept
this evidence in part. On my review of the photomontages, the central recess
breaks the length of the building into
distinct halves. This is not achieved by
the size of the recess, which I regard as minimal, but by the inclusion of
planter boxes.
The plants at each level of the recess create a green
” that divides the building in two. I also accept that
the appearance of verticality is, to an extent, enhanced by the repetitive
interspersing of full height clear glass panels with textured concrete panels.
Each concrete panel is divided into parts using alternating
colours, so that the
size of each coloured concrete panel is proportionally greater in height than in
width. The same vertical stripe
effect is achieved with the glazing. Long
lengths of glazing are broken into smaller panes by window framing so that each
panel is proportionality greater in height than length. The vertical
sunscreen fins further add to an impression of verticality.
[174] I accept
that these design features assist in reducing the visual impact of the
building’s length and its expressed horizontal
floor plates.
Nevertheless, the extent to which they mitigate the impression of a single,
elongated block form is severely hampered
by the lack of modulation and the
arrangement of the various materials on a single plane. For those reasons, I do
not accept Mr
Richard’s opinion that the proposed development
achieves an excellent standard of appearance.
[175] Mr Curtis
also gave evidence that the building has an excellent standard of appearance.
He approached this issue by considering
how well the proposed development
resolves its functional requirements while responding to the opportunities and
constraints of the
subject land in its context. In his view,
s 3.3.2.1(9)(d) is satisfied if there is:
(a) effective mitigation of the visual impacts arising from building bulk;
(b) a high quality activated or animated interface with the pedestrian
environment; and
(c) articulated tower forms that would be attractive and contribute to the
interest of the local skyline.
[176] Regarding
the key attributes of the proposed development and their influence on the
standard of appearance of the built form,
Mr Curtis says that the ground
storey’s external wall along Archer Street is generally setback from the
line of the floor plate
above. He states that this erodes the bulk of the
building at ground level and provides a transitional interface between the
space on the ground storey and the adjoining external open space areas.
In addition, Mr Curtis opines that the differentiation of
the ground storey
from the storeys above assists to provide a legible base to the built form and a
visual reference that aids the
transition of height and scale from the building
to the pedestrian environment.
[177] Above the
ground floor, the building has an extruded vertical form that reflects the
elongated proportion of the subject land
and the stacking of uniform floor
plates. Mr Curtis says that this is consistent with recent development
outcomes which adopt consistent
setbacks in each tower level that comfortably
comply with acceptable outcome AO1 in the Medium density residential zone code
lower levels, but which do not comply at the upper levels.
[178] Mr Curtis
says that the building’s height is layered by the floor plate projections
and floor to ceiling height fenestration
between the floor plates. He says that
this fragments the building’s overall height and provides a clear
expression to the
building’s individual human scale storeys.
[179] According
to Mr Curtis, the length of the buildings is subtly modulated by the
juxtaposition of the floor plate alignments that
(a) dominant straight eastern and western floor plate edges;
(b) an angled southern floor plate edge;
(c) a concave northern floor plate edge;
(d) curvilinear corners to the floor plate;
(e) a prominent recess midway along the length of the floorplate on each side
that divides the floor plate into two approximate halves;
(f) a smaller recess on each side of the northern part of the floor plate;
[180] Mr Curtis
says that further modulation is provided by:
(a) the differentiation of the ground storey from the storeys above, which
assists to provide a legible base to the built form;
(b) the differentiation of the upper most storey and reduced enclosed area of
the northern half relative to the storeys below, which
allows for a fringe of
landscaping along the two sides of the floor plate that
” the built form;
(c) the floor to ceiling height glazing that adds a high level of transparency
to the building’s appearance and reduces the
visual solidity of the
(d) the provision of planter boxes within the central floor plate recesses,
which when viewed as a vertical stack contributes to
the bifurcation of the
north-west façade appearance and introduces a vertical landscape feature;
(e) the incorporation of vertical blade screens between the floor plates at each
storey, which complement the horizontal window mullions
and provide a visual
rhythm to the building’s appearance, thereby assisting to balance the
horizontal proportions of the projecting
floor plate edges;
(f) the subtle sophisticated palette of external materials, colours and finishes
that reflect the coastal location;
(g) the vertical stack of deep balconies that extend across the full width and
height of the building’s north facing façade,
which have a
curvilinear form that animates and characterises the appearance of the facades
and erode their bulk; and
(h) the balconies at the southwest corner of the building.
[181] Finally,
Mr Curtis relies on the accommodation of all car parking ground, which he
says is preferable to on-grade car parking
within building setbacks.
[182] Based on
his analysis, Mr Curtis concludes that the proposed development is
demonstrably well resolved and provides an excellent
standard of appearance of
the built form.
[183] I accept
Mr Curtis’ description of each of the key attributes of the proposed
development. To the extent that they accord
with my analysis set out above, I
accept his opinion about their impact on the visual appearance of the building.
I can appreciate
Mr Curtis’ view that the proposed development
appears well-resolved. That said, I disagree with his opinion that the design
attributes modulate the proposed development. I also do not subscribe to
Mr Curtis’ view that the result is an excellent standard
appearance of the built form. I prefer the evidence of Mr Middleton about
the overall visual impact, which are more closely aligned
with my own
[184] As is
explained by Mr Middleton, the design of the proposed development results
in a large, bulky street elevation with little
relief through form, shadow,
screening and modelling. The tower form has very limited articulation, relying
only on a small indentation
behind the northern unit kitchen area to create a
recess and a slightly larger recess near the entry lobby. To this is added some
curvature to the balconies at either end of the building and essentially a
straight-line wall expression for the balance, and majority,
[185] To quote
Mr Richards, the proposed development adopts a design approach that is
characterised by its “
”, and which is
cost-effective
Although the result may be characterised as “
well-mannered
these descriptors used by Mr Richards are hardly synonymous with
excellence. In my view, the arrangement of the various
design elements and
materials culminates in a built form that has a contemporary but solid, even
bulky, appearance. I accept that
this descriptor is not apposite for the
Pacific Parade elevation as that elevation has a far superior appearance to the
the building. However, in my view, the appearance of the Pacific
Parade façade is not sufficient to overcome the sub-standard
of the highly visible Archer Street façade, let alone the combined
appearance of this façade and the even
plainer façade that adjoins
4 Archer Street. As such, I am not persuaded that the proposed development
achieves an excellent
standard of built form appearance.
[186] With the
above matters in mind, I now turn to consider the appearance of the street edge.
[187] I describe
the landscape design elements situated between the boundary and the
building’s façade in paragraphs
above. In my view, they combine to
provide a visual pleasing outcome.
[188] Mr Powell
and Dr McGowan opine that the landscape design contributes to an excellent
standard of appearance of the street edge.
They confirm that the proposed
landscaping is achievable given the extent of planting medium proposed.
Mr Butcher agrees but opines
that it is not an excellent outcome.
Mr Butcher’s concerns focus on the lateral extent of Archer Street
that is dedicated
to the provision of necessary infrastructure.
[189] I prefer
the evidence of Mr Powell and Dr McGowan to that of Mr Butcher on
this issue. The opinions of Mr Powell and Dr McGowan,
identified foundations, accord with my assessment of the street edge based on
the plans, landscape plans and photomontages.
Mr Butcher’s do
[190] In the
circumstances, to the extent that the appearance of street edge is informed by
the landscape treatment between the boundary
and the built form of the proposed
development, I am satisfied that it achieves an excellent standard of
appearance. However, the
excellence in the landscape treatment is not
sufficient to overcome the adverse character and visual amenity impacts
occasioned by
the lack of modulation in the Archer Street façade and the
visible extent of the facades facing the adjoining neighbours.
The overall
visual result is that of a bulky building that presents multiple, largely flat
facades to the public realm.
[191] For the
reasons provided, I am persuaded that there is only partial compliance with
s 3.3.2.1(9)(d) of City Plan. The proposed
development does not achieve an
excellent standard of appearance of the built form. The extent of
non-compliance is significant.
It sounds in unacceptable town planning impacts,
namely unacceptable visual amenity and character impacts.
Is there compliance with the
outcome in s 3.3.2.1(9)(e) regarding housing choice and affordability?
Appellants contend that there is non-compliance with the outcome sought in
s 3.3.2.1(9)(e) of the Strategic framework.
That outcome is expressed as
housing choice and affordability
dispute between the parties is now limited to whether the proposed development
provides housing choice.
Appellant relies on the evidence of Dr Stubbs to contend that the proposed
development does not provide housing choice because
of its failure to provide
studio and one-bedroom apartments.
McInnesville Pty Ltd and the Council disagree. They urge reliance on the
evidence of Mr Duane.
[196] For the
reason explained in paragraph
above, it is unnecessary to address the issue of compliance with
s 3.3.2.1(9)(e) in detail. It is sufficient to make just a few
observations about the meaning of the outcome, relevant context in City Plan and
the evidence of Dr Stubbs and Mr Duane.
[197] As has
been observed by this Court on several of occasions, the grammatical construct
of s 3.3.2.1(9)(e) is unfortunate. The
absence of a verb appears to deny
s 3.3.2.1(9)(e) the status of an outcome that is capable of satisfaction by
a development:
Bell Co Pty Ltd & Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2022] QPEC 32
[2023] QPELR 1160
, 1185 [132];
Council of the City of Gold Coast & Ors
[2022] QPEC 59
; [2024] QPELR
387, 470 [396]. Nevertheless, it is to be given some meaning.
considered the meaning to be given to this outcome in
Archer v Council of the
City of Gold Coast & Ors
[2022] QPEC 59
; [2024] QPELR 387 at
469—75 [389] — [418]. The parties do not cavil with that analysis
of City Plan, nor with the findings
outcome. To the contrary, the Council submits that the appropriateness of that
approach is
supported by the fact that the Council has amended City Plan,
including s 3.3.2.1(9), since that decision. It has not sought to
the wording of this outcome nor of the provisions of City Plan that provide
relevant context and inform the meaning that was
attributed to it. In those
circumstances, it is unnecessary to further address the meaning of the outcome
[199] City Plan
recognises the need for increased housing density to accommodate population
growth without urban sprawl. It does
so by, amongst other things, allowing for
increased heights in specific areas.
[200] In this
locality, City Plan encourages redevelopment of the land to achieve urban
consolidation. This is apparent from the
mapping to which I refer in paragraph
above. It is also evidenced by,
amongst other things:
(a) the inclusion of the land in the Medium density residential zone;
(b) its designation on the Building density overlay map for a density that is
far greater than the historical development present
in the area; and
(c) its designation for a height of 23 metres on the Building height
overlay map, which is a height far greater than the historical
development that
is present in the area.
[201] Dr Stubbs
paid no material regard to this context, nor to many provisions of City Plan
that reveal its approach to housing choice
and affordability.
[202] In an
86-page report, to which Dr Stubbs attaches a 40-page curriculum vitae,
Dr Stubbs opines that the proposed development
does not comply with various
assessment benchmarks about housing choice and affordability: Exhibit 21.
[203] There are
three matters that found Dr Stubbs’ opinions.
[204] The first
is Dr Stubbs’ approach to broad concepts of social policy with
respect to housing, which is largely founded
on the approach to social housing
in New South Wales and Victoria. To the extent that Dr Stubbs relies on
the Queensland approach,
her consideration is informed by the Queensland
Government’s efforts to deliver social housing through legislation that
outside the planning framework.
[205] Second,
Dr Stubbs’ opinions are underpinned by her consideration of rental
affordability, purchase affordability and housing
stress. In this regard,
Dr Stubbs places significant weight on her assessment of the proposed
development’s inability to provide
housing that would be affordable for
target groups that she considers to be relevant. Dr Stubbs identifies
those target groups as
low- and moderate-income households and very low-income
working people who are not eligible for social housing. She does not provide
cogent explanation for her definition of the target groups. Her selection of
the target groups and her decision to link them to
housing on the subject land
has no apparent foundation in City Plan.
[206] Third,
Dr Stubbs’ opinion is founded on her interpretation of City Plan.
That interpretation:
(a) ignores relevant context in City Plan;
(b) is entirely discordant with my findings in
Archer v Council of the City
of Gold Coast & Ors
[2022] QPEC 59
; [2024] QPELR 387 at 469—75
[389]—[418]; and
(c) does not accord with other decisions of this Court that have dealt with the
proper construction of City Plan.
[207] In those
circumstances, I find the evidence of Dr Stubbs in her primary report,
Exhibit 21, to be of no assistance.
[208] Dr Stubbs
provided a second report, Exhibit 22, in which she responds to the report
prepared by Mr Duane. Dr Stubbs’
second report criticises
Mr Duane’s analysis. The criticisms reveal a fundamental
misunderstanding about Mr Duane’s
approach to the issue of housing
choice and affordability. The evidence in Dr Stubbs’ second report
does not assist me.
[209] Dr Stubbs
oral testimony is equally uncompelling. Like the evidence in her reports, it is
entirely misdirected.
[210] Unlike the
evidence of Dr Stubbs, Mr Duane’s evidence is founded on an
approach to this issue that is consistent with
my analysis of City Plan’s
treatment of housing choice and affordability in
Archer v Council of the City
of Gold Coast & Ors
[2022] QPEC 59
; [2024] QPELR 387.
[211] Mr Duane
opines that the proposed development will contribute to housing choice by
providing apartments that are larger than
those that currently exist in his
identified study area. He says that the proposed development will increase the
number of two-
and three-bedroom units. It will introduce a modern product with
a price point that is greater than that for attached unit product
generally, but
at a level expected of new beachfront apartments. According to Mr Duane,
the proposed development will provide a
more affordable housing option than that
provided by detached houses close to the subject land. Mr Duane observes
that the housing
options will be provided in a location with a high degree of
existing and future infrastructure. This will help reinforce a compact
settlement, resulting in improved efficiencies and use of existing and future
infrastructure in the surrounding area. Mr
Duane opines that this
contributes to the stated planning goals of improved housing affordability and
[212] Mr Duane
provides cogent explanations for all his opinions. They were unshaken during
cross-examination. Mr Duane’s
evidence is compelling and I accept it
without reservation.
[213] In the
circumstances, I am persuaded that the proposed development achieves the outcome
sought in s 3.3.2.1(9)(e) of the Strategic
is the nature and extent of non-compliance with s 3.3.2.1(9) of City
proposed development does not comply with the specific outcome in
s 3.3.2.1(9) of City Plan.
matter is entitled to significant weight given:
(a) the non-compliance manifests in adverse visual amenity and character impacts
and serious non-compliance with s 6.2.2.2(2)(d)(i)
and performance outcome
PO3 of the Medium density residential zone code;
(b) the non-compliance relates to a matter of forward planning policy about the
intended building height pattern and desired future
appearance for the local
area: see s 3.3.2.1(8) of City Plan;
(c) the proper approach for the Court to matters of planning policy is one of
Grosser & Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast
(2001) 117 LGERA 153
, 163 [38]; and
(d) LGDC McInnesville Pty Ltd does not suggest that the identified policy is
unsoundly based or overtaken by events.
[216] In my
view, the forward planning policy is entitled to respect and should be given its
full force and effect, unless there are
sound town planning reasons to do
the Appellant’s additional reasons for refusal material to the
mentioned in paragraph
Appellants allege non-compliance with many assessment benchmarks in City Plan in
support of their case for refusal. The
alleged non-compliances raise issues
relating to site cover, setbacks, roof design, density, design and amenity,
visual amenity and
character, landscaping, streetscape character, communal open
space, and sub-tropical design.
[218] That said,
the Appellants contend that the central issues relate to:
(a) the nature and extent of any non-compliance with the outcomes in
s 3.3.2.1(9)(a) to (e) of the Strategic framework and, consequently,
significance of the non-compliance with s 6.2.2.2(2)(d)(i) and performance
outcome PO3 of the Medium density residential zone
(b) whether any non-compliance with s 3.3.2.1(9) of the Strategic framework
should be given decisive weight in the exercise of the
discretion.
[219] As the
Appellants explain in their opening written submissions, they rely on the other
alleged non-compliances to buttress or
support their contentions that the
non-compliances with the outcomes in s 3.3.2.1(9)(a) to (e) are significant
and should be given
decisive weight. The Appellants submit that the other
assessment benchmarks will not, of themselves, warrant refusal if there is
compliance with s 3.3.2.1(9) of City Plan. They say that it is unnecessary
to separately address each of them.
[220] I have
examined each of the assessment benchmarks put in issue by the Appellants and
the evidence related to them, including
aspects of the evidence that I have not
analysed above. Having done so, I am satisfied that the issue of compliance
with those additional
assessment benchmarks does not alter the balance to be
struck in the exercise of my discretion. For that reason, it is unnecessary
me to address each of the allegations of non-compliance seriatim. The weight to
be given to the non-compliances with the specific
outcome in s 3.3.2.1(9)
of the Strategic framework and s 6.2.2.2(2)(d)(i) and performance outcome
PO3 of the Medium density residential
zone code would not be materially
increased or decreased in the circumstances of this case.
there relevant matters that support an approval?
McInnesville Pty Ltd relies on several matters that it says arise for
consideration under
Planning Act 2016
favour approval of the development application. LGDC McInnesville Pty Ltd
succinctly address these in their written submissions,
which relevantly
“(a) To the extent non-compliance with any aspects of
the Uplift Provision is determined (or, compliance is not demonstrated)
result of the provision of roof top infrastructure or the absence of operable
window detailing on the plans, that non-compliance
would not warrant refusal
because it would be minor in nature and able to be ameliorated by the imposition
of lawful development
conditions, including those conditions 10 and 56 in the
development approval given by the Council;
(b) The design, bulk, height, scale and density of the proposed development will
not have any unacceptable impacts on the character
and amenity of the area, but
rather will fit comfortably within a range of existing and approved development
evidenced in Mr Perkins’
Separate Report Exhibit 16, Table 2; and
(c) There are no adverse traffic engineering impacts resulting from the Proposed
Development, which warrant refusal, as accepted
by the Appellants.”
[222] The first
matter is of not of material significance to the exercise of discretion. My
findings of non-compliance are unrelated
to the provision of roof top
infrastructure and the absence of operable window detailing on the plans. That
said, I accept LGDC
McInnesville Pty Ltd’s contention that, in isolation,
these matters would not stand in the way of an approval.
[223] Regarding
the third matter, at the commencement of the hearing, the Appellants contended
that traffic impacts warranted refusal.
To support their contention, they
called evidence from Mr Bryce Trevilyan. After the cross-examination of
Mr Trevilyan, the Appellants
abandoned their contention. This was
appropriate. Mr Trevilyan’s evidence contained material inaccuracies
and was not compelling.
I accept that LGDC McInnesville Pty Ltd has established
that there are no adverse traffic engineering impacts resulting from the
proposed development that warrant refusal. This matter is deserving of weight
and supports the case for approval.
[224] As for the
second matter, I do not accept that the design, bulk, height, scale and density
of the proposed development will
not have any unacceptable impacts on the
character and amenity of the area. For reasons explained above, there are
aspects of the
design that are attractive, well-resolved and that fit
comfortably with the existing and approved development in the local area.
However, other aspects of the design are left wanting. They negatively impact
the overall appearance of the built form such that
they sound in non-compliance
with City Plan and adverse planning consequences.
the proposed development be approved in the exercise of the planning
discretion?
appropriate approach to the exercise of the planning discretion is explained in
[226] There are
two alternative propositions that are fundamental to LGDC McInnesville Pty
Ltd’s case for approval, namely:
(a) the proposed development complies with each of the outcomes in
s 3.3.2.1(9) of the Strategic framework and, as such, warrants
despite the conceded non-compliances with s 6.2.2.2(2)(d)(i) and
performance outcome PO3 of the Medium density residential
zone code; and, in the
alternative,
(b) any non-compliance with the outcomes in s 3.3.2.1(9) of the Strategic
framework are technical in nature and should note be determinative
because the
proposed development addresses the planning intent for the land in this
[227] As is
evident from my findings above, LGDC McInnesville Pty Ltd has demonstrated
compliance with some of the outcomes in s 3.3.2.1(9)
of the Strategic
framework, namely those in ss 3.3.2.1(9)(b) and (e). It has also
demonstrated partial compliance with the outcomes
in ss 3.3.2.1(9)(c) and
(d). Those matters lend support to the case for approval.
[228] Against
those findings, I must weigh the non-compliances with City Plan. The
non-compliances are occasioned by the design deficiencies
of the proposed
development and its inappropriate visual amenity and character impacts. They
are serious and deserving of significant
balance, I am not persuaded that the positive aspects of the proposed
development and the other matters that favour approval,
taken collectively, are
sufficient to provide a sound town planning basis to depart from City Plan.
They do not render the impacts
on visual amenity and character acceptable.
Moreover, there is no sound town planning reason to not give the planning policy
respect to building height in City Plan its full force and effect.
McInnesville Pty Ltd has not discharged its
[231] The orders
of the Court will be:
(a) the appeal is allowed;
(b) the decision of the Respondent to approve the Co-respondent’s
development application is set aside;
(c) the Co-respondent’s development application is refused.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (582 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter