URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/202.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v O'Dea [2025] QCA 202 (24 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
[2025] QCA 202
O’DEA, Patrick Finbar
(appellant)
CA No 203 of 2024
DC No 1499 of 2021
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Appeal against Conviction
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Brisbane – Date of Conviction: 30 August 2024
(Clare SC DCJ)
DELIVERED ON:
24 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
20 May 2025
Bond and Boddice and Bradley JJA
Appeal dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – INTERFERENCE WITH
DISCRETION OR FINDING OF JUDGE – CONTROL OF PROCEEDINGS
– DISCHARGE
OF JURY – where the appellant was convicted by a jury of three counts of
publishing an account of proceedings
and three counts of use of a carriage
service to offend – where the appellant was not legally represented at
where an issue sought to be agitated by the appellant at trial was
an order of the Family Court of Australia permitting publication
of the Family
Court proceedings, as authorised by the Court – where the appellant sought
to pursue the existence of that order
during cross-examination – where the
trial judge made repeated rulings that that order had no relevance to the
appellant’s
publications as they had not been authorised by the Court
– where the appellant again sought to agitate the existence of that
during cross-examination despite the repeated rulings – where, in the
absence of the jury, the trial judge reminded the
appellant that she had ruled
that the existence of the order was irrelevant and that the questioning during
cross-examination was
therefore impermissible – where, upon the return of
the jury, the appellant persisted in raising the existence of the order
where an exchange between the trial judge and the appellant relating to the
impermissible questioning occurred in the presence
of the jury – where an
application was made by the appellant to discharge the jury because of the trial
judge’s comment
made in the presence of the jury – where the
application was refused – where the trial judge specifically addressed the
jury in relation to the trial judge’s comment – whether the trial
judge erred in not discharging the jury
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE
– PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES NOT AMOUNTING TO MISCARRIAGE
MISDIRECTION OR NON-DIRECTION – where the appellant was convicted by a
jury of three counts of publishing an account
of proceedings and three counts of
use of a carriage service to offend – where the appellant was not legally
represented at
trial – where the trial judge gave directions to the jury
undercover police operative and between the appellant and a Mr Holt –
where the appellant submits that a miscarriage
of justice occurred because the
trial judge’s directions to the jury, about “admissions” in
the appellant’s
conversations with an undercover police operative and
between the appellant and Mr Holt, were inadequate as the trial judge
to direct the jury that it had to be satisfied as to the truth and
accuracy of those statements, beyond reasonable doubt –
whether the
directions made by the trial judge were inadequate
Jury Act 1995
Brawn v The King
(2025) 99 ALJR 872
[2025] HCA 20
Crofts v The Queen
(1996) 186 CLR 427
[1996] HCA 22
R v Bosscher
M J Jackson for the appellant
G R Rice KC, with D A Marley, for the
SOLICITORS:
Bell Criminal Lawyers for the appellant
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Commonwealth) for the respondent
I agree with the reasons for judgment of Boddice JA and with the order
proposed by his Honour.
[2] BODDICE
On 30 August 2024, a jury found the appellant guilty of three counts of
publishing an account of proceedings and three counts of
use of a carriage
service to offend.
September 2024, the appellant was sentenced to 12 months’
imprisonment for each count of publishing an account of proceedings,
18 months’ imprisonment for the first count of use of a carriage
service to offend, 2 years’ imprisonment for the second
count of use
of a carriage service to offend and 2 years and 6 months’
imprisonment for the third count of use of a carriage
service to offend. It was
ordered that all terms be served concurrently, except for the sentence of
2 years and 6 months’
imprisonment which was ordered to commence at
the conclusion of the sentence of 12 months’ imprisonment imposed on
count of publishing an account of proceedings. A non-parole period was
set at 20 months.
appellant appeals his convictions,
relying on two grounds. First, that a miscarriage of justice occurred because
the trial judge wrongly refused to discharge the jury
Jury Act 1995
(Qld). Second, that a miscarriage of justice occurred
because the trial judge’s directions to the jury, about
“admissions”
in the appellant’s conversations with an
undercover police operative and between the appellant and a Mr Holt, were
as the trial judge failed to direct the jury:
(a) that it had to be satisfied as to the truth and accuracy of those
statements, beyond reasonable doubt;
(b) alternatively, that before it could use each statement, the jury had to be
satisfied of the truth and accuracy of each statement.
Procedural history
29 July 2021, an indictment was presented in the District Court of
Queensland at Brisbane, charging the appellant and others
with two counts of
conspiracy to defeat justice (counts 1 and 2). The indictment also charged
the appellant, alone, with three counts
of publishing an account of proceedings
(counts 3, 4 and 5) and three counts of use of a carriage service to offend
(counts 6, 7
and 8). All the charges related to the same Family Court
proceedings.
5 February 2024, a joint trial of all the charges commenced before a jury.
At the commencement of that trial, the appellant
unsuccessfully applied for
severance of counts 3 to 8 on the indictment.
6 February 2024, a further application for severance of counts 3 to 8
on the indictment was allowed and the jury was discharged.
8 February 2024, the Crown indicated that it would not proceed further in
respect of counts 1 and 2 on the indictment.
26 August 2024, a trial of counts 3 to 8 on the indictment commenced before
a jury. The prosecution called three witnesses.
30 August 2024, the Crown closed its case. The appellant elected to
neither give nor call evidence. The jury commenced its
deliberations late that
afternoon. The jury delivered guilty verdicts in respect of each count at
Particulars
[11] The Crown
particularised counts 3 to 8 as follows:
(a) In or about February 2017, the appellant and Timothy Holt (
agreed to set up a website called “Free Missing Twins”, which Holt
subsequently set up at the appellant’s request.
(b) The appellant and Holt agreed to administer the website together as an
ongoing course of conduct, pursuant to an agreement between
them to commit
(i) contrary to
Family Law Act 1975
by disseminating
on that website, accounts of proceedings in the Family Court which identified
the parties to the proceedings; and
(ii) contrary to s 474.17(1) of the
Criminal Code
publishing on that website, material that asserted that the male party to the
Family Court proceedings was a paedophile,
that he sexually abused or raped the
twins and/or that he sexually abused or raped the female party to the Family
Court proceedings.
(c) The appellant and Holt intended that offences contrary to those provisions
would be committed under the agreement.
(d) The appellant provided Holt with documents relating to the Family Court
proceedings and with instructions on their publication
and commentary about
them, with the intention that Holt would publish them on the website.
[12] The Crown
particularised count 3 as having been committed, in accordance with the
agreement, between 28 March 2017 and 3 May
2017, when Holt engaged in
a course of conduct to publish 23 “leaks” and one “press
statement” on the website
which contained accounts that identified parties
to the Family Court proceedings, namely, the male and female parties and their
[13] The Crown
particularised count 4 as having been committed, in accordance with the
agreement, between 21 May 2017 and 29 June
2017, when Holt engaged in
a course of conduct to publish 22 “leaks” on the website which
contained accounts that identified
parties to, persons associated with a party
to, or witnesses to the Family Court proceedings, namely, the parties, their
and relatives of the female party.
[14] The Crown
particularised count 5 as having been committed, in accordance with the
agreement, between 17 August 2017 and 30 December
2017, when Holt
engaged in a course of conduct to publish one “leak” and one
“press statement” on the website,
which contained accounts that
identified parties to the Family Court proceedings, namely, the male and female
parties and their children.
[15] The Crown
particularised count 6 as having been committed, in accordance with the
agreement, between 28 March 2017 and 3 May
2017, when Holt engaged in
a course of conduct to use a carriage service, namely, an internet service or
mobile telecommunications
service to publish 16 “leaks” and two
“press statements” on the website, in circumstances where the use of
that carriage service by Holt to publish those leaks and press statements on the
website would be regarded by reasonable persons
as being in all the
circumstances, offensive because they referred to the male party to the Family
Court proceedings as a “paedophile”
and/or alleged that he and
others sexually abused or raped the twins and/or alleged that he sexually abused
or raped the female party
to the Family Court proceedings.
[16] The Crown
particularised count 7 as having been committed, in accordance with the
agreement, between 21 May 2017 and 29 June
2017, when Holt engaged in
a course of conduct to use a carriage service, namely, an internet service or
mobile telecommunications
service, to publish 22 “leaks” and
one “press statement” on the website where the use of that carriage
by Holt to publish those leaks and press statements on the website would
be regarded by reasonable persons as being in all the circumstances,
because they referred to the male party in the Family Court proceedings as a
“paedophile” and/or alleged that
he and others sexually abused or
raped the twins and/or alleged that he sexually abused or raped the female party
to the Family Court
proceedings.
[17] The Crown
particularised count 8 as having been committed, in accordance with the
agreement, between 17 August 2017 and 30 December
2017, when Holt
engaged in a course of conduct to use a carriage service, namely, an
internet service or telecommunications service
to publish one “leak”
and two “press statements” on the website, where the use of that
carriage service by
Holt to publish that leak and those press statements on the
website would be regarded by reasonable persons as being in all the
circumstances,
offensive because they referred to the male party to the Family
Court proceedings as a “paedophile” and/or alleged that
others sexually abused or raped the twins and/or alleged that he sexually abused
or raped the female party to the Family Court
proceedings.
Opening statement
[18] In its
opening statement, the Crown informed the jury that the background, to the
establishment of the website and the uploading
of material to it, was that the
male and female parties to the Family Court proceedings were in dispute about
custody and access
of their twin daughters; that despite Family Court orders
that the children reside with the male party, the female party had hidden
children; and that the website was supporting the female party’s
contentions that the court orders were wrong and that
the children ought not to
be with the male party as he had sexually abused them.
[19] The Crown
told the jury that an undercover operative, who had had conversations with the
appellant, posed as a journalist feigning
an interest in the Family Court
proceedings. The Crown case was that in the course of seven recorded
conversations with the undercover
operative, the appellant made very explicit,
obvious and clear admissions to his participation in the establishment of the
of his involvement with Holt in publishing on that website, and of the
fact that he knew that the material he was writing and providing,
was an account
of Family Court proceedings and that he knew it was a breach of
Family Law Act
to publish that
[20] The lead
investigator gave evidence that over a number of years, police monitored
postings on the website, which was described
as a blog-style website to which
videos and other documents could be uploaded. Those postings contained
information about the Family
Court proceedings, identifying the parties and
their twin daughters.
investigator produced a running log of the posts to the website, listing the
respective dates of each post. Copies of the
actual posts revealed that there
were references to the need for a reinvestigation into a court case involving
twins, with the twins’
father being specifically named and referred to as
a paedophile. The posts included specific references to the twins being raped
and abused by their “paedophile father”, who was identified by name.
There was also reference, by name, to the judge
and to the terms of the order
made by the judge. There was specific identification by name of the twins, as
well as their maternal
grandparents. The investigator gave evidence that the
grandparents were witnesses in the Family Court proceedings. An issue in
Family Court proceedings was custody arrangements.
investigator gave evidence that posts on the website contained a link to
affidavits filed in the Family Court proceedings.
Those affidavits specifically
identified the parties to the proceeding in the heading of the document, as well
as in the contents
of the affidavit. The postings also included a video of an
interview conducted by the Queensland Police Service with one of the
well as what was said to be a diary of the twins’ mother, with a post
referring to repeated disclosures of sexual
abuse by their father. One post
referred to the father of the twins as having “raped” his own wife
and his own children.
Another post gave the date of birth of the father and the
date of his marriage to the twins’ mother. There was a reference
entries of the twins’ maternal grandfather, by name, with those entries
identifying both the father and the twins
by name. There was also reference to
the Family Court of Australia awarding sole custody of the twins to the
investigator gave evidence of telephone calls, intercepted by police, between a
Timothy Holt and the appellant. Recordings
of those telephone calls were played
to the jury. Evidence was led as to the subscriber of the telephone numbers
involved in each
communication. One subscriber was Timothy Holt, the other was
the appellant’s wife, with her address being an address in Grafton.
investigator gave evidence that documents seized during the execution of a
an Australia Post pack with
sender details of “P O’Dea”. The pack contained
11 discs. Those discs included interviews
conducted between the twins and
members of the Queensland Police Service.
cross-examination, the investigator agreed that an issue in the Family Court
proceedings was where the twins should live and
that allegations had been made
in those proceedings by the twins’ mother, of sexual assault by the
twins’ father. The
investigator agreed that when the appellant was
arrested, he was living in Grafton. He also agreed that the twins and their
grandparents were not applicants, respondents, or intervenors in the
Family Court proceedings.
Queensland Police officer gave evidence that in the course of her investigation
of ‘the missing twins’, she became
aware of the website. During
2017, she accessed the website from Townsville every couple of weeks to view its
posts. She did not
do so on a daily basis.
cross-examination, the police officer said that the documents she saw in 2017
were similar to the documents sent to her by
the Crown, prior to trial. She
accepted she could not say that they were 100 per cent the same, but
said they were very consistent
with what she had read in 2017. She recalled
that the documents contained a reference to the twins’ father being a
and to one of the twins having drawn a picture of a little girl with
a vagina and a man with an erect penis. She also recalled seeing
police interviews with the twins.
undercover operative gave evidence that he was authorised to perform undercover
duties in relation to an investigation into
the website. As part of that
investigation, he made contact with the appellant, who believed the undercover
operative to be a journalist.
Prior to doing so, he had received information
from Holt to expect a call from the gatekeeper, known as Alan in regard to the
twins. He recorded those telephone conversations.
[29] The first
telephone call recorded was around 10.00 am on 22 October 2017. The
number was the same number used when the appellant
undercover operative made a phone call to the person on 16 January 2018.
He had a subsequent telephone call
with that person on 27 January
2018. During that latter recording, the person said their real name was
undercover operative gave evidence that on 20 February 2018, he attended a
tavern in Western Australia where he met a person
who introduced himself as
Patrick. The undercover operative described the person as aged in their
early-to-mid 60s with a distinctive
South African accent. The undercover
operative also had another conversation with the person on 20 February
recordings with the undercover operative contained statements to the effect that
the person speaking had re-posted links
to the relevant website, to various
people in Queensland. The recordings included statements to the effect that
that person had
recruited Holt for his technical expertise, giving instructions
to Holt about setting up the website and forwarding material to Holt
post on the website.
cross-examination, the undercover operative accepted that he did not tell the
appellant he was a police officer. He agreed
that his investigation was
primarily to locate the twins. He accepted that in his telephone conversations
with the appellant, the
appellant had stated, “over and over and
over” that he wanted a reinvestigation into the allegations by the twins
their father had been sexually abusing
He agreed that in contacting
the appellant, his main objective was to find the twins and return them to their
[33] There was
no admission at trial by the appellant that he was the person speaking to the
undercover operative. Accordingly, a
central issue for the jury to consider in
respect of those recordings, was whether the jury was satisfied to the requisite
that the person speaking on the phone was the appellant.
[34] The trial
judge directed the jury that before it could be satisfied of the
appellant’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt, the
jury must first be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, that the appellant was the person speaking to
the undercover operative and
that it was satisfied that the appellant was
admitting to that undercover operative, that he was responsible for the
publication
of the material on the website and that he knew that it would be an
account of the Family Court proceedings and that he published
it nonetheless
intending that that account of the proceedings be published on the website. The
jury was directed that in respect
of counts 6, 7 and 8, the jury had to be
satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that the appellant intended for the postings
website to be offensive.
Consideration
[35] An issue
sought to be agitated by the appellant at trial was an order of the Family Court
of Australia permitting publication
of the Family Court proceedings, as
authorised by the Court. The appellant sought, in cross-examination, to pursue
the existence
of that order. On numerous occasions, the trial judge ruled that
that order had no relevance to his publications as they had not
been authorised
by the Court.
[36] Notwithstanding
those repeated rulings, the appellant again sought to agitate its existence in
cross-examination of the undercover
operative. In the absence of the jury, the
trial judge reminded the appellant that she had ruled that the existence of the
was irrelevant and that the questioning was therefore impermissible.
[37] Upon the
return of the jury, the appellant persisted in raising the existence of the
order with the undercover operative. There
then occurred the following
exchange, in the presence of the jury:
“APPELLANT: Are you
aware or unaware that the Family Court made an order allowing publication of
identifying details of the
parties and children?
PROSECUTOR: I object.
HER HONOUR: Well, that is - - -
PROSECUTOR: I object to that.
HER HONOUR: That is not true. You know it is not true.
DEFENDANT: Okay. I apologise. I don’t know. Okay. And I’m
being genuine. I will move on by – sorry. Really
sorry. Have we –
we’ve discussed before media pictures.
PROSECUTOR: Your Honour, can I – we have a moment in the absence of the
jury. I want to discuss this
[38] After the
trial judge asked the jury to retire, the trial judge informed the appellant
that there was no need to apologise and
that the trial judge needed to ensure
that the trial did not run off on tangents that were unnecessary, irrelevant and
inadmissible.
There was a further discussion about questions the appellant
still wanted to ask and upon the return of the jury the appellant completed
cross-examination and the Crown closed its case.
[39] When the
appellant was called upon, he asked for time before responding. The trial judge
adjourned the trial to the next day.
On the following morning, the appellant
made an application for discharge of the jury on the basis of the exchange
between him and
the trial judge. The trial judge described that exchange as
“probably an imprudent thing to
and expressed concern to
ensure that she did not suggest to the jury that the appellant was a person who
is untrustworthy. The trial
judge indicated that the jury would be told that
the trial judge had misspoken when stopping the appellant from asking the
and that the trial judge did not mean to imply that he was being
untruthful. On that basis, the application for a mistrial was refused.
[40] Upon the
return of the jury, the trial judge addressed them as
“... I need to correct something I said yesterday
– yesterday [the appellant] was cross-examining one of the witnesses
commenced a question about court orders. And I stopped him at that point.
I stopped him from continuing. That was because
the matter had no
relevance to the charges before you. But in – in stopping him,
I misspoke and I just want to clear that
up. I did not mean to suggest in
any way that [the appellant] was being deliberately deceitful or dishonest. It
he was stopped because the direction he was going is irrelevant
to these charges.”
[41] After that
statement, the appellant was called upon and replied that he would not be
introducing evidence or calling any witnesses.
Thereafter the appellant
addressed the jury and the trial judge summed up to the jury.
appellant submits that a miscarriage of justice occurred because of the trial
judge’s refusal to discharge the jury
because no direction was sufficient
to overcome the prejudice caused by the trial judge’s comment “you
know it is not
[43] Whilst the
Crown submits that the trial judge’s observation would not have been
understood by the jury to be implying that
the appellant was deliberately
dishonest, there is no other way in which to understand the trial judge’s
statement “you
know it is not true”. That was the view of the trial
judge, who specifically addressed the jury in an effort to overcome that
implication.
[44] To imply to
a jury that the appellant was being deliberately dishonest is to disparage the
appellant before the jury. That was
an error. However, the establishment of
such an error does not of itself give rise to a miscarriage of justice. To be a
miscarriage
of justice, such an error must be shown to be material in the sense
that it could realistically have affected the reasoning of the
jury to its
In the context of the
present error, ‘could’ means “having the capacity to”
and “realistically”
relates to the possibility of a different
outcome that is not merely fanciful or
improbable.
undertaking the inquiry required by materiality in the instant case, it is
relevant to have regard not only to the error.
Also relevant is the time at
which it occurred, the issues which were truly in dispute for determination by
the jury, and the fact
that the appellant was not legally represented and was
acting as his own advocate.
[46] Although
the appellant submits that the test of materiality is met because the
disparagement went to his honesty and occurred
just prior to the closing of the
Crown case and before he addressed the jury, the disparagement was quickly
addressed and repudiated
in the clearest of terms by the trial judge. That
repudiation occurred before the appellant addressed the jury.
[47] Further,
the issues in dispute for determination by the jury did not involve whether the
appellant had acted honestly. To the
contrary, the Crown made an express
admission to the jury that the appellant at all times believed that the twins
had been sexually
[48] The only
other potential issue, which concerned believing the appellant, namely, whether
he was the person talking to the undercover
operative, was never seriously in
dispute. Not only did the appellant not challenge the undercover operative on
this issue, his
questioning of that operative was premised on the conversations
being between him and the
[49] When regard
is had to those circumstances, it cannot be said that the error by the trial
judge could realistically have affected
the reasoning of the jury to a verdict
[50] That being
so, there was no miscarriage of justice by reason of the trial judge’s
refusal to discharge the jury. The exercise
of the discretion to discharge a
jury concerns fairness or
Here, the discharge
of the jury was not necessary to ensure fairness as the error did not have the
capacity for practical
appellant submits that a miscarriage of justice occurred because the directions
to the jury about what was said to be admissions
by the appellant in
conversations with the undercover operative and Holt, failed to direct the jury
that it had to be satisfied as
to the truth and accuracy of those statements,
beyond reasonable doubt.
relevant directions given by the trial judge were in the following
“Now, the recordings. [The appellant] made it clear in
his closing address that he was not admitting that that was him on the
recordings. So that is an issue for you to decide. The prosecution relies on
things said by the person they say is [the appellant]
in those recordings. They
say that the statements made by that person supports the prosecution case
against him. In order to rely
on any statement that [the appellant] made in the
recordings as an admission that may tend to incriminate him or point to his
you must first be persuaded that this man – the accused in our
court – is the person who said it. That [the appellant]
said it. And
secondly, that what he said in that respect was
[53] Whilst it
is correct that the Crown advanced those statements as admissions, they were
advanced as admissions as to the appellant’s
involvement in, and the
placement of material on, the website as well as knowledge that that material
gave an account of Family Court
proceedings which was in breach of
Family Law Act
. As such, the statements were being advanced as
statements against interest going to prove the appellant’s guilt of the
not as confessions to the commission of the offences themselves.
[54] One that is
understood, the obligation on the trial judge was to direct the jury that it
must be satisfied as to the truth and
accuracy of each statement before acting
upon those statements as going to prove the appellant’s guilt.
[55] The trial
judge’s direction expressly directed the jury that in order to rely on any
of the statements in the recordings
as an admission that may point to guilt, the
jury had to be first satisfied that the appellant was the person who said it and
that what he said was truthful. There was no obligation on the trial
judge, in the circumstances, to direct the jury that they had
to be satisfied as
to the truth and accuracy of each of those statements beyond reasonable doubt.
There was no miscarriage of justice
by reason of the failure to do
Ground 2(b)
appellant submits that a miscarriage of justice occurred because the trial
judge’s direction about the admissions in
the appellant’s
conversation with the undercover operative failed to direct the jury that before
it could use each statement
it had to be satisfied of the truth and accuracy of
each statement.
considering this ground, it is important to have regard to a later direction
given to the jury in the following terms:
“If you are
satisfied – if you accept that – if you accept that [the appellant]
admitted to the undercover agent
that he was responsible for that material
– then what was published in relation to
section 121
can also be
taken into account when you are considering this issue of whether or not there
has been some admission by [the appellant]
that is relevant to this offence. It
is a matter for you whether you think that the combination of the things that he
said to the
undercover agent by themselves or the combi – what he said to
the undercover agent and what he had posted online, combine to
amount to a
– effectively, an admission by him that what was being published in this
website was an account of proceedings
in the Family Court. That he knew it
would be an account of proceedings in the Family Court and he, nonetheless,
still published.
Intending that that account of proceedings in the Family Court
be published.
What you make of the material, of the conversation, is a matter for you.
What you make of the material in the trial book is a matter for
consideration of the summing up as a whole supports a conclusion that there was
no miscarriage of justice. The jury were properly
directed as to the need to be
satisfied of the truth and accuracy of the statements said to be admissions.
The trial judge directed
the jury, that it had to be satisfied that what was
said by the appellant was true.
There was no need for the trial judge to specifically direct the jury that they
must be satisfied as to the truth and accuracy of
[59] I would
[60] BRADLEY
I agree with Boddice
An application for leave to
appeal sentence was abandoned at the hearing.
AB 875/45–AB 876/15.
AB 903/11–AB 903/18.
Brawn v The King
AB 869/10; AB 869/35; AB
Crofts v The Queen
[1996] HCA 22
(1996) 186 CLR 427
R v Bosscher
AB 119/38–AB
AB 137/34–AB
AB 119/38–AB
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (208 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter