URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/207.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parklands Blue Metal Pty Ltd v Sunshine Coast Regional Council [2025] QCA 207 (28 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Parklands Blue Metal Pty Ltd v Sunshine Coast Regional Council
[2025] QCA 207
PARKLANDS BLUE METAL PTY LTD
(ACN 010 471
(applicant)
SUNSHINE COAST REGIONAL
(first respondent)
CHIEF EXECUTIVE ADMINISTERING THE
TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE ACT
(second respondent/not a party to the
application)
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT,
TOURISM, SCIENCE AND INNOVATION (FORMERLY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND HERITAGE
PROTECTION), AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES, MINES
AND ENERGY (FORMERLY DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES
respondent/not a party to the application)
YANDINA CREEK PROGRESS
ASSOCIATION
(fourth respondent/not a party to the application)
Appeal No 1275 of 2025
P & E Appeal No 247 of 2011
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Application for Leave
Planning and Environment Court Act
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Maroochydore –
[2024] QPEC 52
DELIVERED ON:
28 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
8 September 2025
Bond and Doyle JJA and Crowley J
is granted to appeal.
appeal is allowed.
proceedings are remitted to the Planning & Environment Court to determine
what conditions, if any, are to be imposed.
respondent is to pay the appellant’s costs of the appeal on the standard
CATCHWORDS:
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING – PLANNING – DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT
AND CONTROL – DECISIONS: CONSENTS, APPROVALS AND PERMITS
CONDITIONS – POWER TO IMPOSE – where the Council rejected
Parkland’s application for a development approval
to operate a hard rock
quarry – where Parklands successfully appealed that decision to the
P&E Court – where the
remaining disputed question before the P&E
Court concerned the means by which and the extent to which Parklands should be
responsible
for ongoing maintenance of the haulage road – where the
Council contended for conditions imposing an obligation on Parklands
to maintain
the haulage road for the life of the development – where Parklands
advanced a construction of the relevant Acts
that meant it was not lawful
to impose such conditions – where the primary judge imposed the conditions
for which the Council
contended – where a condition about non-trunk
infrastructure must be ‘for supplying infrastructure’ –
the maintenance conditions are about trunk infrastructure and for
supplying infrastructure – whether the primary judge erred
in finding that
s 5.1.2 of the
Integrated Planning Act 1997
(Qld) (IPA) permitted
the imposition of the maintenance conditions
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING – PLANNING – DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT
AND CONTROL – DECISIONS: CONSENTS, APPROVALS AND PERMITS
CONDITIONS – POWER TO IMPOSE – where Parklands contended that the
maintenance conditions impermissibly seek to
shift from Council to Parklands,
the statutory obligation to maintain the road, which it says lies with the
Council under the
Local Government Act 2009
(Qld) – whether a local
government must maintain exclusive and direct control of the roads and be
directly responsible for
the conduct of any work on the roads – whether
the maintenance conditions operate to exclude the haulage road from the
control under its statutory obligation
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING – PLANNING – DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT
AND CONTROL – DECISIONS: CONSENTS, APPROVALS AND PERMITS
CONDITIONS – POWER TO IMPOSE – where Parklands contended below that
it should pay a levy towards the additional
costs of the maintenance of the road
–where the primary judge found that there was no power to impose a levy
such a condition will only be within power if it is about
non-trunk infrastructure and ‘for supplying infrastructure’
where a condition of this nature must state the infrastructure to be supplied
and when the infrastructure must be supplied
–whether s 5.1.2(1) of the
IPA permits a condition for the payment of financial contributions for or of the
costs of the maintenance
of the haulage road
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING – PLANNING – DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT
AND CONTROL – DECISIONS: CONSENTS, APPROVALS AND PERMITS
CONDITIONS – RELEVANCE AND REASONABLENESS – where Parklands contends
that the maintenance conditions are an unreasonable
imposition or not reasonably
required within the meaning of s 3.5.30 of the IPA – where Parklands
argues that the conditions
do not recognise the fact that they are not the sole
beneficiary of the haulage road or the saved costs of the Council given they
would otherwise have to maintain the current roads – where Parklands
submits that the primary judge failed to have regard to
these features –
where Parklands further contends that they may be exposed to third party claims
for loss or damage –
where Parklands asserts that performance of these
conditions may oblige them to obtain operational works approvals which would
with the stipulated timings in the maintenance conditions –
where Parklands suggests that this kind of condition is novel –
Parklands points to what it says is a well-established and reliable means of
obtaining a contribution from it to the marginal
costs of the maintenance of the
road – whether the primary judge erred in finding that the maintenance
conditions were not
unreasonable
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING – PLANNING – DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT
AND CONTROL – DECISIONS: CONSENTS, APPROVALS AND PERMITS
CONDITIONS – RELEVANCE AND REASONABLENESS – where the primary judge
considered the reasonableness of the proposed
levy condition, despite
determining it was without power – whether, if there had been a power to
impose a levy, the primary
judge erred in finding that such a condition
should nevertheless not be imposed
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING – COURTS AND TRIBUNALS WITH ENVIRONMENT
LEAVE TO APPEAL
– where an appeal from a decision of the P&E Court requires Parklands
to demonstrate an error or mistake
in law or jurisdictional error – where
an appeal of this nature only lies with leave of this Court – whether
appeal should be granted
Integrated Planning Act 1997
(Qld), s 1.2.1, s 1.2.3, s 3.5.30,
s 3.5.32, s 5.1.1, s 5.1.2, s 5.1.6, s 5.1.10, s 5.1.12, s 5.1.20,
s 5.1.25, s 5.1.27, s 5.1.29,
Local Government Act 2009
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
Ajana Park Pty Ltd v Mackay City Council
[2011] 1 Qd R 403;
Allen Commercial Constructions Pty Ltd v North Sydney
Municipal Council
(1970) 123 CLR 490
[1970] HCA 42
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v BHF Solutions
(2022) 293 FCR 330
[2022] FCAFC 108
Collin C Donges
& Associates Pty Ltd v Baulkham Hills Shire Council
(1989) 67 LGRA 370
Felixstowe Pty Ltd v Gladstone City Council
(1994) 85 LGERA
Hymix Industries Pty Ltd v Alberton Investments Pty
[2002] QPELR 116
McNab Developments Pty Ltd v Toowoomba City Council
[2009] QPELR 361
[2008] QPEC 118
, considered
(2002) 54 NSWLR
[2002] NSWCCA 186
Sabdoran Pty Ltd v Hervey Bay Town
[1983] 2 Qd R 172
Western Australian
Planning Commission v Temwood Holdings Pty Ltd
(2004) 221 CLR 30
D R Gore KC, with J D Houston, for the appellant
C L Hughes KC, with A N
S Skoien, for the first respondent
SOLICITORS:
P&E Law for the appellant
Sunshine Coast Regional Council Legal
Services for the first respondent
I agree with the reasons for judgment of Doyle JA and with the orders
proposed by his Honour.
This appeal raises issues as to the limits of the power to impose
conditions about non-trunk infrastructure in a decision granting
a development
[3] In 2009,
Parklands Blue Metal Pty Ltd (Parklands) applied for a development approval to
operate a hard rock quarry at Yandina.
The first respondent, the Sunshine Coast
Regional Council (the Council) rejected that application, and that rejection was
successfully
appealed to the Planning & Environment Court (the P&E
Court). What remained outstanding after the initial hearing of that
the determination of conditions to be attached to the development approval.
Most of them are now resolved. Parklands
is to upgrade the current partly
unsealed road to make it suitable for use as a haulage road. This is not in
issue. The remaining
disputed question concerns the means by which and the
extent to which Parklands should be responsible for the ongoing maintenance
that haulage road.
common ground between the parties below that at least some contribution towards
maintenance of that haulage road should
be made by Parklands. Parklands
contended below that it should pay what it referred to as a ‘levy’
towards the additional
costs of the maintenance of the road to be calculated as
a figure per tonne of material extracted from the quarry (the Levy Condition).
The Council on the other hand contended for conditions that impose upon
Parklands the obligation for maintaining the haulage road
for the life of the
development (the Maintenance Conditions). These remain the primary positions of
both parties. Parklands, as
its fall-back position, also relied on a
construction of the relevant Act that, if adopted, would mean it was not lawful
either type of condition.
[5] The primary
judge determined that dispute in favour of imposing the conditions for which the
Council contended. This was done
by orders made 14 February 2025, but
reflecting Reasons delivered 17 December 2024 (First Reasons) which dealt with
most issues,
and further Reasons delivered 17 February 2025 (Second Reasons).
The Second Reasons dealt with one residual issue concerning the
likelihood of
the maintenance work to be conducted by Parklands requiring further operational
works approvals to be obtained.
contended by Parklands that the primary judge fell into a number of errors,
which it characterises as errors of law.
Nature of Application
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
(Qld) Parklands
may appeal a decision of the P&E Court “but only on the ground of
error or mistake in law or jurisdictional
error”. Even then that appeal
may only be made with leave of the Court of Appeal. Given the nature of the
issues involved
both the application for leave and the appeal were heard
Grant of Leave
[8] The issues
raised are such that, in my view, leave should be granted for this
The Conclusions of the Primary judge
[9] The primary
judge summarised the dispute before him (with welcome economy) in [5] of his
Honour’s First Reasons as follows:
“The dispute between
Parklands and the Council distils to two questions. First, can a levy of the
kind proposed by Parklands
be lawfully imposed? Secondly, what should be
Parklands’ responsibility for the maintenance of the haulage
[10] His Honour
then determined in relation to those questions:
(a) First, that the kind of Levy Condition proposed by Parklands could not
lawfully be imposed; but alternatively, even if it could
there were certain
problems which his Honour identified such that he would not have “adopted
Parklands’ proposal”:
First Reasons [68].
(b) Second, that there was power to impose the Maintenance Conditions sought by
the Council and that the particular conditions were
relevant and not
unreasonable or reasonably required in each case in the senses these expressions
are used in s 3.5.30(1) of the
Integrated Planning Act 1997
(Qld) (IPA):
First Reasons [49] and [78].
(c) In the course of reaching his conclusion on the second question the primary
judge rejected submissions put to him as to why the
Council’s particular
Maintenance Conditions could not or ought not be imposed on the basis of: it
being an unlawful or an unreasonable
shift by the Council of its road
maintenance obligations to Parklands; that the public would at least to some
material extent benefit
from the haulage road’s upgrade and maintenance
and that it is unreasonable to visit the whole of the costs or burden of the
maintenance on Parklands not only now but into the future; and the possibility
(remote as the primary judge found) that Parklands
would need to make an
application for approval to conduct operational works in relation to any future
maintenance was such as to
render the imposition of the conditions urged by the
Council not reasonable.
Grounds of Appeal
[11] The grounds
of appeal are:
: The primary judge erred in
law in deciding that conditions should be imposed on the approval that made the
appellant (
) responsible for the maintenance of the quarry
haulage route for the life of the quarry namely, conditions 38 and 59 (and
Note 12) (re routine maintenance) and conditions 60 to 67 (re general
maintenance) (
the First Respondent’s proposed conditions
1A the primary judge erred in principle in regarding it as legally open to
shift the First Respondent’s statutory maintenance
obligations onto
1B the primary judge erred in principle in dismissing the complications that
would arise in the future as a result of the clash between
Respondent’s obligations as a highway authority and Parklands’
obligations under the First Respondent’s
proposed conditions, as not
providing a reasoned basis for concluding that those conditions would be an
unreasonable imposition on
the development, for the purposes of s.3.5.30 of the
Integrated Planning Act
1C the primary judge asked himself the wrong question, when he stated that
his decision about conditions was not at large, and posited
that there were only
2 proposals to consider (Parklands’ levy proposal and the First
Respondent’s proposed conditions),
whereas the correct question was
whether the First Respondent’s proposed conditions could be, or ought to
be, imposed (ie.
irrespective of any countervailing levy condition);
1D alternatively to Ground 1C:
(a) having wrongly decided that there was no power to impose a levy condition
(ie Ground 2A), the primary judge failed to take a
relevant consideration into
account, namely, that there was a reasonable alternative to the First
Respondent’s proposed conditions;
(b) alternatively, the primary judge wrongly decided that there was power to
impose the First Respondent’s proposed conditions
(ie Ground 2B);
1E the primary judge erred in law in deciding that the possibility that the
routine maintenance conditions would constitute ‘
operational
’ under the
Planning Act
) was remote
and that that was a basis for deciding that the First Respondent’s
proposed conditions were not unreasonable for
the purposes of s.3.5.30 of IPA
(ie Ground 3);
1F the primary judge erred in law in deciding that a levy condition should
not be imposed, in view of difficulties with its calculation
(ie Ground 4);
1G in view of Grounds lA to lF, the primary judge erred in principle in
failing to decide that it was beyond power, or unreasonable
(for the purposes of
s.3.5.30 of IPA), to impose the First Respondent’s proposed
conditions.
: The primary judge erred in law in deciding that:
2A there was no power to impose a levy as a condition of Parklands’
approval, because, as a matter of statutory interpretation,
the primary judge
erred in failing to conclude that s.5.1.2 of the IPA conferred such a power;
2B further or alternatively, there was power to impose the First
Respondent’s proposed conditions because:
(a) applying the reasoning of the primary judge with respect to Parklands’
levy proposal, the First Respondent’s conditions
are not directly
concerned with the provision of infrastructure;
(b) the First Respondent’s conditions do not constitute ‘
used for supporting economic activity and meeting environmental needs
for the purposes of the definition of ‘
infrastructure
: The primary judge erred in law in deciding that the
possibility that the routine maintenance conditions in the First
Respondent’s
proposed conditions would constitute ‘
operational
’ under the PA was remote and that that was a basis for deciding
that the First Respondent’s proposed conditions were
not unreasonable, for
the purposes of s.3.5.30 of IPA, because:
3A the primary judge erred in principle in failing to recognise that a
determination as to whether any of the routine maintenance
would constitute
operational work could not be made in advance of the time when any such work
would be required during the estimated
40 year life of the quarry;
3B the primary judge failed to ask himself the correct question, namely,
whether it was open to him to make any determination about
the correct
characterisation of work that was not known with specificity at the time of the
determination;
3C further or alternatively to Grounds 3A and 3B, on the evidence before the
primary judge, it was not reasonably open for him to
conclude that the routine
maintenance in the First Respondent’s proposed conditions would not come
within the definition of
operational work
’ in the PA.
: The primary judge erred in law in deciding that a levy
condition (if within power) should nevertheless not be imposed, because:
4A the primary judge erred by failing to apply the principle that such a
condition could only be expected to yield a fair, but not
4B the primary judge erred by failing to take into account the evidence that
it was possible to apply an appropriate index to the
calculation of the levy
that appeared in the 2018 Joint Expert Report;
4C the primary judge erred by failing to take into account the concessions
made by Mr Healey in his evidence in 2024, and that Mr
Healey’s evidence
in 2017 was based on a flexible pavement, not the concrete pavement proposed by
Parklands in 2024;
4D the primary judge erred in principle in failing to accept that, in the
particular circumstances of this case, any difficulties
in calculating the levy
did not provide a proper reason for deciding that the condition should not be
4E it is an error in principle, and involves a failure to correctly take into
account what are or are not relevant matters, to fail
to exercise the conditions
power in a way that would result in a significant public purpose outcome,
by reliance upon the resolution
of administrative matters which, even
unresolved, could not, or should not, impede the achievement of the public
purpose outcome.”
[12] Notwithstanding
the complexity with which the grounds are expressed, and their overlap, it is
convenient to deal with them in
respect to the following issues:
(a) Whether there was any power (collectively the Power Issue) to impose:
condition seeking a financial contribution by Parklands to the maintenance of
the road, being a ‘levy’ of the kind suggested
(the Levy Power
(ii) the Maintenance Conditions (putting aside the question of whether doing so
would be relevant and not unreasonable or reasonably
required so as to fall
within the scope of the power in s 3.5.30 of
(the Maintenance
Power Issue))?
(b) Whether it was unreasonable to impose the Council’s Maintenance
Conditions (the Maintenance Reasonable Issue)?
(c) Whether the primary judge erred in determining not to impose
Parklands’ proposed condition (the Levy Reasonable Issue)?
(d) Whether any identified errors can be said to fall within the right of appeal
to this Court (the
Planning Act
The Power Issues
General Statutory Scheme
[13] It was
common ground between the parties that the question of power of the Council and
the Court to impose any condition was
to be assessed under the
process for making the decisions contemplated that the assessment manager could
impose conditions: s 3.5.11 and the decision
notice of that decision was to
include those conditions: s 3.5.15.
[14] There are
two constraints upon the imposition of conditions which it is necessary to
consider for this appeal.
[15] First,
under s 3.5.30 it is stated that:
“(1) A condition
(a) be relevant to, but not an unreasonable imposition on, the development or
use of premises as a consequence of the development;
(b) be reasonably required in respect of the development or use of premises as a
consequence of the development.”
[16] There is no
issue in this case that both the Levy Condition and the Maintenance Conditions
would be “relevant” and
the contention in relation to the
application of this section has been whether either is an “unreasonable
imposition”
or “reasonably required” within the meaning of
these expressions in the above sub-paragraphs. For convenience, unless
otherwise necessary, I shall in these reasons use the shorthand of referring to
the reasonableness (or unreasonableness) of the conditions
when referring to the
requirements of s 3.5.30(1)(a) or (b).
[17] Second, s
3.5.32 governs what a condition must not do. It provides, relevantly, as
“(1) A condition must not—
(b) for infrastructure to which chapter 5,
applies, require (other than
under chapter 5,
(i) a monetary payment for the establishment, operating and maintenance costs of
the infrastructure; or
(ii) works to be carried out for the infrastructure; or
(c) state that works required to be carried out for a development must be
undertaken by an entity other than the applicant;
[18] Again, the
focus of this appeal has been on s 3.5.32(1)(b) which in turn requires
consideration of Chapter 5
That part is entitled
“Infrastructure Planning and Funding”. It draws a distinction
between “non-trunk infrastructure”
infrastructure”. The Court was informed by the parties that the haulage
road is non-trunk infrastructure.
Non-trunk infrastructure is defined in
as development infrastructure which is not trunk infrastructure.
That latter expression means “development infrastructure
identified in a
priority infrastructure plan as trunk infrastructure”: sch 10. The
priority infrastructure plan is one prepared
by the local government which
identified the local authorities’ plans for infrastructure it intends to
supply identifying the
assumptions the local government makes as to the type,
scale, location and timing of future growth upon which the plan is based and
other matters. This has significance when considering the provisions in
for raising charges for the provision of that trunk infrastructure,
to which I shall return.
[19] Section
5.1.2 (which is within Chapter 5
local government imposes a condition about non-trunk infrastructure, the
condition may only be for supplying infrastructure
for 1 or more of the
(a) networks internal to the premises;
(b) connecting the premises to external infrastructure networks;
(c) protecting or maintaining the safety or efficiency of the infrastructure
network of which the non-trunk infrastructure is a component.
(2) The condition must state—
(a) the infrastructure to be supplied; and
(b) when the infrastructure must be supplied.”
[20] The primary
judge concluded (in his discussion of the power to impose the Maintenance
Conditions) that, assuming otherwise it
was within the scope of the section, the
condition fell within s 5.1.2(1)(c), as being one for protecting or maintaining
or efficiency of the infrastructure network of which the non-trunk
infrastructure is a component: First Reasons [48]. That aspect
of the First
Reasons is not the subject of challenge and indeed that s 5.1.2(1)(c) was
applicable was accepted by both
[21] In respect
of trunk infrastructure, Divisions 3 and following of
make provision for
the levying of charges or the imposition of conditions for a contribution
towards the provision, or for the supply
of infrastructure. In doing so
distinctions are drawn between a levy and conditions, between the provision of
the infrastructure
and payment as a contribution towards that, and indeed to
some extent between establishment costs and maintenance costs. It will
necessary to come back to these differing provisions later, but it is apparent
that Division 2 (non-trunk infrastructure) does
not contain such elaborate
provisions and in particular has no provisions expressly referring to a money
payment on account of the
supply of maintenance or the supply of infrastructure.
The primary judge relied on this in part in his construction of s 5.1.2.
[22] Certain of
the terms used in those provisions are defined: sch 10. Non-trunk
infrastructure is defined to mean “development
infrastructure that is not
trunk infrastructure”. Trunk infrastructure is “development
infrastructure identified in
a priority infrastructure plan as trunk
infrastructure”. Development infrastructure is defined to mean,
materially, “land
or works or both land and works for ... transport
infrastructure (including roads, vehicle lay-bys, traffic control
devices...)”.
Additionally, reliance was placed on the definition of
“Infrastructure” which is defined as including “land,
facilities,
services and works
used for supporting
economic activity and meeting environmental needs”.
Approach to Construing IPA
observations of Walsh J in
Allen Commercial Constructions Pty Ltd v North
Sydney Municipal Council
[1970] HCA 42
(1970) 123 CLR 490
at 499 to 500 (applied
unanimously in
Bathurst City Council v PWC Properties Pty Ltd
[1998] HCA 59
offer a helpful starting point in approaching the construction of
the power of a planning authority to impose conditions.
[24] His Honour
observed that such power is to be understood:
“not as giving
an unlimited discretion as to the conditions which may be imposed, but as
conferring a power to impose conditions
which are reasonably capable of being
regarded as related to the purpose for which the function of the authority is
being exercised,
as ascertained from a consideration of the scheme and of the
Act under which it is made. This purpose may be conveniently described,
accordance with the expression used by Lord Jenkins in
Fawcett Properties Ltd
v Buckingham County Council
, as being ‘the implementation of planning
policy’, provided that it is borne in mind that it is from the Act and
any relevant provisions of the Ordinance, and not from some preconceived
general notion of what constitutes planning, that the scope
of planning policy
is to be ascertained.”
[25] It follows
that a determination of the scope of a power (or limit on a power) to impose a
condition requires a review of the
relevant legislative regime and consideration
of the planning policy.
The Primary Judge’s
[26] Assuming
that a condition is otherwise permitted within the language of s 3.5.30 (as
reasonable) a condition seeking to impose
some burden for the payment of future
maintenance of the haulage road would be lawful unless it was precluded by
s 3.5.32. Both
the Levy Condition and the Maintenance Conditions would be
precluded by s 3.5.32 (1)(b). That is because the Levy Condition would
fall within subparagraph (i) while the Maintenance Conditions would fall within
subparagraph (ii). That is unless the condition
was something ‘under
non-trunk infrastructure, s 5.1.2 would authorise those conditions but only if
the condition was ‘for supplying infrastructure’
and for one or more
of the purposes stated.
[28] In relation
to the Maintenance Conditions, the primary judge found at First Reasons
“The effect of section 3.5.32 is that a condition may
not be imposed which requires works to be carried out for the infrastructure,
other than as permitted by Chapter 5,
of the IPA. The maintenance
proposal of the Council would amount to works being carried out in relation to
the non-trunk infrastructure.
To be permitted, they must be consistent with
section 5.1.2. Section 5.1.2 allowed ‘a condition about non-trunk
infrastructure
... for supplying infrastructure for ... protecting or
maintaining the safety or efficiency of the infrastructure network of which
non-trunk infrastructure is a component’. The works involved in the
maintenance of the haulage route would be infrastructure
for maintaining the
safety and efficiency of the network. Unlike a monetary payment, maintenance
works were specifically contemplated
by section 5.1.2.”
[29] In this
passage the primary judge has concluded that the maintenance work is itself
‘infrastructure’. The Council
submitted on appeal that the
performance of maintenance on the haulage road is itself ‘works’
within the meaning of the
definition of infrastructure (and by extension the
definition of development infrastructure).
[30] I do not
accept that reasoning (that is that maintenance is supplying infrastructure
because it is works) for reasons to which
I shall return later.
[31] As to the
Levy Condition, the primary judge found that such a condition cannot be imposed:
First Reasons [8] and [36].
[32] The central
aspects of his Honour’s First Reasons are as
“[36] Section 5.1.2 permitted a condition in relation
to non-trunk infrastructure only where it was for ‘supplying
infrastructure’
for one or more of the purposes identified in the section.
Parklands argues that ‘supplying’ is to be given a broad meaning
would include contributing money to defray the cost to the Council (or other
responsible entity) of providing the infrastructure.
The Council contends that
the provision should be given its ordinary meaning, and that to be valid the
condition must be concerned
directly with the provision of infrastructure.
[37] In my view, the Council’s submission must be accepted.
[38] The text of section 5.1.2 is unambiguous. If a local government wished
to impose a condition about non-trunk infrastructure pursuant
provisions of the IPA, that condition could only be for supplying infrastructure
for one or more of the identified purposes.
‘Infrastructure’ was
defined in the IPA as including ‘land, facilities, services and works used
for supporting
activity and meeting environmental needs’. This definition
indicates that ‘supplying infrastructure’ meant to supply
facilities, services or works of this kind. That is, section 5.1.2
envisaged an arrangement for the provision of the infrastructure
itself, rather
than a payment to defray the costs of the infrastructure. While the definition
was inclusive, rather than exhaustive,
the text does not support a conclusion
that ‘supplying infrastructure’ can be sensibly read as paying a
levy to defray
the costs of infrastructure.”
[33] The primary
judge drew support for his conclusion by contrasting the levies provided for in
in relation to trunk infrastructure with the provision for
non-trunk infrastructure being limited to a condition “for supplying
infrastructure”. His Honour derived no assistance from some earlier
observations by Robin QC DCJ in
McNab Developments Pty Ltd v Toowoomba City
[2008] QPEC 118
[2009] QPELR 361
: First Reasons [41]-[44].
[34] The primary
judge expressed his conclusion that the definition of
‘infrastructure’ does not support a conclusion
that ‘supplying
infrastructure’ can be sensibly read as including paying a levy to defray
the costs of infrastructure.
[35] In my view,
this is the wrong question. The financial contribution may not itself be
infrastructure, but it does not follow
that a condition requiring its payment is
not ‘for supplying infrastructure’. Whether it can be said to be
such a condition
requires a close consideration of the text of s 5.1.2 and
contextual indications.
The Maintenance Power Issue
[36] For the
reasons which follow, in my view it was within the power conferred by
s 5.1.2 to impose the Maintenance Conditions.
“for supplying infrastructure” in s 5.1.2
[37] Condition
38 which the primary judge imposed required Parklands to construct the haulage
road to certain standards. No issue
is taken about that aspect of the
condition. It would satisfy the description of being a condition about
non-trunk infrastructure
and be for supplying infrastructure (and for one of the
nominated purposes). It was not suggested that this condition was excluded
3.5.30 as not reasonable.
[38] The same
condition also requires Parklands to maintain the road at no cost to the Council
in accordance with Advisory Note 12.
Condition 59 requires the road to be
maintained in accordance with Condition 38.
[39] The case
was not argued at first instance or on appeal on the basis that the issue of the
power of the Council to impose the
condition is to be approached by considering
whether it was one for the supply of infrastructure (the haulage road) with the
maintenance
obligation being ancillary to it. That being the case, in these
reasons I shall proceed on the same basis. That does not however,
ignoring the language employed in s 5.1.2 itself.
mentioned, the primary judge found (and the Council submits) that provision of
maintenance is supplying infrastructure because
it is works. Infrastructure is
defined (in sch 10 of
) to include “land, facilities, services
and works used for supporting economic activity and meeting environmental
The word ‘works’ when used in this definition is
inapt to refer to the performance of activities (working). Rather
it identifies
facilities or works which themselves are things capable of being used for
supporting economic activity and meeting
environmental need. This is supported
by reference to the Explanatory Note accompanying the introduction of the
replacement Chapter
The word ‘works’ when used in the definition of development
infrastructure (which is more directly relevant because
of its use in the
definition of non-trunk infrastructure) has a similar meaning. In context, it
is a word used to identify lay-bys,
or traffic control measures, and the like
and not the performance of work.
[41] Accordingly,
I do not accept that the Maintenance Conditions provide for ‘works’
within the meaning of the definition
of infrastructure (or the definition of
development infrastructure). But for a different reason in my opinion the
Maintenance Conditions
do fall within the category of conditions permissible
under s 5.1.2(1).
s 5.1.2 permits is a condition
non-trunk infrastructure only
supplying infrastructure and that the supplying is for specified
(a) The use of the word ‘about’ is apt to capture something wider
than if the section merely stated the condition had
to be for the supply of
infrastructure for the nominated purposes:
[2002] NSWCCA 186
. It contemplates a connection to the subject matter in some way, in
the sense of being concerned with
But the language does not
require that there be a direct supply of infrastructure for the condition to be
(b) The condition must be ‘for supplying infrastructure’. The
preposition ‘for’ takes its character from
its context:
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v BHF Solutions Pty Ltd
[2022] FCAFC 108
(2022) 293 FCR 330
. In this context, in my view, it is used in the
sense of something intended to belong to or with, or to be on account
(c) The establishment of a road is the supplying of infrastructure. But to
ensure that road is maintained in a usable state is nonetheless
in my opinion a
condition about the road and for supplying infrastructure – namely the
supply of that road in a continuously
functional or serviceable condition. The
express reference in s 5.1.2(1)(c) to ‘maintaining’ provides
some support for
(d) It is not evident what planning purpose is served by a reading of s 5.1.2
which would not include such a condition. If the proposed
approved use of the
subject land is such as to make reasonable the imposition of the condition to
construct a haulage road suitable
to carry the heavy load trucks which the
quarry will impose on it, then that use also makes it reasonable to require the
be repaired when the entirely predictable damage to it
The intended use requires
the supply for the term of the quarry’s use of a functional haulage road
and a condition to achieve
that by requiring its maintenance is, in my view, one
supplying that non-trunk infrastructure.
Other Textual Indications
[43] Can that
conclusion be reconciled with other textual indications in
fair to say there are some obstacles to doing so.
such obstacle arises from the terms of s 5.1.2(2) which are set out
above. It requires that the condition must state the infrastructure
supplied and when it must be supplied. That language is not well suited to
refer to a maintenance condition but can accommodate
such a condition.
[45] In my view
the Maintenance Conditions are for supplying the road in a functional repaired
condition continuously throughout the
life of the quarry, to be effected by
certain identifiable steps.
The Other Divisions of
such obstacle arises from the different treatment given in
to trunk infrastructure.
charge may be levied only in relation to trunk infrastructure, not non-trunk
infrastructure. The process for creating such
a charge includes preparing a
schedule which amongst other things identified the ‘establishment cost of
the infrastructure’:
s 5.1.6(1)(d). The charge imposed then is to be
no more than the proportionate share of the ‘establishment cost of the
referrable to the premises: s 5.1.7(1)(b). The money
received must be used to provide the infrastructure for the network:
ss 5.1.10(1)(a);
5.1.20. There is nothing in
of Chapter 5 which
suggests the establishment costs will include ongoing maintenance costs.
[48] Divisions 6
to 8 contains provisions for the imposition of conditions (as distinct from
charges). They provide for relief of
different kinds against the developer
being responsible twice; once for a charge and once under a condition, and also
for the proportionate share of the use of the trunk infrastructure by
other premises. But mostly they are not explicitly concerned
with maintenance
of the resultant infrastructure. Section 5.1.27 (which is concerned with costs
for development completely or partly
outside the priority infrastructure area)
differentiates between establishment costs, and maintenance and operating costs
may be included for up to 5 years). This is not expressed as the source
of an additional power, but rather as the sum recoverable
under the power in s
5.1.25 (which is to require payment of additional trunk infrastructure
implicit assumption for these provisions may be that the Council is obliged to
maintain the trunk infrastructure and that
its costs of doing so are recoverable
under some different power (save for the specific instance mentioned in s
consideration of these divisions concerning trunk infrastructure raises issues
or comparisons relevant to the construction
of s 5.1.2.
(a) Parliament has evidently limited both charges and conditions to
establishment costs (with one exception) and not explicitly extended
maintenance costs.
(b) In relation to both levied charges and conditions for the supply of
infrastructure or financial contribution to that supply,
Parliament has
carefully calibrated the extent of relief to be afforded to the landholder or
developer and provided for the council
to actually use the money for the purpose
for which it was levied or the condition imposed.
(c) From this it may be said that the absence of
these provisions in s 5.1.2 for non-trunk infrastructure is deliberate and shows
that the conditions contemplated by that section are narrow in scope.
(d) Accordingly, it is argued by Parklands (as its fall-back position) that the
Maintenance Conditions are outside the scope of s
[51] The Court
is to prefer to other possible constructions of a provision, that which will
best achieve the purpose of the Act: section
Acts Interpretation Act
purposes of
and the means of advancing them are set out in ss 1.2.1
to 1.2.3. They are (naturally) expressed at high levels of generality and
themselves do not support a narrow reading of powers conferred on decision
makers in relation to development applications or the
conditions to be attached
to them. They are powers conferred to achieve desired planning outcomes.
[53] But in
relation to
of Chapter 5, s 5.1.1 identified its purpose in these
“(a) seek to integrate land use and infrastructure
(b) establish an infrastructure planning benchmark as a basis for an
infrastructure funding framework; and
(c) establish an infrastructure funding framework that is equitable and
accountable; and
(d) integrate State infrastructure providers into the framework.”
purposes do not seem directed to the operation of Division 2 of
contains one section (section 5.1.2) which does not provide for any
infrastructure plans or planning benchmarks. The only
one of these stated
purposes arguably served by s 5.1.2 is the establishment of an infrastructure
funding framework, but it does
so only obscurely. On the case advanced by the
Council the one thing s 5.1.2 does not deal with is funding (except by limiting
to those which provide for the actual supply of non-trunk
infrastructure).
[55] On the
other hand, Divisions 3 and following of
do serve those various purposes.
Those divisions, which relate to trunk infrastructure, provide for the giving of
notices to levy
charges on landowners, or the imposition of conditions on
developers. Trunk infrastructure is identified as such on a priority
infrastructure
plan as something the local government intends to provide. Such
plans must be prepared as required under regulated guidelines.
Parliament has
identified the extent of the burdens and relief to be afforded to the landholder
or developer under those provisions.
divisions strongly suggest that
Parliament’s focus was to make the provisions for trunk infrastructure to
give effect to the purposes identified in s 5.1.1,
and that s 5.1.2’s role
is to deal with the minor and less predictable kind of requirement where
planning and frameworks cannot
be provided.
The Explanatory
Notes & Second Reading Speech
[57] Section
5.1.2 is at least sufficiently unclear in its operation to permit recourse to
the Explanatory Notes and the Second Reading
Speech at the time the 2003
amendments to
which introduced the new Chapter 5
Explanatory Notes refer to the Bill as necessary to introduce a number of
critical reforms: page 2. In the explanation of
the Notes list
the major changes, none of which refers to non-trunk infrastructure: page 20-21.
In this regard at least the Explanatory
Notes support the view that the
Parliament’s focus was on the provisions for trunk infrastructure.
Otherwise, there is nothing
of assistance in the Explanatory Notes in relation
to the maintenance power issue.
[59] The second
reading speech of the minister casts no light on Parliament’s intention in
any material respect. Accordingly,
I derive no assistance from reference to
either of these documents beyond that of confirming the focus was
on trunk infrastructure. That affords a sound basis
for not drawing too much significance from the divergent complexity and detail
of the treatment of trunk infrastructure compared with the one provision dealing
with non-trunk infrastructure.
Conclusion Maintenance Power
[60] Accordingly,
these considerations of the context provided by the other divisions of Chapter 5
, the legislative purpose and the Explanatory Notes, do not cause me to
depart from what the language of s 5.1.2 itself suggests as
[61] I would
construe s 5.1.2 as enabling the Maintenance Conditions because they are about
non-trunk infrastructure and for supplying
infrastructure, inter alia, for
maintaining the efficiency of the infrastructure network of which the haulage
road is a component.
The very object of the conditions is the maintenance
of the safety and efficiency of the infrastructure network, and it would distort
the language of s 5.1.2 to read it as not permitting conditions which are
‘about’ non-trunk infrastructure in the sense
of seeking to achieve
that very objective.
Further Maintenance Power
[62] Apart from
the ‘fall back’ submission of Parklands addressed above, the
imposition of the Maintenance Conditions
is challenged principally on the basis
that it is not reasonable within the meaning of s 3.5.30 of
that the primary judge’s conclusion was not open to him. I shall return
to that aspect later in this judgment.
[63] There is,
however, one separate legal challenge which was sought to be made out. It is
that the Maintenance Conditions impermissibly
that obligation from the
Council to Parklands.
[64] Under the
Local Government Act 2009
(Qld) (LGA), the local government has power to
do anything that is necessary or convenient for the good rule and local
of its local government area:
Specific provisions are
made with respect to roads and other infrastructure. By
local government has control of all roads in its local government area”.
It is further provided by
that that control “includes being able
to ... construct, maintain and improve roads”:
s 60(2)(b).
combination of these two provisions of
which Parklands relies upon for
the proposition that there is a statutory obligation to maintain the road which
the Council cannot
“shift” by the Maintenance Conditions.
[65] I do not
accept that submission.
[66] First, by
control of the roads is conferred on the local government by
That permissibly is expressed to include the ability to maintain
roads; and is likely to oblige the local government to consider
the exercise of
its power to maintain and then to act accordingly. However, these
considerations do not dictate how that control
is be exercised or how the
maintenance, if any is required, is to be effected. The word
“control” when used in
does not, in my
opinion, require it to physically directly carry out the works to maintain the
road. A local government can control
a road by engaging others to do work on
them, or by permitting others to do so.
[67] Second,
contemplates, that with the written approval of the
local government, another person may carry out works on a road. Of course, the
nature of those works might vary enormously and may well include many things not
concerned with the maintenance of the road itself.
But there is nothing in the
language of that section which suggests that the Council must always maintain
exclusive and direct control
of the roads and must be directly responsible for
the conduct of any work on the roads.
[68] Third, the
Maintenance Conditions do not operate in such a way as to exclude the haulage
road from the Council’s control.
Parklands is to provide reports to the
Council: Condition 59; and can seek the Council to review the routine
maintenance program:
Advisory Note 12 (b). The Council has the capacity to
enforce compliance with the development approval which includes the conditions:
Planning Act 2016
Planning Act
[69] Finally,
quite apart from those considerations,
contains a code for dealing
with applications for development approvals, their assessment and their
disposition by a decision. That
code includes the powers presently under
consideration to impose conditions subject to the constraints of
s 3.5.30(1) and s 3.5.32.
If otherwise the Maintenance Conditions
were found to be within the scope of those constraints, there would be no proper
in my view, to read down the power to impose those conditions by
reference to
, at least unless, by the imposition
of the particular conditions, the local government put it beyond its power to
control the road.
In that situation, which is not the case here and therefore
it is unnecessary to express any concluded view above, at least one
construction
of the two Acts would be that the condition would need to be read so as to not
amount to the local government ceasing
to have control of the road.
additional challenge does not, therefore, alter my conclusion that the
Maintenance Conditions are within the power conferred
The Levy Power Issue
[71] Can the
same be said of the Levy Condition?
The Language of s
discussed earlier in these reasons s 5.1.2(1) permits a condition
non-trunk infrastructure only
supplying infrastructure and that the
supplying is for specified purposes. That language is not confined to
conditions for the direct
supply of infrastructure. I will not repeat what I
have said above about the relevance of the words ‘about’ and
in this provision.
[73] Having
regard to those words, in my opinion –
(a) A condition for establishment of a haulage road would be for supplying
infrastructure. So much is uncontroversial.
(b) Similarly, a condition
is to pay C for C’s establishment of the haulage road is a condition
‘about’ non-trunk infrastructure and
is fairly described as
a condition ‘for’ supplying infrastructure provided it is for
one of the stated purposes listed
in s 5.1.2(1). This is so even though B is
not itself supplying the road. The
does not use the language of
referring to ‘directly’ providing the infrastructure.
(c) For the reasons given above in relation to the Maintenance Conditions, a
condition making provision for a functional road by
its maintenance would be a
condition for supplying infrastructure provided it is for one of the stated
purposes listed in s 5.1.2(1).
(d) Similarly, the language in s 5.1.2(1) could readily be construed as allowing
as a condition
infrastructure for supplying infrastructure a condition that provided for B
to pay C for C’s provision of a
maintained and functional road, provided
it is for one of the stated purposes listed in s 5.1.2(1).
(e) The precise form in which the payment was calculated would not affect its
lawfulness. The circumstance that it was a payment
expressed as a figure per
tonne of extracted material or a percentage of the total cost of the maintenance
or in some other way,
would not detract from it being a condition of the
requisite character.
[74] But can
that reading of s 5.1.2 (1) be reconciled with other textual indications in
? Ultimately, for the reasons below, I do not believe it can be, such
that reading
as a whole requires that s 5.1.2(1) be construed so
as to not empower the imposition of the Levy
Section 5.1.2(2)
obstacle arises from the terms of section 5.1.2(2). The condition
must state certain things which requirement cannot be adapted
to accommodate the
Levy Condition, without doing considerable violence to the words used.
(a) To identify a sum of money to be paid and when it is due will not readily be
said to satisfy the requirement that the condition
must state the infrastructure
to be provided. This is even if the money to be paid is explicitly calculated
by reference to the
cost of the supply of infrastructure.
(b) Moreover, if Parklands is to make a payment of money on account of the
supply of infrastructure, someone else (usually the Council)
will be supplying
that infrastructure. Conditions do not impose obligations on the Council. The
language of stating when the infrastructure
‘must’ be supplied is
not apt to accommodate a case where someone else, not obliged by the condition
to make the supply,
is contemplated to make the supply.
[76] By way of
comparison (and it can be inferred reflecting Parliament’s appreciation
that the different provision was necessary)
when in relation to trunk
infrastructure a condition may be imposed for the payment of a contribution
or the supply of infrastructure,
a different formulation of words is used to
identify what the condition must state: s 5.1.29(1). In that case the condition
state (emphasis added) –
“(a) the infrastructure of
works to be supplied
or the contribution to be made
(b) when the infrastructure or the works must be supplied or
the contribution
The Other Divisions of
the primary judge also drew support from the explicit provisions in
which allowed a levy to be charged or condition imposed
for supplying trunk infrastructure while no such express power was granted
non-trunk infrastructure. Certainly, reference to them does not help identify
that s 5.1.2 is intended to include a power to
impose the Levy Condition. But
as before, I do not place much significance on the difference in the detail of
the provisions relating
to trunk infrastructure compared with s 5.1.2, though in
relation to the Levy Condition they do provide some relevant context.
(a) The mere existence of the more detailed provisions dealing with trunk
infrastructure is not of itself persuasive. An explanation
for the different
treatment of trunk and non-trunk infrastructure in Chapter 5
can be seen
to be not necessarily referrable to an intention by Parliament to make the
conditions power for one narrower than the
other, but rather to empower in
relation to planned trunk infrastructure the imposition of a levy by charges
notices or the like.
The non-trunk infrastructure demands are not likely to be
as predictable as those for trunk infrastructure.
(b) However, other features emerge from Chapter 5
which support the view
I have reached. Parliament has used different language to refer to a payment
and to a supply: for example,
s 5.1.25; s 5.1.29(1); s 5.1.33. Section
5.1.2 only refers to supply.
(c) Similarly, someone otherwise liable to pay the levy under a charges notice
in relation to trunk infrastructure may enter into
an agreement providing for
the “infrastructure to be supplied instead of paying” the levy: s
5.1.12(1)(b); (c); (d).
(d) Section 5.1.24(5) contemplates a comparison of the value of the
infrastructure (to be supplied) and the value of the charge for
the premises,
which seeks to draw a distinction between the charge and the supply of the
infrastructure.
(e) Finally, taking account of the wider context, s 5.2.1 (which is in
defines infrastructure agreements to mean various
things by reference to other provisions. One of those listed is s 3.5.33 using
language that differentiates between a condition for the payment for, or the
supply of, infrastructure.
Reliance on ‘Works’ being Infrastructure
[78] A further
basis for the Council’s contention that the Levy Condition could not be
lawfully imposed relied on maintenance
itself being ‘works’ within
the definition of ‘Infrastructure’ while the payment of a
contribution to those
works was not within that
definition.
This can be put
aside given the view I have expressed above that the word ‘works’ in
the definition of infrastructure
is not to be construed as referring to the
performance of work.
[79] Referring
to the stated purposes of the Act or Chapter 5
does not assist in
resolving the construction issue presently under consideration for the reasons
I have given above when discussing
the Maintenance Conditions.
[80] It is not
readily apparent what purpose is served by not permitting the Levy Condition to
be imposed in relation to non-trunk
infrastructure. For all trunk
infrastructure the Council has the power to obtain a payment from the developer
reflective of the
proportionate share of the costs of infrastructure. There is
also power to require infrastructure to be provided but in each case
safeguards to ensure the developer does not have to pay or do more than its
proportionate share. There is accordingly,
at least for trunk infrastructure, a
statutory recognition of the objective of spreading the costs fairly amongst the
community or
area concerned. Of course, some non-trunk infrastructure may not
in fact confer any benefits beyond the proponent of the development.
cannot be expected to always be the case.
[81] The primary
judge’s construction can produce what are seemingly odd outcomes. Where
the supply of non-trunk infrastructure
benefits more than one property or, as is
said in this case, benefits many other users of the existing road, it would mean
provides only a very blunt instrument to deal with the costs, and may
only do so by requiring the supply of that infrastructure.
In argument the
Council was not able to identify a planning purpose as such which this served.
Rather it relies on the amendments
in 2003 introducing a program
to regulate charges by local governments and, it is said, to disable them from
imposing financial burdens
unless expressly authorised by Chapter 5
The Explanatory Notes & Second Reading
discussion of non-trunk infrastructure in the Explanatory Notes identifies it as
lower order infrastructure: page 21. Then
after stating the terms of what
became s 5.1.2(1) it is stated –
“It is recognised
these types of conditions are routinely imposed and in large part are separate
from the broader and more strategic
planning and associated funding arrangements
put in place under divisions 3, to 8 that deal with trunk infrastructure.
Subsection (2) requires a condition for non-trunk infrastructure to specify
the infrastructure to be provided and when. In other words,
the section
generally envisages developers constructing the specified infrastructure.
However, if an applicant wished to pay the
local government to supply the
infrastructure, an infrastructure agreement between the parties could be entered
into. Section 5.2.1
remarks provide limited assistance in the construction of s 5.1.2. The author
of the Notes identified that “these
routinely imposed. There is no statement that the provision was to function as
a departure from
that routine practice and the consequences of such a departure
are nowhere canvassed in the Explanatory Notes. But while the Explanatory
refer to a routine practice, they do not identify whether that practice was
confined to the direct provision of infrastructure,
the maintenance of
infrastructure or a condition calling for a financial contribution. This remark
therefore is of no assistance
in resolving the present construction issue.
[84] Similarly,
while the Notes refer to how a developer, if it wanted to pay the council to
provide the infrastructure, may enter
into an infrastructure agreement, it does
not directly deal with the situation of whether the council can
the developer to maintain the infrastructure or whether a condition can be
imposed without an infrastructure agreement for the developer
contribution for its maintenance.
[85] The second
reading speech of the minister casts no light on Parliament’s intention in
any material respect. Accordingly,
I derive no assistance from reference to
either of these documents beyond that as confirming the focus was on trunk
infrastructure.
Authorities
[86] Parklands
sought to draw support for its case from what it submitted was the established
history of courts in Australia imposing
conditions in the form of
‘levies’ on a quarry operator for the maintenance of local
government roads affected by the
trucks servicing the quarry: Appellant’s
outline at [11].
instances were referred to, the most recent of which was decided more than 15
years ago with most being older than the date
of the 2003 amendments to
. Not only did this show (it was submitted) the lawfulness of such a
condition but it was also submitted that it showed Queensland
courts had not
contemplated imposing any absolute obligation on the developer to itself
maintain the affected roads. They are not
relied on as revealing a
consideration of the operation of s 5.1.2 of
(and they do not, nor do
they differentiate between trunk and non-trunk infrastructure), but as instances
of a long-standing practice
which perhaps it can be inferred was known to
the Parliament when the amendment was introduced.
[87] Most of the
authorities relied on are from other jurisdictions (NSW and WA) and were decided
under materially different statutory
provisions. As to the Queensland
authorities identified in Parklands’ submissions, with one exception they
involved consideration
of earlier and materially different statutory regimes.
In any event, in them the issue of a power to impose the condition did not
directly arise.
[88] The one
quarry case decided since the introduction of
to which Parklands in
this part of its case referred was
Agtec Holdings Pty Ltd v Kilcoy Shire
[1999] QPELR 208
where Quirk DCJ said –
[the traffic engineer’s] opinion, the proposed development will be
a comparatively minor traffic generator and its
traffic planning impacts
will also be relatively minor. Subject to appropriate contributions (probably
best assessed on a levy on
extracted material) towards road upgrading and
maintenance, I find no justification, in a traffic engineering context, to
the application.”
[89] The learned
judge in that case clearly proceeded on the basis that
permitted a
condition requiring contribution for maintenance of the road in that situation,
but that view was not the subject of
any argument in the case.
[90] Parklands
referred to and relied on the decision of Robin QC DCJ in
McNab Developments
Pty Ltd v Toowoomba City Council
[2008] QPEC 118
[2009] QPELR 361.
The issue in that case
was, having regard to s 5.1.2 of
, to what extent could a developer be
required to contribute to the cost of some infrastructure as distinct from
having to supply
the whole of it
. As to that, his Honour
stated, at –
“[21] ...I am attracted by [the] submission
that a condition requiring contribution to the upgraded intersection (whether it
be the one propounded by the Council or the one propounded by the Appellant) can
properly be characterised as a condition for “supplying
infrastructure” within s.5.1.2(1), that it is an inappropriately narrow
construction to limit the condition to the provision
of the whole infrastructure
in specie. Some reliance was placed on the Explanatory Memorandum apropos
subsection (2) where it was
said that the section “generally”
envisages developers constructing the specified infrastructure. Common sense and
experience indicate that there will be many cases where from any point of
view a developer’s obligation ought to be limited
to some portion of work
necessitated by the development and where (unlike the special circumstances in
) it is not feasible to identify or separate out specific works
from a greater whole to be done. The solution surely cannot be that
contribution in cash or kind can be required; cf
s.1.2.3(1)(d).
evident from the passages which followed that paragraph in the judgment, that
his Honour saw the possible solution in the
imposition of a different condition,
namely one under s 3.5.31(1)(c) (for compliance with an infrastructure
agreement) which no one
urges in this case. In the events, his views as to the
scope of s 5.1.2 were obiter, and seemingly arrived at without express
apparent that s 5.1.2(1) must be read with s 5.1.2(2). The conditions which
Parliament contemplated could fall within
s 5.1.2(1) are those in respect of
which it would be possible to state, in the conditions, those things mandated by
s 5.1.2(2).
The language of s 5.1.2(2) provides to clearest indication that a
condition for the payment of a sum of money is not one contemplated
(a) Even if a condition requiring a financial contribution could fall within the
broad language of s 5.1.2(1), the obligation to
make such a payment is not
itself the supply of infrastructure. Perhaps the condition could identify the
infrastructure which is
to be supplied for which the money is paid as being the
haulage road in the properly maintained condition at all times within certain
parameters. But even then, that is descriptive of the desired result of the
payment and not the supply of that thing.
(b) The requirement to state when the infrastructure must be supplied is readily
accommodated if the condition provides for the developer
to provide the
infrastructure. It cannot readily be accommodated if the developer is to make
a financial payment on account of the
supply, where it is perhaps assumed
the council is to make the supply. And if the council is said to have an
obligation arising
or otherwise to maintain the haulage
road, stating that in, or seeking to limit it by the terms of, the condition
serves no worthwhile
[93] The last
passage of the Explanatory Notes quoted above suggests that the section
‘generally’ envisages that the developers
will construct the
infrastructure. This qualified language leaves open that in some instances the
section does not envisage the
developer constructing the infrastructure, which
is some support for concluding that s 5.1.2(1) allows for a condition calling
a financial contribution. However, even allowing for this it does not
overcome the effect of the language of s 5.1.2(2).
[94] As already
mentioned, it is of significance that by s 5.1.29(1), when Parliament had in
mind the contents of a condition calling
for a financial contribution, it not
only expressly stated that as something that could occur, but also identified
that the condition
must state the contribution
in contrast with the
of the infrastructure. That supports the view I have taken as to
the construction of s 5.1.2(2).
[95] Finally,
read with these textual matters, the language used in s 5.1.2(1) referring to
that “the condition may
be for supplying infrastructure”
is not indicative of a wide application of what requirements the condition
may impose.
[96] For these
reasons, the primary judge was correct to conclude that s 5.1.2 of
did not empower the imposition of a condition requiring Parklands to make
financial contributions for or of the costs of the maintenance
of the haulage
road. It did not allow for the imposition of the Levy
Maintenance Conditions – reasonableness
[97] Parklands
contends that for a variety of reasons the Maintenance Conditions cannot be said
to meet the description in s 3.5.30(1)
[98] The terms
of the Maintenance Conditions imposed by the primary judge are
Conditions 38 and 59 which provide as
“38 Construction of the haulage route in accordance
with Condition 51 shall include a dense graded asphalt material (except
concrete is used) for 100m either side of residences within 200m of the haulage
route. The haulage route is to be maintained
free of potholes and routine
pavement defects for the life of the development, at no cost to Council in
accordance with the requirements
in Advisory Note 12.
quarry operator/landowner shall undertake routine maintenance in accordance with
Condition 38. The quarry operator/landowner must
report to Council in writing
regularly (annually) providing details about all such routine pavement
maintenance completed in the
preceding year.”
[99] Advisory
Note No 12 is in these terms:
“12 The definition of a pothole
is derived from Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology
Evaluation and Treatment Design (2011 version) as follows
A steep-sided or bowl-shaped cavity extending into layers below the
wearing course.
Routine Maintenance Assessment shall be carried out by visual assessment of
the haul route at least every 6 months, which will also
inform whether any
investigation triggers have been met.
Any routine maintenance should be based on the following:
Intervention Level
Reactive Maintenance
Diameter greater than 300mm and depth greater than 100mm
Diameter greater than 300mm or depth greater than 100mm
Diameter less than 300mm and depth less than 100mm
Routine Pavement Defects
Maintenance Timing
Drainage – edge drains and subsoil drains
Drain outlets
obstructed or blocked
broken subsoil drain outlet
non-functional, blocked or inoperable decayed element of the subsoil drainage
system causing reduced flow capacity or drainage
missing sections of subsoil drain.
Blocked by soil,
stones, roots and any other caused by environmental or human
intervention.
Drainage swales (also referred to as side drains, table drains)
Any blockage
that is retaining moisture
Reduction in
depth below shoulder point of more than 20%
Cracks in flexible pavements
Any crack exceeding 1m length and 3mm width
Cracks in concrete pavements
Any crack exceeding 1m length and 3mm width
Joint sealants in concrete pavement
Joint seal missing or damaged exceeding 20% of the length of the
(a) If maintenance inspections indicate pavement damage is caused by a soft
subgrade, repair will have to include the replacement
and / or improvement of
the subgrade.
(b) The quarry operator/owner may request review by the Council of the above
routine maintenance where the review is based on experience
in maintaining this
haul route and the request demonstrates a reason(s) for making
[100] Parklands
contends these are an unreasonable imposition or not reasonably required within
the meaning of s 3.5.30. This is
for a number of reasons,
(a) Parklands is not the sole beneficiary of the haulage road, because it is
used by others and further the Council would otherwise
have to maintain the
current (unsealed road) the costs of which are to be saved by a combination of
the construction of the new road
and its proposal that Parklands meet the whole
costs of maintenance. There is nothing in the form of the Maintenance
to recognise these features. Indeed Parklands submits that the
primary judge’s reasons do not show that his Honour had regard
feature when considering the Maintenance
Conditions.
(b) Whatever is the case for the foreseeable future, it is possible over the
life of the development (found by the primary judge
to be about 40
) for the benefits to be
enjoyed by others to increase disproportionately with no mechanism for any
amelioration of Parklands’
obligations to continue to maintain the road in
those circumstances.
(c) One consequence of Parklands being responsible to maintain the haulage road
is that it may be exposed to claims by third persons
who suffer loss or damage
as a result of alleged defects in the maintenance of the road with any resultant
litigation being more
complex and costly given the road remains under the
control of the Council.
(d) There is the possibility that performance of the obligation to maintain the
road will give rise to an obligation to obtain operational
works approvals and
that whatever the forecast likelihood of that occurring, it cannot be said (and
the primary judge did not find)
that it may not be a requirement. The timings
specified in the Advisory Note 12 could not be performed if it was necessary
to obtain an operational works approval and that renders the conditions
not reasonable.
(e) The Council’s planning scheme policies do not provide expressly for a
proponent for development to be responsible for providing
long term road
maintenance and, it is submitted, this kind of condition has not previously been
(f) There was available a well-established and reliable means of obtaining
contribution by Parklands to the marginal costs of the
maintenance of the road
by some kind of requirement for payment of a financial contribution, even if not
in the form precisely proposed
by Parklands.
‘Current’ Use by Others
haulage road to be constructed will be concrete for that part affected by
flooding with the balance to have flexible pavement.
The minimum design life
for the concrete section is 50 years with the design life for the balance
being 20 years: First Reasons
[18]. The unsealed road is currently
used by others albeit at present it carries very little heavy truck traffic:
First Reasons
[25]. The traffic evidence referred to by the primary judge is
now approaching a decade old. However, the primary judge recorded
was no evidence to suggest that the traffic levels had changed significantly
since 2016 to the date of the hearing before
him at the end of 2024. The
evidence was that an average of around 450 vehicles per day used the road
in 2016; mostly light vehicles
(nearly 90 per cent) with only about
one per cent of heavy trucks: First Reasons [15]. The quarry would
impose a maximum additional
112 trips per day (half each way) with maximum loads
for the trucks leaving the quarry of no more than 50 tonnes: First Reasons
‘Current’ Maintenance Costs
[102] A Joint
Expert Report for the Levy Calculation dated 15 February 2018 was prepared by Mr
McAnany retained by Parklands and Mr
Healey for the Council. Paragraph 3.1 of
the report stated (emphasis added):
“It is agreed that in
calculating a pavement maintenance and rehabilitation contribution levy
applicable to the development,
it would be reasonable for the costs of
maintaining the existing roads, in the absence of the development
assessed and subtracted
from the post development maintenance costs, as the
levy should only cover any additional maintenance costs that are a result of
development.”
experts endeavoured to determine what the ‘levy’ ought to be by
reference to the expected maintenance and rehabilitation
costs less the current
maintenance costs. Mr McAnany compiled a calculation with which, with some
qualifications, Mr Healey agreed.
The precise figures are not the subject
of a finding by the primary judge and my reference to them should not be
understood as an
acceptance of their precision. They do, however, provide some
basis on the evidence for illustrating the asserted unreasonableness
Maintenance Conditions.
calculations appear in paragraph 3.23 of the report. Separate calculations are
carried out for different segments of the
road based on whether they are above
or below the Q100 flood level, and the kind of road surface (concrete or
(a) In broad terms for each of the road segments analysed the existing
maintenance costs were in the order to $39,433 to $40,960
per kilometre per
(b) These sums were then deducted from the estimated future routine maintenance
costs plus rehabilitation and reconstruction costs.
These costs included
reconstruction costs at year 50 (as well as in some instances resealing or
reconstruction costs at earlier
times as well). It may well be in error to have
taken into account some of these future costs because the Maintenance Conditions
are expressed to apply for the life of the development, and that has been found
to be in the order of 40 years. That said, if these
costs have been
inappropriately included in the future anticipated costs, that will only serve
to alter the margin left when the
current costs are subtracted from them.
(c) The identified marginal costs (allowing for the possible overstatement of
future costs) once the road is upgraded vary from a
significant negative figure
to a positive one in the order of $10,722 per kilometre per year.
[105] It is
those smaller, marginal figures, which the experts agreed ought to be made the
subject of the calculation of the levy
and not that plus the existing
maintenance costs.
Future Use by Others
[106] Moreover,
whatever might be the position currently, the usage by the quarry of the haulage
road is be capped at 112 trips per
day. There is, however, no cap on the
ability of others to use the haulage road (it being a public road). One of the
matters which
was adverted to in the joint expert report was that there was no
mechanism for reimbursement of additional maintenance costs that
may be incurred
due to unpredicted increases in traffic counts from non-quarry sources:
paragraph 3.28 of that expert report.
No Net Maintenance
Costs/Benefits
primary judge considered only some of these issues. His Honour: made findings
using the road and the relative
absence of other heavy traffic at present; adverted to the uncertainty of future
increased usage;
and identified that the road needed to be upgraded at that time
to make it suitable for Parklands’ intended use.
[108] However,
in his Honour’s discussion of the Maintenance Conditions there is no
consideration of the relevance of the marginal
costs of maintaining the haulage
road over those which the Council presently must bear in respect of the unsealed
[109] In a real
sense the Council therefore was also a real beneficiary of the upgraded haulage
route if as well Parklands is to maintain
[110] This, to
my mind, is a significant omission of a highly relevant matter and its absence
from consideration is not explained
nor any justification discernible from his
Honour’s Reasons.
The Risks of Complex
[111] Parklands
contend that if it was obliged to maintain the haulage road that would give rise
to potential problems at common law
which would be unique for this public road
amongst the other 2,500 km or so of the Council’s public road
network. The feature
which makes it unique, it was submitted, is that someone
injured or whose property was damaged as a result of the alleged negligent
of maintenance of the road would have potential claims against Parklands
distinct from those it might otherwise have against
the Council.
Council’s duty and potential liability as a highway authority at common
law is now to be assessed in accordance with
the reasoning of the High Court in
Brodie v Singleton Shire Council
[2001] HCA 29
(2001) 206 CLR 512
In Queensland that position is affected by the
Civil Liability Act 2003
[113] It can be
accepted that there will be the possibility of an additional defendant to and
greater complexity in proceedings commenced
by a plaintiff injured or whose
property is damaged as a result of some negligent failure to maintain the
haulage road. It is however
difficult to describe this as a material
consideration in relation to the reasonableness of the condition, and I do not
as to be so.
Operational Works Approval
Requirement
[114] Under the
Planning Act
‘development’ includes carrying out of operational
works. The expression ‘operational works’ is in turn
meaning “works, other than building work or plumbing or drainage work, in,
on, over or under premises that materially
affects premises or the use of
premises”. The primary judge assumed that whatever maintenance work
Parklands would be required
to carry out would not be within the defined terms
“building work or plumbing or drainage work”: Second
Reasons [7].
[115] It was
contended below by Parklands that to conduct at least some of the maintenance
works required by the Maintenance Conditions
would constitute operational works.
In that event an approval would need to be obtained from the Council to conduct
that work. That
was relied on as a further indication of the Maintenance
Conditions being not reasonable really for two reasons. First, that the
frames required to conduct the maintenance would in some instances not allow for
the obtaining of that approval, especially
with respect to the items identified
in Advisory Note 12 under the heading ‘Potholes’. Second, because
securing the
approvals would involve costs but more importantly there was
uncertainty whether they would be obtained which would cut across the
Parklands to perform the Maintenance Conditions.
primary judge concluded (at Second Reasons [5]) that:
sort of work involved in the routine maintenance of the haulage route in
accordance with proposed conditions 38 and
59, and Advisory Note 12 is not
likely to be ‘operational work’. The remoteness of the possibility
that the work will
be considered ‘operational work’ is such that the
conditions proposed by the Council are not unreasonable and should
[117] This was
based on his Honour’s consideration of the likelihood of the works being
such as to materially affect premises
or the use of premises. As to that his
Honour stated (Second Reasons [23]):
“Ultimately, it will be a
‘question of fact and degree’ as to whether any of the routine
maintenance work materially
affects the premises or its use. Of course, I cannot
offer some prospective, binding opinion about what is or is not
‘operational
work’. As Parklands submits, that can only be
determined if and when the question properly arises. But to decide whether the
proposed conditions are not unreasonable, it is sufficient to form a judgment
be operational
[118] On appeal
Parklands challenges this conclusion on three bases (which in substance are two)
which I will summarise.
(a) First, it is said it was irregular for a judge to speculate about the
possibility of an operational works approval being required
in advance of
knowing the facts which can only arise in the future.
(b) Second, and as an aspect of the first, it is said to be an error of law for
the primary judge to have done so.
[119] This is
not persuasive. The primary judge was invited to test the reasonableness of
a condition taking into account the impact
on its fulfilment of other
requirements of the
Planning Act
. Given the facts cannot then be fully
identified the only way to assess the reasonableness of the condition is to
undertake the
task performed by the primary judge.
[120] Third, a
challenge is made to the correctness of the primary judge’s conclusion
taking into account the Council’s
Asset Management Plan 2017/18-2022/23
which it is submitted justified a conclusion that the works would materially
affect premises
or their use. This is not a proper matter to be the subject of
an appeal to this Court.
[121] Nonetheless
the position is that the assessment of the Maintenance Conditions as reasonable
or not must take into account the
possibility, albeit remote, that the
requirement to obtain an approval for operational works will make the
performance of the condition
either more difficult or impossible in the times
prescribed by the conditions.
Novelty of Imposed Condition
& Planning Policies
[122] Parklands
urged that the Maintenance Conditions were unique in that such conditions had
not previously been imposed by planning
courts. The Council did not take this
Court to any such prior planning court decision. That said, it cannot be
assumed that challenges
to conditions imposed on planning applications which
make their way to courts represent the universe of conditions imposed. In any
event mere novelty (if it be so) does not render a condition unreasonable.
Council’s planning scheme policy for development works documents does make
provision for maintenance of works performed
by a developer. It contemplates
the provision of a maintenance security bond of the greater of 5 per cent of the
contract value
of the whole works or $3000 as security for the satisfactory
maintenance of the works and rectification of defective works during
maintenance period: SC6.14.10.7(13). The maintenance period is a minimum of 12
months after the works are completed: SC6.14.10.7(15).
The policy also defines
when the works will commence being on maintenance and when they come off that
maintenance, and hand over
to the Council occurs: SC6.14.10.10(2). These
provisions are species of the usual defects liability provisions seen in many
construction
and civil works contracts. They are relevant only because the
policy does not expressly contemplate a long-term process by which
the applicant
for approval to use land for some particular purpose, having provided a road, is
also responsible for its maintenance
during the life of the project that
applicant is to develop. The only, and very limited, significance that can be
given to this
is that the Council itself did not view this kind of circumstance
as sufficiently frequently engaged to make provision for it in
its planning
Alternative of Financial Contribution
remaining contention by Parklands, namely that there was available a
well-established and reliable means of obtaining contribution
by Parklands by
some condition imposing a requirement for payment of a financial contribution,
can be put aside given the conclusion
above as to the want of power to impose
such a condition.
[125] However,
where the parties have joined issue over which of two forms of condition should
be imposed, the inability to impose
(or rejection of) one of them does not of
itself make the other reasonable. This is especially so as the choice is not
necessarily
between no condition, or the Maintenance Conditions proposed by the
Council. Without intending to suggest doing so might itself
be reasonable, a
maintenance condition might be imposed which imposes less of a burden on
Parklands. This could be, for example,
by limiting its duration, or by limiting
the events which might give rise to its requirement to maintain the haulage
road. It might
be reasonable to condition any or some of the maintenance
obligations on the Council first providing a financial contribution to
Parklands. No doubt other possibilities can arise.
Primary Judge’s Summary
primary judge undertook an analysis of some of these arguments and concluded
“[78] It is hard to see how it would be unreasonable
to require the operator of the quarry to maintain the haulage route which
the benefit of the quarry, necessary to its operation and which will be the main
cause of the need for maintenance.”
[127] That is
not a conclusion with which I agree. The primary judge did not take into
account a plainly relevant consideration (the
saved current maintenance costs)
despite that being urged on him. The conditions imposed, in my opinion, are
ones which no assessment
manager could reasonably come to. They work upon the
developer a wholly unreasonable burden of maintenance not only arising from
its use of the road, but from the use of the road by all users, and however
impacted by storms, flooding or other events and in that
way shifts wholly the
financial burden of the current maintenance costs from the Council and the local
government area as a whole,
to the developer and owner of one
The Levy Condition – Reasonable?
primary judge, despite having determined that there was no power to impose the
Levy Condition, considered the alternative
question, if there was power, whether
that condition ought to be adopted. Given the conclusions I have reached above
as to the want
of power to impose such a condition, it is unnecessary for me to
decide whether, in the alternative, the primary judge was in error
in rejecting
such a condition. But in the events that my view as to the want of power is not
adopted, and because the matters were
subject to submissions by both parties, I
will consider aspects of this question.
primary judge extracted (at First Reasons [67]) the terms of the Levy Condition
which Parklands had proposed, namely:
“A condition requiring a
contribution towards the maintenance of the integrity of the haulage route
taking into account the
design life of the road and the council’s existing
responsibility to maintain the road, calculated as a levy per tonne of material
extracted in accordance with the Joint Expert Report of Mr Healey and Mr McAnany
dated 15 February 2018.”
[130] The debate
between Mr Healey and Mr McAnany in their joint report, and in their evidence
concerned some details of the factors
which would be employed in the calculation
of the levy (if one was to be imposed), including the deduction to be made on
of the costs of maintaining the road in its existing form.
[131] It was
“3.28 It is agreed that over a 50 year period, any
number of issues (most of which could not be foreseen at this time) may arise
that could significantly change the count for the non-quarry traffic on the
haulage route and impact upon the constructed road. If
the quarry operator was
to be responsible for the full cost of maintaining the roads that form the
haulage route for the full life
of the quarry operation (possibly 50 years)
regardless of the volume of non-quarry traffic using the roads over this period
there would be no mechanism for reimbursement of additional maintenance
costs that may be incurred due to unpredicted increases in
traffic counts from
non-quarry sources.
3.29 The payment of a per tonne levy solves this problem as the levy is
calculated based on the traffic generated by this quarry.
If and when, any other
development comes online that increases the traffic count for the road (and
hence reduces the design life
of the road), Council could impose reasonable and
relevant conditions on the new development to cover any additional costs that
may incur in relation to the maintenance of the haulage route.
3.30 It is agreed that the levy applied should be indexed at an appropriate
rate to account for escalation of related costs over the
life of the
primary judge was not prepared to act upon the joint expert report. This was
for a variety of reasons. First, and his
Honour said most significantly,
because it was nearly seven years old and the costs of construction would have
increased significantly
since then. Secondly, there was no attempt to identify
a method of indexing the 2018 calculations to arrive at current figures or
figures which would be valid for the life of the haulage route. There was no
reliable consideration of the cost of maintaining those
parts of the haulage
road which were below the Q100 flood level, and they could not be assumed to be
comparable with the costs of
maintaining an ordinary road within the local
government area. Finally, there were some acknowledged minor errors in the
assumptions
which had not been adequately addressed. Insofar as his Honour was
discouraged from adopting the Levy Condition suggested by Parklands
some minor errors, or imprecision in the costing data he was in my view,
adopting too high a bar. A condition requiring
a financial contribution can be
assessed as reasonable or not without descending into the requirement for
complete precision resolving
all areas of
difference.
[133] Moreover,
none of those things would seem incapable of being overcome. As the primary
judge recorded (with apparent approval)
there was broad agreement in that report
that an appropriate levy could be calculated: First Reasons [55]. Indeed, the
options which
his Honour later identified as available to be pursued included
seeking a further updated joint expert report to take account of
construction costs and maintenance costs. The primary judge expressed his
reluctance to pursue this (or the other options)
because to do so would have
further delayed the finalisation of the appeal which, as has already been
mentioned, was commenced more
than a decade ago, not because it was futile to
have done so.
[134] However,
his Honour concluded (at [68] of the First Reasons):
difficulties identified above in relation to the 2018 report concerning updating
the report and indexing the figures used
in it mean that such a condition would
lack certainty and have every chance of leading to further litigation. They also
to have little confidence that a levy could be calculated to properly
reflect the actual costs to the Council for maintaining the
haulage route once
the quarry is operating. Even if I had concluded it was lawful to impose a levy
condition, I would not have adopted
Parklands’ proposal for these
[135] The second
sentence of this passage is a finding not only adverse to the adoption of the
current expert report but a degree
of resignation that there is little chance of
any revised exercise achieving a calculation which would properly reflect the
maintenance costs.
[136] Of course,
the primary judge’s view that no further time should be afforded the
litigants (and in particular Parklands)
to fix up these issues would be entirely
a matter within the scope of his discretion and not reviewable as such in this
it was a discretion exercised based on a view that there was no
utility in doing so, for which there was no proper basis.
[137] It is a
view that cannot be reconciled with the agreed expert evidence that an
appropriate levy could be calculated, and which
his Honour seemingly accepted:
First Reasons [55]. To the extent that it reflects his Honour’s view that
there would likely
persist difficulties in reaching an agreed position or
obtaining precise data, again that reflects the application of the wrong test.
Additionally, it identifies his Honour’s pessimism at being able to assess
a levy to properly reflect the actual costs to
the Council, when for the reasons
I have given even an inability to do so with precision is not a necessary bar to
the adoption of
a condition requiring a financial contribution as
reasonable.
[138] An appeal
to this Court lies, with leave, only on the ground of error or mistake of law or
[139] It would
be an error of law for the primary judge to have determined that power existed
to impose a condition if no such power
did exist and conversely it would be an
error for the primary judge to conclude that a power to impose a particular
condition did
not exist if such a power existed.
[140] I have
concluded that the primary judge made no such error.
[141] As to the
Maintenance Conditions, in order to be conditions which can be imposed, they
(a) relevant (and there is no issue as to that) but not an unreasonable
imposition on, the development or use of the premises as
a consequence of the
development; or
(b) reasonably required in respect of the development or the use of the premises
as a consequence of the development.
[142] In my view
the primary judge was wrong to conclude that these requirements were
But is that a ground of
error or mistake of law or jurisdictional error? Is it not enough that it is or
is said to be factually
Sabdoran Pty Ltd v Hervey Bay Town Council
[1983] 2 Qd R 172
Connolly J (with whom Douglas and Sheahan JJ agreed) put the test as
“In deciding that [the relevant conditions] should
stand, the Local Government Court was obviously reaching a conclusion which
in part one of law and in part one of fact. It is a question of law whether the
respondent has power to impose such conditions
at all and it is also a question
of law, in my judgment, whether an element or factor in the charge imposed is
beyond power. However,
once the power to impose the charge is established the
reasonableness of the charge is essentially a question of fact. This last
proposition is I think subject to the qualification that the charge imposed must
be capable of being referred to the head of power.
I emphasise these elementary
propositions because the appeal to this Court is confined to error or mistake in
law or excess of jurisdiction
on the part of the Local Government Court. The
reasonableness of the charges which have been imposed by the respondent and
by the Local Government Court is not, subject to the qualification
which I have endeavoured to state, a matter for the Full
approach has been adopted with the qualification (arguably adverted to by
Connolly J at 178 in that decision) that it would
be an error of law if the
condition was so unreasonable that no reasonable planning authority (or
assessment manager) could have
imposed it:
Hymix Industries Pty Ltd v
Alberton Investments Pty Ltd
[2001] QCA 334
Felixstowe Pty
Ltd v Gladstone City Council
(1994) 85 LGERA 234
at 238-239;
Park Pty Ltd v Mackay City Council
[2011] 1 Qd R 403 at
Western Australian Planning Commission v Temwood Holdings Pty
[2004] HCA 63
(2004) 221 CLR 30
[145] For the
reasons I have given above, in my view such an error of law has been made out in
this case in relation to the imposition
of the Maintenance Conditions.
[146] It follows
that the decision of the primary judge to impose the Maintenance Conditions must
be set aside. The matter should
be remitted to the Planning & Environment
Court for further consideration as to what if any further conditions ought to be
I do not think it is essential that the proceedings be heard by
a differently constituted Planning & Environment Court and there
some advantage in the judge who has most recently dealt with this matter
continuing to do so. That, however, is a matter
which should be left to that
court to determine.
[147] Accordingly,
in my view the orders that should be made are –
is granted to appeal.
appeal is allowed.
proceedings are remitted to the Planning & Environment Court to determine
what conditions, if any, are to be imposed.
respondent is to pay the appellant’s costs of the appeal on the standard
[148] CROWLEY
I agree with the orders proposed by Doyle JA for the reasons given by
his Honour.
should be noted that while, for convenience, the condition urged by Parklands
has been called the Levy Condition, it is a condition
and not imposed by a
charges notice of the kind contemplated by
in respect of trunk
infrastructure. It is a condition requiring some financial payment for specific
purposes. Despite this it remains
a convenient shorthand to call it the Levy
1–3 lines 2 to 5; Parklands’ Amended Outline para 31;
Council’s written Outline para 23.
Integrated Planning and Other
Legislative Amendment Bill 2003 Explanatory Notes page 21.
Macquarie (online);
[2012] QCA 173
different context).
Macquarie (online).
I defer for the moment the
question of the extent to which the developer is to be made responsible for the
costs of those repairs.
This is the language used by
Parklands and adopted by the primary judge: First Reasons [82].
Assuming that it was otherwise
one which could be lawfully imposed.
Again assuming that it was
otherwise one which could be lawfully imposed.
Appeal T 1-58 lines 17 to
This was not put in issue
as such by the respondent in its written outline at [14].
Appeal T 1-24 lines 17 to
First Reasons at [13].
Parklands in its written
submissions below had identified this as a feature it relied on to contend the
Maintenance Conditions were
not reasonable: Parklands’ written submissions
at [36(a)].
Collin C Donges &
Associates Pty Ltd v Baulkham Hills Shire Council
(1989) 67 LGRA 370
This does not involve the
exercise of a discretion but the satisfaction of a requirement which is either
correct or not:
Moore (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] HCA 30
(2024) 98 ALJR 1119
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (468 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter