URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIC/2009/33.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Elizabeth Miller v Q-Comp [2009] QIC 33; 192 QGIG 120 (5 October 2009)
[Extract from Queensland Government Industrial
dated 16 October, 2009, Vol. 192, No. 7, pages
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
- appeal against
decision of industrial magistrate
Elizabeth Miller AND Q-COMP (C/2009/20)
PRESIDENT HALL
5 October 2009
On 13 January 2008, Elizabeth Pauline Miller lodged an application for
benefits under the
Workers' Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Act) for an "over a period of time" psychological injury. By a letter dated 13
February 2008, WorkCover Queensland rejected
the application. WorkCover
Queensland summarised its decision as follows:
"WorkCover Queensland is satisfied that you were a 'worker' under the Act at
the relevant time that you developed a psychological
condition where your
employment was a 'significant contributing factor'.
WorkCover Queensland is also satisfied that at least some of the employment
related events that contributed to your condition were
the result of 'reasonable
management action taken in a reasonable way' under the Act. As a result,
WorkCover Queensland cannot accept
your Application for Compensation as your
claim is excluded under section 32(5) of the Act.".
Ms Miller exercised her right to a Statutory Review. By a decision of 30
April 2008, Q-COMP confirmed the decision of WorkCover Queensland.
Officer summarised her decision as follows:
"In all the circumstances of the case, I am satisfied that:
1. The Claimant was a 'worker' for the purposes of the Act.
2. The Claimant sustained a 'personal injury' for the purposes of the
3. The Claimant's injury arose in the course of the Claimant's employment for
the purposes of the Act.
4. The Claimant's employment was a significant contributing factor to the
onset of her injury for the purposes of the Act.
5. The Claimant's injury arose out of reasonable management action taken in a
reasonable way.
Therefore, I conclude that the Claimant's injury is excluded from the
definition of 'injury' pursuant to section 32(5) of the Act.
My decision is to
confirm the decision by the insurer.
Therefore, my decision is that the Claimant's claim for compensation is one
for rejection.".
Ms Miller appealed to the Industrial Magistrates Court at Brisbane. By a
decision delivered on 28 April 2008, Ms Miller's appeal
was dismissed. On 15
May 2009, Ms Miller lodged an appeal to this Court.
At all material times
Ms Miller was employed by BCF Australia Pty Ltd (BCF) at a store at Springwood.
At that site BCF (trading under
the name Supercheap Auto) sold boating, camping
and fishing items. Ms Miller's employment at the store commenced in late
November/early
December 2005. Initially Ms Miller was employed as a casual
worker "to fill stock off the pallets and take them on trolleys into
and fill the shelves in the store". Subsequently, Ms Miller became a permanent
staff member and, at least in Ms Miller's
perception, integrated into the retail
Ms Miller seems to have been contented enough in her employment
prior to the end of Autumn 2007. Doubtless she was encouraged by
an Employment
Review of January 2007 which was quite flattering of her work. Whilst it is
true that the Employment Review contained
comments suggesting that Ms Miller
lacked "confidence" in dealing with customers, the Employment Review also
attributed the lack
of confidence to inadequate product knowledge and praised Ms
Miller's efforts to improve her product knowledge. Any lack of confidence
move onto the next task" is explicable by the length of her absence from the
workforce before commencing employment with BCF.
In my view there is no
legitimate evidentiary basis for proceeding on the view that Ms Miller was, from
the beginning, afflicted
by a fragile personality.
In May 2007, a Ms
Lesley Darling commenced employment at the store. In terms of seniority Ms
Darling ranked second behind the manager.
Ms Miller did not engage with Ms
Darling. Ms Miller attributed to Ms Darling that:
"She would tell you that ... she didn't like the way you did it and it's not
done properly, and then get someone else to do it.".
Ms Miller claimed also that Ms Darling had spoken harshly to her in a
loud voice in front of customers, had humiliated her in front
of a customer at a
cash register, and had responded to a request to show Ms Miller what she wanted
done with criticism of the quality
of Ms Miller's work.
Ms Miller was not
the only member of staff to experience difficulty in adjusting to Ms Darling's
management style. Ultimately, a
Mr Harrison, who ranked third in seniority,
prepared a letter seeking redress. The Industrial Magistrate summarised the
the issues raised by it of particular concern to Ms Miller. It was
necessary for the Industrial Magistrate to take that course as
those who signed
(including Ms Miller) had concerns with some (differing) issues but not all of
the issues. The issues of concern
to Ms Miller were?
"[18] As a result of dissatisfaction by staff with Ms Darling, a letter was
prepared by Mr David Harrison and signed by, in total,
6 staff members including
the appellant. This letter, in its unsigned form, was presented to the manager
of the Springwood store
(then a Mr Daryl Curtin) on an 'informal' basis and
according to Mr Harrison, was provided to see if Mr Curtis 'would get something
sorted out to get Leslie back under control' (Day 2, p.6). the letter is dated
28 September 2007 and identified issues staff had
with Ms Darling. They did not
all relate to the appellant. The appellant identified the following conduct of
Ms Darling referred
to in the letter as relevant to her:
i. Concern at Ms Darling's 'bullying and harassment' of staff
ii. Negativity and negative comments about the performance of teams [sic]
members with customers and performing routine tasks within
iii. Her use of company time to perform tasks that are only of benefit to
herself and resulting unavailability to do her job on the
shop floor when
iv. Abusive comments to team members in front of customers and other team
v. Her critical remarks about team members to the manager, when the person
being commented about is not present to defend themselves.".
It was the evidence at first instance that Mr Harrison showed Mr Curtis
the signed copy of the letter but provided him with an unsigned
copy only*. Mr
Curtis made Ms Darling aware of the letter. Ms Darling sought to discover the
signatories. There was a conflict
in the evidence about whether Ms Darling
became aware that Ms Miller had signed the letter. The Industrial Magistrate
accepted that
Ms Miller had told Ms Darling that she was a signatory. That
finding is not attacked on the Appeal. Neither is there a challenge
further finding that Ms Darling's treatment of Ms Miller "got worse". [*No
formal response to the letter was ever received
by Mr Harrison.]
Darling's treatment of her was causing her to
become stressed, sought assistance
from BCF's Human Resources Division. She spoke to a Ms Enright who, like
Mesdames Miller and
Darling, gave evidence at first instance. Ms Enright acted
on Ms Miller's appeal for help. She agreed to visit the Springwood store
soon as possible. In fact she visited the store the following Friday (9
November 2007). Ms Miller's evidence about the meeting
with Ms Enright
conflicts with that of Ms Enright (and, in part, with that of Ms Darling).
Again, it is convenient to reproduce
the Industrial Magistrate's recounting of
the evidence and findings of fact.
"[22] The evidence from Ms Miller as to what happened when Ms Enright
visited the store on that date conflicts with that of Ms Enright
and Ms Darling,
the latter two stating that Ms Enright had a private discussion with Ms Miller
before a meeting involving all 3 women
took place. This was recorded in a
document that was part of 2 files produced in response to a subpoena. The
document is headed
'9 November 2007 - Meeting between Megan E and Elizabeth M
File Notes'. I understand that where the text refers to 'Elizabeth' that
referring to the appellant and 'Megan' refers to Megan Enright. Without
reciting the whole of the document, I note that it commences:
Elizabeth and Megan discussed the issues that Elizabeth had with Lesley.
Elizabeth was unable to provide examples of bullying behaviours.
discussion between Megan and Elizabeth, Elizabeth agreed that it would be a good
idea to have a chat with Lesley.
Lesley D joined the meeting. ...
And continues:
It was agreed that there was a lot of miscommunication and that Elizabeth
and Lesley would work together to ensure that daily review
sheet was followed
and that Elizabeth would communicate her activities to Lesley at the end of the
day, instead of after the completion
of every task unless she had
[23] Ms Enright did not record whether Ms Miller gave examples of behaviour
bullying. I accept Ms
Miller's statement that she felt intimidated with Leslie Darling present and
could not discuss her problems
freely. However, I accept the evidence of Ms
Darling and Ms Enright as to the meeting commencing with only Ms Enright and Ms
present. An initial discussion between an unhappy employee and the HR
officer followed by a meeting with the person allegedly causing
problems to the
unhappy employee is not unusual workplace practice and, indeed, would in my view
be seen as accepted practice and
appropriate.
[24] Ms Darling viewed the meeting as 'just a simple chat'. At the end of
the meeting, the appellant and Ms Darling agreed that there
miscommunication between them, for example, around the distinction between
'running of stock' and 'filling stock' and when
the appellant should report on
completed work.".
By his written submissions Dr Cross for the Appellant contends:
"Prior to the meeting on 9 November 2007, Darling had raised no issues in
regard to the appellant's performance with her nor are there
any notations in
the personnel file.".
With respect, neither of the two personnel files relating to Ms Miller
which are attached to the Industrial Magistrate's file were
tendered. I have to
accept that there was some evidence from Ms Darling that she had made some notes
which were not discovered (as
they should have been). However, it is apparent
from the exchanges between Ms Darling and Ms Miller prior to the letter of 28
2007 to which I have referred above, and from Ms Miller's
identification of issues the raised in the letter that were relevant to
that Ms Darling had raised performance issues with Ms Miller. The criticisms
which Ms Darling made of Ms Miller's performance
may have been unfair and
uncouth, but criticism of performance was advanced. There is no evidentiary
basis for treating the criticism
as lacking any factual foundation nor for
treating the criticism as entirely malicious.
In fact, Ms Darling was
promoted to the position of manager of the Springwood store on 26 November 2007.
I am unable to determine
whether any change in Ms Darling's treatment of Ms
Miller flowed from the meeting with Ms Enright or from the change in Ms
role of authority. It was Ms Miller's evidence that after the meeting
with Ms Enright, Ms Darling's treatment of her "got worse".
particular example of ill treatment developed in evidence at first instance
concerned a visit to the store by BCF's Chief
Executive Officer. Again I
reproduce the Industrial Magistrate's recounting of the evidence. (Her Honour's
findings were given
subsequently.)
"[26] Ms Miller referred to Ms Darling's behaviour towards her getting worse
after the meeting of 9 November 2007 and gave the example
of when, during the
week of 19 December 2007, the CEO (Mr Steve Doyle) of BCF was visiting and
inspecting the store. It appears
from other evidence that, rather than being
the 'CEO', Mr Doyle was the Chief Operative Executive. On the day of the visit,
had finished tidying up the apparel section for which she was
responsible and sought comments from Ms Dee Fraser (the Acting area
manager) and
a Mr Tony Reilly (thought by the appellant to be Retail Operations Manager).
Other than a comment that one or two tickets
were missing, the inference Ms
Miller drew from the comments of those 2 people was that the section was in good
order. After the
visit of Mr Doyle, Ms Miller approached Ms Darling to find out
how the store had fared in Mr Doyle's inspection. According to Ms
Darling 'went off' at her because Mr Doyle had said that the apparel section was
untidy with tickets missing.
[27] Ms Darling's evidence on this matter was significantly different. She
recalled Mr Doyle's visit when he came to the store on
12 December 2007, not 19
I discussed with her that Steve mentioned it was a little cluttered as we ...
did have quite a lot of stock up there ... I was clearly
saying it was cluttered
'cause that was all that had been interpreted to myself. (Day 2 pp. 85-86).
[28] Ms Miller said that she felt humiliated by Ms Darling's comments and
felt sad and empty.".
Of much greater significance than the allegation that Ms Darling's rebuke
of Ms Miller, after the Chief Executive Officer's visit
was not proportionate to
Mr Doyle's mild remark, is a direction to work in the back-dock issued by Ms
Darling to Ms Miller on 20
December 2007.
It appears that on 20
December 2007, while Ms Miller was working in the back-dock area Ms Darling told
Ms Miller that she was to work
in the back-dock area for a period of 10 days.
She was not to go into the store. She was to take stock from the pallets and
the stock on shelves in the storage area. Ms Miller asserts that she was
told to "get [the back-dock area] tidy, because Steve Doyle
wasn't happy. How
it was that Ms Miller was to find time to unpack and stock goods received in the
busy Christmas period and time
to tidy up the area seems to me not to emerge
from the evidence. The Industrial Magistrate raised other issues about the
"[30] The person ordinarily posted in the back dock was called 'the
receipter'. Unfortunately, the evidence does not make it clear
how, if at all,
the work required to be performed by the appellant in the back dock differed
from her ordinary work or from the receipter's
duties or the tasks performed as
'fillers' (see paragraph [1] above), a role which both the appellant and the
receipter at the time
(Richard Symons) had performed at BCF Springwood.".
There were other short-comings in Ms Miller's evidence. The case was one
in which it was being vigorously contended that it was not
reasonable management
action to require Ms Miller to undertake work beyond her capacity. It was
further contended that the burden
of work was unreasonable because of the
absence of an exercise in hazard identification of an attempt at risk
assessment, any review
of Ms Miller's training and the absence of training or
additional training whatsoever. Yet Ms Miller's evidence was uninformative
(ten working day) period when she worked in the back-dock.
Ms Miller's
evidence, which was not entirely consistent with the claim that she was not
allowed into retail areas, was by way of
an overview. The transcript of day one
at pages 21 to 22 records the following exchange with her own Counsel:
"All right. In your period from September '05, up till December 2007, had
you ever seen a female doing work out - that job out there
before? -- Do you
mean the work that she expected me to do in those two weeks? No.
Now, the things - the product you had to unload, or handle, was it on pallets
when you - was it on pallets that you had to unload?
-- Yes. They were pallets,
there were pallets everywhere. In the back dock, all around, underneath the car
park. Richard would
Richard is the ----?---- Receiptor.
Receiptor? -- Yep.
What's his last name, do you know? -- Symon.
How many pallets would you unload, per day? -- I think I did between five to
nine pallets, that day. But I've done up to 22 pallets
on my own, out of 25, in
The items that you had to unload, could you describe the items that you had
to unload? -- Yeah, they could be gazebos, tents, furniture,
chairs, table,
camping, et cetera. Some of those can be light; some of those can be very
heavy. The gazebos are very heavy lifting.
Any idea what they weigh? -- To be honest, no.
All right? -- I think about maybe - no I don't know.
Did you struggle to lift them? -- Yes, I did.
Did you have to just unload them on a flat surface, or did you have to take
them - or put them on shelves, or take them upstairs?
-- Some of the items that
you take off the pallets, say if they're chairs, there might be half a dozen in
a box. And you've got
to unwrap that box and there might be another box inside.
Just depending on what it is. Sometimes the gazebos and tents - say for
instance they're already in a box, the gazebo, but they're in a cardboard box,
on the outside, and you have to cut it and take it
out of that box and then take
it into the camping section. Our store is different, because we have camping on
one side, and the
main store on one side and there's this street, like a
driveway in between the two stores.".
Mr Harrison was able to assist Ms Miller by giving the weight of the
items unloaded in the back-dock, but could not give evidence
had performed because he had not observed her performance of work in the
back-dock. In the result (and unsurprisingly)
the Industrial Magistrate
"[78] Ms Darling's evidence was that an employee knew if they felt
uncomfortable about lifting a particular item, they did not have
to do so. I
accept that may have been her understanding generally. I have already alluded
to a lack of evidence about how, in a
practical way, the back dock work differed
in a significant way from the appellant's usual work in the store or the tasks
performed when first employed. I accept that is was more physical than
her usual role in the store, and made her tired. Merely
because she was a
female assigned to work in that area does not, without more, make the assigning
of her to the tasks not reasonable
management action taken in a reasonable way.
[79] There was no evidence that any stage Ms Miller was compelled to lift any
weight beyond her capability or that she sustained injury,
however minor, in her
work at the back dock. Significantly, Ms Miller did not complain to her
superiors about the deployment to
the back dock, or about her sustaining any
injury of a physical nature.".
For completeness I should add, that it was the evidence of Ms Miller's
treating psychologist (Mr Sheppard) that Ms Miller's substantial
complaint about
her redeployment to the back-dock was that she had been sent there as
"punishment" and had been separated from her
friends. In fairness to Ms Miller,
I hasten to add that Mr Sheppard gave evidence without access to his notes.
Once cannot ignore
the very real risk that Mr Sheppard's recollection was faulty
and that Ms Miller had complained also that the work in the back-dock
burdensome. Certainly both complaints were voiced by Ms Miller from the witness
box. However (importantly) the suggestion that
the redeployment to the
back-dock was by way of punishment was put to Ms Darling and was denied by her.
Ms Darling asserted that
she had chosen Ms Miller for the role in the back-dock
"... she likes - used to like working with the stock and tidying things up
and getting stock out. She also liked to have that feeling
of achieving a goal
and so I was quite confident that she would be able to complete it (Day 2,
The Industrial Magistrate's reasons do not reveal whether Her Honour
accepted the reasons advanced by Ms Darling for selecting Ms
deployment to the back-dock but Her Honour expressly accepted that the
deployment was not by way of punishment, observing:
"I am not persuaded that the direction to work in the back dock was a form of
punishment directed to the appellant. It occurred at
a time when, in all the
evidence, things were busy at the store. The appellant was an extra worker
assigned; she had the assistance
of the person usually stationed in the back
dock, called at BCF 'the receipter'.".
The finding was neither glaringly improbable nor made in the teeth of
uncontroverted facts. Like every claimant under the Act pointing
psychological injury, Ms Miller faced the forensic risk that a medical
practitioner called to prove the existence of the condition
will reflect on how
the condition may have affected the claimant's recollections or perceptions.
Here the risk fructified. The
consultant psychiatrist who gave evidence (Dr
Cantor) did venture comment (in his report) and the Industrial Magistrate seems
have adopted the comments saying:
"... As to the trigger factor for any diagnosed psychiatric injury, the
doctor had noted: 'Ms Darling was suggested by Ms Miller
to be the basis of her
perceived stress associated with her declining mood. A depressed perspective
always involves seeing problems
in darker terms than in the reality'. He had
opined in his report that Ms Miller's perception of what was occurring may not
be entirely
accurate (T2, p.21 L45).".
If regard is had to that passage in the weighing of the conflicting
evidence of Ms Miller and Ms Darling, the conclusion that the
deployment was not
by way of punishment was unexceptional.
Given the Industrial Magistrate's
expressed views about the evidence relating to the work Ms Miler performed in
the back-dock and
the finding about Ms Miller's perception that the deployment
was a "punishment", Her Honour's finding that there had been reasonable
management action taken in a reasonable way seems to me to be entirely correct.
As to the suggestion of failure by BCF to discharge
the workplace health and
safety obligation at s. 28 of the
Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995
the evidence put in by the Appellant at first instance is too vague and lacking
in detail to raise the issue. The onus to prove
discharge of the obligation at
s. 26 of the Act or a defence at s. 37 does not arise until such time as
sufficient evidence is led
to require the employer to go into evidence.
It is not entirely clear when Ms Miller finished her assignment in the
back-dock. However, it is clear that she had rejoined the
in-store team by 9
January 2008. It was on that day and (after an adjournment) on 10 January 2008
that Ms Miller was required to
participate in a disciplinary interview. The
Industrial Magistrate found that the decision to interview Ms Miller, the
allegations
put to her, the conduct of the interview and its sequila constituted
reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way. There
is no appeal
against that finding. In those circumstances I do not propose to analyse and
publish the details of the allegations
and the meetings. I do, however, propose
to comment about Ms Miller's response to the allegations and the disciplinary
which followed.
Ten January 2008 was a Thursday. Ms Miller
attended at her place of work on the Friday. She told the Industrial Magistrate
she was stressed and found it hard to concentrate. On Saturday 12 January
2008 she tried to visit a doctor. On Sunday 13 January
2008 she succeeded in
seeing a general practitioner who was a relative's treating doctor and was
referred to a psychologist (Mr Sheppard)
in the same medical centre. Ms Miller
did not return to work.
Neither the issues surrounding the letter of 28
September 2007, the issues surrounding Ms Enright's visit to the workplace, the
arising after Mr Doyle's visit nor the redeployment to the back-dock and
her workload therein had caused Ms Miller to seek medical
herself from work. If one concentrates on what happened and what Ms Miller did,
rather than concentrating upon
her attempts at self-diagnosis, it seems
tolerably clear that the triggers to which her fall into depression were
attributable were
the allegations and disciplinary action of January 2008. As
the Industrial Magistrate recorded, such was the opinion of Dr
Both at first instance and on the Appeal, Dr Cross for the
Appellant has focussed on Ms Miller's assignment to the back-dock and on
work required of her thereat as the cause of her decompensation. The conduct of
Ms Darling leading to the letter of 28 September
2007, the action (and lack of
action) by Mr Curtis in response to the letter, Ms Miller's request to BCF's
Human Resources and Ms
Darling's treatment of Ms Miller after Mr Doyle's visit
were said to be but background to Ms Miller's descent into depression. On
reflection I have come to the view that the submission is not consistent with
the medical evidence.
There were two medical witnesses. A Mr Sheppard
who, for a period had been Ms Miller's treating psychologist and Dr Cantor (a
psychiatrist)
who had provided Ms Miller's solicitor with a medico-legal
assessment (which was tendered by the Appellant). Mr Sheppard was called
Appellant. Dr Cantor was called by Q-COMP.
With the greatest of
respect to Mr Sheppard, his evidence was less than satisfactory. The core
difficulty was that Mr Sheppard no
longer worked at the medical centre at which
he had treated the Appellant and did not have access to his notes. Giving
on 23 February 2009, Mr Sheppard had to rely on his memory of his
interviews with the Appellant over a six week period (weekly consultations)
commencing on 4 February 2008. Mr Sheppard's diagnosis was that Ms Miller had
suffered a "major depressive episode, single occurrence,
single episode" and,
indeed was "the most extremely affected patient" that he had ever seen. His
evidence about cause and effect
did not display that measure of clarity. Whilst
I lack the advantage of hearing Mr Sheppard (who gave evidence on the telephone)
and of hearing his evidence develop, I am compelled to observe that if the
transcript is read as a whole there is reason for thinking
that Mr Sheppard had
it in mind that the assignment to the back-dock* was consequential on the
disciplinary interview of 9 and 10
January 2008. In any event Mr Sheppard seems
to have considered the allegations and disciplinary events of January 2008 to
been the trigger of the depressive episode. However, even if one ignores
all of that, the thrust of Mr Sheppard's evidence was that
the single episode
was the result of a build-up of symptoms over time. [*For convenience, I record
also that Mr Sheppard's recollection
was that Ms Miller was not upset about the
physical demands of the back-dock work simpliciter. Mr Sheppard's recollection
Ms Miller's concern was that she was being unfairly punished by being
taken out of contact with her friends and taken out of a job
which she had been
trained to do and put into a job for which she had no training. She was
concerned also that the change in her
work was part of a strategy to induce her
to terminate her employment.]
Dr Cantor's written opinion squarely
attributes Ms Miller's impairment to her treatment by Ms Darling over a period
of time and to
BCF's failure to respond appropriately to her request for
assistance. In oral evidence Dr Cantor referred to the "evolution" of
Miller's condition over time. Dr Cantor also agreed that Ms Miller's problems
with Ms Darling may have been fuelled by perceptions
attributable to her
declining mood state.
In the presence of such medical evidence the
Industrial Magistrate was compelled to consider whether the pre-December 2007
interactions
with Ms Darling and Ms Enright constituted reasonable management
action taken in a reasonable way. The Industrial Magistrate did
course. In respect of each of the incidents of the letter of 28 September
2007 and Ms Enright's response to Ms Miller's
call for help, the management
action was held to be reasonable and reasonably implemented. In neither case is
such a finding is
not surprising. The "inadequate" response to the letter of 28
September 2007 arose from Mr Harrison's request that the matter be
informally and his decision to withhold the signed letter. Ms Enright acted
promptly and consistently with normal human
resource practice. The Industrial
Magistrate characterised Ms Darling's criticism of Ms Miller after Mr Doyle's
visit as imperfect
but within the bounds of reasonable action. The decision is
within the principle of
Bowers v WorkCover Queensland
[2002] QIC 18
(2002) 170 QGIG 1
and a decision which is reasonably open.
Given those findings and the
medical evidence previously described, the decision of the Industrial Magistrate
that s. 32(5) of the
Act operated to exclude Ms Miller's psychological
condition from the operation of injury seems to me to be correct and to be
by the subsequent decision of this court in
Q-COMP v Rowe
[2009] QIC 17
(2009) 191 QGIG 67.
On that ground also the Appeal must fail.
the Appeal. I reserve all questions as to costs. I decline the invitation to
deal with the outstanding issues of costs
in the Industrial Magistrates
Dated 5 October 2009.
D.R. HALL, President
Released: 5 October 2009
Appearances:
Dr G.J. Cross instructed by C. Patino and Company
for the Appellant.
Mr S. Sapsford directly instructed for the
Respondent.
Government Printer, Queensland
The State of
Queensland 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (66.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter