URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIC/2009/31.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:38:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Transfield Services v Gavin Wesche [2009] QIC 31; 192 QGIG 107 (1 October 2009)
[Extract from Queensland Government Industrial
dated 9 October, 2009, Vol. 192, No. 6, pages
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Workplace Health
and Safety Act 1995
- s. 164(3) - appeal against decision of industrial
Transfield Services (Australia) Pty Ltd AND Gavin Scott
Wesche (C/2009/18)
PRESIDENT HALL
1 October 2009
There is a sugar mill at Pleystowe near Mackay. Sugar cane is brought
from the fields to the mill by the use of light trains. At
Wallingford the
track for the cane trains which runs north/south, passes over Queensland Rail
(QR) tracks running east/west. The
drawbridge which enables the cane trains to
pass over the QR tracks consists of two parts which, when not required for use,
in a raised position. When a cane train needs to cross the QR tracks,
the two parts of the drawbridge are lowered allowing the cane
train to pass over
the QR tracks. After the cane train has passed, the two parts of the drawbridge
are returned to the raised position.
The drawbridge, which is owned by
QR, is normally lowered and raised by the use of hydraulic actuators. The
actuators are operated
by staff of Transfield Services (Australia) Pty Ltd (the
Appellant). The staff use a remote control device. However, in early November
2005 the actuator on the northern side of the QR track had been removed for
repair. In the absence of the actuator it was necessary
for the Appellant's
staff to lower and raise the northern part of the drawbridge by manual operation
of a crank handle. Running
along the hub of the crank handle but ceasing short
of the tip I should add, is a raised keyway. When the hub slides over the
shaft a raised piece of metal on the shaft fits snugly into the keyway
allowing the hub and the shaft to engage when the crank handle
Mr Daniel Thomas Gerard Casey, who is an electrician by trade,
was an employee of the Appellant. In the early hours of Friday 11
2005, Mr Casey was at the Wallingford drawbridge. He had been sent to the
Wallingford drawbridge by Mr Shane Wilkinson,
a traffic officer employed by the
Appellant (and the duty traffic officer at the time) to lower and then to raise
the drawbridge.
Mr Casey had had some experience in manually operating the
northern part of the drawbridge. He had done so on six or seven occasions
to 11 November and had lowered and raised the drawbridge on a prior occasion
that night. He explained the instruction in manual
operation which had been
given to him (approximately three nights earlier) as follows:
instructions you've been ---?--- Yeah.
---given on operating it and you had started to give evidence about Jim
Plan? -- Jim Plan took me out there and explained what to
do. At that stage
there was no train coming through. I wasn't happy with the explanation and I
wanted him to actually watch me
do the job so that I could be confident in
knowing exactly what I had to do.
Uh-huh? -- I actually lowered the drawbridge and operated it and he was
quite happy with what I'd done.".
Mr Casey also had accepted a job risk analysis. It is clear beyond
reasonable doubt that the possibility of the hub coming off the
shaft was not
identified as a hazard to Mr Casey and, indeed, was not identified as a hazard
at all by the Appellant's staff.
The Industrial Magistrate conveniently
summarised Mr Casey's evidence about what happened to him as follows:
"I went out to lower the drawbridge because we had a cane train approaching.
I went out, was out there a good five minutes - 10 minutes
before our train
came, waited until it got to a certain position along the track, pressed the
remote control button which sounded
the siren and actually activated the
southern side. Once the siren sounded and the other side started activating, I
went into the
pit and wound the northern side of the drawbridge down. Once that
was down and locked in position I hopped out of the pit and walked
down about 30
or 40 metres up the Queensland Rail line out of the road, waited for our cane
train to go through. Once our cane train
had actually done [sic] through the
siren sounded again to automatically activate to raise the bridge. Once it
started raising [sic],
I walked into the pit and then wound up the northern
side. It was - I looked up to see of the drawbridge is almost up and noticed
that it only had a little way to go and the next thing I know is I picking
myself up from the side of the pit.".
Shortly thereafter Mr Casey gave
evidence as follows:
"I picked myself up and noticed that the drawbridge was actually down -
sorry, on the side that I had been winding up.
I hopped back into the pit to rewind it up and found the crank handle laying
on the ground and I then proceeded to grab the crank
handle, put it back on the
shaft and wind it up again.".
After the incident Mr Casey found that he had blood coming from his nose
and from cuts above and below his right eye. A Dr Ki Joseph
specialist occupational physician who had reviewed Mr Casey's hospital files,
gave evidence that Mr Casey's right eye
socket has been "smashed up" and that
even after seven operations Mr Casey, who has seven plates incorporated in his
cheek, continued
to have double vision when looking up, could not assess depth
very well and has been left with an eyeball sunken back into his head.
clear beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Casey suffered injuries which amounted to
grievous bodily harm.
The incident of 11 November 2005, caused Gavin
Scott Wesche (the Respondent), a public officer within the meaning of s. 142A of
Justices Act 1886
and an inspector duly appointed under the
provisions of the
Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995
(the Act) to make
a complaint to a Justice of the Peace that:
"On the 11th day of November 2005 at Wallingford Drawbridge, Pleystowe,
TRANSFIELD SERVICES (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD (CAN 093 114 553)
person on whom a workplace health and safety obligation prescribed by section
28(1) of the
Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995
is imposed, did fail to
discharge that obligation contrary to section 24 of the
Workplace Health and
Safety Act 1995
, in that being a person who conducts a business or
undertaking the said
TRANSFIELD SERVICES (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD (CAN 093 114
did fail to ensure the workplace health and safety of tis workers
is not affected by the conduct of the persons business or undertaking.".
Particulars (as amended 9 November 2007) were supplied as
" Particulars
Worker: Daniel Thomas CASEY
or Undertaking: Sugar Milling
Workplace: Wallingford Drawbridge,
Risk: The risk is the risk of injuries to workers including the risk of
fracture injuries to the right side of the face of Daniel
Thomas CASEY.
The source of the risk emanates from plant namely drawbridge and the system
of work for the manual operation of the hydraulic actuator.".
circumstance of aggravation was alleged,
that Mr Casey had
sustained grievous bodily harm as a result of the failure to discharge the
workplace health and safety obligation.
When the matter was called in the
Industrial Magistrates Court at Mackay a plea of "not guilty" was entered.
After a five day trial
the (now) Appellant was found to be guilty. This is an
Appeal against the decision of the Industrial Magistrate. To give context
the matters canvassed on the Appeal (to which I shall shortly turn), I should
record that at the close of the complainant's case,
the Appellant put a
substantial submission that the Appellant had no case to answer. By reasons
reduced to writing and published
on 27 August 2007, the Industrial Magistrate
rejected the submission. Criticism of that decision lives on in the matters
on the Appeal and is coupled with criticism of the way in which the
Industrial Magistrate is said to have treated rejection of the
submission as
impacting upon the allocation of the burden of proof.
Very properly the
complaint did not plead law. However, as is implicit in the giving of
particulars of "Business or Undertaking",
the case developed at trial was that
the Appellant had failed to discharge the obligation at s. 28 of the Act which
(at the material
time) provided:
Obligations of persons conducting
business or undertaking
(1) A person (the
relevant person
) who conducts a business or
undertaking has an obligation to ensure the workplace health and safety of the
person, each of the person's
workers and any other persons is not affected by
the conduct of the relevant person's business or undertaking.
(2) The obligation is discharged if the person, each of the person's workers
and any other persons are not exposed to risks to their
health and safety
arising out of the conduct of the relevant person's business or undertaking.
(3) The obligation applies -
(a) whether or not the relevant person conducts the business or undertaking
as an employer, self-employed person or otherwise; and
(b) whether or not the business or undertaking is conducted for gain or
reward; and
(c) whether or not a person works on a voluntary basis.".
It is a legitimate criticism of the Respondent's case at first instance
that the evidence did not establish the particularised business
or undertaking
of "Sugar Milling". I rather apprehend that the Industrial Magistrate shared
that view. At page 15 of the written
decision delivered at first instance,
His Honour said:
"... whether in terms of the precise contractual arrangements between Mackay
Sugar and Transfield, Transfield could be correctly
characterised as a sugar
miller or, as the full name of Transfield might suggest, as supplier of services
to a sugar miller is not
the point.".
However, the issue is whether the Appellant conducted a business or
undertaking, and it is clear from the record that the Appellant
had the conduct
of the business or undertaking of operating the Wallingford drawbridge to permit
cane trains to cross QR's tracks.
It does not matter that the particulars
wrongly branded the undertaking or business. Such an error may be corrected by
pursuant to s. 48 of the
Justices Act 1886.
starting point is s. 164 of the
Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995
which provides:
164 Proceedings for offences
(1) A prosecution for an offence against this Act is by way of
summary proceedings before an industrial magistrate.
(2) More than 1 contravention of a workplace health and safety obligation
under part 3 may be charged as a single charge if the acts
or omissions giving
rise to the claimed contravention happened within the same period and at the
same workplace.
(3) A person dissatisfied with a decision of an industrial magistrate in
proceedings brought under subsection (1) who desires to
appeal must appeal to
the Industrial Court.
Industrial Relations Act 1999
applies, with any necessary
changes, to a proceeding before an industrial magistrate brought under
subsection (1) and to a proceeding
on appeal before the Industrial Court brought
under subsection (3)
. [Emphasis added]
(5) A prosecution for an offence against this Act must be commenced by
complaint of an inspector or someone else authorised by the
Minister or the
chief executive.
(6) In this section -
Person dissatisfied with a decision
in a proceeding means -
(a) a party to the proceeding; or
(b) a person bound by the decision; or
(c) if an inspector started the proceeding - any inspector.".
By s. 683(2) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1999
proceedings before an industrial magistrate are to be heard and decided
summarily under the
Justices Act 1886.
The difficulty is that the
Justices Act 1886
vests authority and responsibility in "justices". The
definition of "justices" and "justice" at s. 4 of the
Justices Act 1886
means justices of the peace
or a justice of the peace having jurisdiction where the act in question is, or
is to be, performed, and
includes a stipendiary magistrate and, where necessary,
a Magistrates Court.".
Although every magistrate (and acting magistrate) is an industrial
magistrate (
Industrial Relations Act 1999
, s. 290), the Magistrates Court
and the Industrial Magistrates Court are separate and distinct courts of record.
If s. 4 of the
Justices Act 1886
is read literally the legislative scheme
at s. 683(2) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1999
(and by extension at s.
164(4) of the
Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995
) is a futility. So
far from achieving the purpose of the legislative scheme, compare
Interpretation Act 1954
, s. 14A(1), the literal construction of s. 4 of the
Justices Act 1886
denies the legislative scheme a purpose. In my view,
the imperative language of s. 683(2) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1999
requires that industrial magistrates must be treated as having the authority and
responsibilities of a Magistrates Court under the
Justices Act
The analysis above is sufficient to meet the criticism made by
the Appellant of the Industrial Magistrate's decision to amend the
particulars
(on 9 November 2007) by substituting "drawbridge" for "hydraulic actuator".
There has not of course been a substitution
of "Operation of Wallingford
Drawbridge" for "Sugar Milling". Section 164(4) of the
Workplace Health and
Safety Act 1995
"ropes in" the power of the Court at s. 341(3) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1999
to amend a decision appealed against.
However, there is room for argument that the power is only available where an
appeal is allowed.
It is preferable to rely on s. 248(1)(e) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1999
which arms the court with ample power to
make the amendment. It is not material that
Everest v Mirozel
Choveaux v Hunt, ex parte Hunt
[1962] Qd R 145
concerned other
legislation and other courts. The critical point is recognition of the
proposition that in an appropriate case a
magistrate has a duty to make an
amendment though not asked for by a party. On the evidence at first instance
that duty to amend
under s. 48 of the
Justices Act 1886
did arise and
this Court should give effect to that duty. I amend the particulars at
"Business or Undertaking" by deleting the words
"Sugar Milling" and inserting
"Operation of Wallingford Drawbridge".
Counsel for the Appellant contends
that if the amendment of the particulars at "Business or Undertaking" had been
made at the close
of the Respondent's case, the submission that there was no
case to answer would have been successful. I do not accept that submission.
a submission that there is no case to answer the test has long been understood
to be "... not whether on the evidence as it stands
the defendant ought to be
convicted, but whether on the evidence as it stands, he
convicted",
May v O'Sullivan
[1955] HCA 38
(1955) 92 CLR 654
at 658. On the evidence
before the Industrial Magistrate - assuming as one must that the evidence is
accepted - a reasonable person
could have been satisfied that the Appellant was
carrying on the "Business or Undertaking" of "operating the Wallingford
Drawbridge".
There was the evidence of Mr Wilkinson, the traffic officer who
had made a job assessment of what manual operation of the drawbridge
and about the members of the Appellant's staff whom he had sent to the site.
There was the evidence of Mr Casey about the
six or seven previous occasions on
which he had been sent to the site and about what he did at the site. Finally
there was the cross-examination
of the complainant himself:
"Did you identify that the actual drawbridge, that is the two parts that
extend up, are owned by Queensland Rail? -- Yes.
And you identified that the pit and the mechanics that operate the drawbridge
are owned by Queensland Rail? -- Yes, I did.
Did you identify that Queensland Rail performed all maintenance on the
drawbridge, the mechanics of the drawbridge and their railway
line? -- Yes, I
That any form of capital work on the drawbridge, the mechanics and their
railway line was performed by them? -- Yes, I did.
Did you also identify that the only rights with the drawbridge that
Transfield Australia Pty Ltd had was use? -- Can you ask that
question again
Yes. Did you also identify that the only rights with the drawbridge that
Transfield (Australia) Proprietary Limited - Transfield
Services (Australia)
Proprietary Limited had in relation to the drawbridge was use - that is user
rights? --The only evidence that
was produced in the investigation, your Honour,
was that Transfield Services were using the drawbridge manually in relation to
caused the auto operations of the drawbridge were failing. To determine
the use of the authority to use I investigated and I requested
if there was any
sort of contractible agreement and there was none forthcoming between either
party could answer that question.
Well, you determined that first of all that Queensland Rail owed (sic) all of
the equipment, that is the drawbridge and its operating
equipment? -- Yes,
that's correct.
You determined that only they were allowed to maintain it? -- Yes, that's
I think I understand from what you said you weren't sure about the capital
works one way or another? -- The only evidence that was
presented of that was
that Queensland Rail maintain and service that equipment.
I want to suggest to you that you were told that Transfield - sorry,
Transfield Services (Australia) Proprietary Limited weren't entitled
anything to the equipment other than use it? -- Yes, I was - I was told that by
one of the employees. It think it was Mr Swart.
And in terms - in terms of that use, did you understand that use meant that
they were allowed to lower it and raise it for the purposes
of having their
trains cross Queensland Rail railway line? -- There was never any evidence from
Queensland Rail to say that they
were allowed to use it. The evidence I was
presented with was that they were using it in that manner. I requested some
evidence in relation to the authority to use it, or was there any sort
of agreement between both parties and that evidence was nor
forthcoming.".
Of course, by the end of the trial, when the Industrial Magistrate had to
consider whether His Honour should convict the Appellant,
there was additional
evidence from the Appellant's Rail Operations Co-ordinator (Mr Strong) and the
Appellant's Technical Services
Manager (Mr Treloar) about the operation of the
drawbridge. It was summarised by the Industrial Magistrate. It gives further
to the proposition that the Appellant had the undertaking of operating
the drawbridge.
It is the contention of the Appellant that, in a case in
which more than one person has a workplace health and safety obligation for
matter, s. 24(3)(b) creates a barrier to conviction. The barrier is not said to
be insurmountable, but the Respondent is said
to carry the onus of proof. I am
disposed to accept that submission. Section 24(3) provides:
more than 1 person has a workplace health and safety obligation for a matter,
each person -
(a) retains responsibility for the person's workplace health and safety
obligation for the matter; and
(b) must discharge the person's workplace health and safety obligation to the
extent the matter is within the person's control; and
(c) must consult, and cooperate, with all other persons who have a workplace
health and safety obligation for the matter.".
I am prepared to accept also that QR carried a workplace health and
safety obligation.
The further contention is that the definition of
"control" is to be found in s. 15C of the Act and that the Respondent failed to
that the Appellant owned the Wallingford drawbridge or otherwise had
effective control under a "contract or arrangement". I have
no difficulty in
accepting that the Respondent failed to establish that the Appellant was the
owner of the Wallingford drawbridge.
Neither did the Respondent establish the
terms of any contractual or other arrangement between QR and the Appellant.
cannot accept that s. 15C of the Act defines "control" for the
purposes of s. 24(3)(b).
Part 1, Division 4 of the Act is headed
"Interpretation". Subdivision 1 is headed "Dictionary" and directs the reader
to Schedule
3 to the Act which defines particular words. Subdivision 2 is
headed "Other important terms" and deals with core terms such as "workplace",
"employer", "worker", "project manager" etc. Subdivision 3 is headed "Persons
in control of relevant workplace areas and fixtures,
fittings and plant in
relevant workplace areas". Sections 15A to 15C then
15A Meaning of relevant workplace area
relevant workplace area
(a) any place, or a part of a place, used as a workplace; and
(b) any area adjacent to the place or part associated with the use of the
place or part as a workplace.
Examples of areas that could be adjacent to a place or part and associated
with its use as a workplace -
1. shopping centre car park
2. common area in a shopping centre
3. hotel beer garden
4. outside play area for a child care centre
15B Meaning of person in control of relevant workplace area
person in control
, of a relevant workplace area, is the person
who is the owner of the relevant workplace area.
(2) However, if there is in place a lease, contract or other arrangement that
provides, or has the effect of providing, for another
person to have effective
and sustained control of the relevant workplace area, the other person, and not
the owner is the
person in control
of the relevant workplace area.
15C Meaning of person in control of fixtures, fittings or plant
person in control
, of fixtures, fittings or plant included in
a relevant workplace area, is the person who is the owner of the relevant
workplace area.
(2) However, if there is in place a contract or other arrangement that
provides, or has the effect of providing, for another person
to have effective
and sustained control of the fixtures, fittings or plant, the other person, and
not the owner of the relevant workplace
area, is the
person in control
the fixtures, fittings or plant.".
As a matter of first impression I should
have thought ss. 15B and 15C provided meaning for the concept of person in
control for s.
34C which is headed "obligation of person in control of relevant
workplace area" and s. 34D which is headed "obligation of person
in control of
fixtures, fittings or plant included in relevant workplace area". Such a
construction accords with the express terms
of ss. 15B and 15C and the heading
to Subdivision 3. Section 28 of the
Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995
(the Act) is not about workplaces, fixtures, fittings or plant and the
obligations of those in control of relevant workplaces or
fixtures, fittings or
plant included therein. It is about business and undertakings and the
obligations of those who conduct businesses
and undertakings. Further, the
control test utilised by ss. 15B and 15C of the Act is entirely appropriate to
workplaces, fixtures,
fittings and plant. It is based on ownership, leases,
contracts and other arrangements with the owner. Section 24(3)(b) of the
which is the Appellant's starting point, limits the obligation holder's
responsibility to "the extent the
is within the person's control"
[emphasis added]. One may sensibly describe the Appellant as having control of
the matter of lowering
and raising the Wallingford drawbridge to allow the
passage of the cane trains over QR's tracks. However, it is an unusual use of
language to speak of ownership of a "matter" or to speak of leases, contracts
and other arrangements with the "owner" of a "matter".
In my view, the extent
of the Appellant's control of the matter of lowering and raising the Wallingford
drawbridge to allow passage
of cane trains over QR's tracks should be determined
as a matter of fact. That was the approach taken by the Industrial Magistrate
in finding that the barrier at s. 24(3)(b) of the Act had been overcome. It
matters not that as the Industrial Magistrate recognised
the control arose by
acquiescence of QR; an acquiescence made manifest by QR removing the padlock
securing the cover of the pit containing
the gearbox. Neither does it matter
that the Appellant's control was temporary and might have been terminated. The
Appellant's
Rail Operations Co-ordinator (Mr Strong) did take control of
operation of the drawbridge on the Appellant's behalf and at all material
the Appellant retained control.
The core of the Appellant's attack on
the Industrial Magistrate's conclusion that the Appellant had a case to answer
appears at paragraph
12 of the Appellant's outline of submissions:
"It is incorrect to suggest that the mere fact that a person is injured at
work without more is enough to satisfy the Court that
a prima facie case has
been proved. Whilst evidence of an injury may be called to assist in
identifying the hazard, it will not
in all circumstances lead to a prima facie
case being established.".
Reliance is placed upon the decision of this Court in
NQEA Australia
Pty Ltd v Walter Frederick Dare
[2002] QIC 98
(2002) 171 QGIG 254
at 254 whereat it is
said: "... liability flows from breach of the Act and not from injury ...". I
continue to adhere to that view
but I also continue to adhere to the view that
death or injury may be used in an evidentiary way to prove breach of the
obligation.
The proposition is more fully developed in
Bow Park Pty Ltd v
David Gordon Williams
[2003] QIC 159
(2003) 174 QGIG 531
"Section 24(1) makes plain that an offence may be committed though neither
death, nor grievous bodily harm, nor bodily harm was caused.
Batley v. S.
Lowe and Sons (Tully) Pty Ltd
[2003] QIC 153
(2003) 174 QGIG 179
is an example of such a
case. However, the circumstance that death, grievous bodily harm or bodily harm
flows from a breach of the
Act is not relevant merely as a circumstance of
aggravation inflating the maximum penalty. The circumstance that death,
bodily harm or bodily harm has occurred may be used in an evidentiary
way to prove the breach of the obligation which is made an
offence by s.
As noted, the obligation which Bow Park Pty Ltd was said not to have
performed was that at s. 28(1) which provides:
'An employer has an obligation to ensure the workplace health and safety of
each of the employer’s workers at work.'.
Although there is no definition of 'ensured', the Act does identify the
circumstances in which it is possible to say that workplace
health and safety
'is ensured'. Section 22(1) provides:
'22.(1) Workplace health and safety is ensured when persons are free from
(a) death, injury or illness caused by any workplace, workplace activities or
specified high risk plant; and
(b) risk of death, injury or illness created by any workplace, workplace
activities or specified high risk plant.'.
It seems to me that it follows from paragraph (a)
that where (as here) death occurred, one could not say of Bow Park Pty
workers that their workplace health and safety 'was ensured'. I
should perhaps add that s. 9(1) of the earlier
Workplace Health and Safety
'An employer who fails to ensure the health and safety at work of all the
employer’s employees, except where it is not practicable
for the employer
to do so, commits an offence against this Act.'.
On two occasions the Court of Appeal held that in that context 'ensure' meant
'make certain' or 'make sure' and rejected a submission
that a further exception
should be read in to cover the case where harm to the employee was not
reasonably foreseeable, see
Hardy v. St. Vincent’s Hospital Toowoomba
[2000] 2 QdR 19
Mount Isa Mines Ltd v. Peachey
I have been taken to nothing which suggests that 'ensure' should be
given any other meaning in s. 28(1) and, as indicated, s. 22(1)
weighs heavily
against any suggestion that liability is limited by foreseeability.
Though the obligation cast by s. 28 is absolute, liability is not absolute.
That is entirely understandable. Section 26(3) provides:
'(3) If an advisory standard or industry code of practice states a way of
managing exposure to a risk, a person discharges the person’s
health and safety obligation only by -
(a) adopting and following a stated way that manages exposure to the risk;
(b) adopting and following another way that gives the same level of
protection against the risk.'.
It would be startling if an employer doing what s. 26(3)(a) requires an
employer to do were to be found guilty of failing to ensure
the workplace health
and safety of the employer’s workers pursuant to s. 28(1) because death,
grievous bodily harm or bodily
harm had occurred. After all, if the employer
had been 'discovered' not to be discharging the obligation under s. 28(1) by a
described at s. 26(3) before the death, grievous bodily harm or bodily
harm had occurred, the employer might have been prosecuted
in breach of s. 24(1)
on that ground. And so it is that s. 37(1)(b) provides a defence:
'37.(1) It is a defence in a proceeding against a person for a contravention
of an obligation imposed on the person under division
2 or 3 for the person to
(b) if an advisory standard or industry code of practice has been made
stating a way or ways to manage exposure to a risk -
(i) that the person adopted and followed a stated way to prevent the
contravention; or
(ii) that the person adopted and followed another way that managed exposure
to the risk and took reasonable precaution and exercised
proper diligence to
prevent the contravention;'. [At the time the s. 28 obligation fell upon
employers, not those conducting a business
or undertaking.]".
I am encouraged to continue to adhere to that approach by the decision of
the Court of Appeal in
Bourk v Power Serve Pty Ltd
[2008] QCA 225.
the Court said:
"[32] Under s28(1) the employee's safety is absolute. It is not expressed
as a duty to supply equipment, advice, training, conditions,
or assistance of a
particular type or at all. Subject to the operation of s26, s27 and s 37, if an
employee such as the appellant
is injured through the failure of a piece of
necessary safety equipment provided to him by his employer there is breach of
the obligation
imposed by s28(1). The employer has failed to ensure the safety
of the employee. Causation is established. If the employee's safety
ensured, the employee would not have been so injured.".
Parry v Woolworths Limited
[2009] QCA 26.
the proposition contended for by the Appellant that on the approach in
Park Pty Ltd v David Gordon Williams
[2003] QIC 159
(2003) 174 QGIG 531
, difficulty may
arise where an employee suffers a heart attack in the course of his employment.
Indeed, that very difficulty arose
Batley v S. Lowe and Sons (Tully) Pty
[2003] QIC 153
(2003) 174 QGIG 179.
However in this case the Appellant failed to put
in evidence to raise the issue, on which the Respondent would have carried the
onus, whether the nexus between the employment and the injury was but temporal.
Conjecture from the bar table that Mr Casey may
have looked up and became dizzy
does not suffice. If, as was also suggested, the crank handle gave way, it
remained the case that
Mr Casey's safety was not ensured, though if the
allegation was made out the Appellant might have had a defence under s. 37(2) of
As a generalisation, I accept the Appellant's submission that
"... a criminal charge cannot create a liability upon a person unless
some blame-worthiness even if the offence is one of an absolute liability
nature". However, in this State exculpation for
non-volitional conduct,
accident, and honest and reasonable mistake of fact arises from ss. 23 and 24 of
the Criminal Code. Sections
23 and 24 of the Code are not available as a
defence on a complaint of breach of s. 24 of the
Workplace Health and Safety
, see s. 24(2) of the Act. It must be remembered that the complaint
is for breach of s. 24 not for breach of the workplace health
obligation to which s. 24 attaches penal consequences. The language of s. 24(2)
"Subsection (1) applies
Criminal Code, sections 23
and 24" [emphasis added], is inconsistent with an intention to revive the common
The appellant has contended that "... the Industrial Magistrate
failed to consider post
prima facie
case being established whether the
case as alleged by the Prosecutor was proved beyond reasonable doubt.". On the
face of the Industrial
Magistrate's decision the criticism appears to me to be
unfair. The Industrial Magistrate did revisit issues, e.g. the issue of
and the cause of Mr Casey's injuries, and in doing so traversed evidence which
was led in the Appellant's case. It seems
to me that the submission is linked
to the more fundamental proposition that once the Appellant led sufficient
evidence to raise
matters at ss. 26 and 27 of the Act, the onus shifted to the
Respondent to prove non-compliance by the appellant beyond reasonable
all material times ss. 26 and 27 of the Act provided:
26 How obligations can be discharged if regulation etc. made
(1) If a regulation or ministerial notice prescribes a way of preventing or
minimising exposure to a risk, a person discharges the
person's workplace health
and safety obligation for exposure to the risk only by following the prescribed
(2) If a regulation or ministerial notice prohibits exposure to a risk, a
person discharges the person's workplace health and safety
obligation for
exposure to the risk only by ensuring the prohibition is not contravened.
(3) If a code of practice states a way of managing exposure to a risk, a
person discharges the person's workplace health and safety
obligation for
exposure to the risk only by -
(a) adopting and following a stated way that manages exposure to the risk; or
(b) doing all of the following -
(i) adopting and following another way that gives
the same level of protection against the risk;
(ii) taking reasonable precautions;
(iii) exercising proper diligence.
27 How obligations can be discharged if no regulation etc. made
(1) This section applies if there is not a regulation or ministerial notice
prescribing a way to prevent or minimise exposure to a
risk, or a code of
practice stating a way to manage the risk.
(2) A person discharges the person's workplace health and safety obligation
for exposure to the risk by doing both of the following
(a) adopting and following any way to discharge the person's workplace health
and safety obligation for exposure to the risk;
(b) taking reasonable precautions, and exercising proper diligence, to ensure
the obligation is discharged.".
[For completeness, I should say that in the circumstances of this case
the relevant provision seems to me to have been s. 26(3) of
the Act. I say that
because the Respondent tendered each of two generic codes of practice,
, Workplace Health and Safety, Risk Management, Advisory Standard
2000 and Plant code of Practice 2005.]
I accept that the interpretation
of ss. 26 and 27 is not without difficulty. The heading to the divisions and to
the sections of
an Act are part of the Act,
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
The heading to Division 4 of the Act is Defences. The
heading to Section 37 of the Act is "Defences for div 2 or 3". On the
that ss. 26 and 27 of the Act cast an onus (even on the civil
standard) upon a defendant, one might have expected the sections to
in Division 4 of the Act and adjacent to s. 37. There is also the problem
created by the overlap of ss. 26, 27 and 37
of the Act. Section 37 of the Act
37 Defences for div 2 or 3
(1) It is a defence in a proceeding against a person for contravention of an
obligation imposed on the person under division 2 or
3 for the person to prove -
(a) if a regulation or ministerial notice has been made about the way to prevent
or minimise exposure to a risk - that the person
followed the way prescribed in
the regulation or notice to prevent the contravention; or
(b) if a code of practice has been made stating a way or ways to manage exposure
to a risk -
(i) that the person adopted and followed a stated
way to prevent the contravention; or
(ii) that the person adopted and followed another way that managed exposure
to the risk and took reasonable precautions and exercised
proper diligence to
prevent the contravention; or
(c) if no regulation, ministerial notice, or code of practice has been made
appropriate way and took
reasonable precautions and exercised proper diligence to prevent the
contravention.
(2) Also, it is a defence in a proceeding against a
person for an offence against division 2 or 3 for the person to prove that the
commission of the offence was due to causes over which the person had no
(3) In this section, a reference to a regulation, ministerial notice, or code
of practice is a reference to the regulation, notice,
or code of practice in
force at the time of the contravention.".
However, it seems to me that the issues of interpretation were resolved
by the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Schiliro v Peppercorn Child
Centres Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2000] QCA 18
[2001] 1 Qd. R 518
at para 49. The Court
said (emphasis added):
"When looked at in its historical legislative context and in the absence of a
clearly discernible intention in the legislature to
do otherwise, an examination
of the scheme of the Act suggests that it is one intended to impose civil
liability on employers who
have failed to ensure the health and safety of their
employees and thereby caused injury to those employees,
unless the employer
demonstrates that it has discharged its obligations under s 26 or s 27 or that
it has established a defence under
s 37 of the Act
. As with the 1989 Act,
this adds to the common law of negligence by placing the onus on employers to
establish these matters under
the Act, once the employee has proved the employer
breached the obligation to ensure the workplace health and safety of the
thereby causing injury to the employee. ...".
There can be no suggestion that the Court of Appeal was limiting the
remarks to civil matters. Earlier, at para 47, the Court of
"... It is consistent with the conclusion earlier mentioned that the
discharge of obligations under s 26 and s 27 and the defence
under s 37 not only
apply to prosecutions under the Act but also to any arising civil cause of
The proper course for this Court is to follow the decision in
v Peppercorn Child Care Centres Pty Ltd (No 2)
, and to treat
the Appellant as having had the onus to prove either the discharge of its
obligations under s. 26(3) of the Act or
the defence at s. 37(1)(b) of the Act.
With respect to the Industrial Magistrate, I have had some difficulty
with His Honour's findings of primary fact relevant to the application
36(3) and s. 37(1)(b) of the Act. In the event on 18 August 2009 the matter was
re-listed and the Court raised apprehension
that the Industrial Magistrate had
misapprehended the evidence. The matter raised was:
"As I understood the evidence, the crank handle has to connect with the shaft
of the gearbox. As I understood the evidence, what
might be described as the
hub of the crank handle, slips over the shaft, there is a raised piece of metal
on the shaft known as the
key, which settles in a key-well or a key-way and it's
at the point of the raised piece of metal in the key-way when the crank handle
is pushed, that the crank handle and the gearbox engage.
It seems to me that the Industrial Magistrate took the view that the shaft of
the gearbox was actually hollow and the hub of the crank
handle was solid and
the solid hub of the crank handle fitted inside the shaft of the gearbox, there
was a raised piece of metal
on the hub and in some way that got into a key-way
or crevice and that appears at page 3 of his Honour's decision in the second
'This crank handle has what is termed a key, a raised piece of metal
which extends along that portion of the crank, which is inserted
in the input
shaft of the gearbox, which fits in a key-way holding the crank handle in place
to prevent it rotating within the input
shaft of the gearbox'.".
Counsel were invited to consider the matter and make written submission.
That happened. Counsel agree that there has been an error.
As I understand it
there is no objection to the factual issues being resolved on the record. Given
the passage of time and the
costs already incurred, that course (if possible)
appears to me to be preferable to remitting the matter for a re-trial on what is
likely to be quite stale recollection by witnesses. In my view, re-hearing on
the record is possible.
It is no longer possible to assert as the Industrial
Magistrate asserted that:
"Whilst there is a dispute as to whether the possibility of the person such
as Mr. Casey being hit in the fact was or was not identified
as a hazard it is
the possibility of the crank handle coming out of the shaft was
not identified. It is clear from Mr. Casey's evidence that the handle
fact come out of the shaft
.". (emphasis added)
It is possible to assert that the possibility of the crank handle coming
off the shaft was not identified. The evidence (properly
understood) is the
very evidence which the Industrial Magistrate rehearsed and relied upon for the
finding about the possibility
of the handle "coming out". It is also clear that
when Mr Casey recovered his senses the crank handle was "off" and lay on the
The handle could only have been "off" the shaft if -
(a) Mr Casey took the handle "off", or
(b) the handle came "off".
The Industrial Magistrate accepted Mr Casey's evidence that he did not
remove the handle from the shaft. The evidence that Mr Casey
was struck in the
face is supportive of Mr Casey's evidence. Only if one speculates about
self-harm does removal of the handle loom
as a possibility. That hypothesis was
not developed in cross-examination of Mr Casey (who may well have given a
forthright reply).
The only remaining explanation is that the crank handle came
off the shaft. I accept that on the flawed analysis that the crank
fitted into the shaft, the conclusion that the crank handle came out is easier
to reach. The Industrial Magistrate described
the crank handle and the shaft as
"This crank handle has what is termed a 'key' - a raised piece of metal which
extends along that portion of the crank which is inserted
in the input shaft of
the gearbox - which fits in a key way holding the crank handle in place to
prevent it rotating within the input
shaft of the gearbox.".
On that description the "key" would have to pass along a gash in the
shaft in the course of being inserted and the open gash would
remain behind the
key while the handle was being turned. On the understanding that the handle
fits over the shaft and the "key"
on the shaft fits into a "key-way" on the
handle, solid metal is behind the key while the handle is being wound. However,
was still some "risk" of the crank handle coming off. It was for that
very reason that, after the incident involving Mr Casey, provision
was made for
the insertion of a lynch pin. The evidence of the expert witness called by the
Appellant (Mr Keaton) was that the purpose
of the lynch pin was to "retain the
crank handle". In my view the crank handle did come off. In any event the
Appellant has the
onus and one cannot find that there was not an unidentified
risk of the handle coming off; neither can one find that the handle did
I should add that while there was dispute about whether the
Appellant had identified the danger that the crank handle might "wind
strike a worker in the face, it is clear that (even if that danger had been
identified), Mr Wilkinson had not been made
aware of the danger. Under a system
of training in which each person operating the gearbox trained his replacement,
it followed
that the system broke down in that Mr Wilkinson and those who
followed him could not have been aware of the danger. On that ground
Appellant has failed to discharge its onus.
I dismiss the Appeal. I
reserve all questions as to costs. I remit the matter to the Industrial
Magistrate at Mackay in order that
the matters of sentence and of costs below
may be dealt with.
Dated 1 October 2009.
D.R. HALL, President
Released: 1 October 2009
Appearances:
Mr M. Shume instructed by Middletons Solicitors for
the Appellant.
Mr S. Sapsford directly instructed for the Respondent.
Government Printer, Queensland
The State of
Queensland 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (94.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter