URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIRC/2025/279.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:40:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wilton v Workers' Compensation Regulator [2025] QIRC 279 (20 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Wilton v Workers' Compensation Regulator
[2025] QIRC 279
Kevin David Wilton
(Appellant)
Workers' Compensation Regulator
(Respondent)
WC/2022/115
PROCEEDING:
Appeal against decision of the Workers' Compensation Regulator
DELIVERED ON:
20 October 2025
HEARING DATES:
11 April 2023
12 April 2023
13 April 2023
DATES OF WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS:
Respondent's written submissions filed on 26 June 2023
Appellant's
written submissions in response filed on 22 August 2023
Respondent's
written submissions in reply filed on 14 September 2023
Hartigan DP
appeal is dismissed.
application for costs, if any, should be made by the Workers' Compensation
Regulator within 28 days.
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS' COMPENSATION – ENTITLEMENT TO COMPENSATION –
EMPLOYMENT RELATED INJURY, DISABILITY OR DISEASE – EMPLOYMENT
SUBSTANTIAL
OR SIGNIFICANT FACTOR – OTHER MATTERS – where the appellant, a
worker, appeals a decision of the respondent
to confirm a decision of a
self-insurer to reject the worker's claim for compensation – where the
appellant was employed as
a coal mine worker – where the appellant
suffered a psychiatric or psychological injury which arose out of, or in the
of, his employment – where the respondent conceded that the
appellant was a worker who suffered an injury and his employment
significant contributing factor to the injury – whether the injury is
excluded pursuant to
Workers' Compensation and Rehabilitation
– whether the appellant's injury arose out of, or in the
course of, reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way –
management action was reasonable and taken in a reasonable way – the
appeal is dismissed
LEGISLATION:
Coal Mining Safety and Health Act 1999
Coal Mining Safety and
Health Regulation 2017
Workers' Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act 2003
Davis v Blackwood
[2014] ICQ 9
Gilmour v Workers'
Compensation Regulator
[2019] QIRC 22
Kuenstner v Workers'
Compensation Regulator
[2016] QIRC 83
APPEARANCES:
Mr M.E. Holmes instructed by Taylors Solicitors for the Appellant
Mr S.A. McLeod KC instructed directly by the Respondent
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
Appellant, Mr Kevin Wilton, appeals a decision of the Workers' Compensation
Regulator ('the Regulator') confirming the decision
of BHP Group Limited ('BHP')
to reject Mr Wilton's application for compensation.
[2] BHP rejected
Mr Wilton's claim for compensation on the basis that Mr Wilton did not sustain
an "injury" in accordance with
Workers' Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act 2003
(Qld) ('WCR Act'). Mr Wilton seeks to appeal this
[3] Mr Wilton
claims that he was injured over the course of several meetings in a three-day
period and that those meetings constituted
"management action" and that
management action was not reasonable nor taken in a reasonable way.
Consequently,
Mr Wilton contends that he suffered a psychological injury
whilst employed by BHP Coal Proprietary Limited ('BHP Coal') and that his
application for compensation should be accepted.
Issues for determination
[4] The parties
agree that at all material times, Mr Wilton was a "worker" for the purposes of
Further, the Regulator
accepts that Mr Wilton sustained an injury for the purposes of the
that the injury arose out of, or in the course of, his employment and that the
employment was a significant contributing factor
[5] The parties
acknowledge that the central issue in dispute is whether Mr Wilton is excluded
from compensation by the operation
, on the basis that
his injury arose from reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way.
[6] Relevantly,
Mr Wilton nominates the stressor for his injury as follows:
acts and/or omissions of Ms Taylor, Mr Dargin, Mr Snelling and BHP Coal's
management team in general, subsequent to Ms Taylor
first requesting that the
Appellant undertake training/assessing duties and her being told by the
Appellant that he did not wish
to perform those duties, on 26, 27 and 28 May
2021 and subsequently in respect of the disciplinary action.
The Appellant asserts that he sustained psychological/psychiatric injuries as
a result of each of the above stressors and/or a combination
[7] Mr Wilton's
stressor is in very broad terms and it does not particularise the relevant
management act and/or omission relied on
in the meetings on 26, 27 and 28 May.
This will be considered further below.
Relevant background
[8] Mr Wilton,
at the relevant time, was employed by BHP Coal in the role of a coal mine
worker, specifically, as a plant operator.
[9] Mr Wilton
held a number of competencies that he had acquired through the course of his
employment including a competency with
respect to providing training to workers
in the operation of plant and machinery and assessing workers' capacity to
operate plant
and machinery (trainer and assessor competency).
[10] Mr Wilton's
position as a coal mine worker generally, and as a trainer and assessor, carried
safety and health obligations pursuant
Coal Mining Safety and Health
(Qld) ('CMSH Act').
[11] In April
2021, Mr Wilton says that he was feeling overwhelmed with the training and
assessing aspect of his work and wanted to
take a break from performing that
part of his role. Mr Wilton claims that the role was voluntary and he was not
financially compensated
for performing the role. However, the evidence was that
Mr Wilton was required to, and had for some several years, perform the role
trainer and assessor in the discharge of his employment duties.
[12] It is Mr
Wilton's case that on or about 14 April 2021, he met with the Peak Downs'
Production Superintendent, Mr John Snelling,
and advised him that he wanted to
take a break from training until he returned from his holidays in or about early
July. There is
a dispute in the evidence about Mr Wilton's recollection of this
conversation as opposed to
Mr Snelling's recollection.
[13] Further,
there is a tension in the evidence with respect to the outcome of this meeting
insofar as Mr Wilton states that he came
to an agreement with Mr Snelling that
he was not required to perform any training or assessing until he returned from
[14] Mr Wilton
states, following the meeting with Mr Snelling, that he went and saw his
supervisor, Mr Steven Dargin,
on 14 May, who agreed that he would not
have to do training and assessing until he went on holidays and returned in
early July.
[15] On the
morning of 26 May, another supervisor, Ms Stacey Taylor, required
to perform a training and assessment task. Mr Wilton replied to Ms Taylor by
stating that he had an agreement with Mr Snelling
and Mr Dargin and was not
doing any training until he returned from leave. Ms Taylor stated that she did
not know of any such agreement
and would return to Mr Wilton after speaking to
Mr Snelling and Mr Dargin. After making the enquires, Ms Taylor directed Mr
to perform the training and assessing and he refused to comply with the
direction. Subsequently, several meetings were held with
Mr Wilton, Mr Dargin,
Ms Taylor and other BHP Coal representatives over the course of 26, 27 and 28
May with respect to Mr Wilton's
refusal to comply with the direction.
contents and consequences of those meetings form the basis of the contested
evidence in this proceeding and will be considered
in detail when analysing the
evidence below.
[17] Suffice to
say, Mr Wilton contends that as a result of the events on 26, 27 and 28 May, he
sustained a psychological injury.
[18] Mr Wilton
further contends that the date of decompensation is 29 May 2021, the date upon
which he attended a general
practitioner.
That date is not
disputed by the Regulator.
consequence of this is that it is the management action that occurred on or
29 May that is relevant to the determination of this appeal.
Specifically, it is the management action relied on by Mr Wilton in his
contentions that took place on 26, 27 and 28 May.
Relevant statutory provisions
[20] The onus
rests with Mr Wilton to satisfy the Commission on the balance of probabilities
that the injury did not arise out of,
or in the course of, any of the
circumstances set out in
relevantly provides the meaning of "injury" as follows:
32 Meaning of injury
is personal injury arising out of, or in the
course of, employment if the employment is a significant contributing factor to
(2) However, employment need not be a contributing factor to the injury if
section 34(2)
(2) applies.
includes the following—
(a) a disease contracted in the course of employment, whether at or away from
the place of employment, if the employment is a significant
contributing factor
to the disease;
(b) an aggravation of the following, if the aggravation arises out of, or in the
course of, employment and the employment is a significant
contributing factor to
the aggravation—
(i) a personal injury;
(ii) a disease;
(iii) a medical condition, if the condition becomes a personal injury or disease
because of the aggravation;
(5) Despite subsections (1) and (3), injury does not include a psychiatric or
psychological disorder arising out of, or in the course
of, any of the following
circumstances—
(a) reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way by the employer in
connection with the worker's employment;
(b) the worker's expectation or perception of reasonable management action being
taken against the worker;
(c) action by the Regulator or an insurer in connection with the worker's
application for compensation.
Examples of actions that may be reasonable management actions taken in a
reasonable way
action taken to
transfer, demote, discipline, redeploy, retrench or dismiss the
a decision not
to award or provide promotion, reclassification or transfer of, or leave of
absence or benefit in connection with,
the worker's employment
[22] Relevantly,
operates to remove a psychological injury from the
statutory definition of "injury" where it arises out of, or in the course of,
reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way.
Gilmour v Workers' Compensation
his Honour, O'Connor
after considering the relevant authorities and the operation of
"management action" for the purpose of
, must be something
different to the everyday duties and incidental tasks of the appellant's
employment.
Regulator contends that the action in this matter was reasonable management
it was observed that
that task to assessing management action was as follows:
...The task of the Commission when applying
does not involve setting
out what it regards as the type of actions that would have been reasonable in
the circumstances. There may
be any number of actions or combinations of actions
which would satisfy
The proper task is to assess the management action
which was taken and determine whether it was reasonable and whether it was taken
in a reasonable way. Sometimes, that may involve consideration of what else
might have been done but that will only be relevant to
whether what was done
was, in fact, reasonable.
[25] Accordingly,
the task is to assess the management action taken and to determine whether it
was reasonable and whether it was
taken in a reasonable way.
Kuenstner v Workers' Compensation
Commissioner Neate
summarised the following relevant principles in respect of the application of
as follows:
[38] There are
also decisions to the effect that:
(a) what management must do is be reasonable, not perfect, and, although
considerations of fairness will always be relevant, "reasonableness"
always equate with "industrial fairness;"
(b) it is not necessary that management action be perfect or above criticism,
and the term "reasonable management action" permits
"failings, deficiencies and
flaws provided the management action was sound, based on reason, was not
arbitrary, did not involve any
unfairness and did not produce an unfair result."
Prizeman v Q-COMP
, President Hall stated that in determining whether
action was reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way by the
in connection with the worker's employment, "it is the reality of the
employer's conduct and not the employee's perception of it
which must be taken
into account."
[40] Where there
are multiple stressors alleged to be management action, the Commission may make
a more "global" evaluation of management
action when considering whether that
management action was unreasonable or was taken in an unreasonable way (e.g.
where there are
were repetitive blemishes joined by subject matter, time and
personality in a discordant workplace).
to operate there must not only be reasonable management action but that
action must be "taken in a reasonable way." The responsibility
for management
action being taken in a reasonable way lies with the management. Whether
management action was taken in a reasonable
way is a question of fact, and
reasonable people may differ from time to time about whether a particular
management decision was
reasonably implemented. Language, tone of voice and
demeanour are relevant to the issue whether action was taken in a reasonable
Commission's role is to embark upon the enquiry whether the
psychological/psychiatric injury arose out of, or in the course
of, reasonable
management action taken in a reasonable way
asserting that the management action taken in the meeting on 26, 27 and 28 May
was unreasonable, Mr Wilton seeks to rely on
several work health and safety
obligations contained in the
Coal Mining Safety and Health
Regulation 2017
Regulations
') and BHP Coal's fitness for work policy
that he contends he was discharging at the relevant time.
Obligations under the
[28] Mr Wilton
submits that the "gist of
of the CMSH [Act] is to make sure that coal
mine workers do not put their safety at risk or others on the mine
[29] He further
contends that there is tension between coal mine workers' obligations under the
and their obligations under cl 4.1 of the of the BMA Enterprise
Agreement 2018
('the EA') that
require coal mine workers to comply with a reasonable obligation of their
employer for production purposes. For reasons
explored further below, that
submission is not accepted.
[30] Given the
reliance placed on the
, the EA and the fitness for work policy by Mr
Wilton in the course of his appeal, it is necessary to consider the provisions
[31] Briefly,
has the following
(a) to protect the safety and health of persons at coal mines and persons who
may be affected by coal mining operations; and
(b) to require that the risk of injury or illness to any person resulting from
coal mining operations be at an acceptable level;
(c) to provide a way of monitoring the effectiveness and administration of
provisions relating to safety and health under the
and other mining
legislation.
objects are achieved
(a) imposing safety and health obligations on persons who operate coal mines or
who may affect the safety or health of others at
(b) providing for safety and health management systems at coal mines to manage
risk effectively;
(c) making regulations and recognised standards for the coal mining industry to
require and promote risk management and
defines "risk" to mean "risk of injury or illness to a person
arising out of a hazard."
[34] A "hazard"
is defined in
to mean a "thing or a situation with
potential to cause injury or illness to a person."
provides that for risk to a person from coal mining
operations to be at an "acceptable level", the operations must be carried out
that the level of risk from the operations is:
(a) within acceptable limits; and
(b) as low as reasonably achievable.
provides that to decide whether risk is within acceptable
limits and as low as reasonably achievable regard must be had to the following:
(a) the likelihood of injury or illness to a person arising out of the risk; and
(b) the severity of the injury or illness.
sets out how an acceptable level of risk is achieved by
requiring that management and operating systems must be put in place for
Section 30(2)
provides that the systems must
incorporate risk management elements and practices appropriate for each coal
: identify, analyse, and assess
avoid or remove
unacceptable risk;
and provide
for critical
[38] If there is
an unacceptable level of risk to persons at a coal mine the
(a) persons be evacuated to a safe location; and
(b) action be taken to reduce the risk to an acceptable
provides that coal mine workers or other persons at coal mines
or persons who may affect safety and health at coal mines or as a
result of coal
mining operations, have obligations under div 2 of the
requires that a person on whom a safety and health obligation is imposed must
discharge the obligation.
[41] Pursuant to
, if a regulation prescribes a way of achieving an
acceptable level of risk, a person may discharge the person's safety and health
obligation in relation to the risk only by following the prescribed
[42] Mr Wilton
as a statutory basis upon which he states that he
was entitled to not comply with the direction to train and assess the trainee
by Ms Taylor because he contends that he requested a break from training
and assessing for safety reasons.
is in the following terms:
39 Obligations of persons generally
(1) A coal mine worker or other person at a coal mine or a person who may
affect the safety and health of others at a coal mine or
as a result of coal
mining operations has the following obligations—
(a) to comply with this Act and procedures applying to the worker or person that
are part of a safety and health management system
for the mine;
(b) if the coal mine worker or other person has information that other persons
need to know to fulfil their obligations or duties
under this Act, or to protect
themselves from the risk of injury or illness, to give the information to the
other persons;
(c) to take any other reasonable and necessary course of action to ensure anyone
is not exposed to an unacceptable level of risk.
(2) A coal mine worker or other person at a coal mine has the following
additional obligations—
(a) to work or carry out the worker's or person's activities in a way that does
not expose the worker or person or someone else to
an unacceptable level of
(b) to ensure, to the extent of the responsibilities and duties allocated to the
worker or person, that the work and activities under
the worker's or person's
control, supervision, or leadership is conducted in a way that does not expose
the worker or person or someone
else to an unacceptable level of risk;
(c) to the extent of the worker's or person's involvement, to participate in and
conform to the risk management practices of the
(d) to comply with instructions given for safety and health of persons by the
coal mine operator or site senior executive for the
mine or a supervisor at the
(e) to work at the coal mine only if the worker or person is in a fit condition
to carry out the work without affecting the safety
and health of others;
(f) not to do anything wilfully or recklessly that might adversely affect the
safety and health of someone else at the mine.
The Regulations
[44] As noted
provides that if a regulation provides a way of
achieving an acceptable level of risk, a person may discharge their safety and
obligation in relation to the risk only by following the prescribed way.
The Regulations may provide for how a coal mine worker discharges
their safety
and health obligations.
[45] Section
42(1) of the Regulations provides that a coal mine safety and health management
system must provide for controlling risks
at the mine associated with personal
and other physical and
psychological
impairment.
BMA's – PDM Fitness for Work
[46] The BMA
– PDM Fitness for Work, Physical and Psychological Impairment (PPI)
Management Plan
('the PPI Plan')
forms part of the mine's safety and health management system and is the
prescribed way in which risks associated
with fitness for work and physical and
psychological impairment are managed at the mine. The PPI Plan was referred to
in the evidence
and relied on by Mr Wilton insofar as he purported to be acting
in accordance with the PPI Plan when he had the conversation with
[47] In order to
form a view as to whether Mr Wilton was discharging his health and safety
obligation as prescribed in the PPI Plan
regard is required to be had to the PPI
Plan's terms.
[48] The PPI
Plan sets out how a potential PPI concern can be identified as follows:
3 Identification of Potential PPI Concern
Employee may be identified as having a potential PPI impairment in a number of
ways including;
report made of a PPI concern;
Employee presenting for work with a medical certificate, or a Coal Mine Workers'
Health Scheme Section 4, stating work restrictions;
In the case of 1a above, this may include referral to this Plan for a
personal fatigue, improper use of drugs, or excessive consumption
In the case of 1b above, the provisions relating to Health Assessments and
Health Monitoring in s46, s47, s48, and s48A of the CMSHR
Any immediate physical signs and symptoms of injury or illness should be
initially managed as a medical event and an emergency called
concern is a concern about,
, a physical or psychological
impairment. Once a potential PPI has been identified, the PPI Plan provides for
the following management
4 Management process
Immediate Response
an Employee knows or suspects they have a physical or psychological impairment,
or an Employee has a PPI concern regarding another
Employee, the following must
Employee will refrain from carrying out their tasks and notify their Supervisor
in accordance with their obligations under the
Coal Mining Safety and
Employee who has the concern must take reasonable and necessary steps to ensure
no Employee is exposed to an unacceptable level
of risk, and notify their
Supervisor in accordance with their obligations under the
Supervisor shall;
the PDM site Paramedic or site Health Specialist to assess and manage the
Employee according to this Plan;
necessary assist with arranging medical care and transport
arrangements;
the Employee's Superintendent.
Confirmation and Consultation Process
PPI concerns raised will be treated as genuine and assessed by the Employee's
Superintendent, in consultation with the PDM site
Health Specialist to have the
reasons for concern verified.
Superintendent will discuss the concern with the Employee and the Employee's
support person or representative (if requested),
in consultation with the site
Health Specialist.
a concern is confirmed;
consultation process will continue to develop the best strategy to return the
Employee to routine duties; and
Superintendent must send a
PDM FRM Fitness for Work: PPI Concern
Confirmation
to the Employee.
consultation may result in;
Employee making a conditional return to work under a Rehabilitation and Return
to Work Plan, and/or;
Employee requiring a medical assessment by the Employee's TMP to support
development of a Rehabilitation and Return to Work Plan.
[50] From the
above, the immediate response from an employee if they have a PPI concern is to
stop work and notify their supervisor
in accordance with their obligations under
. Once notified of the PPI concern, the supervisor must undertake a
number of steps, including but not limited to, contacting the
onsite paramedic
or the site's health specialist to assess and manage the employee and notify the
employee's superintendent.
[51] The PPI
Plan continues with the process by introducing a medical assessment process,
however, the medical assessment process
is not relevant to the consideration of
this matter as the evidence does not address any step being taken in accordance
The BMA Enterprise Agreement
[52] Finally, Mr
Wilton contends that there is a "tension" between Mr Wilton's safety and health
obligations under the
and the requirement to comply with cl 4.1 of the
[53] Relevantly,
cl 4 of the EA provides for employees duties. Falling under that heading is cl
4.1 which is in the following terms:
4.1 Employees
will perform such tasks as reasonably required by the Company without any
demarcation of duties while complying with
all legal and statutory obligations.
In this regard, Employees accept that the Company can require the performance of
any operational,
mining, maintenance or technical tasks that Employees are
trained, competent and/or authorised to perform. The Company will not allocate
tasks in a manner which promotes
deskilling.
[54] On the face
of its terms, cl 4.1 of the EA specifically states that,
employees will perform such tasks as reasonably required by the Company... while
complying with all legal and statutory obligations.
Clause 4.1, by its terms,
clearly contemplates the requirement of employees to perform their duties as
reasonably required by BHP
Coal whilst also complying with all legal and
statutory obligations.
[55] Consequently,
it is open to conclude that a direction to comply with an employer's request to
perform a duty or part of a duty
would not be reasonable if it required an
employee to act in a manner inconsistent with their legal and statutory
obligations.
[56] Whilst Mr
Wilton adopts language such as that there is "tension" between his statutory
obligations under the
and the Regulations and his requirement to comply
with a direction to perform a task under cl 4.1 of the EA, to be successful he
must establish that the direction issued was seemingly inconsistent with cl 4.1
because it was unreasonable and, for instance, it
required him to not comply
with his legal and statutory obligation and the acts and/or omissions taken by
management as a consequence
of his failure to comply with the direction were
unreasonable because when he refused to comply with the direction he was doing
on the basis that he was discharging his work health and safety obligations
and/or the PPI Plan.
[57] Given the
prescriptive statutory regime for identifying hazards and risks and then
assessing hazards and risks, if Mr Wilton
was acting to discharge the associated
statutory obligations his actions should accord with the requirements set out
of the Regulations and
cls 3 and 4 of the PPI Plan. Indeed, by operation of
Regulations
, the PPI Plan prescribes how Mr Wilton must discharge his
obligations with respect to fitness for work and physical and psychological
impairment.
respect to the matters included in the EA, and for completeness, it is noted
that disciplinary processes are not dealt with
in detail in the EA. Instead, BHP
Coal have a policy document called the "BMA's Guideline to Fair Play Policy"
('Guideline to Fair
Play') which sits outside of the EA. This policy was
referred to in the evidence
was invoked by BHP Coal after commencing the investigation process. The
Guideline to Fair Play refers to a Just Culture Decision
Tree ('Just Culture
Tree') which was also referred to in the evidence. The Just Culture Tree is a
flowchart which is followed to
determine an appropriate disciplinary level when
considering the imposition of disciplinary action.
within the context of this highly regulated and prescriptive health and safety
environment that the Commission will now
consider the evidence.
The Evidence
Mr Wilton's employment
[60] Mr Wilton,
at the relevant time, was employed by BHP Coal as a plant operator at the Peak
Downs open cut mine ('Peak Downs').
Mr Wilton commenced working at Peak Downs in
[61] During the
course of his employment, Mr Wilton had obtained a number of competencies
including trainer and assessor, loader,
dozer, digger, float and water cart. As
noted above, cl 4.1 of the EA provides that an employee accepts that BHP Coal
can require
the performance of any task that an employee is,
deemed competent to perform.
[62] Mr Wilton
worked on D crew which operated on a three days on, three nights on and six days
off rotating roster. There were approximately
30 workers assigned to D crew. At
the relevant time, the supervisors on D crew included Mr Dargin and Ms Taylor.
[63] Mr Wilton
and another coal mine worker on D crew,
undertook the trainer and
assessor duties for the crew with respect to truck driving. Although there was
some evidence that Maria
was not at work during the relevant time.
[64] Because of
his training and assessor duties, Mr Wilton would perform the crib relief which
would require him to operate a loader
or digger whilst the designated operator
took their crib break. This prevented the machine from being "parked up" and
allowed operations
to continue while operators took a break.
[65] The three
Recognition of Prior Learning ('RPL') and Recognition
of Current Competency
[66] Mr Wilton's
evidence was that Full Training was undertaken when a new coal mine worker
commenced in order for them to become
familiar with a machine, to complete the
full paperwork for that machine and to become familiar with mine site rules,
with traffic
rules and "absolutely everything". It requires completion of 100 +
hours of direct training supervision and then a further 300 hours
rigorous supervision. Consequently, Full Training for an operator requires 400
hours of varying degrees of training and supervising
which can take
approximately four to six months to complete.
requires the trainer to train and assess the coal mine worker who is familiar
with pieces of machinery to familiarise themselves
with the specific machine
subject to the training, undertake paperwork, take them for a drive and be
satisfied they can operate the
machine, both during the day and at night.
[68] Depending
on the operator of the machine, an RPL assessment can take between two to four
hours during daylight hours and four
to six hours during night hours to
[69] RCC occurs
when an operator has been deemed competent on a machine but needs to familiarise
themselves with the particular machine
on site. The RCC training and assessment
ordinarily takes approximately four hours to complete. It is clearly the least
onerous type
of training and assessing in terms of time to be undertaken. As
will become evident, the evidence relates to a request for Mr Wilton
RCC training and assessment.
[70] Mr Wilton
explained that he would ordinarily be notified that he was to undertake training
and assessment with little advanced
warning. His evidence was that sometimes he
would be advised at the start of shift or sometimes during the shift on a
moment's notice.
It was not in dispute that because of his competency, training
and assessing formed a large component of Mr Wilton's duties.
[71] In his
evidence before the Commission, Mr Wilton explained that he found parts of the
training and assessment role stressful.
He explained that this was in the
context of there being a high turnover rate of workers, the amount of training
and the continuous
repetitiveness of the training. Mr Wilton expressed a high
degree of resentment that he was one of the only operators in the crew
maintained the training and assessing competency.
[72] Mr Wilton
expressed frustration with respect to the turnover rate of new starters. He
explained that his crew would have three
to four new starters who would be
trained but as soon as they were trained, they would leave the mine. He
described it as a "continuing
[73] Mr Wilton
stated that in the period between January 2021 to April 2021 there had been
approximately seven or eight rotations
of his roster and during that period of
time he had trained approximately 10 to 15 different trainees.
Meeting with Superintendent Snelling on 14 April 2021
[74] Mr Wilton's
evidence is that he went and saw Mr Snelling to ask for a break from training.
Mr Snelling held the position of the
production superintendent for coal mining
at Peak Downs at the relevant time.
[75] Mr Wilton's
evidence with respect to the conversation with Mr Snelling was as follows:
All right. Can you just take the Commission through what happened on 14
April 2021 when you spoke to Mr Snelling?
I'd finished the night shift and I went and seen John Snelling, knocked on
his door, and said, "Have you got five minutes?" He said,
"Yep, come in. Sit
down". I said, "Look, I've had enough of training", that I'd had two really good
nights on ROM Tiger, and "I need
a break from training" and that I've just
finished doing eight different trainees with familiarisations. He said, "By the
it, you need a break", and I said - he said, "You're not giving up
training?" I said, "No, I'm not giving up training but I'm going
away in June
and back in July, I'll continue my training when I come back from holidays in
Okay. Did he say anything else to you that you needed to do before that
took place, that?
Yeah, I had to go and - he told me to go and see the
supervisor.
[76] Mr Wilton
stated that it was his understanding after that discussion that he had to see
his supervisor to get permission to have
a break from training.
Snelling's understanding of the nature of the conversation with Mr Wilton
differed from Mr Wilton's evidence.
Snelling's evidence was that a few weeks after he had commenced in the role of
production superintendent at Peak Downs, Mr
Wilton arrived at his office door.
Prior to that occasion Mr Snelling had never met Mr Wilton. Mr Snelling
described the conversation
that occurred between he and Mr Wilton as
And could you just outline your recollection of the discussion?
MR SNELLING:
Yes. Will do. At the end of - and I - my normal habit is to get to work
quite early and I don't - as I say, I was only - I'd been
in the role a couple
of weeks so I'd never ever met Kevin before, and it was towards the end of a
nightshift - Kevin was on the nightshift,
I was starting day - on the day's. And
a gentleman knocked on my door and asked to come in and I said sure, come in.
And was that in a - in the crib room or in the superintendent's room?
MR SNELLING:
No, in my office. In my office, yeah. So I said, sure, come in, how are
you? And he said, my name's Kevin. I said it's nice to meet
you Kevin. And I
said, well, you know, just a normal conversation, what's going on. And he said,
if you know, I've been busy with
training, I need a break, I've got some
holidays booked. I'd like to have some holidays and go and enjoy myself. And I
said, that's
really good. I said, it's great that you've identified that you
need a break and, you know, go and enjoy yourself and look - look
after yourself
and we'll see you - and basically we'll see you when you - you return. So - - -
MR SNELLING:
And then after that he proceeded to have a conversation around labour hire
and why it's so hard to retain labour hire and Kevin was
of the opinion that it
was around the pay cycle and they get paid, you know, certain times of the week
and we had a fairly lengthy
discussion around that. And I guess, as I said, we -
I can't sort of understand their pain, they only get paid for a day, it just
depends how the cycle falls, but you've got to understand that provide - labour
hire providers work over several different lines
- several different rosters, so
I suppose they need to have a pretty - you know, certain days when they pay
their employees and that
was about it. Wished him all the best and that was - I
didn't see the gentleman again for - weeks
respect to the conversation, it was Mr Snelling's evidence that he did not
understand that Mr Wilton was asking for his
permission to take a break from
training. Rather, he understood that Mr Wilton had already decided to take a
break and was consequently
commencing his holidays.
[80] Following
the conversation, Mr Snelling said that he had nothing further to do with
Wilton for some weeks.
[81] In any
event, neither Mr Wilton nor Mr Snelling's evidence suggests that it can be
concluded that an agreement had been reached
between them that Mr Wilton did not
have to perform the trainer and assessor role. Even on Mr Wilton's evidence of
the conversation
he does not ask Mr Snelling if he could take a break from
[82] Rather, the
highest Mr Wilton's evidence goes in this regard is that he stated he had had
enough of training and needed a break.
Further, on Mr Wilton's evidence, Mr
Snelling did not grant permission for this, but instead, told him to go and see
his supervisor.
[83] Mr Wilton's
evidence does not support a conclusion that he was reporting a health and safety
concern to Mr Snelling on 14 April
as he contends. Moreover, it appears that his
statement that he had had enough of training appears to be consistent with his
frustration arising from the high turnover of staff, particularly with
the use of labour hire employees which also formed part of
the conversation
between the two.
[84] On his own
evidence, Mr Wilton states that he told Mr Snelling that he needed a break from
training and that he would return
to it when he came back from holidays.
[85] Mr Wilton's
evidence was that Mr Snelling advised him to talk to his
supervisor.
[86] Accordingly,
even on Mr Wilton's evidence, no agreement had been reached between he and Mr
Snelling's evidence is to the effect that Mr Wilton, whom he had never met
before, entered his office and asked to talk to
him. Mr Snelling's evidence is
to the effect that
Mr Wilton indicated that he needed a break from training
and that he was going on holidays. Mr Snelling commended him for recognising
that he needed to take a break.
apparent from Mr Snelling's evidence that at the relevant time he assumed that
Mr Wilton was starting his leave imminently. Mr Snelling's perception of the
conversation is that Mr Wilton was telling him that he
needed a break and was
taking leave. Mr Snelling's evidence does not support a conclusion that an
agreement had been reached between
he and Mr Wilton that Mr Wilton need not
perform any training before taking leave. I accept Mr Snelling's evidence (which
event does not differ significantly from the evidence of Mr Wilton) as to
what was said during the discussion on 14 April. However,
it is each of Mr
Wilton's and Mr Snelling's perception of the effect of what was said that
differs significantly.
further accepted, consistent with Mr Snelling's evidence, that if such an
agreement had come to exist between a superintendent
and a coal mine worker that
it would have been formalised and placed in writing. That is because if such an
agreement existed it
would need to be formalised in order to comply with any
relevant policy, for instance the PPI Plan, that provided a basis for such
[90] On this
basis, I am not satisfied that an agreement was reached between Mr Snelling and
Mr Wilton that Mr Wilton was not required
to undertake his training and
assessing duties until he took leave as Mr Wilton contends.
Meeting with Mr Dargin on 14 May
conversation with Mr Snelling took place on Mr Wilton's last night shift before
he was rostered to have six days off. The
next roster cycle of work was not
undertaken by
Mr Wilton because he had suffered an unrelated physical
injury. He returned to work on the following roster which was approximately
[92] Mr Wilton
states that on the first shift back he went and spoke to Mr Dargin at the
commencement of the shift. Mr Wilton states
that he had the following discussion
with Mr Dargin:
Okay. Can you just explain to the Commission what was the nature of that
discussion?
So at the start of the shift
was out on the - the 2
South A crib hut deck and I said to Dargo that 'I've seen John Snelling about
having a break from training,
I need a break from training, that until I come
back from holidays in July'.
Okay. And what was Steve's response to that?
He said, "Yep, no worries".
Okay. Was there much else to that conversation?
[93] Mr Wilton's
evidence is that following the conversation with Mr Dargin he was under the
impression that he would not need to
do any training or assessing until after he
came back from holidays in July.
[94] Mr Dargin
recalled having a conversation with Mr Wilton about needing a break from
training as follows:
Okay. Now, do you recall having a conversation with
Mr Wilton about Mr
Wilton needing a break from training?
Yeah, I – I hadn't been long back with the crew, as I'd previously
been working on that crew, and Kev and I were having a chat
out in our crib area
and Kev advised me he was getting burnt out. He had a couple of weeks to go or a
couple of swings before holidays,
just wanted to know if he could have a break
from it. He was getting burnt
[95] Mr Dargin
responded to the request from Mr Wilton as follows:
So, Mr Dargin, we'll take you back to that meeting you had with Mr Wilton.
What was your response to Mr Wilton to him telling you
It – I just stated it's – I'd worked with Kev before, I know
how much training and assessing he had been doing and I couldn't
see an issue
with it. We – I wasn't aware of having any new trainers to be done and we
could work around it, so I agreed to
give Kev a – a rest, have a break
from training until he came back from his holiday.
Okay. So again, just to confirm, an agreement, then, was reached between
the two of you and can you just confirm your understanding
of what that
agreement was from that point of time?
The understanding was that Kev would not be required to do any
[96] Mr Dargin's
evidence was that at the time the agreement was reached between himself and Mr
Wilton that Mr Wilton was still in
the process of training someone and would
finish up training that individual within a few days. Further, following the
of that training and assessment he agreed to give Mr Wilton a rest
from training on the basis that he was not aware of any new trainees
required training before Mr Wilton commenced his leave.
[97] Despite the
agreement, Mr Dargin did state that if he really needed to ask Mr Wilton to
undertake training and he could not find
anyone else he would have asked Mr
Wilton but "there was no need to do so".
[98] Presumably,
Mr Dargin's comment that "there was no need to do so" related to the fact that,
until the morning of Ms Taylor's
request, there were no new starters who needed
training or assessing.
[99] Mr Dargin
gave evidence about the processes that would need to be put into play if a
trainer and assessor operator was being
replaced or there was not one available
at the time.
evidence was that as D Crew was in the coal department they would approach a
pre-strip crew who had their own trainer and assessor and they may have been
able to call on the pre-strip to swap one of the operators
[101] However,
he noted that because they were sourcing someone from pre-strip they would have
to replace that person so production
could keep going.
[102] It is
apparent from the evidence that Mr Wilton put forward the request to Mr Dargin
on the basis that he needed a break from
training. Mr Wilton's evidence supports
the conclusion that he was becoming frustrated by performing the trainer and
assessor role.
Neither Mr Wilton's evidence nor Mr Dargin's evidence suggest
that Mr Wilton raised the matter in the context of asserting that he
was not fit
to perform his role as a coal mine worker or was suffering from a physical or
psychological impairment as described in
the PPI Plan. Rather, it was stated as
being his preference to not perform the part of his duties that related to
training and assessing
as he "needed a break".
[103] It is
accepted that the agreement was acceded to by Mr Dargin on the basis that Mr
Wilton complete the training and assessing
that he was supervising at that time.
The evidence was that it would take a few days. Further, Mr Dargin's evidence
was that he agreed
to the arrangement on the basis that there was no training
and assessing scheduled for the crew to be undertaken prior to Mr Wilton's
[104] Accordingly,
it is found that Mr Wilton did not raise a PPI concern in accordance with the
PPI Plan. That finding is consistent
with Mr Wilton's and Mr Dargin's subsequent
conduct as neither of them assert in their evidence that they took steps
consistent in
any meaningful and/or genuine manner consistent with the
requirements set out in cls 3 and 4 of the PPI Plan. It follows that the
agreement was not formed on the basis of addressing a work health and safety
concern or in the discharge of a work health and safety
obligation.
Ms Taylor's request for Mr Wilton to train and assess on 26 May
[105] On 26 May,
Mr Wilton was approached by Ms Taylor who also held the position of supervisor
of D crew. Mr Wilton states that Ms
Taylor approached him about undertaking some
training. His evidence was that the conversation occurred as
Now, let's move then to the events of 26 May 2021 when you were approached
by Ms Taylor about undertaking some training. So can you
just take us through
what you recall about being approached by Ms Taylor to do that?
So at the start of shift, it might have been just after pre-start, Stacey
come [sic] up to me and asked me if I would do an O&K
170, which is a 380
tonne digger and I said, "No, that I'm having a break from training" and then "I
need a break from training".
I've seen John Snelling and I've seen Dargo about
it, Steve Dargan [sic], and that I've had enough of training, "I need this
Okay. What was her response to that?
"Okay, I didn't know that you were having a break". I don't know whether
she knew or not but I said, "I need this break. I need this
time from training
for my own health and safety".
"And for the others".
[106] Mr Wilton
states that approximately five minutes after having the conversation with
Taylor that she returned and approached him again and asked him to go and start
loading trucks.
[107] Mr Wilton
continued to perform duties that morning, loading trucks and performing crib
relief. He states that a little later
in the morning Ms Taylor again approached
him about undertaking training and assessor duties. She asked him whether he
would change
his mind with respect to undertaking the training and assessment.
Mr Wilton states that he told Ms Taylor, "I need this break, I'm
over it, go and
do what you need to
[108] Mr Wilton
states that he then went and commenced operating a truck.
[109] It is
apparent from Mr Wilton's evidence that he considered that he was entitled to
reject Ms Taylor's request to conduct the
RCC training and assessing at this
[110] Ms Taylor
gave evidence that she needed an RCC training and assessment conducted. She
explained that a new person had started
in D crew but that they were not new to
site as they had come over to the crew from a contractor onsite and were site
inducted. They
could already operate other machines, in particular a digger, but
were required to be made familiar with the specific digger model
that was to be
operated that day. Ms Taylor estimated the RCC would take a couple of hours to
[111] Ms Taylor
gave evidence that she approached Mr Wilton and asked him to perform the RCC
training and assessing that morning.
[112] Ms Taylor
said that Mr Wilton responded by saying that "he wasn't doing training" and that
Ms Taylor should go and speak to
Mr Dargin or Mr Snelling about the reason why.
Ms Taylor stated that Mr Wilton did not provide an explanation to her as to why
refused to conduct the training.
[113] Ms Taylor
states that she responded to Mr Wilton by saying, "okay, I will go and find
[114] Ms Taylor
states that at approximately 9.00 am, she spoke to Mr Snelling who advised her
that there was no arrangement between
he and Mr Wilton for Mr Wilton to not
perform training and assessing duties.
[115] Ms Taylor
then gave evidence that she attended "some meetings" and then went back down to
the supervisor crib hut and office
to organise hot
for crib time.
[116] Whilst
there, Mr Wilton approached Ms Taylor and asked whether she had him down for any
hot seats to which she responded, no,
because she needed him to conduct the RCC
Taylor's evidence was that by this stage she had reached out to another
supervisor in the pre-strip crew to see if they had
a spare trainer to try to
"smooth over Kev's
save any hassles".
pre-strip supervisor advised Ms Taylor that it would impact production if she
took a person off the pre-strip crew for training.
[119] Ms Taylor
stated that she needed the training done as she had several machines "parked up"
due to a shortage of operators.
[120] Ms Taylor
states that after making the hot seat arrangements she then approached
Dargin to enquire as to whether there was an arrangement between he and Mr
Wilton. Ms Taylor's evidence was as follows:
... I then went to the supervisor office, which is just at the back of the
crib room, sort of, it's a couple of rooms in the one building,
and I saw Steve
Dargan [sic] after, that which is when I asked him. I explained to him what had
happened in the morning, that I'd
asked Kev to do the training and that he'd
said that he didn't want to do it and that he told me that he had some agreement
Steve and John, to which Steve shook his head and said, "Really?" and he
said, "Oh, well, we've got no choice" or something to that
effect. So he at that
point basically, by shaking his head he meant
Dargin's evidence with respect to the conversation with Ms Taylor differed from
Ms Taylor's evidence.
[122] Mr Dargin
said Ms Taylor came and saw him and asked whether he had an agreement with Mr
Wilton. His evidence was that he advised
her that he did agree that Mr Wilton
did not have to conduct training until after his holiday.
Dargin's evidence was that he had agreed, as a supervisor on that crew, for Mr
Wilton to not be required to undertake training
and as far as he was concerned
that agreement should have been abided with.
[124] It is
apparent that there is a discord in the evidence about what each of Ms Taylor
Mr Dargin say about what Mr Dargin told Ms Taylor of the "agreement".
discord between the evidence will be considered further following the
consideration of a statement of Mr Dargin taken by
Ms Taylor on 27 May.
[126] In any
event, it is apparent that Ms Taylor did not understand, after speaking to
Mr Snelling and Mr Dargin, that she was prevented from asking Mr Wilton to
perform the work requested of him. Ms Taylor's evidence
was that after speaking
to Mr Dargin and Mr Snelling she went and spoke to an HR representative.
[127] Ms Taylor
states that the HR representative advised her of a process whereby she was to
speak to Mr Wilton again and to put
to him that she was asking him to perform
the training and to seek more information from him if he again refused the
First meeting on 26 May – Mr Wilton, Ms Taylor and Mr Dargin
[128] Mr Wilton
stated that following his initial conversation with Ms Taylor, he was requested
to attend a meeting.
[129] Mr Wilton
did not give any direct evidence about this particular meeting in his
evidence-in-chief. Under cross-examination,
Mr Wilton confirmed that he recalled
the meeting between himself, Ms Taylor and Mr Dargin in the supervisor's office.
[130] Ms Taylor
gave evidence of the meeting that she attended with Mr Wilton and Mr Dargin
during which she took handwritten notes.
[131] As will
become evident, Ms Taylor adopted the same process after this and subsequent
meetings whereby she would collate her
handwritten notes and her recollection of
the meeting into an email which was then sent to Mr Snelling and several HR
representatives.
The email correspondence sent after the meetings containing the
are accepted as
evidence of a near contemporaneous record of the conversations between the
parties. Ms Taylor accepted that she may
not have recorded all things that were
said during the meetings, but that she did her best by compiling her handwritten
her recollection to produce the typed-up notes.
[132] In any
event, Mr Wilton accepts the notes do provide a reasonable guide as to what
occurred during the course of the meetings.
The notes are accepted generally as
being a reliable account of what occurred during the meetings.
[133] Ms Taylor
states that following the first meeting she sent an
to Mr Snelling which was
based upon her notes and recollection of the first meeting. The email to Mr
Snelling relevantly states:
Afternoon John,
Please see my notes below to share with HR.
Kev Wilton, Steve Dargo, Stacey Taylor - 12.42pm meeting in the 2S
supervisor office
Kev walked up to the door
ST "Hi Kev. Come in" I cleared off a bag from the couch so that he could
ST "I'm sure you know what this conversation is about already, carrying on
from our earlier conversation about training. At this time
I'd like to offer you
a support person as this will be a formal conversation since its just myself and
Dargo in the room I'd like
to offer you someone to sit with you. Would you like
to have someone in the room with you?
Kev answered "No." Kev then said "Is this going to be disciplinary?"
ST I stated "Not at this stage it isn't but I know you're a smart man and
you know that that is sometimes a possibility dependent
upon outcomes."
Kev then started to talk about how he just wanted a break from training
and that he's over it and that he's stated that to John that
he just wanted a
break. He was talking quite quickly so I couldn't quite get every sentence.
ST I stated to Kev "I can sympathise with your position however I am in a
position where I need this RCC completed this afternoon
using your skillset and
you are the only one I can use at the moment."
Kev said "Yeh cause all these other guys got the shits and chucked in
their trainer skill. I'll do the same I'll write a letter right
now and take it
to the training department cause I'm over it."
ST I said "My understanding is that you can't deskill yourself in that
Kev "Yes you can what about everyone else on the crew that's done it."
ST "That's another discussion which I'll take up separately with John."
Kev ''You are just picking on me cause I'm the only one left with the
ST "I'm not picking on you Kev, I just need this RCC completed this
afternoon."
Kev "Well get all these other trainers in here now and we'll talk about
ST "Ok well I need to redirect, at this time I've asked you to complete
the RCC this afternoon with Phil and you've refused."
Kev "No I didn't refuse I've said that I need a break I just want to go on
holidays and come back and I'll be right. For the past
year you've been here and
how much training have I done for you its been non-stop.
I nodded in agreeance and appreciation.
Kev continued stating "Well multiply that by the past 5 – 10 years
it just hasn't stopped and I need a break."
ST I interrupted and again redirected, "Ok, I understand but now I'm
giving you a lawful and reasonable direction to complete the
task. Will you
please complete it?
Kev "No I won't."
ST "Ok so just to confirm you are refusing to complete this task?
Kev said ''Yes."
ST "Ok well lets just leave it there for now I'll need to get some further
advice. For now please don't get back on a machine, just
stay at the crib hut
and I'll come back to you.
Kev nodded and muttered yep.
ST I then said ''You're free to leave the office if you like."
[134] The notes
from the meeting have been extracted in full in order to consider what it is
alleged that Ms Taylor recalled Mr Wilton
stating in response to the direction
and what input of Mr Dargin is reported as having occurred.
[135] The notes
taken by Ms Taylor record that Mr Wilton again expressed his frustration at
performing the training and assessing
role and that he was "over it" and that he
wanted to take a break from training. Mr Wilton indicated that his very clear
was that he not perform those duties until after his holiday.
[136] Mr Wilton
maintained his position that he does not want to perform the supervision of the
training and assessment and he was
frustrated that he was "the only one left
with that skill".
[137] The notes
also record that Ms Taylor, after discussing the matter with Mr Wilton and
explaining why she needed the RCC training,
issued a direction that he perform
the RCC training to which he refused.
[138] Relevantly,
Mr Wilton at the time of refusing the direction did not seek to argue that the
agreement had been made to manage
any risk arising from a health and safety
hazard nor did he seek to invoke the provisions of the PPI Plan or indicate that
attempting to discharge his obligations pursuant to
or any other health and safety obligation. Accordingly, I find that Mr Wilton
refused Ms Taylor's request and the subsequent direction
on the basis he had an
"agreement". Mr Wilton did not raise a PPI concern with Ms Taylor during this
[139] The notes
from the meeting indicate that Mr Dargin did not contribute in any meaningful
way to the meeting.
Dargin's evidence about his lack of involvement in the meeting was the subject
of the following cross-examination:
No, no, no, let's just focus on the meeting. I'm not interested about
initial discussions. So I'm focusing on the meeting in the supervisor's
- - - in the early afternoon, okay? So you agree with me that the meeting
was centred around the fact that he'd been requested to
do the training role, he
refused - - -?
- - - and then the whole meeting was centred around those circumstances and
I suggest to you that if, in fact, you had told Ms Taylor
arrangement, why didn't you sort of pipe up during the course of the meeting
that there was an arrangement in place and
what's all this meeting about and why
are we going down this track when there's an arrangement in place between
yourself and Mr Wilton?
Why didn't you pipe up?
I didn't think I needed to, as I'd already instructed – advised her
that there was an agreement –
But Mr Dargin, the – the meeting between, in particular, what Mr
– Ms Taylor and Mr Wilton were effectively debating was
Mr Wilton's
refusal to undertake the training. That's what the meeting was about?
And it – and he – and I suggest to you he may have said he
wanted a break from the training because he's over it, etcetera?
So he's putting forward an explanation why he's not prepared to undertake
the training and there's questions and answers being given
and a discussion
to Ms Taylor, look, there's an agreement
in place between him and I, this
meeting's a waste of time because there's an agreement. Why didn't you pipe up?
Because Ms Taylor
is asking questions of Mr Wilton, on your evidence, on a false
I didn't see the need to speak up when I'd already advised
Ms Taylor of
the agreement.
Okay. Would you agree with me that in hindsight, it would perhaps have been
prudent to pipe up?
No, I don't. I've just explained to you I'd already spoken to Ms Taylor
prior to that meeting.
Second meeting on 26 May – Mr Wilton, Ms Taylor and Mr Dargin
[141] A second
meeting was scheduled for later that afternoon. The purpose of that meeting was
to give Mr Wilton written notice of
his suspension for the remainder of the
shift due to his refusal to comply with the direction issued by Ms Taylor.
[142] Mr Wilton
gave evidence that there was a further meeting later on in the afternoon on
26 May between himself, Ms Taylor and Mr Dargin. He states that his
recollection of the meeting was as follows:
And what's your recollection of that meeting?
Repeated myself again that I needed this break, I'm over it. It's - I
needed a break because I don't want to lose the plot with my
trainees, for the
safety of my trainees and for anyone else that's on crew and I believe there was
a letter may have been given to
me, I can't recall what the letter
[143] Mr Wilton
states that at the end of the meeting he received a letter and that he
understood he was being suspended or stood
down for the remainder of the shift
which only had
20 minutes remaining and was advised to come back the
following morning on 27 May.
Mr Wilton reports feeling stressed at this
point in time.
[144] Ms Taylor
gave evidence that she attended the second meeting and following the second
meeting typed up notes taken from her
handwritten notes and recollection which
was sent as an email
[145] The notes
relevantly state:
Please see notes below on secondary discussion with Kev.
Meeting at 2S Supervisor office with Kev Wilton
Present: Steven Dargin, Stacey Taylor, Kevin Wilton
I informed Kev that I needed to have a secondary conversation further to
our previous discussion.
Kev said "yeh righto is this disciplinary action?
ST "No it's not at this stage."
ST "So I have asked you 3 times to complete the RCC training. Once on the
deck and twice in our previous meeting."
ST "I am now giving you a lawful and reasonable request to compete this
training. Failure to execute this task will be considered
refusal of duty. I
have asked you and now I am telling you. Will you complete the training?"
Kev "I'm no refusing
I just need a break from the training
I've told you that and I've told Snelling. I'm not comfortable to give it my
100% at this stage
you need to understand where I'm coming from and put across
my point not just your version of what I'm saying. I don't feel comfortable
do the training at the moment I need a break."
ST "I do understand your position but I also have some obligations and I
need the training completed. Will you complete the training?"
ST "Are you aware of the consequences if you refuse?"
ST ''You can potentially be stood down and or face disciplinary action."
Kev "Alright well I'll just put it in to dispute we'll get Noono down here
right now."
ST "We aren't at that stage right now. I am just asking you to complete a
task as a supervisor and confirming that you are refusing
to complete that
task." "I'll just confirm again you are sure that you don't want to just go and
do the training this afternoon?"
Kev "No I don't want to."
ST "Ok well I now need to let you know that you are stood down for the
remainder of this shift. Please stay at the crib hut and do
not hop on a
machine. Please come back to work tomorrow morning and we can catch up again.
Kev "yep alright"
ST "If you change your mind between now and then, please let me know. I
have my phone on me also just let me know an
I can come see you if
Kev "yep ok" "I just wish you could see it from my point of view that I'm
needing a break from training. I'm not going to do it if
I can't give 100%. You
know what I'm like."
ST "I understand what you're saying but that doesn't change what I need
right now and I need to be able to utilise your skillset while
you are fit for
work. I have a digger driver here that could have been out on his own in maybe
passed out on this site, just needs a famil
on this digger."
Kev "Yeh but I'm not going to do it if I don't feel comfortable to do it."
ST ''Are you sure you don't want to change your mind?"
Kev "Yes" "I've had enough the turnover is so high I am sick of the
constant training and it's disheartening when all the people do
is leave its
been constant for 5 years or more."
ST ''Alright, well we'll leave it there. Just don't leave the crib hut
area this afternoon. We will catch up in the morning."
extract of Ms Taylor's records of the meeting give some insight with respect to
Mr Wilton's response to the re-issuing of the direction.
[147] Relevantly,
when issuing the direction Ms Taylor provided Mr Wilton with an explanation that
she required the training to be
undertaken.
[148] Mr Wilton
acknowledged that and, in addition to repeating that he wanted a break and did
not feel he could give 100 percent,
also stated in response to the direction,
"[n]o, I don't want to".
[149] Mr Wilton
explained his reasoning for his position further when he stated, "I've had
enough the turnover is so high I am sick
of the constant training and it's
disheartening when all the people do is leave its been constant for 5 years or
Taylor's account of the meeting as contained in the notes is preferred to Mr
Wilton's evidence at the hearing as to what
he recalled he said during the
second meeting.
[151] From the
above, it is apparent that Mr Wilton felt frustrated from the high turnover of
staff. From the notes, there is no evidence
that Mr Wilton tried to contradict
Ms Taylor when she referred to him as being fit for work. Consequently, Mr
Wilton was stood down
for the remainder of his shift following his refusal to
comply with a direction.
[152] Further, I
am satisfied that Mr Wilton did not raise a PPI concern with Ms Taylor in the
course of this meeting.
First meeting on 27 May at 8.30 am – Mr Wilton, Mr Noonan, Ms Taylor
and Mr Snelling
[153] Each of
the witnesses spoke of several meetings that occurred on 27 May but only
Taylor was able to describe the nature of the first meeting.
[154] Ms Taylor
states that the purpose of the first meeting was to discuss with Mr Wilton what
had occurred the day before and to
advise that a process had been commenced
investigating his conduct.
[155] Ms Taylor
consistent with her practice the day before took notes in the meeting and then
relying on those notes and her recollection
of the meeting compiled a written
record of the meeting that she sent to Mr Snelling and others. The
relevantly said:
Meeting 1 Winchester Room 8.30am 27/05/2021
Jason Noonan, Kevin Wilton, Stacey Taylor, John Snelling
ST "Further to the discussions from yesterday we would like to progress
further from the stand down to a stand aside."
ST handed letter copy to KW
ST "I will just read out the letter for everyone in the room."
ST reads letter aloud.
ST "From here we would like to set up another meeting at a time suitable
to yourself where you may bring your support person if you
choose to put our
allegations to you."
JN "lets just do it now."
KW agreed with JN
JS "Ok well give us half an hour to prepare and we will meet you bock at
Meeting ended JN, KW left the room.
Second meeting on 27 May at 9.30 am – Mr Wilton, Mr Noonan, Ms
Mr Snelling
[156] A further
meeting was scheduled for 9.30 am on 27 May at the mine site. It is apparent
from the evidence that the purpose of
this meeting was to put the allegations to
Mr Wilton with respect to his failure to comply with a direction.
attendance at that meeting were Mr Wilton, Mr Jason Noonan, Ms Taylor and
[158] Mr Noonan
attended the meeting as Mr Wilton's support person, although it is noted that he
also spoke on Mr Wilton's behalf
at the meetings.
[159] By way of
background, Mr Noonan gave evidence that he was employed as a production
employee operator at Peak Down's on D crew,
the same crew as Mr Wilton. During
the relevant time, Mr Noonan was assigned to the post-strip area which meant
that he had a different
supervisor and superintendent to Mr
[160] Mr Noonan
held competencies in excavation operator, dozers and trucks. He also held a
competency as a trainer and assessor.
[161] Mr Noonan
became involved in Mr Wilton's matter as a consequence of being the Vice
President of the Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Energy Union's
Peak Downs lodge. He
attended several of the relevant meetings as Mr Wilton's support person, he
described taking notes during the
course of the meetings although no notes taken
by Mr Noonan were tendered into evidence.
[162] Mr Noonan
described attending the meeting on 27 May with Mr Wilton,
Mr Snelling and Ms
Taylor. He states that he recalled Ms Taylor reading out an allegation that Mr
Wilton had refused to train and
therefore was in breach of cl 4.1 of the
[163] Mr Noonan
recalls that Mr Wilton responded that the reason he refused was that he needed a
break from training because he was
stressed out and had had enough of training
and he wanted to refresh and come back to training after the
[164] Mr Wilton
gave evidence about his attendance at the second meeting on 27 May.
[165] Mr Wilton
states that he recalls that it was said to him that the purpose of the meeting
was to discuss his refusal of duty
on the previous day. Mr Wilton understood
that he was being asked to provide his version of events during the course of
that meeting.
Mr Wilton states that he said the following
Okay. And you say that you were putting your side of the story across, so
can you just explain what you believe was part of that -
or was the content of
that meeting, that second meeting?
It was that "I'd already gone and seen John and that I've asked for a break
and youse aren't allowing me to have time out that I need
to get meself [sic]
refreshed after I come back from holidays. I needed this break and you guys are
not listening to me". And I believe
what I was doing by pulling myself back was
for my own health and safety and the safety of others on crew.
Okay. Mr Noonan was also in the meeting. Do you recall if he said anything
and, if so, what?
No, I can't recall. Jason will have notes.
So you got the opportunity to put your side across. Was there anything else
said in that meeting from Mr Snelling or Ms Taylor in
response to that?
Only that it was refusal of duty and I - I failed to take a
[166] Ms Taylor
also gave evidence about attending the second meeting on 27 May. Her evidence
was that during the course of that meeting
the Just Culture Tree was discussed
with Mr Wilton.
[167] As with
the earlier meeting, Ms Taylor made handwritten notes and relied on those notes
and her recollection of the meeting
to draft an
to Mr Snelling. The email
relevantly stated:
Meeting 2 Winchester Room 9.30am 27/05
Jason Noonan, Kevin Wilton, Stacey Taylor, John Snelling
JS "We are here to put our allegations to you and allow you an opportunity
JS reads out allegation. "CMW refused lawful and reasonable request by
supervisors to perform the assigned task to complete RCC training
with another
CMW on 26/05/2021."
JS "any response?"
KW "Well it's the same as yesterday I discussed with Stacey that I need a
break from training. I saw you four rounds ago and said
I wanted a break from
training and you told me to see my supervisor. Stacey was away that round. So I
saw Dargo the next round and
he was ok with it. I am not 100% with training at
the moment. I'm not refusing to train cause the guy has the skill or anything.
This is at the stage now where its bullying and harassment. I was going to go on
leave and then come back from leave and get back
into it, but I don't think so
anymore. You's just don't know when to stop. It's not right.
JS "alright, anything else?"
JS "anything from you Jase?"
JN "You's aren't looking after your people's wellbeing at the moment. Why
are you doing this? You are putting people at risk by pressuring
JS "I wont put anyone at risk. But I wont respond now, I'll consider what
you've said."
KW "Well what am I doing here then?"
JN "Why can't you respond now?"
JS "I'll just follow the process then consider what you've said."
"Anything else from either of you?"
JS "Alright we'll consider it then. Then we will meet back at 10.30am
approximately if that suits of 12 at the latest I can do?''
JN "lets do it sooner rather than later."
KW nodded and said "yeh"
JS "alright we will meet back at 10.30 here."
[168] As noted
above and is evident from the notes of the meeting, the allegation was put to Mr
Wilton and it is apparent that Mr
Wilton was given an opportunity to respond to
the allegation.
Snelling gave evidence that he relied on the notes produced by Ms Taylor
following the two meetings on 27 May which she emailed
to him. During the course
of his evidence, Mr Snelling was taken to the notes and was questioned as to
whether they accurately recorded
the discussions that took place during the
course of the meetings. He indicated that he considered them to be "all pretty
[170] Under
cross-examination it was put to Mr Snelling that Mr Wilton had asked Mr Snelling
if he could have a break from training
until he returned from leave. Mr
Snelling's evidence in this regard was as follows:
Well, I suggest to you that he said to you that he was tired of training,
that he needed a break from training and could he have a
break from training
until he returned from leave?
MR SNELLING:
No, he definitely never asked me could he have a break. He said I've - as I
said before, he said, "I need a break. I've got holidays
booked" and as I said,
I - "Great that you've identified that, mate. Go and enjoy your - go and enjoy
your break, maximise your time
and when you come back, work with your
supervisor".
[171] Further,
it was put to Mr Snelling that he had told Mr Wilton that he needed to raise
that he needed a break with his supervisor.
Mr Snelling denied this on the basis
that he said Mr Wilton never asked him for a break from
Snelling, under cross-examination, gave evidence that it was highly unlikely
that an agreement between a supervisor and a
coal mine worker would be made and
then not formalised. He expressed a view that if an opinion had been formed that
a coal mine worker
"cannot train due to such and such" then a suitable duties
plan would be created in accordance with consultation with the
Mr Snelling's evidence
was that it was unlikely that you could train one day and then not train the
[173] During the
second meeting, it is apparent that Mr Wilton was starting to feel stressed by
the process and felt like he was being
bullied because he refused to conduct the
RCC training. I accept that Mr Wilton's stress arose from the process commenced
his refusal to comply with the direction.
Third meeting on 27 May at 10.30 am – Mr Wilton, Mr Noonan, Ms
Mr Snelling
parties returned for a further meeting at 10.30 am. The purpose of the meeting
was to put to Mr Wilton the determination
from the Just Culture Tree process. It
was found that Mr Wilton had engaged in "deviant behaviour" within the meaning
of that term
in the Guideline to Fair Play and the Just Culture Tree. This was
based on the substantiation of the allegation and the consequential
finding that
Mr Wilton had contravened cl 4.1 of the EA.
[175] Mr Noonan
accepted under cross-examination that by the conclusion of the 10.30 am meeting
it was "fairly and squarely" raised
with Mr Wilton that a request had been made
to Mr Wilton on 26 May to conduct training by Ms Taylor on multiple occasions
Mr Wilton had indicated that he was not prepared to undertake the
training that was requested of
[176] In his
evidence, Mr Noonan maintained that in his view the Just Culture Tree had not
been correctly followed by BHP Coal's management.
If that was the case, the
alleged non-compliance with the Just Culture Tree did not form part of Mr
Wilton's contentions and will
not be considered further.
[177] Mr Noonan
gave evidence that at the conclusion of the last meeting Mr Wilton was informed
that he was stood down from duties
pending further investigation. He described
that Mr Wilton appeared to be frustrated and stressed at the conclusion of that
[178] Again, Ms
Taylor took records of the meeting which she used, together with her
recollection, to draft an email
to Mr Snelling which is set out as follows:
Please see notes from the third meeting today with Kevin.
Meeting 3 Ripstone Room 10.30am
Jason Noonan, Kev Wilton, John Snelling, Stacey Taylor
ST "alright so further to our previous meeting we have consulted the Just
culture tree and determined that this is a deviant behaviour.
I'll just read out
the allegation and the particular clause for reference."
ST reads allegation and EA clause Employee Duties 4.1 aloud.
ST "Do you agree or disagree with the allegation."
JN "I'm lost here hey. How you've come up with that."
JN "How's this a deviant act? So how've you come up with that"
ST "By the request that was made to Kev yesterday by myself to Kev,
multiple times."
KW "but multiple times I've given you an answer and you still don't"
JN "He wanted a break from training."
KW "You just can't get it that I wanted that break from training. And the
more you push the more aggravated I'm getting and I'm just
not gonna deal with
it alright. I'm not gonna put anyone's health nor mine or anyone else out there
in harm's way because I'm not
gonna do my job to 100% I need to do. That's why I
wanted the break and you's aren't giving it to me. By doing this you're making
things worse. I can't understand why you's are even pushing this. It's not hard
to ask for a bit of time away from a job that I've
chose on my own self to do.
I'm not employed to do that job. I've volunteered to be a trainer assessor
alright. I'm not getting paid
any extra to volunteer to do a trainer assessor's
role. So if I feel that I need to stand back I should have every right to stand
back from what I feel is unsafe and it is unsafe. I'm unsafe to be training
someone when I don't feel I'm right to do it.
ST "Ok so now that you've raised that you feel unsafe could you explain
why and is there some kind of underlying issue that we need
to be made aware
that we can further provide assistance to you?"
KW "I told you this yesterday."
JN "Well I'll put it to you now, he's stressed. There's 1 trainer on the
crew. Ok. And you've got how many people coming through getting
trained all the
time. Is that going to put stress on you or not?"
ST "I don't have the answer to the question."
JN 'Well it's obvious now we're sitting here."
ST ''There is more than one trainer just to confirm that."
JN "Well for the time being there only been 1 trainer. I just wanna know
how you've come to the conclusion it's a deviant act, after
he's given you fair
warning that he wants a break from training. How is that a deviant act?"
JS "We believe it was a lawful and reasonable request."
JN "But he'd actually asked you months ago if he could have a rest from
JS "There was more to the discussion than that, a lot more to the
discussion."
KW "What was the more discussion with it? You told me to talk to the
supervisor next round is that correct?"
JS "Not from my records no."
KW "Yes that's correct. You told me to see the supervisor. Stacey wasn't
on that round neither was I. Stacey was not on there the
following round nor the
round after. Dargo was my supervisor. I seen Dargo. So is that not following
what you asked me to do?"
JS "If that's how you see it, then that's how you see it."
KW "Well just doing what you asked me to do."
JS "So you mentioned the health. Any more on the health that we need to be
KW "What do you mean health?"
JS "You said it's affecting your health. Is there something we need to
KW "Yeh. I want a break from training. That's all I've asked. Let me have
my break from training so I can come back healthier and
a mindset and do my
JS "Alright we'll take all that into consideration."
JN "So John I'll put it to you, do you want people out here training with
their heart and their heads not in it? Do you think that's
JS "Definitely not."
JN "He's come to you previously and said that.
JS ''There was a few other things said as well Jason."
ST "I guess I would redirect that and put it back to yourselves. If you're
not in a position to perform a duty that you have the skillset
on your LMS to
do. Then why are you coming to work?"
KW "No, no no. I volunteered to be a trainer assessor. So I'm asking to
step back for 5 rounds and then get back into the role, that's
all I've asked.
It's a volunteered role. I am not paid any extra to do it. It's a volunteer
ST "From what I understand the company gives you that skill along with
every other skill that they give you and no skill that you
receive from the
company is voluntary. The company provides those skills to you so that you can
utilise them for the company."
JS "Just be mindful that all Stacey was asking you to do was an RCC so it
wasn't full training or anything like that."
KW "It's not full training but it's still a full familiarisation, walk
around, operation of the machine and everything else."
JS "I understand that''
KW "And I didn't feel up to the task. I wanted the break. It's not hard to
ask for that break."
JS "If you think back to the discussion we had where you discussed the
time you had booked in and I said make sure you maximise the
discussion was that when you come back from holidays you need to see your
JN "The agreement was that he come back after the holidays."
JS "There was no agreement. The training skill is not a nice to have if
you are required to assist your supervisor then you will need
JS "Anything else mate?"
KW "No it doesn't matter what I say."
JS "It does."
ST "Alright well we'll pause it there."
JS "We'll meet back at my office at 12."
ST "If that's suitable otherwise you're more than welcome to take a longer
break away."
JN "Get it over and done with."
KW "Let's get it over and done with find out what's going on."
ST "Alright no worries."
KW, JN left the room.
[179] It is
apparent from the extract of the notes that after advising Mr Wilton of the
finding in relation to the allegation that
Mr Noonan and Mr Wilton attempted to
dispute the finding. It was in the context of responding to the finding that Mr
Wilton contended
that it was unsafe for him to supervise the training and
assessment. It is accepted that Mr Wilton describes feeling stressed and
stressed at the conclusion of the third meeting.
Fourth Meeting on 27 May at 12.40 pm – Mr Wilton, Mr Noonan, Ms
Mr Snelling
[180] Following
the third meeting, Mr Wilton was invited to attend a fourth meeting later that
day. The purpose of that meeting was
to seek further information for Mr Wilton
regarding his fitness for work. Mr Wilton recalls that the same people were in
as the meetings earlier in the day. Mr Wilton states that he was
advised that they alleged he had refused duty the previous day and
had failed to
comply with the directive in accordance with cl 4.1 of the
Mr Wilton states that he did
not believe that they were correct and advised them that he understood he was
doing the right thing
by pulling himself away from harm's way and putting others
at risk of putting them in harm.
[181] Mr Wilton
states that his state of mind during the course of this meeting was "all over
the shop" and that he could not believe
he was "being punished for what I
thought was a safe thing to do at that time".
[182] Mr Wilton
was sent home and advised that he would be telephoned the following day, 28 May.
He states that he was feeling confused,
lost and stressed at that point in
[183] Again, Ms
Taylor took records of the meeting which she used, together with her
recollection, to draft an email
to Mr Snelling which is set out as follows:
Please see notes from fourth meeting with Kevin from today.
Meeting 4 in Ripstone Room 27/05/ 2021 12.40pm
Jason Noonan, Kevin Wilton, Stacey Taylor, John Snelling
ST "Ok. Thank you. Sorry we're a bit late John's last meeting ran over.
Further to our last conversation Kev you indicated that you
were'nt [sic] fit to
perform that specific part of your normal job role in terms of the training. So
we'd just like to ask if you
could provide further context as to why,
specifically that part."
KW "Have I not told you's enough?"
JS "You don't have to elaborate we're just asking if you wanted to add
anything further?"
ST "Particularly because you indicated that you weren't fit to do that
particular task, you didn't feel confident to do it or words
to that effect."
KW "Lets just say an overload of training over the last 10 years alright.
Just continuous. You get one person, in one leaves. Four
people come in, three
people leave. When you see that constantly it wears thin. Sorry.
JS "That's fine. Good feedback."
ST "Is there any assistance that you need at this stage from the company
in terms of your own personal health?"
KW "No. Just time. Left alone not to do any training that's all I ask.
Other than that I'm fine but I'm not getting the assistance
that I should be
ST "Ok. So from here given some of the other things that you've raised
throughout our previous meetings we'd like to take the time
to pause our
discussion with you whilst we investigate the things you've brought to light and
then we will come back to you and try
to schedule a meeting with you at a time
that suits. For now we will keep you as stand aside on your full pay so this
afternoon you
will be able to go home. We will be in contact with as soon as
possible once we investigate the other things you've raised.
KW "Yep. So this round or next rpund [sic]?"
ST "'So we will definitely aim to have it closed out by the end of the
round given [you] will be on leave."
JS "We'd like to investigate it thoroughly before I make a decision on it.
We will take everything on board what you've said.
KW "Yeh I'm honest like I've said I'm not trying to avoid training at all
I just want that break. I don't think its too much to ask
to have a few rounds
off go away on holiday be refreshed and kick it off again. I don't think it was
too much to ask."
JS "We will take all of that on board and consider it. You got anything
JN "No I'm all good mate I think its just got to run its course now."
JS "Alright thanks for your time we will talk soon."
ST "In terms of you getting home you've got your vehicle or would you like
a lift home?"
KW "No I'll need a lift home please so I can leave the car for
ST "Yep I'll organise that for you I'll just have to sort out a car.
Please also remember to reach out to the EAP service if you do
feel like you
need to talk about this given all of the things you've stated about how you're
feeling. Just make sure you use that
service if you need to."
KW "yep yep I will."
ST "Alright thanks guys."
JN, KW left the meeting room.
[184] From the
above extract, Ms Taylor and Mr Snelling appear to attempt to enquire further of
Mr Wilton about his statement that
he was not fit to undertake the training and
assessing duties in the context of being at work and contending he was unfit to
[185] Upon being
specifically asked about his fitness for work, Mr Wilton did not provide any
additional information about the basis
for his alleged unfitness and reiterated
his preference that he not perform the training and assessing duties. Mr Wilton
to continue to assert that he was fit for work whilst at the same time
expressing, he felt "unsafe".
[186] It is open
on the evidence to conclude that Mr Wilton was fit for work and had a preference
not to perform the training and
assessing duties. It appears as the meetings
progressed, particularly on 27 May, that Mr Wilton attempted to tie his
reluctance to
do the training and assessing with some sort of safety issue.
[187] However,
Mr Wilton did not meaningfully raise any PPI concern and in a manner which would
discharge his obligations under
, if that provision had been
enlivened, and so as to properly place his supervisor on notice of his PPI
concern. It is concluded that
the reason for this is that there was no PPI
concern that formed the basis for Mr Wilton wanting to take a break from
meeting was concluded by BHP Coal's management stating that it was considering
the responses made and the parties would
meet again the following day, 28 May.
Statement of Mr Dargin taken on 27 May
[189] As part of
the process of investigating whether
Mr Wilton had an agreement in place
with Mr Snelling and/or Mr Dargin, Ms Taylor went to speak with Mr Dargin on 27
May, noting that
she had previously seen him about the agreement on the morning
of 26 May, and was left with the impression that there was no agreement.
[190] Given Mr
Wilton's assertion of there being an agreement in place, Ms Taylor was advised
by HR to collect a statement from Mr
Taylor's evidence was that she went and saw Mr Dargin on the afternoon of 27 May
and asked him if he could write a statement
in relation to the matter.
[192] Ms Taylor
states that Mr Dargin did not want to write up a statement. Ms Taylor said that
she had her laptop with her and typed
up the conversation she had with
Dargin and later emailed to Mr Snelling. That document was tendered as Exhibit
13 which relevantly states as follows:
Hi Jon / John
Please see notes from discussion with Steve Dargin this afternoon to aid
investigation in to Kevin Willton's [sic] alleged agreement
he made with Steve.
Meeting Winchester Room 2.10pm 27/05/2021
Stacey Taylor, Steven Dargin
ST ''So to provide you some context Kev alleges that he made an agreement
with yourself approximately 3 rounds ago where he requested
a break from
training completely from that conversation up until he returned from leave at
the end of June. What we need to get from
you is your version please if this
occurred at all or not. Do you want to hand write it or would you like me to
SD "You can type it."
ST "Alright well you just talk me through it when you're ready."
SD "Kev came to work the week after he had his sick leave when he had the
time off for his foot. He was limping around so I spoke
to him about that. Then
the issue of training came up. He said listen I've really had enough and I only
have a couple of swings left
til holidays so he didn't want to do any more until
he came back. I had a look at what we had coming up at the time and there were
no new starters booked in at the time that would require training. I said to Kev
yep that's fine. When you come back from holidays
you can get right back to
training. There was nothing on the horizon for new starters so I agreed to it."
ST "Did you say to Kev that we would need him to step back in to training
if we requested it?"
SD "No not really."
ST "anything else."
SD "No, not really there was nothing on the radar with any new
ST "Was there any witnesses to the conversation?"
SD "No just us" "It would have been a couple of swings ago cause it was a
nightshift."
ST "It was a nightshift?"
SD "yeh it was."
ST "Ok I think that's about it then."
SD "It was more of a gentlemen's agreement than anything just because
there were no new starters on the horizon."
ST "yeh ok that makes sense, so it was left open to interpretation that he
may need to do training if we were desperate."
SD "well we didn't discuss it but it was just a gentlemen's
agreement."
ST "alright well I'll just be sharing these notes with John and HR are you
ok with that?"
[193] Under
cross-examination, Mr Dargin was taken to the
and largely confirmed
that it was an accurate reflection of the discussion with Ms Taylor. However, Mr
Dargin stated that he could
not recall Ms Taylor putting to him that Mr Wilton
might step back into training if it was requested of him and he also did not
Ms Taylor saying the agreement "was left open to interpretation".
Meeting on 28 May – Mr Wilton, Mr Noonan, Ms Taylor and Mr Harper
[194] On 28 May,
Mr Wilton received a phone call from Ms Taylor who asked him to attend a meeting
at 4.00 pm that day. In attendance
at that meeting was Mr Wilton,
Ms Taylor and Mr Kyle Harper.
purpose of the meeting was to advise Mr Wilton of the disciplinary action to be
taken following the substantiation of the
allegation. Mr Wilton understood that
he was advised that he was permitted to return to work on full duties but that
he may be required
to train. He says that his response to that was, "no, and
I'll probably never train again".
[196] Mr Wilton
was advised at the conclusion of that meeting that he would be placed on a Step
and further that a written
note would be placed on his employment file stating that he had refused duty. He
understood that being
placed on a Step 2 was a type of disciplinary step.
[197] At the
conclusion of the meeting, Mr Wilton asked to see the paramedics on site because
he was feeling under stress and needed
[198] Mr Noonan
stated that he recalled that during the course of the meeting Ms Taylor spoke to
Mr Wilton about the "Just Culture
Tree" and advised that the employer had come
to the conclusion that Mr Wilton was to be placed on a Step 2.
[199] Ms Taylor
gave evidence that Mr Harper attended this meeting in the absence of
[200] Ms Taylor
described the meeting as a "close out" meeting.
[201] Again, Ms
Taylor consolidated her handwritten notes and her recollection of the meeting in
sent to Mr Snelling.
The email relevantly states:
Hi John / Jon
I have attached Just culture and below are my notes from the meeting with
Kevin Wilton 28/05 where he was informed of the Step 2.
Jon – Could you please draft the Step 2 letter from Kevin and send
Meeting Winchester room 4pm 28/05
Kevin Wilton, Jason Noonan, Stacey Taylor, Kyle Harper
ST "Thanks for coming in Kev appreciate it. Thanks as well Noono
for freeing up your afternoon. So we are here to discuss the just
culture as I told you yesterday we started the process and then
you gave us some
further information to investigate. We have completed that investigation now. So
we will put our allegation to you
again and then follow through the just culture
steps from there.
ST reads out allegation and the clause from EA breached.
ST "Do you agree or disagree with the allegation?"
KW "disagree"
ST "Yep. Is there anything else you'd like to add to the why that you
didn't add yesterday?"
KW "There's a word in that 4.1 clause 'competent'. So at the time that
you've asked me and four rounds ago when I've seen the superintendent
I was not competent to be training. Simple.
ST "Competent in what way?"
KW "Not to do my duties to 100% and I'm not going to put anyone at risk."
ST "Ok. So do you mean not competent to operate the machine or not fit to
be at work?"
KW "Not fit to be training someone in the head space I was in. That's why
I seen the superintendent and seen Dargo to have time out."
ST "yep. So would you say that you were fit for duty on that shift?"
KW "Yes. On all those shifts. I just needed time out. I'm fine. There's
nothing wrong with me. All I've asked is time out which you's
will not allow.
No. I should say, You will not allow." (pointed finger at ST) raised and
agitated voice at this stage.
ST "So is your understanding of being fit for duty that you can only
perform part of your task or your skillset when you come to work,
or all of your
KW "No. I find that a trick question."
ST "No. It's not a trick question."
KW "So as of the 14th of April I could only do part of my skillset. Not
the training part of it which I've asked to have a break from."
ST "Ok so the date is new, you didn't mention that yesterday."
KW "I had to go back through my diary. It was the end of a nightshift
before I had off on my sick leave, and then the round after
that I seen Dargo
and told him which is the 2nd of May."
ST "Ok. So if you're saying that you weren't fit to perform part of your
duty during that time; but yet you still attended work?"
KW "The training side of it not anything else. I did everything else. I
just didn't want to do any training."
ST "And do you feel that's reasonable?"
KW "I do feel that's reasonable cause it's a voluntary position."
ST "Ok. Is there anything else you'd like to add?"
ST "alright well we will break for five minutes now to consider what
you've said there and then come back and go on to the next step
if that's ok
with you both?"
JN "yeh mate."
Break meeting ST, KH leave meeting room.
Second part of meeting 4.15pm 28/05/2021 in Winchester Room
ST "Thanks for letting us take that break. Thanks Kev for all the things
you told us this afternoon so far. We have considered what
you have raised. So
your stand aside period will end as of this afternoon and you will be able to
provided you are fit to perform your full
duties which may or may not include training."
JN "You're not getting it Stacey. He's requested to have a break from
training cause its stressing him out. Can you not understand
JN "So then you're going to ask him to go and train." Slightly raised and
agitated voice from this point on.
ST "No I said it may include training."
JN "So is there a chance you're going to ask him to train?"
ST "There is a chance if we are in a desperate position like we were two
JN "He's asked to have a break from training because he's stressed. Do you
want to put someone in a mental hospital or something like
ST "No I don't want to do that."
KW "Why can't yous give me what I want. That's what you're not getting. I
want time away from it until I come back from holidays.
As of yesterday or the
first dayshift, the training thing is done. It's finished. I refuse to do it
ever again." Agitated voice and
slightly raised.
ST "That's a separate issue."
KW "No its not. No its not." Still agitated.
KH "Let's not get into an argument here."
ST "Let's just take it down a step because that's a separate issue Kev."
JN "I just can't fathom how he's requested not to train. It's a reasonable
ST "I understand, but the request that I made was reasonable."
JN "Not after he's asked for a break. It is Stace. There's trainers all
over the mine site. What's wrong with coming to grab me or
Potter or someone
like that? What's stopping you from doing that?"
ST "Well look we aren't here to debate that one."
JN "Instead of having to go down this road, there's other avenues you
could take."
ST "Yep I'll take that on board what you're saying Jase."
JN "I dunno we're just going round in circles Stace this is causing more
drama if you do ask him to train. We'll be back in here again
cause you're going
to get him for trying to refuse duty again. Am I correct?"
ST "I can't predict the future Jase so I don't know. Anyway that's
definitely not productive at this stage so let's move on cause
we're here to
discuss one issue which happened on 26/05."
ST repeated that the stand aside ending and return to work as long as fit.
ST "You may also choose to submit leave for consideration if you wish
considering how you may be feeling at the moment. So, from here
as well we have
decided to issue you with a step 2. So it will be a written warning so that will
start from today and we will issue
you a written letter confirming that as soon
as it is available from HR."
JN "Who came up with that decision? Yourself, or was it John?"
ST "Collectively from the company."
JN "So you both? This is for dispute purposes so I can skip yourself and
John and go straight to Des. I need to know that."
ST "From my knowledge you'll need to follow the chain of command unless
its directly against either one of us as an individual. However
I would refer to
the dispute resolution part of the EA to confirm. Please do let me know as soon
as possible what you've decided
to do in terms of returning back to work. I'd
also like to remind you that we've provided you the EAP contact information
you like to use the free service. That concludes the formal part of the
KW "no worries."
ST "You'll be all good to travel back home this afternoon. Do you need any
assistance to get home at all?"
KW snickered at my question "No I'll be all good."
ST "ok no worries."
KW "I'd like to talk to Jase alone for a second."
ST, KH leave the meeting room.
JN calls for KH to come back in to the meeting room. KH then escorts KW to
the paramedic. JN also attends.
[202] Mr Wilton
attended a doctor, Dr Kumar, on 29 May
[203] Mr Wilton
stated that Dr Kumar advised him to go and have his holidays, come back and then
get back into training. As a result,
he was given a medical certificate for the
remaining three-night shifts of his roster before he commenced his
[204] As noted
above, the agreed date of injury is 29 May 2021.
[205] As noted
above, the stressor nominated by Mr Wilton does not identify, with
particularity, the acts and/or omissions of management
that he relies on in
support of his position. Accordingly, a global assessment of the relevant
management action will be undertaken
further below.
factual issues that remain in dispute are informed by the relevant background
information including the details with respect
to there being an "agreement" in
Was there an agreement?
[207] As derived
from Mr Wilton's submissions, great weight is placed upon there being an
"agreement" in place that he was not required
to conduct the training and
assessing for
continued use of the term "agreement" and the weight of the reliance placed on
there being such an agreement during the
course of the appeal implies, at least,
that there was a formal agreement in place which had the effect of overriding Mr
obligations, including those contained in cl 4.1 of the EA.
[209] In doing
so, Mr Wilton attempts to rely on
and the PPI Plan as the
basis upon which he sought the agreement.
[210] Accordingly,
a finding is required to be made not only as to whether there was an agreement
in place but who the parties to
the agreement were, on what basis the agreement
was formed and, if an agreement was formed, what were its terms. Consideration
also need to be had as to whether such an agreement was made having regard
to the relevant work health and safety obligations of
the respective parties to
the agreement.
Was there an agreement between Mr Snelling and Mr Wilton?
evidence above suggests that Mr Wilton asserts that the reason he was entitled
to refuse Ms Taylor's request was that he
had an agreement in place with,
Mr Snelling that he not perform training and assessing
duties until he returned from holidays.
[212] Whilst Mr
Wilton contends that he had an agreement with Mr Snelling, that conclusion is
not supported by the evidence, including
Mr Wilton's evidence.
[213] As noted
above, it has been found that there was no agreement in place between
Snelling and Mr Wilton as Mr Wilton contends.
Was there an agreement between Mr Dargin and Mr Wilton, and if so, what
were its' terms?
Wilton's evidence is that he approached Mr Dargin and told him that he had seen
Mr Snelling about having a break from training and further that he needed a
break from training until he comes back from holidays
in July. On Mr Wilton's
evidence Mr Dargin responded by saying, "yes, no worries."
[215] Mr Wilton
stated that his understanding of the arrangement from that point onwards is that
he would not do any training or assessing
until he came back from his holidays
without exception.
difficulty with accepting Mr Wilton's evidence in this regard is that it appears
that the arrangement did not immediately
take effect as Mr Dargin required Mr
Wilton to complete the supervised training and assessing of a coal mine worker
over the course
of the next few shifts.
[217] Mr Wilton
did not speak of Mr Dargin's requirement that he complete the supervision of the
training and assessing he was part
way through in his evidence-in-chief.
Dargin's evidence addresses the basis upon which he understood the arrangement
came into effect.
[219] Firstly,
Mr Dargin understood that Mr Wilton made the request as he was starting to feel
"over training".
[220] Further,
Mr Dargin's evidence is that he agreed to the break from training as he was not
aware of having any new training to
be done and that they could work around Mr
Wilton's request.
Dargin's evidence confirmed that Mr Wilton was, at the time of their discussion,
still training someone and had a few days
Dargin's further evidence was that during the period before Mr Wilton took
holidays if they needed training undertaken that
he would have asked Mr Wilton
if he really needed to and could not find anyone else to do it. His evidence is
that he "would've asked
but there was no need to."
[223] Mr Dargin
described the agreement as "a gentleman's agreement" and it is not in dispute
that this agreement was not formalised
in any way, including in writing.
[224] Accordingly,
there was an arrangement between Mr Dargin and Mr Wilton that after
Wilton had completed the current training he could have a break from training
until he took his holidays.
Dargin's evidence is that he agreed to this arrangement on the basis of,
, that there was no new training to be done. It appears Mr
Dargin agreed to Mr Wilton's request to keep him happy and because he was
of the large amount of training and assessing Mr Wilton ordinarily performed.
[226] It is
apparent from the above, that when the agreement was entered into it was due to
Mr Wilton being frustrated with the training and assessing process and
because he expressed a desire to take a break from it before
taking his leave.
Although he did not articulate it to such a degree when he made the request to
[227] It was Mr
Wilton's intention to recommence training when he returned from leave.
[228] Further,
there is no evidence to suggest that at the time of entering into the agreement
that Mr Wilton or Mr Dargin had a genuine
PPI concern about Mr Wilton's fitness
for work, including in discharging his duty to complete the supervision of the
training and
assessing from a health and safety perspective. Or to put it
another way, the evidence did not establish that either Mr Wilton or
identified that the performance of
Mr Wilton's duties, including training
and assessing, created a hazard that posed a risk to the health and safety of
coal mine workers
and others at the mine within the meaning of the
Given the strict statutory requirements and the obligations placed on both Mr
Wilton and Mr Dargin it is unlikely that if either
Mr Wilton or Mr Dargin were
genuinely concerned that Mr Wilton's training and assessing duties posed a risk
to his fitness for work
or to the safety of him or other coal mine workers:
(a) Mr Dargin would not have required of Mr Wilton, and Mr Wilton would not, in
the days following the agreement, have continued
and completed the ongoing
training and assessing; and
(b) that no steps were taken to immediately remove Mr Wilton from performing his
duties as a coal mine worker and to comply with
the PPI Plan to ensure he was
fit for work.
[229] Even if,
for the sake of the argument, it is accepted that a safety reason was one of the
reasons Mr Wilton
request to pause training and assessing, I find that
Mr Wilton did not
articulate that in any meaningful way when he made the request to
and certainly not in the manner required of a coal mine worker discharging his
obligations pursuant to
or acting in accordance with the
reality is that if Mr Wilton had a genuine safety concern about his fitness for
work, including his ability to perform his
training and assessing duties then he
should have taken steps to immediately stop work and escalate his health and
safety concern
through the PPI Plan. The PPI Plan process would ultimately
determine what tasks it was or was not safe for Mr Wilton to perform.
[231] As noted
above, consistent with the finding that Mr Wilton did not make the request on
the basis of an articulated PPI concern
is that it was agreed between Mr Wilton
Mr Dargin that Mr Wilton would continue to perform those duties for
several days following the formation of the agreement.
[232] Accordingly,
I find that the temporary arrangement between Mr Wilton and Mr Dargin was
entered into orally on the basis that
Mr Wilton expressed a desire to take a
break from his training and assessing duties, that Mr Dargin agreed to the
arrangement on
the basis that there was no upcoming scheduled training and
assessing that was required to be undertaken by Mr Wilton although Mr
required to complete the training and assessment that he was currently
supervising before taking the break.
[233] It is
against the backdrop of this agreement that Mr Wilton contends that the
management action was unreasonable and taken in
an unreasonable way.
Was the request to Mr Wilton to perform training and assessing and the
subsequent acts and/or omissions of management reasonable management
[234] It is not
in dispute, given the informal nature of the arrangement between Mr Wilton and
Mr Dargin, that Ms Taylor was unaware
of the arrangement between them when she
asked Mr Wilton to perform the RCC training and assessment.
[235] It is
further not in dispute that Ms Taylor made the request on the basis of a genuine
operational requirement.
[236] Further, I
find that Ms Taylor was entitled to make the request of Mr Wilton as he was able
to perform the RCC training and
assessing task on the basis that he was trained
and held the relevant competency. Accordingly, the request made by Ms Taylor
with the power to make such a request pursuant to cl 4.1 of the EA.
[237] Consequently,
Ms Taylor's request that Mr Wilton perform the RCC training and assessing in
those circumstances was reasonable.
[238] As noted
above, Mr Wilton refused the request on the basis of an agreement he says he had
with Mr Snelling and Mr Dargin. As
already found, there was no agreement between
Mr Snelling and Mr Wilton.
[239] It is
accepted that there was an agreement between Mr Wilton and Mr Dargin on the
terms referred to above.
[240] It is
apparent, however, that Mr Wilton had a different perception of the effect of
the agreement. From his subsequent conduct,
it appears he considered the
agreement gave him a licence to refuse Ms Taylor's request despite the terms of
cl 4.1 of the EA.
[241] However,
on the basis of the findings made above, the agreement between Mr Wilton and Mr
Dargin was no more than a temporary
rearrangement of the performance of certain
duties at the request of an employee to his supervisor.
[242] I accept
Ms Taylor's evidence that when she asked Mr Wilton about the agreement on
May, he did not nominate any safety reasons for not agreeing to perform the work
but refused because he said he had an agreement
with Mr Snelling and Mr Dargin.
[243] It is
apparent that the operational requirements of D crew had altered since Mr Wilton
and Mr Dargin entered into the agreement
and that Ms Taylor advised Mr Wilton of
the operational need for the training and assessing.
[244] Given the
alteration of the operational requirements, that is operationally a coal mine
worker immediately required RCC training,
it was reasonable for Ms Taylor to
request that Mr Wilton perform a task for which he was deemed competent to
perform regardless
of whether the agreement was in place or not.
[245] In any
event, I find it unlikely that the informal agreement between Mr Dargin and
Mr Wilton with respect to what duties Mr Wilton performed prior to
commencing his leave operated to limit the effect of cl 4.1 of
Accordingly, I find that it was reasonable of Ms Taylor to consider that she was
entitled to request Mr Wilton to perform
a task which he was competent to
perform and to expect that Mr Wilton perform it. That is the case even in
circumstances where there
was an agreement in place as the operational needs of
the mine and the terms of cl 4.1 of the EA operated to override the agreement.
consequence of this is that although Mr Wilton considered he was entitled to
refuse to do the training and assessing on
the basis of the agreement with Mr
Dargin that belief was misguided, and consequently, tainted his actions and the
view he took of
the management action going forward.
[247] As noted
in consideration of the evidence above, following Ms Taylor's initial request
that Mr Wilton perform the RCC training
and assessing and his refusal, the
following management action was taken:
(a) Ms Taylor made enquiries of Mr Snelling and Mr Dargin in relation to the
existence of an agreement between either of them and
(b) Ms Taylor also contacted the supervisor of a pre-strip crew to ask if an
operator swap could occur to "smooth over" Mr Wilton's
request but that it was
decided for operational reasons that could not be done;
(c) Ms Taylor and Mr Dargin at the first meeting on 26 May during which Ms
Taylor issued a direction (which was repeated during the
meeting) to Mr Wilton
to perform the RCC training and assessing to which Mr Wilton refused;
(d) Ms Taylor and Mr Dargin at the second meeting on 26 May during which
Taylor again issued a direction to Mr Wilton to perform the RCC training and
assessing and when he refused to comply with the direction,
they then issued him
with a written notice that he was suspended for the remainder of the shift;
(e) Ms Taylor and Mr Snelling at the first meeting on 27 May during which Ms
Taylor provided information about the process going
forward with respect to BHP
Coal's response to Mr Wilton's refusal to comply with the direction;
(f) Ms Taylor and Mr Snelling at the second meeting on 27 May during which the
allegation was put to Mr Wilton and he was given an
opportunity to respond to
(g) Ms Taylor and Mr Snelling at the third meeting on 27 May during which they
advised Mr Wilton that a determination had been made,
based on the Just Culture
Tree, that he had engaged in "deviant behaviour" as that term is described in
the Just Culture Tree process
on the basis that he failed to comply with cl 4.1
of the EA and gave Mr Wilton an opportunity to respond;
(h) Ms Taylor and Mr Snelling at the fourth meeting on 27 May whereby they
sought additional information from Mr Wilton regarding
his response in the
earlier meeting that suggested issues regarding his fitness for work;
(i) Ms Taylor and Mr Harper in the meeting on 28 May during which Mr Wilton was
advised of the outcome of the substantiation of the
allegation by the imposition
of a "Step 2" disciplinary action, namely a formal written warning.
Taylor's conduct referred to in sub-paragraphs (a)-(d) above concerns her
request and subsequent direction to Mr Wilton to
perform the RCC training and
assessing. As noted above, there was a sound operational reason for Ms Taylor to
make the request and
further, because of Mr Wilton's competencies she was
entitled to require him to perform the task.
[249] At no
stage during the course of the meetings did Mr Wilton raise a genuine PPI
concern which would have disturbed the reasonableness
of Ms Taylor's request and
subsequent direction. Mr Wilton's repeated assertion that he needed a break from
training without providing
a sound basis for that request gave the appearance,
at least, of an employee picking and choosing what tasks to do based on his
preference.
[250] In these
circumstances, the actions of Ms Taylor in the meetings referred to in
sub-paragraphs (a)-(d) above at [247] were reasonable.
[251] Whilst not
specifically stated, it appears that Mr Wilton is critical of Mr Dargin's
omissions during the course of the meetings
referred to in sub-paragraph (c)-(d)
above. As can be seen from the evidence, Mr Dargin did not contribute in any
meaningful way
during the meetings, specifically, Mr Wilton contends that Mr
Dargin did not articulate the existence of the agreement in support
Wilton. As found above, it is consistent with the evidence that Mr Dargin and Mr
Wilton had different perceptions with respect
to the terms and effect of the
agreement. The fact that Mr Dargin did not actively assert that the agreement
operated when Ms Taylor
made the request may be consistent with the fact that Mr
Dargin viewed the agreement as no more than an informal "gentleman's agreement".
In these circumstances, Mr Dargin's conduct at the 26 May meeting was not
unreasonable management action. It was appropriate for
Mr Dargin to observe the
meeting and to not interfere in Ms Taylor's request and the subsequent direction
to perform the training
as the request and direction were both reasonable.
[252] Mr Wilton
is further critical of the management action going forward. That is the
management action referred to in sub-paragraphs
(e)-(i) which relate to the
process commenced by BHP Coal as a consequence of Mr Wilton failing to comply
with a direction.
[253] The action
at subparagraphs (e)-(i) above must be considered in the context of the fact
that Ms Taylor had requested and then
issued a direction to Mr Wilton to conduct
the RCC training and assessing to which Mr Wilton refused to comply. The
subsequent direction
was issued on the basis that BHP Coal considered it was
entitled to direct
Mr Wilton to perform a task which he was deemed competent
and trained to perform. The reason, at that stage, put forward by Mr Wilton
the refusal was that he had an agreement with Mr Dargin and he "needed a break".
Mr Wilton did not at any stage leading up to
or at the time the direction was
issued assert he was unfit for work. Rather to the contrary, by his attendance
at the workplace
he was asserting he was fit for work.
[254] On this
basis BHP Coal, through Ms Taylor and Mr Snelling, commenced a process whereby
the allegation regarding his failure
to comply with the direction was put to him
for his response. It is not alleged by Mr Wilton that he was denied procedural
during this process. In any event, I am satisfied that at each separate
meeting where the allegation was put to him; where he was
advised that he was
suspended from shift; where the finding was put to him; and where the
disciplinary action to be imposed was put
to him that on each occasion he was
given an opportunity to be heard and his responses considered and that the
process was the result
of reasonable management action taken in a reasonable
[255] However,
the real focus of Mr Wilton's appeal is conveniently summarised in the following
submissions:
second aspect of unreasonable management action was the continuance of the
disciplinary process after being made aware of the
agreement on 27 May 2021.
Notwithstanding that knowledge, Ms Taylor proceeded with the disciplinary action
and requested a meeting
with the Appellant on 28 May 2021 and again put forward
the allegation that he had breached clause 4.1 of the enterprise agreement
failing to follow a direction which culminated in the Appellant being advised
that he was in breach and that he would be issued
with a step 2, being a written
warning starting from that day and that a written letter would be sent from HR
confirming that.
is submitted that in circumstances where the Commission ought find that there
was an agreement in place between the Appellant and
Mr Dargan [sic] that he was
not to undertake any further training and assessment, and
Ms Taylor being
made aware of that by Mr Dargan [sic] and the Appellant, that to proceed with a
disciplinary process and breaching
the Appellant pursuant to the enterprise
agreement in preference to the general obligation pursuant to
CMSHA, was unreasonable.
is submitted that this is not a mere blemish. The obligations under the CMSHA
are paramount. The principal object of the CMSHA
is to protect the safety and
health of persons at coal mines and persons who may be affected by coal mining
operations.
that agreeance, the Appellant was disciplined for putting his and other coal
mine workers' safety in conformance with his
obligation under
CMSHA by making arrangements to have a break from training and then refusing to
undertake the training in defiance of that
Wilton's case is premised on the basis that the mere existence of the agreement
between Mr Wilton and Mr Dargin operated
to remove his obligation to comply with
a request to perform a task in accordance with cl 4.1 of the EA and in
circumstances where
the agreement was no longer operationally appropriate to his
employer's needs. Findings have been made above regarding the nature,
effect of the agreement about the informal and temporary rearranging of Mr
Wilton's work duties between he and his supervisor,
Mr Dargin. The agreement did
not operate to limit the effect of cl 4.1 of the EA, and further, the
operational requirements of Mr
Wilton's employer had altered and were such that
Mr Wilton was required to perform the task requested and subsequently directed
[257] In these
circumstances, there was a sound basis, and further, it was reasonable for BHP
Coal to consider that it was lawful
and reasonable for it to issue the
direction. It follows that upon Mr Wilton refusing to comply with the direction
there was a sound
basis, and further, it was reasonable for BHP Coal to commence
the process whereby the allegation relating to the refusal to comply
direction was put to Mr Wilton and culminated in a Step 2 formal written warning
being issued.
[258] As part of
the process, management did have regard to Mr Wilton's responses. Notably,
during the third meeting on 27 May, Mr
Wilton raised for the first time with
particularity that he needed a break because he felt unsafe. A further meeting,
meeting on 27 May, was convened during which Ms Taylor sought further
information from
Mr Wilton regarding why he considered he was not fit to
perform the task. Specifically, Mr Wilton was asked whether BHP Coal could
provide him with any assistance in terms of his health. Mr Wilton responded:
"No. Just time. Left alone not to do any training that's all I ask. Other
than that I'm fine but I'm not getting the assistance I
[259] From the
information provided to BHP Coal, particularly when they gave Mr Wilton an
opportunity to explain or present information
on why he felt unsafe doing the
task, he asserted, consistent with his position throughout the matter, that he
needed a break and
to not do the training. Mr Wilton's response to this further
enquiry was taken into account and considered by his employer.
[260] Accordingly,
it is found that it was reasonable for the management action to be taken to
commence and complete the disciplinary
process following Mr Wilton's refusal to
comply with a direction.
[261] Accordingly,
Mr Wilton has not discharged the onus that rests on him to establish that the
management action was not reasonable
nor taken in a reasonable way. It follows
that the injury is excluded by operation of
[262] It is
evident that Mr Wilton perceives that he was treated unfairly because he was
directed to do a task he had previously requested
his supervisor to temporarily
excuse him from performing.
[263] At the
time the agreement was made between Mr Dargin and Mr Wilton it was operationally
convenient for Mr Dargin to agree to
Mr Wilton's request that he not perform
training and assessing duties.
[264] However,
the temporary arrangement entered into between Mr Dargin and Mr Wilton did not
exist in a binding form so as to disturb
the terms of the EA, including cl 4.1,
or further to usurp the operational needs of the mine.
Wilton's perception as to the effect of the agreement between he and Mr Dargin,
specifically that it enabled him to refuse
to comply with Ms Taylor's request
and subsequent direction, tainted his view of the management action that was
taken in the meetings.
management action taken as a result of Mr Wilton's failure to comply with a
direction, including during the meetings on
26, 27 and 28 May, was reasonable
and taken in a reasonable way. In these circumstances, the nominated stressor
for the injury is
excluded by operation of
[267] The appeal
is dismissed.
appeal is dismissed.
application for costs, if any, should be made by the Workers' Compensation
Regulator within 28 days.
Workers' Compensation and Rehabilitation Act
('WCR Act').
T2-2 ll 20-2.
Kevin Wilton, 'Appellant's
statement of facts and contentions psychiatric and/or psychological injuries',
Form 9A filed in
Wilton v Workers' Compensation Regulator
, WC/2022/115,
14 September 2022, 10 ('Appellant's statement of facts and contentions').
T2-3 ll 8-13; Kevin Wilton,
'Medical Certificate from Dr D. Kumar (Sonic Health Plus) dated 29 May 2021',
Exhibit 3 in
Wilton v Workers' Compensation Regulator
, WC/2022/115, 11
April 2023 ('Exhibit 3').
[2019] QIRC 22.
See ibid [78]-[82].
[2014] ICQ 9.
[2016] QIRC 83
[38]-[42] (citations omitted).
Kevin Wilton, 'Appellant's
Outline of Submissions', Submission in
Wilton v Workers' Compensation
, WC/2022/115, 22 August 2023, [17] ('Appellant's Written
Submissions filed 22 August 2023').
Kevin Wilton, 'BMA
Enterprise Agreement 2018', Exhibit 1 in
Wilton v Workers' Compensation
, WC/2022/115, 11 April 2023, cl 4 ('Exhibit 1').
Coal Mining Safety and
Health Act 1999
('CMSH Act').
CMSH Act (n 13) s 7.
Ibid s 7(a).
Ibid s 7(b).
Ibid s 7(c).
Ibid s 30(2)(a).
Ibid s 30(2)(b).
Ibid s 30(2)(d).
CMSH Act (n 13) s 31.
Coal Mining Safety and
Health Regulation 2017
s 42(1)(a).
s 42(1)(b).
Kevin Wilton, 'BMA –
PDM Fitness for Work', Exhibit 2 in
Wilton v Workers' Compensation
, WC/2022/115, 11 April 2023 ('Exhibit 2').
Exhibit 1 (n 12) cl 4.
Kevin Wilton, 'Letter
(Finding and Outcomes of the Investigation) dated 23 June 2021', Exhibit 4 in
Wilton v Workers' Compensation Regulator
, WC/2022/115, 11 April 2023
('Exhibit 4').
"Maria's" surname was not
adduced in the evidence.
T1-11 ll 21-2.
T1-12 ll 29-40.
T3-4 ll 15-40.
T1-12 l 40.
The references to
'Dargo' refer to Mr Steve Dargin.
T1-13 ll 34-41.
T2-15 ll 38-43.
T2-17 l 41 to T2-18 l 4.
T1-13 l 49 to T1-14 l
T1-14 l 34.
"hot seating" requires
replacing operators who are taking a crib break with fill-in operators, so the
machinery keeps operating
without impacting production.
T3-30 ll 19-26.
Exhibits 8, 9, 10, 11 and
The Regulator, 'Email
correspondence from Ms Taylor to Mr Snelling', Exhibit 8 in
Wilton v Workers'
Compensation Regulator
, WC/2022/115, 13 April 2023 ('Exhibit 8').
T2-23 l 36 to T2-24 l
T1-15 ll 39-43.
The Regulator, 'Email
correspondence from Ms Taylor to Mr Snelling', Exhibit 9 in
Wilton v Workers'
Compensation Regulator
, WC/2022/115, 13 April 2023 ('Exhibit 9').
Exhibit 9 (n 46).
The Regulator, 'Email
correspondence from Ms Taylor to Mr Snelling and Mr Calligeros', Exhibit 10 in
Wilton v Workers' Compensation Regulator
, WC/2022/115, 13 April 2023
('Exhibit 10').
As it then was.
T1-17 ll 13-26.
The Regulator, 'Email
correspondence from Ms Taylor to Mr Snelling and Mr Calligeros', Exhibit 10 in
Wilton v Workers' Compensation Regulator
, WC/2022/115, 13 April 2023
('Exhibit 10').
T3-16 ll 17-22.
T3-16 ll 27-29.
T3-18 ll 29-34.
T2-11 ll 3-47.
The Regulator, 'Email
correspondence from Ms Taylor to Mr Snelling and Mr Calligeros', Exhibit 11 in
Wilton v Workers' Compensation Regulator
, WC/2022/115, 13 April 2023
('Exhibit 11').
Exhibit 1 (n 12).
The Regulator, 'Email
correspondence from Ms Taylor to Mr Snelling and Mr Calligeros', Exhibit 12 in
Wilton v Workers' Compensation Regulator
, WC/2022/115, 13 April 2023
('Exhibit 12').
The Regulator, 'Email
correspondence from Ms Taylor to Mr Snelling and Mr Calligeros', Exhibit 13 in
Wilton v Workers' Compensation Regulator
, WC/2022/115, 13 April 2023
('Exhibit 13').
Step 2 is referred to in
the letter from Mr Snelling to Mr Wilton dated 28 June 2021 as a "Formal
The Regulator, 'Email
correspondence from Ms Taylor to Mr Snelling and Mr Calligeros', Exhibit 14 in
Wilton v Workers' Compensation Regulator
, WC/2022/115, 13 April 2023
('Exhibit 14').
Exhibit 3 (n 4).
I am not satisfied that Mr
Wilton's evidence establishes this.
Appellant's Written
Submissions filed on 22 August 2023 (n 11) [81]-[83], [86] (citations
Exhibit 12 (n 58).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.37 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter