URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2002/71.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Barletta Tavern [2002] QLAT 71 (18 December 2002)
Joan Speirs, Julie Margaret Wyburn, Clyde Harvey Crothers and Jean Anne
Crothers, James William Crompton
Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading (incorporating Liquor
Barletta Holdings Pty Ltd
APPEAL NUMBERS
71, 72, 73 and 74 of 2001/2002
PROPOSED PREMISES
Barletta Tavern, 17-25 Kennedy Highway, Atherton
HEARING DATE
16 September 2002
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST
Provisional Grant of a General Licence for a period of 12 months subject to
the receipt of outstanding documentation.
Mr J. Rolls (Chairperson)
Mrs G. Spender
Dr M. O’Donnell
DECISION DATE
18 December 2002
Background to this Appeal
1. On the 7th of April 1998 Barletta Holdings Pty Ltd (the applicant) lodged an
application for a general licence in respect of premises
“Barletta Tavern” situated at 17-25 Kennedy Highway, Atherton. The
proposed trading hours were from 10.00 am
and 12 midnight, Monday to Sunday.
The applicant initially sought trading hours of 10.00 am to 2.00 am, Monday to
Sunday, but the
local authority restricted trading until midnight, Monday to
Sunday, because of residential amenity considerations and to comply
conditions of a consent order of the Local Government Planning and Environment
Court dated 10 November 1999. As a result,
the applicant withdrew its
application for an extended hours permit to allow trading to 2.00
2 The original application included entertainment areas, conference and seminar
facilities, family bistro style dining, café/coffee
shop style dining, a
la carte dining as well as a public bar and beer garden facility. A table
capacity for up to 600 persons in
all areas was contemplated.
3. The proposed premises are some 2 kms outside of the central business district
of Atherton on the Kennedy Highway. The site of
the proposed premises is in a
largely residential rural area. The applicant required town planning consent to
proceed with this
application.
4. The application was advertised pursuant to s.118 of the Act. Some 119
objections on amenity, some incorporating submissions on
public need, and 117
submissions on public need were received by the closing date for the receipt of
such objections, 20 May 1998.
It also appears that there were a further 41
letters of objection which were received after this date.
5. The local authority, the Atherton Shire Council, and the Assistant
Commissioner of Police, Far Northern Region, were informed
of this application.
The Chief Executive Officer of the Atherton Shire Council originally objected to
the application as the proposal
was considered to be contrary to the intent of
the zone in which the premises was to be situated. In the local
authority’s
submission it was recommended the application be refused on
the basis that any commercial development outside the Atherton town centre
have a strong and direct connection with the tourist industry and a stand alone
tavern was not considered appropriate. The
local authority also noted that
considerable public objection had been generated to the application. This
matter was investigated
by the local authority who viewed the nearby objector
residences but it was considered that the proposed development would have little
impact on the residential amenity of the area. The local authority considered
that the proposed development would not create an interference
with the amenity
of the locality such as to warrant refusal. Any impact presented by the
development could be reduced by the provision
of appropriate buffer areas. The
local authority considered that the proposed tavern would improve the services
of the facilities
available to the community. It was noted that the existing
hotels cater for segments of the market and only one of the four has made
investment to improve its services. Whilst there may be a “need”
for a modern tavern, the local authority would
prefer it to be in the Atherton
Town Centre.
6. The Assistant Commissioner of Police, Far Northern Region, also objected to
the application. In the Assistant Commissioner’s
view, the demand for
liquor services in the Atherton community could be satisfied by the existing
premises. The population of the
area was small, 8,000. The proposed trading
hours of midnight to 2.00 am were not required and were not matched by any other
The location of the premises on the Kennedy Highway raised, in the
Assistant Commissioner’s opinion, health and safety issues
due to the poor
standard of the road which would require a major upgrade if the proposal
proceeded. Increased alcohol availability
could increase the level of crime in
7. Further, the Assistant Commissioner noted the adjoining land was residential.
The application provided for entertainment which
could create a noise nuisance
affecting those residents. The nearby Atherton International Club had been the
cause of some disturbance
in the area.
8. At its meeting of the 2nd of July 1998 the local authority refused the
application to establish a tavern on the land as the proposal,
as submitted, was
contrary to the intent of the tourist business and residential zone on the
Council’s town planning scheme.
A further ground of rejection was that
the proposal conflicted with the Council’s planning objective of
consolidating the
Atherton town centre and strengthening its role as a regional
centre by keeping commercial developments significantly in the town
9. On the 19th of August 1998 the division, cognisant of the local
authority’s refusal, was not prepared to proceed further
application until the matter of local authority approval was
“resolved”.
10. On the 10th of August 1998 the applicant filed a notice of appeal against
the refusal of the local authority to grant the application
in the Cairns
registry of the Planning and Environment Court. On the 10th of November 1999 an
order was made by that court by
Perusal of the order
reveals that as part of the agreement out of which the order sprang, the nature
of the proposal had altered.
The approved use as granted in the development
permit was for a hotel (tavern) and accommodation building. The development was
to be constructed in accordance with plans annexed to the order. Further,
pursuant to paragraph 1.2 of the order, the buildings,
including the
accommodation unit, were to be constructed in accordance with approved plans and
specifications and a certificate of
classification was to be issued in respect
of the accommodation units “...prior to the commencement operation of the
(tavern) component of the development on the subject
11. The order also provided for open space and set back areas as shown in plans
attached to that order. Further, the property boundaries
were required to have
a suitable buffer to existing and future residential developments surrounding
the site. The landscaping required
by the order was to be completed in
accordance with the approved planting plan prior to the premises being occupied.
Screen fencing
in accordance with the plan was to be constructed with a height
of 1.8 metres and was to constructed of solid material with no gaps.
mounding was to be provided in accordance with the plans at a height of 1.5
12. Concerns as to the location of the site and its impact upon traffic using
the Kennedy Highway were dealt with in paragraph 7
of the order which required
certain road works. A traffic engineering report was to be prepared covering
the site. The proposed
external site access and internal access arrangements
would conform with any conditions imposed by the Department of Main Roads in
respect of the site. Further, transport related noise was ameliorated by the
creation of a buffer strip along the entire Kennedy
Highway subject property.
There was a minimum width of 10 metres from the final Kennedy Highway property
boundary. Further, road
traffic noise levels were not to exceed, within ten
years from the time of completion of the full development, 65 dB(A)18h for
noise levels and internal noise levels within the building were not to
exceed the maximum noise level specified in AS2107-1987.
13. On the 13th of February 2001 the agents on behalf of the applicant indicated
that the project was proceeding and requested an
objectors’ conference be
held. On the 19th of February 2001 the Division indicated that it was
considering the application
but required a further public need submission
addressing the new details relating to the changed nature of the services
by licensed premises and those already existing in the locality, their
number, condition and distribution and the extent and quality
of services
14. The applicant supplied further material in
relation to the issue of public need.
15. On the 19th of February 2001 the Atherton Shire Council and the Assistant
Commissioner, Far Northern Region, were again asked
for their comments in
relation to the altered development.
16. In response, the Council recommended the extended hours permit be approved
only until midnight on the ground that the tavern
is proposed to be located in a
residential area and late night activity will adversely impact on the amenity of
17. By letter dated the 27th of March 2001 the Queensland Police Service again
objected to the application. It was considered that
there was insufficient need
for additional premises. Further, the site where the proposed premises were to
operate was adjacent
to residential areas and would adversely impact on the
people who resided there. Further, the proposed site was situated on the
Kennedy Highway which is a major arterial road. The site was on the crest of
the hill with limited visibility. Major road works
have to be undertaken to
allow for the safe and effective regulation of traffic along the Kennedy
Highway. The crime statistics
for the Atherton region over the past three years
were also referred to and it was considered that an increase in licensed
would cause an increase in anti-social
18. The objectors’ conference was held on
the 8th of May 2001.
19. On 1 March 2002 the Assistant Commissioner, Far Northern Region, wrote to
the Executive Director, Liquor Licensing Division,
and indicated that after
consultation with police officers in the region the Queensland Police Service
had no objection to the application
at this time. This alteration of position
was brought about by the change in stance by the Atherton Shire Council towards
the application
which approved of the application subject to the applicant
building a substantial number of accommodation units prior to commencing
construction of the licensed premises. Further, the objections based on the
physical nature of the entrance to the proposed site
had been addressed by road
upgrades as part of the construction of the site. Ultimately a submission in
support of the change of
stance by the Queensland Police Service observed:
“The proposal has now changed and it will be doubtful whether our
initial objection lodged could be substantiated.”
On the 4th of April 2002 the Chief Executive determined to grant the
application. It was considered that any new premises would be
superior in
condition, facilities and general appeal to meet the requirements of a separate
public need. The proposal in a separate
location and the four existing premises
would provide a substantially different extent and quality of service in terms
of distribution
and distinction. The Chief Executive noted the traffic concerns
appeared to be addressed by the Planning and Environment Court order
local authority did not appear to have amenity concerns apart from the lateness
of the trading hours. It was noted that
the proposed premises would be seen as
an accommodation venue without large scale entertainment and there would not be
the same amenity
concerns as with the earlier application. Further, the tavern
would be constructed with the necessary noise acoustic qualities to
excessive entertainment noise emanating from the premises, thus ensuring that
residents would not be affected. The Chief
Executive being satisfied that the
approval sought was necessary to provide for the reasonable requirements for the
public for liquor
and related services in the locality and that the amenity in
would not be unduly affected, granted
the application.
Four Appeals
21. From this determination four appeals were lodged. Joan
each appealed on grounds
which are identical.
appellants objected to the proposal on the grounds of noise and annoyance, undue
offence, disturbance, security and property
devaluation and the peaceful
pleasing environment of the area would be greatly jeopardised. Comparison
between this proposal and
the International Club “across the road from the
proposed site” was made.
22. An appeal was lodged by Clyde Harvey Crowthers and Jean Ann
but this was withdrawn.
It is, therefore, not necessary to further consider this appeal.
23. An appeal was also lodged by James William
The grounds for this
appeal was the siting of the premises in a residential area was inappropriate.
It appears that Mr Crompton
objected on 8 May 2001. The original application
had been advertised requiring objections to be made by the 20th of May 1998.
application was not subsequently readvertised after it had been altered.
This will be considered shortly. In the absence of the
application being
re-advertised, this means that Mr Crompton’s “objection” was
made after the last day for filing
objections specified in the notice. There is
no power under the Act to extend this time for objection. Mr Crompton, as he is
a valid objector under
Liquor Act 1992
(the Act) is,
therefore, not a person entitled to appeal under
of the Act.
Accordingly, Mr Crompton has no standing to bring this appeal.
24. Although Mr Crompton did not appear to prosecute his appeal it is
nevertheless clear to us that the appeal is incompetent. Accordingly,
74 of 2001/2002 ought be struck out. It ought be noted that the appeal made by
Mr and Mrs Crowthers would suffered the
same fate if it had not been withdrawn.
It was founded on an “objection” made after the last day for the
objections specified in the notice. In this case the
“objection” was made on the 16th of May 2001.
25. It remains then to consider the appeals lodged by the appellants, Speirs and
Wyburn, which were founded on objections made within
the prescribed period of
A Changed Application
26. It was noted that the application substantially altered between April 1998
and April 2002 when it was granted. This raised the
question as to whether the
application should have been re-advertised. Whether the application ought to
have been re-advertised
is a question of fact and degree. Changes which reduce
the intensity of the proposal may not require re-advertisement or changes
to meet submissions or objections would not require
re-advertisement.
In this case, it
appears that the changes reduced the intensity of the proposal or, at least,
incorporated changes which were made
to meet submissions or objections lodged
not only by the local authority and the police but also, so it would appear, the
of Atherton. Accordingly, in our view the proposal did not need to be
re-advertised.
Issues for Determination
27. This appeal arises out of an application made before the amendments to the
Act came into force on 1 July 2001. Although the appeal
is to be heard in
accordance with the procedures prescribed by the Act as amended, and in force
from 1 July 2001, the Chief Executive
and this Tribunal in determining the
application and appeal are bound to apply
as it was in force as at the
time that the application was lodged on the 7th of April
The effect of this is that
this appeal is to be determined on the basis of the “public need”
test rather than the “public
interest” test promulgated under the
amended Act.
28. In determining whether or not to grant the licence the Chief Executive and
the Tribunal on appeal, must be satisfied pursuant
of the Act that the
primary purpose of the business to be conducted on the subject premises is the
sale of liquor for consumption
on the premises or on and off the premises; the
provision of entertainment on the premises and that the business to be conducted
on the premises includes the provision of meals and accommodation to the extent
required by the Chief Executive. We are satisfied
the requirements of
the Act have been met in this instance.
29. Further, the Tribunal must also have regard to the matters specified in
s.121(5)(c)
, (d), (e), (f) and (g) of the Act. Only if the Tribunal is
satisfied under
s.121(5)(c)
that the licence is necessary to provide for the
reasonable requirements of the public for liquor in the relevant locality
of the Act is it then necessary to consider the remaining
factors specified in
These remaining factors are the objections made
to the application, comments from the relevant local authority and the impact on
the amenity of the community concerned. It is that issue of the reasonable
requirements of the public to which we now
Reasonable Requirements of the Public
30. There seems no dispute on the material before us, and we find, that the
relevant locality in terms of
is the Atherton
31. There are four licensed premises in the Atherton Shire. All of these
premises are 2 kilometres from the proposed site and within
300 metres of each
other along Atherton’s main street. The four hotels are, the Atherton
Hotel, which has a public bar, dining
facilities and “pub style
accommodation”, walk in bottle shop and provides live entertainment. The
hotel has not been
renovated since 1930 and appears to be, according to Peter
Reinhold, Acting Senior Liquor Licensing Officer, who investigated the
relevant under
of the Act, “below average” in its
32. The Grand Hotel was built in the early 1900s and had been refurbished
approximately ten years ago. It is apparently a reasonably
modern facility
which has a public and private bar, an entertainment area and provides
accommodation.
33. The Carrington Hotel was constructed in 1907. It too has been recently
renovated. This hotel is owned by the applicant. The
applicant notes that the
hotel is incapable of being redeveloped to a standard which would provide for
the facilities contemplated
by the applicant’s proposal on the Kennedy
Highway. Demolition and reconstruction is not a viable option.
34. The fourth hotel is the Barron Valley Hotel which provides a public bar,
dining facilities, accommodation, drive through bottle
shops, home delivery
service and live entertainment. Accommodation apparently has not been provided
since the end of World War II.
The premises are heritage
35. Mr Reinhold notes that the four existing hotels are “practically in
sight of each other”. All hotels have the same
old or heritage style
architecture. The existing hotels have a greater emphasis on public bar
facilities. Accommodation, if it is
used by the premises, is not of a modern
36. In considering whether or not there would be any health and social impacts
arising from the granting this application, the appeal
books do not disclose any
evidence which would appear to us to support a finding that adverse health and
social impacts would occur
if the applications were granted. The Queensland
Police Service drew a correlation between liquor consumption and an increase in
anti-social behaviour. No evidence exists that relates this particular facility
to any anticipated increase in such conduct. Therefore,
this matter, in the
absence of any other evidence, cannot be of great weight. In any event, the
Police Service seem to have now
ameliorated their view. It could not be said
that there are any health and social impacts that ought be taken into
37. It appears that the Atherton Shire has a population of around about 10,000
with the town of Atherton having a population of 5,500.
Mr Reinhold notes the
low population and identifies that “there is little justification for the
provision of further facilities
based on the modest population and the fact that
there are four existing premises”. We agree. However, this does not take
into account the emerging tourist industry which is developing in and around
Atherton. In 1991 there were 850,000 tourists, in 1996
there were 1,117,000 who
visited or passed through the region. Arguably, the provision of the facility
offered by the applicant
especially with the requirement to provide
accommodation would remedy what the local authority regarded as an unfortunate
tourist infrastructure in the area.
38. Ultimately
Mr Reinhold concludes:
“In reaching a conclusion, the over-riding consideration is the
reasonable requirements of the public for liquor and related
services in the
locality. Atherton is a prisoner of its past. The Main Street hotels have been
established for so long that they
have become social icons. But, time moves on.
Despite extensive renovations to some premises, the truth is that they are still
style, traditional hotels. The mere fact they were constructed first and
are otherwise of sufficient number in a limited population,
is not ultimately
conclusive. Does it mean that no new premises will ever be built in Atherton?
Surely not. If a new premises is
modern, innovative and offers an extent and
quality of service that is superior in enough respects to the Main Streets
would likely appeal to a segment of the residents and patrons, then
that proposal deserves approval. Economic viability, potential
job losses and
other commercial criteria must be of second importance.
In all the objector submissions, there was not one party prepared to say the
proposed premises would not be popular. Rather, there
were strong indications
that the premise would be so popular as to force an existing premises to close
and for there to be significant
amenity problems by the volume of patrons at the
new locality. This is the surest test of patron requirements for a service, one
that will attract a large crowd who are dissatisfied with existing levels of
service. If the proposal was yet another heritage listed
renovated building in
Main Street offering exactly the same service, there would be no similar rush of
demand and hence no justification
for additional premises. The proposal
represents a significant different service to establish a public need.”
39. We would agree with this conclusion. Accordingly, we find that the
applicant has demonstrated that the facility is necessary
to provide for the
reasonable requirements for the public for liquor and related services in the
Atherton Shire.
40. Whilst there may be a “public need” for this application, if the
granting of the application could cause undue offence,
annoyance, disturbance or
inconvenience to persons who reside or work in the locality or if the
application were granted the amenity,
quiet or good order of the locality would
be lessened then, the application may be refused. It is to this issue that we
41. It is this issue that forms the basis of the appeals made by Ms Speirs and
Ms Wyburn. It would appear that a significant number
of the concerns voiced by
the many objectors to this application have, to some extent, been ameliorated by
the order of the Planning
and Environment Court to which we have already
42. In particular, the traffic concerns of the Queensland Police Service appear
to have been comprehensively addressed at paragraph
7 of the consent
Accordingly, we find
that as a consequence of the imposition of the requirements contained in the
order of the Planning and Environment
Court the traffic concerns have and will
be addressed and this issue would not cause any lessening of the amenity or any
undue disturbance, inconvenience or annoyance pursuant to
s.119(3)(a)
(3)(b) of the Act.
43. The concerns of the appellants, as articulated in their notice of appeal and
in submissions, related to noise emanating from
the premises. Both the
appellants live in close proximity to the proposed site. Both appellants have
had an unfortunate experience
with the International Club which is located
nearby. It should be noted that the Tribunal, prior to embarking on this
hearing, had
the opportunity to go to see the subject site and observe the
International Club premises. Of course, as this view took place prior
commencement of the hearing of the appeal, no assessment of any noise emanating
from the International Club could be made.
44. The appellants in particular were concerned that as the applicant proposes
from time to time to conduct live entertainment from
the premises that the
provision of this entertainment would disturb the rural serenity which the
appellants currently enjoy. In
this case, the proposed facility as we have
noted is required to contain set backs, noise buffers and fencing. The
applicant tendered
at the hearing various colour plans of the site which show
what the proposed premises will look like upon completion. We observe
that the provision of set backs and buffers and fencing is in stark contrast to
the layout of the Atherton International
Club. That club appears to us to be an
aged single building sitting on a flat block of land surrounded by a car park.
no noise attenuation devices apparent at all. We note that the
proposed premises is required to contain safeguards to preclude noise
from the premises.
45. Further, we are attracted to the submission made by Counsel for the
applicant that this facility, since the order of the Planning
and Environment
Court, must provide accommodation. Those accommodation facilities must be
constructed prior to the licensed premises
operating. It would seem to us that
the applicant would be causing himself considerable financial harm if, by the
provision of entertainment
at such volume and at such a late hour, it disturbed
those utilising the accommodation. If the accommodation facility is to be
successful,
then guests must be considered so that their rest is not disturbed.
It is unlikely, in our view, that this facility as it is now
envisaged to be
operated would cause significant noise to emanate from it. Any noise that does
emanate would, in our view, be muffled
by the extensive noise amelioration works
which are required to be undertaken as part of this proposal.
46. As we have noted, this is in contrast to the Atherton International Club
which is a building which is a stark building sitting
on a flat space without
any apparent noise amelioration facilities at all. In our view, it is a
comparison which although, in the
circumstances is understandable, is not able
to withstand scrutiny. Accordingly, whilst the Atherton International Club may
caused some disturbance in the area this does not mean that the applicant
will, in the operation of its proposed premises produce
similar disturbances. A
modern building with noise muffling features surrounded by fences, buffers and
with appropriate setbacks
is a facility greatly distinctive from the Atherton
Club. In those circumstances, having regard to the safeguards required by the
Planning and Environment Court, we consider that it is unlikely that this
application would cause any lessening of the amenity or
any relevant undue
disturbance, inconvenience or annoyance pursuant to
s.119(3)(a)
of the Act.
47. Having considered the evidence placed before us and having listened
carefully to the submissions of all interested parties and
taking into account
the matters which we are required to, pursuant to
(5) of the Act,
the Tribunal is satisfied that this application would satisfy the reasonable
requirements of the public for liquor
and related services in the Atherton Shire
and that the granting of this application would not cause undue offence,
annoyance, disturbance
or inconvenience to persons who reside in the locality
nor would the granting of this application lessen in some way the amenity,
or good order of the locality. Accordingly, appeals nos. 71 and 72 of 2001/2002
ought be dismissed.
Order of the
48. The Tribunal orders that:
(a) Appeals No. 71 and 72
of 2001/2002 be dismissed;
(b) The Tribunal gives the appellant leave to withdraw Appeal No. 73 of
(c) Appeal No. 74 of 2001/2002 be struck
(d) The decision of the Chief Executive made on the 4th of April 2002 be
This order, in its entirety is
set out at pages 139-151, Appeal Book, volume
Appeal No. 1 of
Appeal No. 72 of
See page 2 and 4, Appeal
Book, volume 1.
Appeal No. 73
of 2001/2002.
Appeal No. 74 of
Graham & Ors v. Chief
Executive, Department of Tourism, Racing and Trading & Ors (Banyans Tavern)
Appeal No. 69 and 70 of 2001/2002, 26 July 2002 at paragraph
the Act and
of the Act.
See page 245, Appeal Book, Volume
See pages 141-147,
Appeal Book, volume 1.
page 140, Appeal Book, volume 1 and page 146, Appeal Book, volume 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (81.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter