URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCAT/2025/432.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Pennisi [2025] QCAT 432 (10 November 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Legal Services Commissioner v Pennisi
[2025] QCAT 432
LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER
(applicant)
VINCENT PENNISI
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
Occupational regulation matters
DELIVERED ON:
10 November 2025
HEARING DATE:
03 July 2025
17 July 2025
DECISION OF:
The Honourable Judicial Member McMeekin KC
Assisted by:
Macpherson, Practitioner Panel Member
Lamont, Lay Panel Member
respondent’s conduct as particularised in the discipline application filed
8 August 2023 is professional misconduct.
respondent’s conduct as particularised in the discipline application filed
13 November 2023 is professional misconduct.
is recommended that the respondent’s name, Vincent Pennisi, be removed
from the local roll.
respondent pay the applicant’s costs of and incidental to each discipline
application, such costs to be agreed or assessed
on the standard basis in the
manner in which costs would be assessed if the matter were in the Supreme Court
of Queensland.
CATCHWORDS:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT AND UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL
TRUST MONEY – where the Legal Services Commissioner filed a discipline
application alleging the respondent
disbursed money held on trust in
contravention of a court order – where the respondent initially sought to
have the discipline
application dismissed because he believed he had authority
to disburse the trust money – where the respondent now accepts
disbursed money in contravention of a court order and s 249(2) of the
Professional Act 2007
(Qld) – where the Commissioner submits the
conduct amounts to professional misconduct – where the respondent submits
the conduct amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct in the circumstances
of the disbursements – whether the respondent’s
conduct amounts to
professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT AND UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL
IMPROPER DEALINGS – where the respondent sent a letter to the wife of his
client – where the client was
subject to a domestic violence order
preventing him from communicating with the wife – where the letter was
long, contained
emotionally manipulative and coercive language – where
the respondent knew the letter may amount to a breach of the domestic
order – where the Legal Services Commissioner alleges that by sending the
letter the respondent acted unprofessionally
and compromised his integrity and
independence – where the Commissioner and respondent agree the conduct
amounts to professional
misconduct – whether the Tribunal is satisfied the
conduct amounts to professional misconduct.
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT AND UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL
where the respondent has engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct and/or
professional misconduct – where
the Legal Services Commissioner seeks
disciplinary orders against the respondent pursuant to s 456(2) of the
Professional Act 2007
(Qld) – where the Commissioner seeks an order
recommending the name of the respondent be removed from the local roll –
where the respondent seeks orders imposing a pecuniary penalty and conditions on
his practising certificate – whether the respondent
is a fit and proper
person to remain on the local roll – whether the respondent’s name
should be removed from the local
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 2012
Family Law Act
Legal Profession Act
Adamson v Queensland Law Society Incorporated
(1990) 1 Qd R
A-G & Minister for Justice Qld v Priddle
[2002] QCA 297
Attorney-General v Bax
[1998] QCA 89
[1999] 2 Qd R 9
Attorney-General of the State of Queensland v Legal Services
Commissioner & Anor; Legal Services Commissioner v Shand
In the Matter of Vincent Pennisi
Jensen v Legal Services Commissioner
[2017] QCA 189
Legal Practice Tribunal v Pennisi
[2007] LPT 1
Legal Services Commissioner v Bussa
[2011] QCAT 388
Legal Services Commissioner v Conradie
[2018] QCAT 170
Legal Services Commissioner v Cooper
[2011] QCAT 209
Legal Services Commissioner v Jensen
[2017] QCAT 148
Legal Services Commissioner v Kirin
[2024] QCAT 489
Legal Services Commissioner v Kurschinsky
[2020] QCAT 182
Legal Services Commissioner v
[2020] QCAT 326
Legal Services Commissioner v Madden
[2008] QCA 301
[2009] 1 Qd R 149
Legal Services Commissioner v Munt
[2023] QCAT 479
Legal Services Commissioner v Orchard
[2012] QCAT 583
Legal Service Commissioner v Pennisi
[2024] QCAT 97
Legal Services Commissioner v PRF
[2023] QCAT 291
Legal Services Commissioner v Reeve
[2016] QCAT 209
Legal Services Commissioner v SYG
[2023] QCAT 401
Legal Services Commissioner v Tang
[2025] QCA 206
Legal Services Commissioner v
[2016] QCAT 4
Legal Services Commissioner v Winning
[2008] LPT 13
Legal Services Commissioner v
Wrightway Legal
[2015] QCAT
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
A Angeli instructed by Legal Services Commissioner
Respondent:
A Psaltis instructed by Mullins Lawyers
REASONS FOR DECISION
are two discipline applications brought by the Legal Services Commissioner
(‘Commissioner’) against the respondent,
Vincent Pennisi, under
Legal Profession Act
(Qld) (‘the
Act’). The Commissioner alleges that the respondent engaged
in professional misconduct, and seeks that disciplinary
orders be made
against Mr Pennisi pursuant to s 456 of the Act.
The charges
file OCR277-23, the Commissioner charges Mr Pennisi that between 4 December 2018
and 19 March 2019 he paid monies from the
V Pennisi & Associates Trust
Account contrary to an order of the Federal Circuit Court of Australia dated 29
May 2018, and in
breach of s 249 of the Act, and will be referred to in these
reasons as the trust account issue.
[3] Under file
OCR191-23, the Commissioner charges Mr Pennisi that on or about 31 May 2021 he
engaged in conduct in the course of
practice which was likely, to a material
degree, to bring the profession into disrepute, and will be referred to in these
as the Letter issue.
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is not in doubt. Mr Pennisi was at all material
times an Australian lawyer as defined in s 5(1)
of the Act and an Australian
legal practitioner within the meaning of s 6(1) of the Act. He was admitted to
the roll of legal practitioners
in Queensland on 5 March 1974 and at all
material times he held a local practising certificate. He held an unrestricted
practising certificate from 1 July 1991 to 30 June 2021, and from 16
July 2021 to date. He was the sole practitioner and principal
practice trading as V Pennisi & Associates from 28 March 2008 to 1 June
2021. He was a partner and principal of the
law practice trading as Pennisi Zia
Lawyers from 28 July 2021 to 30 June 2022, and from 8 September 2022 to
OCR277-23: The trust account issue
A brief overlook of the issues
Pennisi withdrew three amounts from his firm’s trust account thereby
exhausting the trust monies being held, two of the
withdrawals being to pay his
own fees. He did so not only without authority but contrary to orders of the
Federal Circuit Court of
Australia. He thereby deprived the entitlement of an
intended beneficiary, as determined under the order of the Court, of some of
monies held on trust.
[6] Mr Pennisi
submits that his conduct amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct, as
defined within s 418 of the Act, but not
professional misconduct, as defined in
s 419 of the Act. In
Legal Services Commissioner v Conradie
, his Honour
Judicial Member P Lyons KC observed
In principle, it is a serious matter for a solicitor to withdraw money from
the solicitor’s trust account, without authority.
While there may be
some exceptional cases, as a general rule such conduct falls short, to a
substantial degree, of the standard of
professional conduct observed and
approved by members of the profession of good repute and
competency.
[7] Given we
accept the general rule as observed by the Judicial Member, the question is
whether this is one of those exceptional
cases. Once we have determined the
characterisation of the conduct, the issue then is to determine the appropriate
The orders and the background context
time to time, Mr Pennisi acted for a person we will identify as ‘the
wife’ in a family court proceeding before
the Federal Circuit Court (later
renamed as the Federal Circuit and Family Court). We will identify the party
contradicting as ‘the
husband’. There were numerous applications,
but for present purposes the proceedings concerned, inter alia, a property
involving the sale of their former matrimonial home located at Fir
Street, Victoria Point (‘Fir St Property’). On 15
June 2017, Judge
Baumann (as his Honour then was) made various orders concerning, among other
matters, the division of property including,
but not limited to, the Fir St
Property. His Honour held that the wife was to receive 45 per cent of the net
assets and the husband
to receive 55 per cent.
[9] In allotting
which property the parties were to receive to reflect the 55/45 split, Judge
Baumann assumed a sale of the Fir St
Property for $570,000 and a net amount
realised of $500,000. Judge Baumann’s order provided that the gross
proceeds of sale
were ‘to be appropriated in the following order and
of liabilities secured over the former matrimonial home by the ANZ;
of all liabilities associated with the sale of the subject property including
statutory charges, vendor duty, legal costs,
agents commission, advertising fees
and auction fees;
payment to each of the party’s share of the nett proceeds set out in Order
4 and 5 of these Orders [as to which see below];
the wife shall be entitled to a 45% share of the following nett assets and the
husband to the remaining 55% [and thereafter
set out his understanding of the
assets and liabilities of the
Baumann then added:
Provided that should the [Fir St Property] nett proceeds from the sale of the
[Fir St Property] home be less or more than the nett
amount of $500,000.00 the
amount of each of the husband and wife is to receive from such sale proceeds
shall be adjusted to reflect
the percentage division of the net asset as to 45%
to the wife and 55% to the husband.
Baumann ordered that the wife was to receive $348,752 and the husband $426,254
from the pool of net assets, but did not
leave the amount to be paid from the
sale of the Fir St Property to be left to any discretion. He identified which
amounts should
come from the sale albeit adjusted as provided above. His Honour
drew a distinction between the disposition of the proceeds of sale
and leaving
payments otherwise to other sources, which is evident from his orders 4 and 5
(inter alia) of the order:
the wife shall be entitled to the following:
Partial property settlement $25,000
Share of sale proceeds of the [Fir St Property] $323,752
the husband shall be entitled to the following:
[various identified assets totalling $681,351 but relevantly including]
Partial property settlement $25,000
[Less two identified liabilities totalling $431,345 leaving a net of
Share of sale proceeds of [Fir St Property] $176,248
(subject to adjustment
as here and before set out)
February 2018, Judge Egan, also a Judge of the Federal Circuit Court of
Australia, ordered that the wife pay her husband’s
costs ‘of and
incidental to the property proceedings incurred by [the husband] from 4 February
2016 until the date of trial
being 30 August 2016, such costs to be
assessed...’.
Further, Judge
Egan ordered that ‘the amount of such assessed costs are to be paid to the
husband from the wife’s forty-five
percent (45%) share of the net proceeds
of sale of the Fir Street
The parties agreed
that the assessed costs, thereby ordered by Judge Egan that the wife was to pay,
was $14,338.00.
[13] On 29 May
2018, Judge Egan ordered:
paragraph 2 of the Order made by me on 9 February 2018 be varied such that the
amount of any assessed costs as ordered by me
to be paid by the wife pursuant to
shall be first paid in the net proceeds of sale from the [Fir St
upon the sale of the [Fir St Property], the net proceeds of sale be held in the
Applicant’s solicitor’s trust account
pending further Order of the
each party have liberty to apply on the giving of three (3) days’ notice,
each to the other.
significance of giving parties liberty to apply is well known to lawyers. In
such an order, the relevant court retains the
ability to make further orders or
directions related to a matter, even after an initial order or judgment has been
made. It allows
parties to return to court for clarification, adjustments,
or further directions concerning the implementation of the original order,
without needing to start entirely new proceedings.
[15] Interposing
here, there can be no doubt about the meaning and intent of Judge Egan’s
orders. Effectively, the husband had
a charge on the net proceeds of the sale of
the Fir St Property to pay the costs mentioned. The costs were to be met from
share of the proceeds of the sale. Further, the net amount once
received into the trust account, intending to be the trust account
of V Pennisi
& Associates, was to be held pending further order of the Court. As will be
seen, there was no such further order.
[16] Returning
to the narrative. On 18 July 2018, Judge Egan made further orders in response to
an application and its amended version
filed by the husband. Mr Pennisi appeared
for the wife. Judge Egan dismissed the applications and, so far as relevant,
ordered the
husband to pay the wife’s costs of and incidental to those
applications. In contradistinction to his Honour’s earlier
costs order in
favour of the husband, Judge Egan did not order the costs to be paid out of the
proceeds of the Fir St Property. The
applications said nothing of the orders
made of 9 February 2018 or 29 May 2018. The applications are described in the
of orders for file’ from the Court’s portal as
‘Dismissed’ at a ‘Directions
Those costs were
assessed at $4,589.
September 2018, his Honour Judge Middleton of the Federal Circuit and Family
Court dismissed an application filed by the
wife on 3 May 2018. The order has no
apparent relevance at this juncture, but, as discussed in [61], it is necessary
to return to
December 2018, the Fir St Property sale was settled on a contract price of
$500,000, some $70,000 less than assumed in Judge
Baumann’s orders. As
well, there were very significant reductions from the proceeds. It transpired
the net proceeds of the
sale totalled $250,458.38 and that was paid into the
trust account of V Pennisi & Associates (‘the trust account’).
Thus, the net proceeds were nearly one half of the assumption underlying his
Honour’s analysis. There are three disbursements
worthy of comment:
(a) $60,000 was paid to Rosen Lawyers’ trust account. It is common ground
that the amount refers to a debt claimed by the husband’s
daughter against
the husband. Judge Baumann mentioned a ‘purported Deed of
Compromise’ that the husband had entered into
with the daughter asserting
a debt of $100,000. The husband’s counsel ‘did not press for the
debt to be included in the
marital pool of assets and liabilities’. There
is no mention in the judgment that the daughter had a caveatable interest in
Fir St Property or that any such amount needed to be brought into account in
determining the cash available for distribution
to the parties. It is not known
to the Tribunal how a claimed monetary debt to the husband resulted in a
caveatable interest in jointly
owned real estate.
(b) $14,938 was paid to V Pennisi and Associates. This is not to criticise the
amount of the fee charged but to note that Mr Pennisi
must have been aware that
a fee of that size was never anticipated by Judge Baumann. That amount is well
above the typical legal
fees of a straightforward conveyance of a residence when
acting for the vendor, perhaps ten times a typical fee. The wife swore an
affidavit in proceedings before the Federal and Family Court that ‘great
difficulty and costs was experienced in the sale of
the home’ and that her
solicitor, presumably Mr Pennisi, ‘negotiated a release of the caveat
[lodged by the husband’s]
daughter at a reduced amount’ of the
existing debt.
Judge Baumann was
not aware of that caveat.
(c) $158,372 was paid to the ANZ Bank reflecting presumably the home mortgage
and ANZ Business Credit facility expressly dealt with
by Judge Baumann. Judge
Baumann knew of the existence of the existing mortgage (which he assumed at
$70,000) and the existence of
the Business Credit facility. His orders were
framed to have the mortgage brought into account in determining the net amount
to share between the parties and left it to the husband to meet the
Business Credit facility. The total debts were a total of $149,453
at the time
of judgment. Whether that increase in indebtedness was due to the husband
increasing the mortgage, as Mr Pennisi asserts
in his response to the discipline
application,
or the effluxion of
time and increase of interest owed, or for some other reason, is not dealt with
by evidence and not known by
this Tribunal.
[19] Several
observations should be made. Firstly, the asset pool in fact available was
substantially less than the $775,006 that
Judge Baumann adopted. The parties had
approximately $250,000 less, more than a 30 per cent reduction. Secondly, the
depletions were
in some cases anticipated but in some plainly not, most
obviously the debt of $60,000. Thirdly, there is a real question over whether
the legal fees that were owed to Mr Pennisi for work involved in negotiating
with a third party’s lawyer about a claimed charge
on the Fir St Property,
which was unknown to Judge Baumann, fell within his Honour’s intent when
he ordered that the gross
proceeds be ‘appropriated’ by ‘legal
costs’ associated with the sale of the Fir St Property (see [9] above).
[20] Mr Pennisi
is not charged in respect of any of his decisions which resulted in the
substantial reduction in the net proceeds
received into the trust account.
However, these unexpected diminutions seem to have impacted on Mr
Pennisi’s decisions as a
trustee, for which he is charged. The husband has
not provided any sworn evidence and so the Tribunal does not know what, if any,
instructions he provided that led to the substantial alteration to the amount
received into the trust account. It seems a reasonable
inference that the
husband did not agree to what transpired. As will be seen, he has complained
bitterly about the end result and
dealt with him. What is certain, is that Mr Pennisi at no time took instructions
the husband. Mr Pennisi was of course aware of the acrimony between the
husband and wife and the long history of litigation that
relevance to the issue here is that any competent solicitor, acting as trustee,
should have been seriously concerned about
their position. Each of these
considerations ought to have caused a competent practitioner to consider seeking
clarification from
the Court as to how the judgment and orders in place be
affected. And a competent practitioner aware of the orders made would appreciate
that such clarification could easily be sought under the liberty to apply
The wife is in financial difficulties
an e-mail of 13 September 2018 from the wife to Mr Pennisi, the wife refers to a
District Court proceeding against her brought
by the ANZ Bank. A contract of
sale for the Fir St Property had failed. She explained to Mr Pennisi the
difficulties she had in relation
to the litigation with the ANZ Bank, and her
belief that ‘all those issues with the bank will be solved when the house
Relevantly, she then wrote, relevant to this discipline
application:
According to judge Egan’s order dated on 29/5/2018 pr7 says that upon
the sale of the property, according to the net proceeds
of sale be held in
the applicant’s solicitors trust account pending further orders of
the court, however Judge Middleton dismissed
the outstanding application
and closed our case..how can we go from there?
I know that first we need to sell the house.
We use relevant court orders below.
15/6/2017 by judge Bauman [sic]
9/2/2018 and 29/5/2018 by judge Egan . [sic]
45% wife 55% husband assets pool ( not 45/55 for house sale)
Cost order 9/2/2018 awarded to [the husband].
Appeal cost awarded to [the wife] $1000 agreed to return “prado” as
Cost order 18/7/2018 to [the wife].
Please find attached copy of the court order 6/9/2018 and assessed cost and a
screen shot of our agreement for appeal cost for
conveyancing.
[23] At no stage
does Mr Pennisi explain what advice he gave in response to the wife’s
question. It is known that the wife did
not take advantage of the liberty to
apply provision set out in the same orders referenced in the e-mail of 13
September 2018, which,
to a competent lawyer, would be the obvious answer to the
question posed.
The distribution
receipt of the net proceeds from the sale of the Fir St Property into the trust
account, Mr Pennisi then made, on the wife’s
instructions, three
distributions. Mr Pennisi:
(a) on or about 7 December 2018, paid the wife the sum of
$235,000.00;
(b) on 7 January 2019, transferred $6,894.59 to the wife’s family law file
(to pay outstanding legal fees owed to Mr Pennisi);
(c) on 19 March 2019, transferred $8,563.79 to her family law file (also used to
pay the outstanding legal fees owed to Mr Pennisi).
[25] The entire
funds received into the trust account from the sale of the Fir St Property were
so disbursed. The husband received
none of the sale proceeds.
A failed contempt proceeding
surprisingly the husband was upset. Some years later, he eventually determined
to bring an application for contempt against
the wife. He was self-represented
and, as is often the case when self-advised, not well advised. On 18 January
2022, his Honour Judge
Lapthorn dismissed the application. Judge
Lapthorn’s reasons, however, offer no support for Mr Pennisi’s
[The husband] did not receive any of these [Fir Street Property]
Both [the wife] and Mr Pennisi hold the view that he was not
entitled to do so in accordance with the judgment and orders of
Baumann, notwithstanding the order of Judge Egan that the
proceeds of sale were to be deposited into a trust account until further
order of the court. There is no doubt this was not complied
This failure to comply forms the basis of the
applicant’s complaint.
I have much sympathy for [the husband’s] complaint. There appears
to be a complete disregard for the orders of Judge Egan including
requirement to pay [the husband’s] costs before the distribution of
the proceeds of sale.
However the orders of Judge Egan were styled
“until further order” and Judge Middleton made an
order dismissing all outstanding
applications.
Whilst I do not
consider that that order in any way took away [the wife’s] obligation
to comply with Judge Egan’s orders
I am satisfied that the
wife could have been confused about her obligations and relied on
her solicitor. I am not satisfied [the
husband] has sufficiently
established his case to the requisite standard, that is the higher standard
of beyond reasonable doubt.
Although there has been a breach of the
I cannot be satisfied the breach was a flagrant challenge to the
court. For that reason I will dismiss each of the applications.
I well understand [the husband’s] frustration in his complaint
that the orders of Judge Egan were not complied
[27] Later, the
husband brought an action for damages for conspiracy against Mr Pennisi and the
wife for depriving him of the monies
in trust. As best we can tell, that action
was similarly misguided. What we are told is that he retained solicitors at some
and the solicitors mention in correspondence that the husband was by then
impecunious. These proceedings were eventually dismissed
by consent on 7 October
2022 by Judge Lapthorn.
Unsworn assertions
are several assertions made that are not supported by affirmed or sworn
evidence. We have not acted on those claims but
are aware that, if true, such
matters may have influenced what decisions were made. For example, in his
response to the disciplinary
application, Mr Pennisi said:
Other Orders (including costs orders against [the husband] – Order of Egan
J 18 July 2018), Warrant of Execution – [the
husband] encumbered property,
subsequent to Baumann J Order (15 June 2017) by increasing the ANZ mortgage by
drawing down for his
failed business enterprise & financial dealings with
his daughter ... who secured a judgment against him, and warrant registered
the property for approximately $111,000.00. [The husband] further failed in
meeting his obligations to ANZ which filed Supreme
Court proceedings for
foreclosure.
[29] Similarly,
the husband has made assertions in his submissions, which are not sworn to,
including that:
(a) Mr Pennisi took advantage of his nervous breakdown – implicitly from
the context when Mr Pennisi was dealing with the trust
(b) he had attempted to communicate to Mr Pennisi many times towards the end of
2018 to ask Mr Pennisi to contact his solicitors
regarding court orders and the
holding of trust monies, but Mr Pennisi ignored his phone calls and emails, and
e-mails from his conveyancing
solicitors;
(c) he had another nervous breakdown in January 2019, which was caused by Mr
Pennisi continuing to ignore his and his solicitor’s
attempts at
(d) Mr Pennisi knew at all times that he had diagnosed post-traumatic stress
disorder and was in an emotionally fragile state from
(e) he was in ‘protective custody’ for his nervous breakdown and not
able to receive communications, which Mr Pennisi
knew (at a time we cannot
determine from the husband’s submissions); and
(f) he was permanently disabled when crushed by a 30-tonne boat on 31 July
[30] We do not
know what Mr Pennisi knew of the husband’s personal situation, and we are
not concerned with any dealings prior
to the receipt of monies into trust, save
to understand Mr Pennisi’s explanation for his conduct the subject of the
We know little of the validity of the various claims made against the
settlement monies from the sale. Whether any of these claimed
matters would have
resulted in the Court reaching some different result is not known to this
Tribunal. However, what is evident is
that a prudent solicitor would have
appreciated that the financial circumstances were very different to the
situation that Judge
Baumann had considered. The puzzling aspect is that Mr
Pennisi proceeded, without direction from the Court, to determine what property
should go to his client.
The law on trust money
is no doubt about the law. Section 249 of the Act governs how a law practice
must deal with trust monies held in the trust
249 Holding, disbursing and accounting for trust money
(1) A law practice must—
(a) hold trust money deposited in a general trust account of the practice
exclusively for the person on whose behalf it is received;
(b) disburse the trust money only under a direction given by the person.
Maximum penalty—50 penalty units.
(2) Subsection (1) applies subject to an order of a court of competent
(3) Subject to division 2A, the law practice must account for the trust money
in the way prescribed under a regulation.
Maximum penalty—50 penalty units.
[32] Thus, Mr
Pennisi was required to disburse the trust monies held in the trust account
‘only under a direction given by the
person on whose behalf it is
received’ but subject to subsection (2): ‘subject to an order of a
court of competent jurisdiction’.
It is undisputed that the orders of
Judge Egan were orders of a court of competent jurisdiction. Put simply, Mr
Pennisi did not comply
with the orders of Judge Egan in contravention of s 249
of the Act.
A concession of unsatisfactory professional conduct
the eve of the hearing on 3 July 2025, Mr Pennisi’s position was, in
summary, that he had done nothing wrong as he
was entitled to disburse monies
from the trust account as and when he had determined. He took legal advice at
some point. As a result
of that advice (which he chooses not to disclose) he
accepts that his conduct consists of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
that his previously held position was wrong. That change of position was
communicated to the Commissioner on 26 June 2025, one week
prior to the Tribunal
[34] The issues
for the Tribunal to determine then are whether Mr Pennisi’s conduct should
be characterised as unsatisfactory
professional conduct as he submits or
professional misconduct as the Commissioner submits, as well as the appropriate
sanction. In
reaching a determination of both issues it is necessary to
understand the extent of the departure from good practice that occurred
[35] In the
discussion that follows it should be emphasised that the Commissioner does not
assert any dishonesty in Mr Pennisi’s
conduct. We proceed on that
The extent of departure from proper practice
position adopted by Mr Pennisi in the week before the initial hearing on 3 July
2025 is very different to the position he
adopted at the time of the
disbursements in late 2018 and early 2019 and held until that time. To provide
insight into his thinking
and understanding, it is helpful to examine his
responses to the complaint and charge brought by the Commissioner.
Commissioner filed the discipline application on 13 November 2023. Mr Pennisi
filed a formal response on 2 January 2024.
He provided an affidavit on 29 August
2024, in which he referred to a ‘full analysis’ in an affidavit
sworn by the wife
on 19 March 2019 in the contempt proceedings. That affidavit
was provided as an annexure to his own affidavit. The Commissioner’s
submissions were filed on 19 November 2024. Mr Pennisi filed his submissions in
response on 2 December 2024. There the matter rested
until supplementary
submissions were filed by Mr Pennisi on the eve of the hearing, being 2 July
2025. The analysis below is intended
as a summary of Mr Pennisi’s position
until those supplementary submissions were received:
(a) the wife had sole authority to deal with the net proceeds of the sale of the
Fir St Property, and she provided instructions to
Mr Pennisi upon which he
(b) section 249 of the Act placed a responsibility on Mr Pennisi to
pay trust money he received from the sale of the Fir St Property
person/s entitled to receive
(c) in carrying out such responsibility it was necessary for Mr Pennisi to take
into account who was entitled to receive the monies
as required by s 249 of
the Act, which he submits he
(d) the person/s entitled to receive proceeds were subject to many orders of the
Federal Circuit Court and Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia, citing the orders of Judge Baumann of 15 June 2017, and
orders of Judge Egan of 9 February 2018, 29 May 2018, and 18 July
(e) Mr Pennisi concluded that the only person entitled to receive the monies in
the trust account was the wife, and on his accounting,
the husband owed monies
to the wife;
(f) in the subsequent proceedings brought by the husband against the wife and Mr
Pennisi, principally regarding whether any monies
were owed to her husband were
dismissed by Judge Lapthorn on 7 October 2022, which corroborates and supports
Mr Pennisi’s own
conclusions that the husband was not entitled to any
monies received into the trust account; and
(g) the discipline application brought by the Commissioner should, therefore, be
Pennisi’s submissions are not merely misconceived but display a level of
profound misunderstanding, ignorance of proper
practises, and disregard for the
judgments and orders of the Court.
[39] The first
three propositions in [37] above, (a)-(c), are wrong either in fact or in law.
The fourth proposition, (d), is accurate
save that the orders made on 18 July
2018 have no impact on the conduct raised in the discipline application. The
fifth proposition,
(e), regarding Mr Pennisi’s views as to who had
entitlements is irrelevant, at least to the submitted justification for his
conduct, but must be examined more closely. The sixth proposition, (f), does not
have the effect claimed, that is, that the dismissal
of proceedings supports Mr
Pennisi’s claims in the fifth proposition, and so is irrelevant.
[40] The first
proposition is simply wrong. The wife had no authority, let alone sole
authority, to deal with the net proceeds. No
argument was advanced by Mr Pennisi
to support the bald assertion. The plain effect of the order of Judge Egan of 29
May 2018 is
that the monies received into the trust account could not be
distributed without an order of the Court. The very order which authorised
monies to be paid into the trust account were made subject to that
qualification.
Hence, absent an
order of the Court authorising disbursement, neither party had authority to deal
with the monies in the trust account.
As can be seen from the wife’s email
of 13 September 2018, Mr Pennisi was made aware of the difficulty that Judge
order presented in relation to the wife accessing the proceeds of
[41] Further,
even assuming Judge Egan’s order was overlooked, it was self-evident that
the monies held in the trust account
were for the benefit of both the husband
and the wife. When a jointly owned asset is sold and the proceeds placed into
monies so held are held on behalf of both, absent an order or
agreement altering that position. That is axiomatic. Here the orders
preserved the husband’s entitlement. As mentioned above, Judge
Baumann’s orders divided the monies from the sale
between the two parties.
He plainly drew a distinction between the allotting of the proceeds of sale and
the division of other property,
a distinction identified in the wife’s
email of 13 September 2018 to Mr Pennisi. Judge Baumann’s orders required
$176,248 of the sale proceeds from the Fir St Property be paid to the
husband, that is approximately 35.25% of the expected net proceeds.
lawyer the monies were plainly jointly held even absent the orders of the Court.
Incidentally, the effect of Judge Baumann’s
order was to put the husband
in funds from the sale of the Fir St Property and so be available to deal with
the debts assigned to
his responsibility, an effect ignored by Mr Pennisi.
[42] As to the
second proposition, s 249 of the Act does not place a responsibility on Mr
Pennisi to pay trust money received from
the sale of the Fir St Property to the
persons entitled to receive same. The proposition ignores s 249(2). Section
249(2) expressly
requires that any disbursement is subject to an order of a
court of competent jurisdiction. Judge Egan’s orders certainly meet
description and required two restraints: firstly, the costs awarded to the
husband, $14,388, be paid from the wife’s share
of the net proceeds of the
sale of the Fir St Property; and secondly, before any disbursement there be a
further order of the Court
dealing with the disbursement of any proceeds. No
lawyer, let alone one of 45 years’ experience (as Mr Pennisi then stood),
could not but have understood the meaning of these orders. Again, there was no
argument advanced to support Mr Pennisi’s bald
authority is cited to support the third proposition. A solicitor is not entitled
to go behind a court order and determine
what the rights of parties ought to be
and so determine their entitlements. However, this is precisely what Mr Pennisi
did by disbursing
the trust monies contrary to multiple Court orders. Again, Mr
Pennisi ought to have known perfectly well that he was not entitled
This is the fundamental error here.
[44] The three
orders mentioned in the fourth proposition subsequent to Judge Baumann’s
decision have been already detailed.
None of the orders have anything to say of
any disbursement being permitted from the trust account. Counsel’s
submissions that
the multiplicity of orders is said to be a cause of Mr
Pennisi’s unsatisfactory professional conduct, as counsel now submits
should characterise Mr Pennisi’s conduct, as the orders did not speak to
one another, and may have been more clearly spoken.
It is of considerable
concern that nothing in the terms of the orders or the context should have
caused a rational competent practitioner
some confusion. At the time of the
order of 18 July, when Judge Egan last dealt with the matter, and Mr Pennisi
appeared, there were
no monies in trust and, at that stage of course, it was not
known what amount would eventually be available to be disbursed. Why
order should have caused any misunderstanding is inexplicable. Judge Egan there
dismissed two applications filed on 4 June
and 13 July 2018, but nothing is said
of authorising disbursements from trust or setting aside his own order that the
entitled to his costs from the wife’s share.
[45] The fifth
proposition again assumes, without citation of authority or argument, that a
solicitor is entitled to work out for
himself the amount his client might be
entitled to – in the very different financial situation dealt with by
Judge Baumann
- and thereby not consider the Court orders and the express
provisions of the Act. To say the proposition is to reject it. Yet Mr
held that view. Again, his analysis lies at the heart of his conduct and again
we will examine it.
[46] The sixth
proposition calls on Judge Lapthorn’s order made years later on 7 October
2022, to somehow justify Mr Pennisi’s
conduct. Counsel for Mr Pennisi did
not advance the proposition and, of course, he could not. Judge Lapthorn was not
asked to examine
the appropriateness of Mr Pennisi’s disbursements. To the
contrary, when his Honour dealt with the issue directly in the contempt
proceedings he held, as indeed was obvious, that the Court orders had been
[47] The order
of 7 October 2022 was made by consent and by its terms dismissed ‘all
outstanding applications’. As mentioned,
the husband had brought a claim
for damages for conspiracy against Mr Pennisi and the wife. Counsel submits that
by then the arithmetic
shows, depending on which items are included or excluded,
a $6,000 payment one way or a $4,000 payment roughly the other way, and
small to justify further litigation. These arguments are to revisit the notion
that Mr Pennisi was entitled to decide what
entitlements the wife should
[48] It is not
known whether the notion of the amount in dispute be
counsel submits, reflects the husband’s thinking and decision to consent
to the dismissals, or indeed reflects what the
Court would have arrived at. The
husband’s submissions filed in this application and dated October 2024
makes it plain that
he remains outraged by Mr Pennisi’s conduct. For
present purposes what can be said about the dismissal of the conspiracy
proceedings
on 7 October 2022, is that no reference was made in the orders that
the disbursements that were made in December 2018, January 2019
and March 2019
and contrary to the existing Court orders were thereby authorised. There was
also no curial examination of the proposition.
Even if Mr Pennisi’s claim
be accurate, that is, the Court seized with the issues would have taken the same
course or authorised
those same disbursements as he decided unilaterally to
undertake—that would be no excuse for his conduct. But that much is
Analysis of Judge Baumann’s judgment
assay an understanding of Mr Pennisi’s approach, and effectively his claim
that even if unauthorised, as he now concedes,
he arrived at a fair result, it
is necessary to set out his reasoning. As mentioned above it was Mr
Pennisi’s decision to put
his own interpretation on Judge Baumann’s
judgment that lies at the heart of his conduct. In his affidavit sworn on 29
2024, Mr Pennisi sets out his reasoning:
application of Judge Bauman’s [sic] said order to disbursement entitlement
of proceeds of sale provided that [the wife]
receive 69.75% of such proceeds,
namely $275,797.00.
application of Judge Egan’s orders of 8 February 2018 and 29 May 2018
provided that [the wife] pay [the husband] $14,338.00.
application of Judge Egan’s order of 18 July 2018 provided that [the
husband] pay [the wife] $4,589.00.
Accordingly,
[the husband] was not entitled to receive any monies from Trust monies received
from the proceeds of sale of the property.
In fact, there was insufficient
monies to pay [the wife’s] entitlements by a shortfall of
$31,048.00.
[50] There are
several criticisms that can be made of this analysis. One is the apparent
unfairness to the husband. It is worth observing
at the outset that it was the
husband, not the wife, who achieved the better result at the trial. He was to
receive the major share
of the net assets, fixed at 55 per cent. Further, he had
the advantage of an order from Judge Egan that he was to receive costs of
trial agreed to be $14,338 from the wife’s share of the net proceeds of
the sale of Fir St Property, not from the pool
of assets. The Fir St Property
was easily the most significant asset held jointly. As mentioned, in his
analysis of the husband’s
entitlements, Judge Baumann found that the
husband was to receive $176,248 from the proceeds of the sale of Fir St Property
35 per cent of the then assumed expected net proceeds). The effect, as we
said, was to place him in funds. To arrive at a conclusion
that it is the wife
who should receive the entire net proceeds of the sale –contrary to Judge
Baumann’s plain intent
– should have caused any practitioner pause
in that his thinking might have gone astray, but apparently that did not occur
to Mr Pennisi.
essential criticism, however, is the adoption of assumptions that are not set
out in Judge Baumann’s orders. To show
that Mr Pennisi did so it is
necessary to follow the thinking that is behind the allegations in paragraph 11
of his affidavit quoted
Baumann did not order that the wife was to receive 69.75 per cent of ‘such
proceeds of sale’. His Honour made
no mention of 69.75 per cent of the
proceeds of anything. Nor were the proceeds of sale reflected by the sum of
$275,797. To understand
where that sum is derived, it is necessary to go to the
affidavit of the wife in the contempt proceedings. She swore, presumably
the advice of Mr Pennisi, that the net amount available at settlement was
$395,409. That amount was arrived at by adding to
the amount received into the
trust account of $250,458.38, the $60,000 paid out to the husband’s
daughter, and $84,950 paid
out to the ANZ Bank regarding a business loan. Mr
Pennisi then added the $25,000 that was ordered to be paid to the wife, and
by the judge as ‘partial property settlement’, to the
$323,752 Judge Baumann assumed would be paid to the wife from the
sale of the
Fir St Property. That total was $348,752. He then divided that total by the net
proceeds of sale that Judge Baumann assumed
of $500,000 and converted it into a
percentage ($348,752/$500,000 = 69.75%). That percentage was then applied to
$395,409 resulting
in $275,797 as being the wife’s entitlement. But
neither the percentage, nor the net amount available, nor the amounts to be
deducted against the husband, reflect anything that Judge Baumann had
determined.
demonstrate the unfairness of Mr Pennisi’s approach, is to apply his
approach but from the husband’s perspective:
one takes the ‘partial
property settlement’ the husband was to receive ($25,000), add his share
of the assumed sale proceeds
($176,248), and add the costs that Judge Egan had
ordered from the wife’s share of the sale proceeds ($14,388). The husband
was therefore to receive $215,636 divided by the net proceeds of sale that Judge
Baumann assumed ($215,636/$500,000) which equals
43.1 per cent. That percentage
applied to $395,409 in fact available results in a payment from the trust
account to the husband of
interpreting Judge Baumann’s order, Mr Pennisi determined – without
any direction from the Court – what
amounts should be brought into account
in reducing the husband’s entitlement from the proceeds of sale. We note
that the wife
did not have an order entitling her to have her costs deducted
from the husband’s share of the proceeds of sale and that Judge
(a) not ordered that the $25,000 to each party was to be taken from the proceeds
of sale and inferentially he did not intend such
a distribution;
(b) not ordered that $60,000 should diminish the proceeds by payment to the
husband’s daughter;
(c) not ordered that the ANZ Business Credit facility should come from the
proceeds of sale; and
(d) plainly been unaware that the ‘legal costs’ associated with a
simple conveyance would result in close to ten times
that amount as would be
normally expected.
[55] Mr Pennisi
does not claim to have had any instructions from the husband at any time, let
alone to disburse monies from the trust
account. Mr Pennisi does not claim that
he was unaware of the existence of Judge Egan’s orders of 9 February 2018
2018 (significantly the later order being the subject of this
discipline application). The wife’s email of 13 September 2018,
above at [22], makes it plain that Mr Pennisi was made aware of the orders and
his client identified the problem that the
order presented. The closest claim of
ignorance of any relevant matter was made is in Mr Pennisi’s assertion
that the wife:
was not in financial position to engage my services on a full-time basis and
only did so itinerantly so I was not always directly
conversant with all of the
issues and reliant upon her instructions, documents she provided to me and my
perusal of the Commonwealth
If this is a plea that he remained ignorant of some relevant fact it is not
evident to the Tribunal what fact that is.
[56] Mr Pennisi
swore and submits that ‘I came to the conclusion that the only person
entitled to receive the monies in Trust
To reach that view
he needed to overlook Judge Egan’s order, his statutory duties, and the
husband’s interests which
Judge Baumann had endeavoured to protect.
Significantly, Mr Pennisi, without any authority, determined the source from
which monies
were to be paid to the wife and himself.
[57] As the
Commissioner submits, Mr Pennisi’s conduct can be compared to that of a
prudent, competent practitioner:
A prudent solicitor in Mr Pennisi’s position‑—a solicitor with
50-years post admission experience, who was only
engaged for certain aspects of
a proceeding, upon learning of potentially incongruent orders, would have taken
steps to satisfy themselves
that it was proper to act on a client’s
direction to make a disbursement from a trust account. It was incumbent upon Mr
to ensure he was complying with the Court orders and with the
obligations of the Act.
Mr Pennisi ought to have approached the Court and sought clarification about the
operation of the 29 May Order, or advised the client
to approach the Court for
clarification or an order that the money could be disbursed. Order 9 of the 29
May Order made provision
for this [by giving parties the liberty to apply]. Mr
Pennisi did not do this—or anything—to satisfy himself that he
acting in accordance with his trust account obligations and his overriding duty
to the Court.
[58] We agree
with that submission. We think it should be self-evident to any practitioner,
let alone one with the experience of Mr
Mr Pennisi’s changed position
his second affidavit filed 2 July 2025, Mr Pennisi:
(a) concedes that he breached s 249 of the Act in disbursing the net proceeds as
(b) says that in disbursing monies from the trust account he ‘overlooked
two important matters arising from the order of Judge
Egan dated 29 May
2018’, that is, that no payment was to be made at all without a further
order of the Court and there was
an order that the husband was to be paid his
costs out of the proceeds of sale;
(c) says that instead of considering these two matters he ‘focused on the
mathematical exercise which [he] had undertaken and
which [he] considered
supported the approach that [the wife] was entitled to the proceeds of sale of
the [Fir St Property] and was
therefore the person authorised to direct [him] as
to where to disburse those proceeds held in [the] trust account’;
(d) accepts as accurate the Commissioner’s submission, set out above in
[57], as to what he should have done and that he therefore
should have advised
[the wife] to approach the Court, or do so himself, to seek a further order
permitting disbursements or variations
to existing orders;
(e) paid out proceeds from the trust account ‘in accordance with the
enquiries which [he] had made with [the wife] to understand
the net effect of
the orders of Judge Baumann and Judge Egan made in the Court and the financial
exercise [he] undertook...’;
(f) allowed his own financial analysis and his understanding of the acrimonious
and protracted nature of the disputes between the
wife and the husband ‘to
cloud [his] proper and careful reading of the 29 May 2018 order’; and
(g) says that he is ‘extremely disappointed in [himself] for not having
carefully checked the orders of 29 May 2018’
while accepting that he had
the orders.
[60] The claim
in [59](e) seems to assert that Mr Pennisi did not work out for himself the net
effect of Judge Baumann’s order
and the orders of Judge Egan. He seems to
assert that the wife has told him, the solicitor, the effect of the judgment and
He makes no claim in either of his affidavits that he did not have a
copy of Judge Baumann’s order. He accepts he had the orders
of Judge Egan.
To not apply his own knowledge and acumen to the judgment and orders would be a
serious departure from good practice,
if it were so. Further, contrary to the
assertion Mr Pennisi’s counsel founded his submissions on, being that Mr
Pennisi ‘genuinely
believed on the basis of his own analysis of the
orders’ that he had authority to act as he
[61] We have
mentioned that the order of Judge Middleton of 6 September 2018 was of no
apparent relevance to these disciplinary proceedings,
see [17] above. So far as
the evidence shows, the order of Judge Middleton, as per the Commonwealth Courts
Portal, was issued at
a direction hearing and dismissed an application filed by
the wife on 3 May 2018 in the
proceedings.
In counsel’s
oral submissions the order is said to have possibly taken greater
significance:
[Mr Pennisi] thought that Judge Egan’s order needed to be effectively
varied to take into account where the parties lay in
terms of their asset
position. He took into account and knew about Judge Middleton’s order
dismissing all of the proceedings
and closing the case, which I don’t take
any higher than that a possible reading of that order, particularly when Judge
order said it applied until further order, is that it could mean
that that order was sufficient to discharge Judge Egan’s
[62] There are
two answers to that submission. Firstly, no competent lawyer could think that an
order dismissing an application varied
Judge Egan’s orders. However, the
reference in the Commonwealth Courts Portal does not go so far as
counsel’s description.
The closest to the assertion that Judge
Middleton’s order was ‘dismissing all of the proceedings and closing
can be found in the wife’s email of 13 September 2018
where she states that Judge Middleton ‘dismissed the outstanding
application and closed our case’. That appears to be a construction
that the wife adopted.
[63] Secondly,
and more fundamentally, nowhere does there appear in any of Mr Pennisi’s
affidavits a reference to Judge Middleton’s
order or a claim that he was
confused by this order. Mr Pennisi does not make the claim that counsel submits.
Characterisation of Mr Pennisi’s conduct
The relevant
Tribunal’s power to make a disciplinary order is dependent on a finding
that the respondent has engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct or
professional misconduct.
statutory definitions are set out in ss 418 and 419 of the Act. They are
inclusive in their terms and hence recourse to common
law tests is permissible
if helpful.
[65] Section 418
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner happening in connection with the practice of
law that falls short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a
member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent
Australian legal practitioner.
[66] Section 419
Professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian
legal practitioner, if the conduct involves a substantial or
failure to reach or keep a reasonable standard of
competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, whether happening
in connection with the practice of law or happening otherwise
connection with the practice of law that would, if established, justify a
finding that the practitioner is not a fit and
proper person to engage in
legal practice.
Commissioner submits that Thomas J’s dictum in
Adamson v Queensland Law Society Incorporated
is of assistance here:
The test to be applied is whether the conduct violates or falls short of,
to a substantial degree, the standard of professional conduct
or approved by members of the profession of good repute and
competency.
[68] Section
420(1)(a) of the Act is also relevant. It provides that ‘conduct
consisting of a contravention of a relevant law’
is conduct ‘capable
of constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct’ and this includes
a ‘contravention of a regulation or
legal profession rules’.
act contrary to the orders of the Court and in relation to the dealings in trust
monies strikes in a fundamental way at the
bedrock of our system of law. It is
fundamental that a solicitor understands the terms on which monies are received
into his or her
trust account and abides by those terms. If authority be cited
for so fundamental a proposition, the Commissioner cites the decision
Thomas J in
Legal Services Commissioner v Reeve
[75] In a conveyancing transaction, where monies are paid, but must be held
pending adjustments due other events occurring, members
of the general public
must be able to have confidence that monies paid into a trust account will be
dealt with in accordance with
the basis on which the moneys are paid. This must
be so regardless of the party for whom the legal practitioner who holds the
in trust is acting.
[76] Because the legal practitioner takes on duties as trustee, the legal
practitioner, acting prudently and to the standard of
competence and diligence a
member of the public is entitled to expect, must ensure that the terms on which
the monies are held and
able to be disbursed, are fully understood by all
parties (including the
practitioner).
[70] The point
of the reasons quoted is to emphasise that a solicitor must act proactively in
identifying the mandate on which he
or she receives monies into trust.
[71] Mr Pennisi
submits that his conduct was not of the degree of seriousness required to
warrant the characterisation of professional
misconduct. There were extensive
oral submissions, but the point attempted to be made appears in the written
submissions:
(a) Mr Pennisi engaged in that conduct which involved paying the money to his
client, [the wife], whom he genuinely believed on
the basis of his own analysis
of the orders of the Federal Circuit Court was the true beneficiary of the money
and with her authority;
(b) the conduct was not a flagrant disregard for the trust accounting
obligations. To the contrary, Mr Pennisi believed that he
was paying the true
beneficiary of the funds. It is also not part of a pattern of repeated and
brazen conduct concerning the misappropriation
or misapplication of trust
[72] With great
respect the issue of whether the disregard is ‘flagrant’ and
‘brazen’ depend on the colouring
of those epithets that one adopts.
The error in the submission is to assume that Mr Pennisi’s subjective
beliefs, that he was
entitled to take the monies from the trust account, is to
be substituted for the objective standard that the legislation and authority
set. To ‘overlook’ the terms of the order authorising his receipt of
the monies into trust, and to not read the relevant
‘carefully’, and to have matters extraneous to the issue
‘cloud his proper and careful reading of the orders’,
as Mr Pennisi
now swears, is to offer little by way of either excuse or explanation.
Objectively, his conduct is a fundamental failure
practitioner’s duties. These submissions downplay Mr Pennisi’s many
[73] Counsel for
Mr Pennisi further submits, citing Tribunal cases, that:
Mr Pennisi’s conduct was not the type of trust accounting conduct which is
readily found by this Tribunal to amount to professional
misconduct. That
conduct usually entails dishonest breaches of the trust accounting rules where
practitioners act to deceive or to
their own financial gain or act
repeatedly.
authorities cited were
Legal Services Commissioner v
Kurschinsky
Services Commissioner v
Legal Services
Commissioner v
. With respect, to say that dishonest conduct invariably falls
into the category of professional misconduct provides no authority
submission made.
[75] Firstly, it
is trite to observe that these decisions depend very much on their own facts and
characterisation of conduct can
turn on questions of
Hence it is not
necessary to examine each of these authorities.
[76] Secondly,
while there are some similarities with some of these decisions, they tend to
point very much to a characterisation
that the conduct subject of this
discipline application constitutes professional misconduct. Particularly, the
Commissioner relied
on the decision of
Kurschinsky
, and with good
Kurschinsky,
the solicitor faced numerous charges, but charge 5 is
directly relevant to the situation here. Justice Daubney described the relevant
circumstances:
[37] Charge 5 relates to the transfer of monies totalling $197,266.77 from the
law practice trust account to the tax practice trust
account without the
consent, authority or direction of the persons on whose behalf the funds were
[38] The funds in question were monies that had been received into the
respondent’s law practice trust account as a consequence
of the sale of a
property which was the subject of dispute in family law proceedings between a Ms
Worthington and a Mr Henry.
The proceeds of sale were deposited into the law
practice trust account by Ms Worthington, and were obviously held on trust for
Ms Worthington and Mr Henry pending resolution of the family law proceeding
and a decision as to the disposition of the money.
Despite the funds being
impressed with that trust, the respondent, solely on the instructions of Mr
Henry, transferred or caused
those monies to be transferred out of the law
practice trust account and into the trust account of the tax practice.
[39] At no time did Ms Worthington give her consent to the withdrawal of that
trust account money.
[78] Those facts
are identical to the situation facing Mr Pennisi, absent the order of the Court
compelling him not to distribute
at all and absent the order to first pay costs
to the husband. As Daubney J observed, the monies were ‘obviously held on
for both’. Justice Daubney did not hesitate to conclude that the
conduct that he had described:
... constituted conduct which violated or fell short of, “to a substantial
degree, the standard of professional conduct observed
or approved by members of
the profession in good repute and
competency”.
[79] Counsel for
Mr Pennisi submits that Daubney J dealt collectively with the conduct and so
provides no guidance on this particular
issue. We disagree. His Honour did deal
specifically with the characterisation of this charge and indeed his duty
commanded that
his Honour do so. Further, the point of distinction the counsel
submits is for the worse, not the better. That is, the family law
proceedings in
Kurschinsky
had not reached resolution whereas the proceedings here had
resolved. Hence, in
Kurschinsky
there was ‘
to transfer the
To assert that
there was no resolution in
Kurschinsky
, but here there was a decision by
Judge Baumann which Mr Pennisi did not follow, somehow justifies his misconduct
being looked on
in a more benign light, is baffling.
[80] As the
Commissioner submits the conduct the subject of charge 5 in
Kurschinsky
related to a breach of s 249 of the Act, exactly the charge Mr Pennisi faces.
The charges involving dishonesty were the subject of
separate charges and
separately dealt with by Daubney J. Here there is the aggravating circumstance,
and an extremely aggravating
one, that Mr Pennisi contravened two Court orders.
[81] Conradie
involved six unauthorised disbursements from the solicitor’s trust account
totalling $10,000. The disbursements were made over
a period of more than a
year. Most involved small if not trifling amounts. The total amount was refunded
by the solicitor. The solicitor
claimed, to a psychiatrist, that the monies
expended by him were expended ‘legitimately’, although the Tribunal
not conclude whether that was so or
The focus of the hearing
was on the solicitor’s mental state, which provided some explanation for
his conduct. Nonetheless,
there was a finding of professional
misconduct.
[82] It is not
irrelevant that the monies disbursed by Mr Pennisi were much more substantial
. Mr Pennisi made three transfers totalling $250,438 over
approximately three months. Counsel for Mr Pennisi submits that in
there was a pattern of behaviour which was not so here. The Hon.
Judicial Member P Lyons KC did not mention that aspect as significant
judgment in
. Counsel submits that there was a single and
explained incident here. That is not so. There were three payments at three
times and each involving a failure to obey different orders, including
that Mr Pennisi:
(a) did not comply with the order not to distribute without the leave of the
(b) did not comply with the order to pay the husband’s costs from the
wife’s proceeds; and
(c) overlooked that there was no order that he pay his fees from the trust
[83] The facts
here are, in our judgment, far more serious than in
[84] Counsel for
Mr Pennisi submits that the facts in
came close to the facts here,
where the Tribunal, DG Thomas J presiding, held that the solicitor had been
guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. The relevant charge was the same,
namely – disbursing trust monies contrary to s 249 of the Act. The
involved in
was $2,337.50 and concerned payment of building work.
The purchaser required a contribution from the vendor for building work needed
as a condition of settlement. The contribution was paid into trust. The
solicitor paid out the monies in trust after settlement but
before such work was
attended to. The vendor complained. The solicitor’s understanding of the
basis on which the monies were
held on trust came from reports to him of
arrangements reached through conversations between agents and not the
vendor’s solicitor.
He thought that after settlement the purchaser was
entitled to the monies and paid out the monies held in trust. He contested the
charge brought against him. The solicitor pointed out that upon settlement of
the transaction the vendor had no interest at all in
whether the work was to be
performed. Further, plainly the purchaser could, if she wished, sell the
property on without attending
to the building work and, absent an express
agreement which did not exist, retain the monies. The solicitor was of the view
the vendor sought to impose a condition on the purchase monies paid after
the power to impose such a condition had passed. Significantly,
there was no
written agreement for him to check to determine the terms on which the monies
were held on trust, or indeed any other
means. Many practitioners would consider
that absent a clear express agreement the purchaser’s position was
unassailable.
The point however is that a purchaser’s rights to the
monies is not the same issue as the authority of a trustee to deal with
[85] Justice DG
Thomas found that the terms of the trust did not permit payment out at that
time. His Honour’s reasoning, so
far as relevant, is set out at [69]. His
Honour considered that the solicitor’s conduct fell short of the standard
but not in a substantial or consistent
In summary, the solicitor
failed to understand the terms on which monies were held due to the confused
conversations relayed to him
by third parties. There was a single event, the
conduct explicable, and involved a very modest amount of monies. The facts in
are far from the facts here. What the decision in
demonstrates is the strictness of a solicitor’s duty when holding monies
Conclusion on characterisation
duty imposed on a solicitor receiving funds into a trust account was explained,
accurately, in the Commissioner’s submission:
The public is entitled to expect that:
, a solicitor accepting money into their (or their law
practice’s) trust account by a court order, does take proactive steps
understand the terms of the court order and his or her obligations;
, if the solicitor remains unsure of his or her obligations
under the court order, that the solicitor raises the issue with the court
obtains independent advice;
, the solicitor ensures compliance with the court
, if instructed to distribute funds in breach of a court order,
informs his or her client of the terms of the court order and the
consequences
for breaching the court order and take no steps to assist the client to
breach the court order, including by causing
funds to be
disbursed from the trust account, otherwise than in accordance with the
order or the Act.
[87] Mr Pennisi
failed to meet the expectations the public are entitled to expect. The orders
were not in any way complex. Mr Pennisi’s
client drew his attention to the
relevant paragraph of Judge Egan’s order. The meaning of the orders made
are self-evident.
It is inexplicable how a competent practitioner would not have
understood the order and followed it. Mr Pennisi failed completely
in his duty
as a trustee.
[88] We return
to the observation of the Hon. Judicial Member Lyons KC in
referred to at [6], that there may be some exceptional cases, involving the
withdrawal of trust money without authority, that do
not depart from the
standard of conduct expected of a solicitor. While not substituting the Judicial
Member’s observation for
the test in the legislation, the circumstances
here are exceptional but not to the good. Mr Pennisi’s conduct fell far
of the standard of professional conduct observed and approved
by members of the profession of good repute and competency and constitutes
professional misconduct as defined by Thomas J in
and s 419(1)(a)
of the Act.
ORC 191-23: The Letter issue
A preliminary matter
the purpose of the analysis and discussion that follows, we will refer to the
person for whom Mr Pennisi acted as ‘the
client’ and the
client’s former wife, who was also the person that submitted a complaint
to the Legal Services Commission
in respect of the conduct, as ‘the
aggrieved’.
Commissioner alleges that on or about 31 May 2021, Mr Pennisi engaged in conduct
in the course of practice which was likely,
to a material degree, to bring the
profession into disrepute.
[91] The conduct
alleged, and accepted, is that on that date Mr Pennisi sent a 13-page letter on
behalf of the client to the aggrieved
(‘the Letter’) containing
statements or assertions which the Commissioner asserts ‘were likely to
amount to a breach’
of a protection order made under the
Domestic and
Family Violence Protection Act 2012
(Qld) (‘DFVP Act’). The
particulars of which are:
(a) the use of emotionally manipulative or coercive language; and
(b) speaking of the relationship between the client and the
[92] There are
other particulars regarding the Letter which are also not in dispute and do not
rely on the existence of the protection
order, they are:
(a) the Letter was unprofessional as it was oppressively lengthy, contained
grammatical and spelling errors, poor punctuation, incorrect
repetitive statements;
(b) the statements contained in the Letter were unprofessional in tone and
context; and
(c) by drafting and/or arranging for the Letter to be sent to the aggrieved, Mr
Pennisi’s integrity and professional independence
compromised.
[93] By that
conduct, Mr Pennisi was likely to bring the profession into disrepute to a
material degree.
protection order referred to in the charge was made by a Magistrate enjoining
the client and contained various conditions
including the following:
The [client] is prohibited from, directly or indirectly, contacting or
attempting to contact or asking someone else to contact the
aggrieved by any
means of communication including but not limited to telephone, internet, letter,
or social networking sites.
- Except by
messages sent through an agreed communication platform namely ‘Talking
Parents’ and all such communications
must be succinct and not include any
form of emotionally manipulative, coercive or abusive language, talk of
past/relationship matters
or any other matter not directly related to the child
spending time with the [client] or the child’s welfare or
development...
accepted, and in any case evident from the Letter itself, that Mr Pennisi was
well aware of the protection order when involved
in the drafting and sending of
the Letter to the aggrieved. Further, he does not claim that he was unaware of
the significance of
the existence of such a condition in such a protection
condition in question was not a ‘standard’ condition. Sections 56
and 106 of the DFVP Act provides for standard
conditions to be included in every
domestic violence order, and they do not include a non-contact condition.
Section 57 provides
that ‘[a] court making or varying a domestic violence
order must consider whether imposing any other condition is necessary
desirable to protect ... the aggrieved from domestic violence’. Obviously,
on the evidence available to the Magistrate,
the condition in question here was
necessary or desirable to protect the aggrieved. In considering imposing a
condition such as the
one here, the DFVP Act instructs that ‘[t]he
principle of paramount importance to the court must be the principle that the
safety, protection and wellbeing of people who fear or experience domestic
violence, including children, are
paramount’.
The retainer
Pennisi says that he was retained by the client two days before the Letter was
sent. He does not speak of any earlier contact.
He was engaged on an urgent
basis. What circumstance necessitated the urgency is not explained. Nor is there
anything in the letter
to suggest any urgency. The arrangement between them, he
says, was entered into contrary to his usual practice. His usual practice
require clients to deposit monies in trust prior to starting work. Here, Mr
Pennisi agreed that he proceed without payment
until the work was done –
‘the letter was complete’ – and without any money in trust. No
explanation is offered
as to why. He says that the client supplied a draft and
wanted Mr Pennisi to settle it and send it. The draft is now not available.
Pennisi’s affidavit reads:
client] and I met throughout the Saturday and Sunday and discussed the draft
disagreed as to the proposed contents of the letter. Within those two days,
there were times where I threatened to cease acting
for [the client]. However,
[the client] always managed to convince me not to do so.
letter was changed to some extent from the original draft. However, there were
some aspects that remained in the letter which
I now acknowledge are
inappropriate and would have been offensive to [the aggrieved].
understood that [the client] knew [the aggrieved] well. I was informed that she
would be receptive to the letter and would not find
it offensive. I was too
trusting in this regard.
letter includes the statement “
it is my own decision as a lawyer to
write and send this letter to you
”. Amongst others, I regret the
inclusion of
matters that were the subject of any disagreement, what aspects of the Letter
caused him to threaten to cease to act, what
changes to the initial draft were
made, and what work was done, are not disclosed. As well, what aspects he now
finds offensive to
the aggrieved, but formerly he did not, are not identified.
Nor did Mr Pennisi explain which statements he regretted, other than
mentioned in paragraph 83 of his affidavit; nor did he explain why he singled
out this statement that he regretted including
in the Letter. What seems evident
is that the inclusion of the statement he regrets was of great importance to the
client, and his
refusal to do so may have been sufficient to deny his fee.
[99] What is
known is that Mr Pennisi charged the client $6,490.00 (including GST) for
settling the Letter, which included 13 hours
of work and 20 phone calls. It is
also known that on the day the Letter was sent to the aggrieved, Mr Pennisi
handed to the client
a letter in these terms:
I confirm advices that the [sic] your letter to [the aggrieved] may amount to a
breach of the Domestic Violence Order against you
but you nonetheless request me
to forward same to her and you indemnify me and take full responsibility for
letter to the client makes plain that Mr Pennisi was well aware that the
correspondence he had forwarded put himself in
the position of being potentially
in breach of the protection order.
absent the protection order, the Letter is quite extraordinary. The Letter has
no identifiable legal purpose. The covering
e-mail from Mr Pennisi to the
aggrieved expressly made that clear: ‘
This letter does not seek any variation to any Orders.
It is just a gentle letter which I hope you will be pleased after reading
The Letter opens with a similar statement: ‘This is a friendly and
genuine letter that does not seek any variation to any orders.’
Pennisi, so far as he has disclosed, did not know the aggrieved, but knew that
the parties were separated, and must have realised
that the aggrieved had sought
protection from harassment from the client by seeking from the Court a
protection order which included
the non-contact condition mentioned above.
[102] According
to the agreed facts, or self-evident from the Letter itself, the Letter
(a) approximately 14 references to the fact the client participated in a
‘men’s behaviour change program’;
(b) approximately 29 references to couples counselling or to counselling;
(c) approximately 40 references to the client’s love for the aggrieved or
their child; and
(d) six separate references (including hyperlinks, quotations and a graph) over
two pages that purport to demonstrate the dangers
of child abuse to children in
step-relationships, Mr Pennisi writing that he has put together the research
‘so you are informed
of the content
[103] The Letter
includes numerous examples of statements that were unprofessional and lacking
any professional independence, including:
[The client] will be delighted and will cherish the new opportunity to show love
towards you the way you want to receive love.
You [i.e. the aggrieved], [the client], and [the child] could have lovely family
times together.
Just through spending time with [the client] you will see for yourself he has
changed into the most easy going, most kind, and respectful
person you always
Since [the child] was born, [the client] has always shown so much love towards
[the child] in emotional, caring and practical
Commissioner chose the following excerpt as illustrative of the general tone of
the Letter. We agree. The Commissioner could
have chosen many other passages for
the same purpose. The excerpt reads:
[The client] understands you cannot please everyone. However more than 4 years
ago you have chosen to please your parents. Isn’t
it time to put you and
[the child’s] own future first?
Sometimes separation and divorce reveals that what couples has is indeed true
love. It has been 4 years since you and [the client]
has separated.
This separation has revealed many things such as [the client’s] unending
love towards you is not based on circumstances honeymoons
periods, nor age.
It has shown that his love for you is patient, it is kind, and it is
unconditional love.
You and [the client] entered into your relationship a decade ago when you were
24 and he was 25, there were several times where you
raised your concerns to
[the client] that he will no longer love you as years go by
[The client] is more in love with you today than when you were a 24 year
[105] The first
paragraph of the extract immediately above appears to the Tribunal as
particularly scandalous. It appears on the fifth
page of the Letter and is
repeated in similar terms on the following page: ‘During discussions with
[the client], this is a
situation where you cannot please everyone, you have
pleased your parents at the expense of [the child] and your own future for the
last 4 years.’ For a lawyer, without any apparent basis and without any
legitimate legal purpose, to assert to a mother that
her decision to quit the
relationship with the client was done so in order to please her parents, and
then to claim that she was
thereby not willing to put her child’s future
first, is simply appalling.
submission is made by Mr Pennisi that any part of the Letter had any legitimate
connection to the domestic violence proceedings
before the Court nor indeed any
reference to what may have been a proper concern for lawyers.
The evidence of the aggrieved
aggrieved separated from the client in April 2017 and they were divorced in July
2019. They have a child, aged six at the
time of the swearing of the
aggrieved’s affidavit on 31 October 2023. Since separation she has
received ‘lengthy, repetitive,
and obsessive communications from [the
client]’. She received such communications on an almost daily basis until
the protection
order was made at her request. This was the third domestic
violence order she had obtained and the one then current was made on 23
2020 to last for five years. She ‘experienced the persistent
communications ... to be emotionally manipulative and
controlling’. She swore that the communications were ‘seriously
affecting [her] physical and mental health
and disrupting [her] work and
personal life.’
aggrieved suspected that the Letter had been written by the client. The Letter
contained coercive and emotional language
that the client had used in the past,
it contained basic spelling and grammatical errors, including the incorrect
tenses, and contained
nonsensical statements.
aggrieved received three such letters from three different solicitors acting for
the client. The letters were received on
31 May 2021 from Mr Pennisi, as it
turns out the second in the sequence, an eight-page letter on 2 March 2021, and
a 23-page letter
on 23 July 2021. The other letters were similar in style and
content, and each caused her a great deal of stress and concern. She
that the client was trying to ‘get around’ the protection
[110] In her
complaint to the Commissioner of 25 June 2021 the aggrieved, in referring to the
protection order, observed: ‘This
letter clearly breaches these
conditions. I simply could not believe a professional lawyer wrote it’ and
repeated the observation
in her affidavit in these proceedings: ‘I do not
believe that a solicitor with decades of experience could have written such
Mr Pennisi’s response
email of 13 August 2021, Mr Pennisi, in response to advice from the Commissioner
that a complaint from the aggrieved concerning
the Letter had been received,
Under the provisions of the
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act
client’s] lawyer, it is lawful for me to have written to the above
[112] In further
correspondence with the Commissioner of 1 November 2021, Mr Pennisi confirmed
that he was the author of the content
of the Letter and that the Letter was sent
in reliance upon s 60 of the DFVP Act.
Pennisi’s response of 13 October 2023 to the discipline application was
that his conduct amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct. He admitted
the particulars save for the allegation that statements or assertions in the
Letter ‘were
likely to amount to a breach of [the protection
order]’, on which he reserved his position.
Pennisi’s counsel advised the Tribunal, during the hearing on 17 July
2025, that Mr Pennisi now accepts that his conduct
amounts to professional
misconduct. Mr Pennisi changed his position after receiving legal advice.
The disputed facts
Pennisi does not accept that certain statements contained in the Letter were
likely to breach the terms of the protection
order. A non-exhaustive list of 14
such statements were provided by the parties in a co-executed statement of
agreed and disputed
a. at page 2:
“,...[the client] is transparent about his desire to reconcile with
b. at page 2:
“I also ask you to take a step back, and ask yourself the honest question,
what is [the client] trying to achieve with spending
all his time, efforts, if
it's not to reconcile with you as well as giving [the child] the best possible
outcome in having a family
c. at page 5:
“[The client] sees and considers that a future with [the child] and you is
worth every second, sweat of his heart and soul,
as it's a dream future
that’ll be a lifelong shame to give up on...
d. at page 5:
“[The client] is more in love with you today than when you were a 24 year
e. at page 6:
“ ...[the client] has realised and experience just how excruciatingly
painful and paralysing it is to break or separate true
f. at page 6:
“[the client] more than anyone else is ready to grow old together with
g. at page 6:
“When you came back to Australia in early 2018, you, [the client] and [the
child] spent time together as a new family, you
went to Rocks riverside parks
together, went swimming at the beach together at Caloundra, Bribe island, Gold
You and [the client] also did easy simple things like cleaning the Oxley house
and moving items to the recycling centre as well as
going shopping together like
Garden city, Ikea and Rocklea markets.
h. at page 7:
“...what remains constant is [the client’s] ending love for you has
not changed. Instead of going to look for another
partner, [the client’s]
faithful love for you has not weakened...
i. at page 7:
“[The client] is honest about his desires to reconcile with you.
j. at page 8:
“[The client] has the heart to listen and be the best husband he can be to
k. at page 9:
“... as [the client] loves you, [the client] cares about your opinion more
than anyone else, and dream of you coming back to
him, so why would he want to
use anything you say against you, that would go against what [the client]
desires which is for you to
freely desire to come back to him.”
l. at page 9:
“Please remember [the client] desires to reconcile, so the last thing he
wants is to upset you so why would he do anything
that might upset
m. at page 10:
“[The client’s] mother also wishes you and [the client] to reconcile
for [the child’s] sake, so she is happy to
join in the time with you, [the
child] and [the client] just like in 2018 where the 4 of you went to places like
a Bribie Island
to have a swim, Jindalee DFO, Southbank and Kangaroo point
together and had a great time. The location can be anywhere of your choice,
Teralba park where you and [the client] enjoyed picnics there together in 2018
and had lovely walks around near the soccer fields.”
n. at page 12:
“[The client’s] mum, sister, and dad all still continues to think
positively of you and also hope that one day you and
[the client] can get back
together again.”
Pennisi’s counsel urges that no findings be made about these disputed
facts. Counsel submits that Mr Pennisi’s
acceptance of the charge means
that no further enquiry is required. Mr Pennisi disputes that these many
statements have the effect
contended for, that is, that the Letter is replete
with statements that were likely to breach the terms of the protection order.
contend that we are to ignore the effect of these statements is to not examine
the facts and not determine how serious the departure
from the standards
expected has occurred. If there was one such statement in a few words of a
phrase in a 13-page letter the case
would be very different. The disputed facts,
if shown, demonstrate that the conduct in question is of a far more serious
[117] Counsel
made no submission why these statements could have any other but that effect
contended for. How could he? Every example
is precisely within the condition
proscribed by the protection order. Every example falls within a ‘form of
emotionally manipulative,
coercive, or abusive language, talk of
past/relationship’.
Commissioner submits that the Letter ‘must be considered in its entirety
as it is impossible to quantify its impact
or the severity of the
Respondent’s conduct by extracting discrete passages’. That is so.
The entire Letter has no other
discernible purpose other than to manipulate or
coerce the aggrieved, and at times discuss the past of the aggrieved and the
and talk of their relationship for that evident purpose.
[119] Counsel
submits that the Tribunal would err in treating the facts here as if the charge
was that the Letter that Mr Pennisi
breached the terms
of the protection order. He is not charged with that. He is charged with a
communication that was
to breach the terms of the protection
order. To go so far is to impermissibly go outside the charge and the
limitations of the Tribunal’s
the allegations in the discipline application, and no more than that. So the
goes, supported by citing
Legal Services Commissioner v
[120] In our
view the decision in
has no relevance to this issue.
concerns the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to determine an allegation not made
against the practitioner in relation to the complaint
against the legal
practitioner, in that case an allegation of dishonesty. Here the allegations in
question are directly made by the
Commissioner.
[121] Section
453 of the Act provides that:
The disciplinary body must hear and determine each allegation stated in the
discipline application.
The legislative provision is mandatory. However, the word
‘allegation’ is undefined. To determine its intended meaning
necessary to consider the legislative context. That will be controlled by the
purpose of the hearing of a discipline application.
After completing the
hearing, s 456(1) of the Act requires a determination of whether the Tribunal is
satisfied that ‘the
practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct’. Section 456(2) specifies the orders
which the Tribunal may make ‘in a way it considers appropriate’.
[122] Neither
categorising the conduct or the making of orders is determined by the attitude
of the practitioner to the allegations.
The Tribunal must independently be
satisfied whether the conduct complained of is one category or the other, or not
at all. Then,
the Tribunal must determine the appropriate order/s. Those orders
range from a recommendation that the name of the practitioner be
removed from
the local roll to a private reprimand. To determine each issue – the
category and the appropriate order –
the Tribunal is required to
‘hear and determine each allegation’, as s 453 demands.
[123] In this
context ‘allegation’ means those assertions of fact made by the
Commissioner that the Commissioner sets
out to prove to enable the Tribunal to
be satisfied both as to the categorisation of the conduct and the appropriate
order/s. Mr
Pennisi does not avoid the effect of s 453 by pleading that he
accepts that the charge is made out but avoids the examination of
‘allegations’ made in the discipline application and so determining
how serious the charge lies in the scale of misconduct.
[124] The issue
in dispute is whether these statements contained in the Letter, had the effect
contended for by the Commissioner.
Each in their context plainly had that effect
as discussed at [117] above. The allegation that the Letter was likely to breach
terms of the protection order is made out.
The section 60 point
Pennisi asserted initially, and for some time thereafter, that he was entitled
to write the Letter. He claimed his entitlement
from s 60 of the DFVP Act. We
note, as Mr Pennisi well knew or should have realised, that the Letter was
directed to an aggrieved
complainant whom the Court, seized with the relevant
facts, intended to protect from communications from the client.
have received no submissions or evidence relevant to that claim and so will say
little of it, save the following. Section
60 of the DFVP Act does provide a
statutory exception to a lawyer from the effect of a prohibition order but is
limited to a lawyer
acting in the proceedings relevant to the imposition of the
protection order. A competent lawyer could hardly think otherwise. Justice
Williams has analysed this case and its application to s 60 in
Legal Service
Commissioner v Pennisi,
we, with respect, gratefully adopt.
Characterisation of the conduct
is now common ground between the parties that the proper characterisation of Mr
Pennisi’s conduct is in the more serious
category of professional
misconduct. It is necessary for the Tribunal to determine the issue
independently. The Tribunal agrees with
that agreed position. Indeed, we
consider this conduct to be a very serious example of professional misconduct.
[128] As set out
above, the Magistrate set out in the protection order a condition that was to
prevent communications that were described
as ‘not include any form of
emotionally manipulative, coercive, or abusive language, talk of
past/relationship or any other
matter not directly related to the child spending
time with the respondent or the child’s welfare or development.’ The
entire letter was within that description – it was repetitively
emotionally manipulative, it was coercive, it mentioned their
past and their
relationship, and dealt with other matters not directly related to the child
spending time with the client or the
child’s welfare and development. The
client was plainly intending to do precisely what he was prohibited from doing,
...prohibited from, directly or indirectly, contacting or attempting to contact
or asking someone else to contact the aggrieved by
any means of
communication...
[129] There are
three particularly troubling features of the evidence. Firstly, Mr Pennisi could
not but have known when forwarding
the Letter that he was aiding his client in
breaching the prohibition order imposed by the Magistrate. Secondly, Mr
act in writing to his client to claim the indemnity strongly
tends to the conclusion that he had little faith in his claim to the
of his conduct provided by s 60 of the DFVP Act. Thirdly, Mr Pennisi had not the
slightest concern for the impact of his
conduct on the aggrieved person, the
person entitled to the protection from the harassment of his client.
indifference to the effect on the aggrieved and indeed his complete lack of
insight into the gravity of his misconduct was
exemplified in his letter of
response to the notice from the Commission that a complaint had been received
from the aggrieved:
To the extent that the letter may have amounted to improper conduct (which I
don’t accept) I say it is an isolated incident
that firstly has not caused
of itself any serious or significant harm to the complainant herself & from
a “public interest”
viewpoint so low scale as to warrant any further
consideration.
Pennisi’s repeated apologies to the aggrieved in his affidavit sworn on 24
November 2023 and his acceptance of his
responsibility of his patent misconduct
is in complete contrast with his response to the Commissioner.
[132] Whether
explained by indifference or a startling lack of insight or some other factor,
Mr Pennisi’s conduct viewed objectively
involved the following:
(a) an act in complete disregard of the protection order in place;
(b) a disregard of the obvious reasons why such an order would be in place;
(c) a significant risk of imperilling the mental health of the aggrieved, which
should have been evident to any competent practitioner
and indeed any lay
person; and
(d) facilitating a man who was evidently endeavouring to use Mr Pennisi’s
legal position to get around the protection put in
place by the Courts.
conduct falls far, far below the conduct that an honourable member of the
profession would expect. The Commissioner’s
complaint that Mr Pennisi
engaged in conduct in the course of practice which was likely, to a material
degree, to bring the profession
into disrepute is sustained.
exercising the discretion conferred by s 456 of the Act in determining the order
best made on a finding, as here, of professional
misconduct the submissions
reflected a view that there were two questions to consider: firstly, the fitness
of the practitioner at
the time of hearing; and secondly, whether he should be
found as probably permanently unfit to remain on the roll. The recent decision
of the Court of Appeal in
Legal Services Commissioner v Tang
handed down after the hearing,
emphasises that that latter question needs to be addressed within a broader
context. That decision
cautions against the Tribunal considering the question of
‘probably permanently unfit’ as if it were a stand-alone test
divorced of the broader protective concerns of the Act.
principles governing the decision on sanction have been expounded in several
cases and the Commissioner identified the following:
Attorney-General of the
State of Queensland v Legal Services Commissioner & Anor; Legal Services
Commissioner v Shand
Legal Services Commissioner v
New South Wales Bar
Association v Cummins
Attorney-General v Bax
Legal Services Commissioner v
[136] In summary
those cases show the following:
(a) The characterisation of the conduct and the determination of sanction
involves a two-stage process. The matters relevant to the
characterisation of the conduct exclude those events that occur subsequent to
the alleged conduct. In second stage, the
determination of sanction, those
subsequent matters can be
(b) Disputed facts need to be decided on the balance of
probabilities.
The degree of
satisfaction required varies according to the consequences for the relevant
Australian legal practitioner.
We are conscious of the gravity of the consequences for the practitioner here.
(c) The remedies of strike off or suspension are not applied by way of
punishment but rather for the protection of the public and
profession’s standing.
(d) There is a deterrent element both personal and
Wrightway Legal
the Court observed on the significance of trust:
Many aspects of the administration of justice depend on the trust by the
judiciary and/or the public in the performance of professional
obligations by
professional people.
(f) The approach can of course be informed by the legislation governing the
regulation of the profession.
The main purposes set out in chapter 4 of the Act include ‘to promote and
enforce the professional standards, competence and
honesty of the legal
profession’, ‘to provide a redress for complaints about
lawyers’, and ‘to otherwise
protect members of the public from
unlawful operators’.
(g) Significantly in
McMurdo JA (with the agreement of Morrison JA
and Brown J) wrote:
The reference by Pincus JA in
to the protection of the
profession’s standing is important. The community needs to have
confidence that only fit and proper
persons are able to practise as lawyers and
if that standing, and thereby that confidence, is diminished, the effectiveness
legal profession, in the service of clients, the courts, and the public
is prejudiced. The Court’s Roll of practitioners is
an endorsement
of the fitness of those who are
[137] Before
turning to the relevant considerations pertinent here it is necessary to refer
to the guidance in
on the question of the ‘probably
permanently unfit’ issue. After referring to the judgment of McMurdo J in
, part of which we have quoted above, Bleby AJA (with whom Boddice
and Brown JJA agreed) wrote:
[29] It is in this context that McMurdo JA explained the role of an assessment
that a practitioner is ‘probably permanently
unfit’ to practise:
Consequently, the respondent’s disavowal of any intention to engage in
legal practice was not the end of the matter. If he
was not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice, all of the purposes which I have described
required that his name be
removed from the Roll, absent something which
indicated that he was likely to become a person who was fit to be a legal
practitioner.
In this way, the test of probable permanent unfitness is, as the
Attorney-General submits,
a way of identifying that the character of the
practitioner is so indelibly marked by the misconduct that he cannot be regarded
a fit and proper person to be upon the Roll
. (emphasis added)
[30] Understood in this way, the ‘probably permanently unfit’ test
is not a separate test to be imposed when considering
practitioner’s name should be removed from the roll. It is a matter that
informs the exercise of the discretion conferred
by s 456(2) to make various
orders directed towards protection of the public and maintenance of confidence
in the profession.
[31] To treat the ‘probably permanently unfit’ test as a separate
test risks encouraging a standalone assessment of various
factors personal to
the practitioner separately from the protective concerns of the Act.
And Bleby AJA concluded at [44]:
[44] ... I would regard the question of probable permanent unfitness as a
significant matter that informs the appropriate sanction
to be imposed in the
exercise of the discretion. It is to be determined with close regard to the
protective purposes of the legislation.
In many cases, having regard to those
the nature of the professional misconduct will itself be sufficient
to warrant a conclusion, absent some countervailing indicator,
in respect of
which an evidential onus necessarily falls on the practitioner,
practitioner is probably permanently unfit to practise. This will often be so in
cases of dishonesty that strike at the heart
of the protective purposes of the
Act and demonstrate a character fundamentally at odds with that required of a
legal practitioner.
(emphasis added)
Disciplinary history
Pennisi’s disciplinary history is not edifying. In 2002, he faced six
charges of professional misconduct, five of which
concerned trust account
matters and the sixth a failure to maintain reasonable standards of competence
and diligence. On each charge
he was found to have been guilty of professional
misconduct. He was fined $10,000, directed to complete the next trust accounts
and required to periodically report to the Queensland Law Society for
the following three years. He was suspended from practice for
a period of 12
months, but that suspension was not to become operative unless he defaulted in
the performance of terms of the orders.
He did not default.
[139] In 2007,
Mr Pennisi faced three charges arising from the operation of his trust account.
The breaches were seen as minor and
primarily the fault of others. A finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct was made. He was publicly reprimanded and
to pay a $1,500 fine.
[140] In 2017,
Mr Pennisi faced three charges: acting contrary to instructions, failing to act
with competence and diligence, and
failing to provide documents on request. The
Tribunal found that his conduct amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct,
was publicly reprimanded and ordered to pay a fine of $1,000.
[141] In 2023,
Mr Pennisi faced two charges, one of which was dismissed. The other involved
undue delay in advising executors of certain
matters and so delaying the
finalisation of an estate by six years. He was publicly reprimanded and ordered
to pay a fine of $5,000.
[142] In his
affidavit in the proceedings involving the Letter, Mr Pennisi swears that he had
been the respondent in three disciplinary
matters and received fines in each. He
overlooked one proceeding. He did recognise that he had made errors, and went on
to say that
the conduct was ‘quite different to this current
That is true so
far as the Letter issue is concerned, but nonetheless relevant in a more general
sense. However, some of these previous
proceedings are potentially very much
relevant to the trust account issue and we will look at those more closely.
[143] The six
charges in 2002 were determined by the Solicitors Complaints
In their reasons the
Tribunal referred to Mr Pennisi having been warned of similar conduct in 1995:
The offences, serious in themselves, must have been uncovered to the
practitioner’s knowledge by subsequent Law Society audits.
Having said
this, the fact remains that the practitioner has resumed a course of conduct
– that is transferring funds where
accounts have not been delivered to the
client and in some cases not raised – of which he was warned against in
A penalty imposed of $10,000 in 2002 was a very substantial penalty.
[144] Five years
later Mr Pennisi was again before the Tribunal, by then at the age of 56, and
found guilty of three further charges
‘arising from the operation of his
trust account’.
decision, de Jersey CJ (as he then was) stated that:
...it is the context of the previous finding of professional misconduct which in
this case would tip the scales in favour of a more
serious characterisation. It
is right to say, as submitted for the applicant, that having been found guilty
of professional misconduct
in respect of trust account breaches in 2002 the
respondent should have been more vigilant in guarding against the sort of
occurrences
involved here and that there has in a sense been a consistent
failure by the respondent to reach a reasonable standard of competence
[145] There are
two factors to bear in mind. These serious trust account charges of 2002
occurred almost 25 years ago and medical
evidence was proffered then that
explained his conduct. Both factors tend to lessen the weight of that very poor
conduct in determining
our decision in this proceeding.
Commissioner submits that these four prior disciplinary sanctions, and the
conduct the subject of this proceeding, demonstrate
that none of the
disciplinary orders which have been imposed have effectively protected the
public from further misconduct by Mr
Pennisi. The Commissioner references the
adverse findings against him, the heavy penalty, the repeated fines, the
reprimands, the
need for retraining on trust accounts, and reporting
periodically to the Queensland Law Society for a period has not prevented
offending over the decades.
[147] We do not
consider the trust account charges are of significance as evidencing of ongoing
misbehaviour involving trust account
matters. Nonetheless, the observations by
the Chief Justice quoted above are very much applicable here. As well, over
approximately
a 20-year period, Mr Pennisi faced the Tribunal on four occasions
involving 13 charges before the two under consideration here. There
force to the Commissioner’s submission in a more general sense. Such a
history cannot but impact on our assessment
of the character of the
practitioner, his attention to his responsibilities as a legal practitioner, and
the potential impact of
our decision here on his future behaviour. We are
conscious that the conduct currently in question, as Mr Pennisi argues, is
essentially
different in character to the earlier cases, and the claimed causes
behind the conduct are very different. However, these two applications
considerably more serious conduct and is a factor against the
practitioner.
Personal antecedents
his affidavit sworn 24 November 2023, Mr Pennisi sets out his antecedents and
personal particulars. He details difficulties
he had with financial matters with
a partner apparently in the 1970s, the nature of his practice since 1984, his
heavy involvement
in community affairs, his six-year period as President of the
North Brisbane Law Association, and his work as an honorary solicitor.
describes his marital problems and his relationship with his three daughters.
Mental health issues involving his second wife,
apparently around 2019, resulted
in the incurring of significant debts, a disputed family law property settlement
that resulted in
litigation not resolved until November 2023. He swore that
until that resolution he had ‘for decades ... been under financial
owing to these matrimonial difficulties...’. He was diagnosed with an
incurable blood cancer in June 2018, has undergone
a successful bone marrow
transplant, but his life expectancy is limited. He considers retiring in the
coming years.
[149] Mr Pennisi
is presently 75 years old, graduating in law in 1973, 52 years ago. He articled
for five years and was admitted as
a practitioner 51 years ago.
The trust account issue
turn then to the issue of sanction in respect of the trust account issue. The
Commissioner submits that the proper sanction
is to make an order recommending
that Mr Pennisi’s name be removed from the local roll.
[151] Mr Pennisi
submits that he be subjected to a public reprimand and that a pecuniary penalty
of $10,000 be imposed. His counsel
submits that Mr Pennisi is no longer a
partner of a law firm or has any authority to operate a trust account. Mr
Pennisi is willing
to undertake to cease to practise by 30 June 2027 and accept
the imposition of appropriate supervision conditions for the intervening
[152] We do not
accept those latter submissions. We proceed on the common submission that Mr
Pennisi believed that he was entitled
to disburse the monies as he did, such a
belief can only be explained by an ongoing level of incompetence and ignorance
that is unacceptable.
The misconduct in question shows a very serious level of
incompetence. See the analysis at [38] – [45] above.
[153] We are
entitled, and indeed required, to bring into account post conduct behaviour.
Practitioners usually point out rehabilitative
conduct after the misconduct
charged to give the Tribunal some confidence that some alternative to the
recommendation of removal
of the practitioner’s name from the roll will be
effective to protect the public and the standing of the profession. What has
transpired has been to the opposite effect. Here, what has occurred provides not
the slightest confidence that Mr Pennisi has learnt,
or can learn, from his
chronology set out above at [37] is to show that Mr Pennisi’s thinking and
understanding were not only in 2018 and
early 2019 when he determined to
disburse monies from trust but that he persisted in this thinking and
understanding after time for
reflection and the opportunity for close study of
the various judgments and orders. Such reflection and consideration was, of
required from the outset and before disbursing monies from the trust
account, but Mr Pennisi’s thinking continued despite the
judgment of Judge
Lapthorn in the contempt proceedings in 2022 and his Honour’s trenchant
criticism of the disbursements contrary
to the orders of the Court, after
receipt of discipline application from the Commissioner in November 2023
detailing his misconduct,
after receipt of her submissions in November 2024, and
when making his response in December 2024. He apparently held these views
two months or so ago.
[155] To persist
in the face of these matters on legal propositions that were completely
untenable provides strong ground for a finding
of Mr Pennisi’s
unsuitability.
Justice DG Thomas
Legal Services Commissioner v Jensen
The sanction of recommendation that the lawyer be removed from the
solicitor’s roll may be appropriate for cases of intransigent
defiance of
the Commissioner, repeated professional discourtesy, or repeated and reckless
assertions of indefensible legal
propositions.
The force of DG Thomas J’s decision is somewhat lessened given the
determination on appeal was that suspension for nine months
along with other
sanctions were appropriate.
However, the circumstances in
are not so compelling as here and
the practitioner’s professional background was very different than Mr
Pennisi’s and
justified a very different view of the permanency of his
fitness to remain in practice.
[156] It seems
Mr Pennisi could not see why he was criticised until he received advice from
others more familiar with their duties
as a trustee and more knowledgeable as to
the effect of such orders imposed by the Court. Counsel offered no submissions
on how this
continued understanding up and until the eve of the hearing could be
consistent with Mr Pennisi’s fitness to remain on the
[157] As well we
must bring into account his conduct regarding the Letter issue. Mr Pennisi has
admittedly been guilty of professional
misconduct again. And there are some
common features. In both cases the effect of his conduct was to bring about a
result quite contrary
to the intended effect of orders made involving or against
his client. In each case he maintained initially that he had acted properly.
demonstrated no significant insight into the gravity of his misconduct in either
case. And he seemed unconcerned with the effect
of his actions on the person
affected by his misdeeds in each case, or at least until advised by solicitors
retained to protect his
[158] We have
detailed his personal antecedents. There is nothing in his personal life that
could justify or explain his misconduct.
We are aware that Mr Pennisi was
undergoing chemotherapy in November 2018, and the first of the payments was on 7
December 2018.
Mr Pennisi does not assert that his understanding of his
decisions was affected. To the contrary Mr Pennisi made two further payments
from the trust account months later and maintained that his conduct was
appropriate years later. As well, his disciplinary history
does not inspire
confidence.
[159] While not
advanced by either party we have considered and rejected the sanction of a
suspension for a period. In
A-G & Minister for Justice Qld v
in dismissing an
Attorney-General appeal seeking that the practitioner be struck off the roll
rather than be suspended as the Tribunal
had determined, McMurdo P (Williams JA
and Mackenzie J agreeing), held the Tribunal was entitled to conclude in all the
circumstances
that suspension was the appropriate penalty. Her Honour
noted that:
Suspension from practice rather than striking from the Roll of Solicitors is an
appropriate order in cases of unprofessional conduct
where a legal
practitioner’s behaviour has fallen below the high standards expected of
such a practitioner but not in such
a way as to indicate that the practitioner
is lacking the necessary attributes of someone entrusted with the important
responsibilities
practitioner.
[160] In our
view, Mr Pennisi lacks the necessary attributes.
[161] Mr Pennisi
submits that the Tribunal should impose a regime of supervision by his partner,
Mr Ibtassam Zia, or some other practitioner
of more experience. Mr Zia was
admitted in 2018. One works out of the city office, the other out of a Chermside
office. Given that
he and Mr Pennisi were in partnership since November 2019, it
is self-evident that Mr Zia has had little influence, presumably, on
Pennisi’s understanding of his patent misconduct in respect of either
issue until in receipt of external advice. In any
case, it would be difficult to
think of a less suitable person than Mr Zia to supervise given that he is very
much the junior partner,
working in a separate office, and with only several
years of experience. But our rejection is not based on that plain unsuitability
or the suitability of any practitioner taking on that role.
[162] Mr Pennisi
has demonstrated an inability to understand his ethical duties or the effect of
the Court orders. At age 75 and after
50 years of practise he cannot learn now.
It would seriously mislead the public to leave his name on the roll and hence to
his fitness to practise.
consider that the only course is to recommend his removal from the roll.
The Letter issue
Mr Pennisi’s affidavit
far as he endeavours to explain his conduct Mr Pennisi asserts in his affidavit
of 24 November 2023:
(a) he sincerely apologised for the stress and any other negative emotions the
aggrieved experienced as a result of the
(b) he found the client to be genuine and
convincing,
‘intense, but
charming and
charismatic’;
(c) his failure to require payment of funds in trust in advance of the work was
an error as it ‘impacted [his] professional
output in relation to the
contents of the
(d) he understood the client knew the aggrieved well and the client informed him
that ‘she would be receptive to the [L]etter
and would not find it
offensive’ and in doing so he was ‘too
(e) that the comment that he expressly identified that he regretted including
was inserted as he believed that, absent the inclusion,
he would not be paid for
his work over two days;
(f) the story invoked sympathy, he ‘took the impression he was genuinely
concerned for his relationship (with [the aggrieved]
and his child)’ and
the client’s concern about not being able to see his daughter resonated
because there was a time
in his life when he was not permitted to see one of his
[165] In his
affidavit Mr Pennisi acknowledged the Letter was ‘long, repetitive and
emotional’, was entirely inappropriate
to send, and that an aggravating
feature was that the aggrieved was ‘the aggrieved in domestic violence
proceedings’.
[166] Counsel
submits that the explanation for Mr Pennisi’s conduct is that he was
overwhelmed by the financial stress that
he was under at the time he sent the
Letter. His affidavit of 24 November 2023 reads:
I can see that at the time of my dealings with [the client], I was very
overwhelmed and under significant financial pressure. I was
in the midst of
stressful personal litigation, and I had significant financial liabilities.
I now recognise that my financial stressors had an impact on how I conducted
myself as a legal practitioner in this matter. I believe
that, if at the
relevant time I was in my current financial position, my decision to send the
[L]etter in the form it was received
by [the aggrieved] may well have been quite
[167] There is
no information provided there of any details, but in his later affidavit of 2
July 2025 Mr Pennisi says that: in August
2019 he and his first wife had
accumulated significant liabilities including in excess of $200,000 of unsecured
and in his dealings with
his second wife he took on a greater share of the debt with a greater share of
the assets, but a breakdown
in their relationships took place and resulted in
litigation.
Resolution of the
litigation in November 2023 with a successful outcome resulted in a great sense
of relief for the first time in
Mr Pennisi’s submissions
[168] Counsel
(a) Mr Pennisi acknowledges the seriousness of the conduct;
(b) Mr Pennisi expressed his remorse and regret;
(c) it is an isolated incident;
(d) it occurred in circumstances where Mr Pennisi trusted the client and found
him charismatic, charming, and persuasive;
(e) the gravity of the conditions proffered demonstrates Mr Pennisi’s
insight and remorse and his desire to demonstrate putting
in place mechanisms so
as not to reoffend;
(f) Mr Pennisi has already put in place the protective measure of retiring from
the partnership; and
(g) the proposed sanction will provide sufficient protection to the public.
[169] Counsel
submits that the appropriate sanction is that Mr Pennisi:
(a) be publicly reprimanded;
(b) pay a pecuniary penalty of $10,000;
(c) undertake the training course Family Violence Foundations or the like and
upon completion provide evidence of completion to the
Commissioner;
(d) practise with appropriate supervision until retirement;
(e) cease practising by 30 June 2027 and not apply for any further practising
certificate which would take effect from that time;
(f) pay the Commissioner’s costs.
The Commissioner’s submissions
Commissioner submits that the proper sanction is to make an order recommending
that Mr Pennisi’s name be removed from
the local roll.
[171] There are
no cases involving similar factual circumstances in reported QCAT decisions
which may serve as a comparative.
[172] Mr Pennisi
demonstrated limited insight into the impact on the aggrieved nor how the
community more broadly would consider his
behaviour. His response to the
complaint which we have referred above – and presumably before he received
independent advice
– attempted to minimise the severity of the conduct.
His affidavit demonstrates no real appreciation of the damage that domestic
violence can cause.
[173] Mr Pennisi
had limited input into the Letter. Various aspects point strongly to the true
author to be the client – for
example the ‘research’ relating
to child abuse in step-relationships and the matters the aggrieved assert
reflect the
client’s typical style of writing. Nonetheless, the
Commissioner submits that there are indications through the Letter of careful
deliberation by Mr Pennisi. The Commissioner relies on such statements
... It is my own decision as a lawyer to write and send this letter to you.
[I have] read and seen the Protection Order ... Even with the no contact
condition. I have mentioned to [the client] that there is
an exemption for a
I have told [the client] under the Act that I am lawfully permitted to also
correspond with you ...
With my lengthy and professional experience, I believe that [the client] loves
you and [the child]. His unconditional and endless
love for you and your
daughter is admirable and rare in today’s
[174] The claim
in the Letter that his contact was lawfully permitted, as he was a lawyer and so
exempted from the no contact condition,
was an ‘especially aggravating
feature to the conduct, as it discloses an absence of good faith in his dealings
with [the aggrieved]
when one considers his letter to [the client] on the same
day. The Respondent knew that the contact likely fell outside of what was
acceptable contact by a legal practitioner in the circumstances. He was
complicit in acting contrary to the protective nature of
the order and cynically
held out to [the aggrieved] that his contact was
[175] Finally,
the Commissioner submits that Mr Pennisi’s culpability was not in any way
mitigated by the matters raised in
his affidavit of 24 November 2023.
the Commissioner contends Mr Pennisi’s conduct here is not really
comparable to the conduct that is the subject of
any decisions that have gone
before. There have been many decisions concerning correspondence directed at
others that amounted to
professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Cases include
Legal Services Commissioner v
Services Commissioner v
Services Commissioner v
Services Commissioner v SYG
is a more serious case but still does not approach the circumstances here.
There the practitioner sent seven letters to various persons,
including senior
government officials. Those letters included emotional language, unsubstantiated
personal opinion, went beyond legitimate
advocacy, and were primarily designed
to embarrass or frustrate other persons. The letters, as is here, included lack
of judgment
in the allegations made and the unprofessional language and tone
used. The practitioner’s conduct was found to constitute professional
misconduct.
[177] Legal
Services Commissioner v Kirin
involved similar correspondence but in the domestic violence proceedings and
directed to the solicitor acting for the client, not
to the client herself.
Legal Services Commissioner v
too involved
correspondence in the domestic violence proceedings. The respondent is alleged
to have failed to maintain reasonable
standards of competence and diligence by
disclosing material to 20 recipients, contrary to s 159 of the DFVP Act and
Family Law Act
(Cth). There were significant
mitigating circumstances not present here. Both cases resulted in a finding of
unsatisfactory professional
distinguishing feature here is that the Letter was sent despite the plain terms
of a Court order prohibiting communication
of this type to this person.
[179] As to Mr
Pennisi’s explanation for his behaviour we have difficulty accepting any
truth to it. Mr Pennisi’s claim
to have found the client
‘charismatic, charming, and persuasive’ sits very uncomfortably with
his actions. So does his
claim that his good judgment was overcome by financial
stress, very little of which was in fact disclosed. While so impressed by
charm of the client, and so overcome by financial stress, Mr Pennisi handed to
the client a letter demanding an indemnity on
the same day as the sending of the
Letter, and we repeat, in these terms:
I confirm that the (sic) your letter to [the ex-wife] may amount to a breach of
the Domestic Violence Order against you but you nonetheless
request me to
forward same to her and you indemnify me and take full responsibility for same.
[180] Nor does
that claim for an indemnity sits well with Mr Pennisi’s claim that he
believed that [the aggrieved] ‘would
be receptive to the letter and would
not find it offensive’. How any practitioner could think such a thing is
hard to imagine,
but if so, why be worried about any ramifications and require
an indemnity?
received no evidence from Mr Pennisi, nor any submission, endeavouring to
explain away the evident inference that the sending
of the Letter was a cynical
exercise in an abuse of a solicitor’s position. He discloses no
instruction he received that explained
his understanding of why the protection
order was in place and why he should feel free to go against it so flagrantly.
What arguments
that are said to have been persuasive are not disclosed. The
circumstances summarised at [97] above are all consistent with that
this was just such an exercise.
[182] Whether Mr
Pennisi authored the Letter as he claimed to the Commissioner initially, or
merely added his letterhead and signature
to the Letter from the draft supplied
by the client (as the aggrieved seem to have suspected), or somewhere between,
we cannot determine.
Mr Pennisi has chosen to reveal very little of what
transpired. The probabilities seem to indicate that Mr Pennisi contributed
to the contents. In addition to the suspicions of the aggrieved, she
being all too familiar with the client’s literacy, or
more accurately lack
of it, we observe that the following are consistent with that view:
(a) in his letter demanding indemnity, Mr Pennisi referred to the Letter as
‘your letter’ indicating it was the client’s
(b) in the same sentence as ‘your letter’, Mr Pennisi writes
‘you ... request me to forward
to her’ (emphasis added),
that is, his task was to forward that same letter provided by the client; and
(c) Mr Pennisi’s remark in his affidavit of 24 November 2023 of ‘my
decision to send the
letter in the form it was received
aggrieved] may well have been quite different’ (emphasis added) had he
been in a different financial position, suggesting
a form determined by the
[183] None of
our observations are conclusive. Whether author or merely forwarder, Mr Pennisi
is responsible for both the contents
of the Letter and for sending it to the
aggrieved. At any point along that spectrum, Mr Pennisi’s conduct was
dishonourable
and disgraceful. He has brought shame on the profession.
[184] Incidentally,
Mr Pennisi’s remark mentioned immediately above in [181(c)], and
previously at [97], demonstrates that he
yet fails to understand his position.
He had no right to send a letter on behalf of the client to the aggrieved unless
in the course of the proceedings involving the protection order,
typically to advise of an intention to seek a variation of the order,
communicated through ‘an agreed communication platform namely
“Talking Parents’” on any permitted
subject as limited in the
prohibition order. Mr Pennisi disclaimed holding any instruction to seek to vary
the prohibition order
and he did not so communicate through the agreed platform,
nor did he avoid any prohibited
[185] We agree
with the Commissioner’s submission that Mr Pennisi’s culpability was
not in any way mitigated by the matters
raised in his affidavit. His letter
demanding indemnity to the client and his initial response to the complaint to
the Commissioner
causes us to treat with some scepticism the impact of the
matters referred to in his affidavits. It is trite to observe that most
community, and in our profession, cope with marital problems, financial
pressures and ill health, yet behave ethically and
competently, behaviour that
should be second nature to a member of an honourable profession.
[186] We have
mentioned above at [157] the common features of this case and that involving the
trust account issue.
[187] Counsel
submits that the various measures Mr Pennisi has put in place to restrict his
ability to practise independently, set
out in his affidavit of 15 July 2025,
provide ample protection for the public particularly as Mr Pennisi proposes to
retire on or
before 30 June 2027. As the decision in
demonstrates
where the practitioner had no intention of again
practising, a willingness to restrict one’s practice as Mr Pennisi has
does not address the wider and important factors of protection and
general deterrence.
conduct in respect of this charge marks Mr Pennisi as one failing to have the
personal integrity necessary to discharge
the duties of a legal practitioner.
To permit his name to remain on the roll would be to endorse him as a fit person
to be on the
roll. That would mislead the public.
[189] General as
well as personal deterrence is also relevant. We share the aggrieved’s
astonishment that an experienced practitioner
would write such a letter. But we
know that at least two other practitioners have sent such letters. Whether they
were charmed by
a charismatic client, as Mr Pennisi’s counsel submits,
into grossly unethical conduct, or by more prosaic influences we cannot
either case, the public are entitled to protection more generally from
practitioners so minded.
recommend that his name be removed from the local roll.
Pennisi does not resist an order for costs and there is no basis not to make an
order against him.
summary, we find that Mr Pennisi’s engaged in professional misconduct on
each charge. We consider him not to be a fit
and proper person at the time of
the hearing, and that the probability is that he is permanently unfit to
[193] The orders
(a) we recommend that the Mr Pennisi’s name be removed from the local
(b) Mr Pennisi pay the applicant’s costs of and incidental to each
discipline application, such costs to be agreed or assessed
on the standard
basis in the manner in which costs would be assessed if the matter were in the
Supreme Court of Queensland.
[2018] QCAT 170
Hearing Book filed 10 December
2025 in the matter of OCR277-23, vol 1, 72 [3] (‘HB –
OCR277-23’).
HB – OCR277-23, vol 1,
HB – OCR277-23, vol 1,
73 [4]-[5].
HB – OCR277-23, vol 1,
HB – OCR277-23, vol 1,
HB – OCR277-23, vol 1,
44-45 [1], [7], [9] (emphasis added).
HB – OCR277-23, vol 1,
HB – OCR277-23, vol 1,
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 128 [9], [11].
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 26 [1.14(b)].
HB – OCR277-23 vol 1,
120-21 (emphasis in original).
NonPub Over Names [2022]
FedCFamC2F 10, [19], [27], [29] (emphasis added).
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 26 [1.14(b)].
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 135-36 [1]-[8].
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 8-9 [4], [9].
HB – OCR277-23, vol
HB – OCR277-23, vol
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 8-9 [7].
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 9 [8], [10].
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 9 [11]-[13].
HB – OCR277-23, vol
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 105 [11]-[14].
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 104, [9].
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 105 9 [8].
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 5, [23]-[24] (citations omitted).
Vincent Pennisi,
‘Affidavit of Vincent Pennisi sworn 2 July 2025’, Statement in
Legal Services Commissioner v Pennisi,
OCR277-23, 2 July 2025,
Vincent Pennisi,
‘Respondent’s Supplementary Outline of Submissions: Characterisation
of the Conduct’, Submission
Legal Services Commissioner v Pennisi,
OCR277-23, 2 July 2025, [18](a) (‘Respondent’s Supplementary
Submissions’).
HB – OCR277-23, vol
Transcript of Proceedings,
Legal Services Commissioner v Pennisi
(Queensland Civil Administrative
Tribunal, OCR191-23 and OCR277-23, Judicial Member McMeekin KC, 17 July 2025),
1-49/29 (A Psaltis).
Legal Profession Act
(‘the Act’).
(1990) 1 Qd R 498
[2016] QCAT 209
Vincent Pennisi,
‘Respondent’s Supplementary Outline of Submissions’,
Submission in
Legal Services Commissioner v Pennisi
, OCR277-23, 2 July
2025, [18] (‘Respondent’s Supplementary Outline of
Submissions’).
Respondent’s
Supplementary Outline of Submissions, [19].
[2020] QCAT 182
Kurschinsky
[2020] QCAT 326.
[2016] QCAT 4.
Legal Services
Commissioner v Bussa
[2011] QCAT 388
Kurschinsky
[37]-[39] (emphasis added).
Kurschinsky
(citation omitted).
Vincent Pennisi,
‘Respondent’s Outline of Submissions in Response to the
Commissioner’s Supplementary Submissions’,
Submission in
Services Commissioner v Pennisi,
OCR277-23, 15 July 2025, [22](a)
(‘Respondent’s Supplementary Submissions in Response’)
(emphasis in original).
HB – OCR277-23, vol
1, 6 [25] (emphasis in original; citation omitted).
Hearing Book filed 10
December 2025 in the matter of OCR191-23, vol 1, 25 [10] (‘HB –
OCR191-23’).
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 25 [1.5], [1.7]-[1.8].
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 25 [1.2].
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 2012
(‘DFVP Act’).
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 207-8 [79]-[83] (emphasis in original).
HB – OCR191-23, vol
HB – OCR191-23, vol
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 29, 214.
HB – OCR191-23, vol
HB – OCR191-23, vol
HB – OCR191-23, vol
HB – OCR191-23, vol
HB – OCR191-23, vol
HB – OCR191-23, vol
[2008] QCA 301
[2009] 1 Qd R 149
[72]-[74] (‘
[2024] QCAT 97
[97]-[104].
HB – OCR191-23, vol
HB – OCR191-23, vol
[2025] QCA 206
[2018] QCA 66
[2023] QCAT 479
[2001] NSWCA 284.
[1998] QCA 89
[1999] 2 Qd R
[2015] QCAT 174
Wrightway Legal
Legal Profession Act
Legal Profession Act
Wrightway Legal
Wrightway Legal,
HB – OCR191-23, vol
In the Matter of Vincent
In the Matter of Vincent
[SCT] 84, 4.
Legal Practice Tribunal
[2007] LPT 1.
Legal Practice Tribunal
[2007] LPT 1, 5-6.
HB – OCR191-23, vol
Legal Services
Commissioner v Jensen
[2017] QCAT 148.
[2017] QCAT 148
Jensen v Legal Services
Commissioner
[2017] QCA 189.
[2002] QCA 297.
[2002] QCA 297
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 207 [70], 208 [86].
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 207 [77].
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 208 [87].
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 207 [78].
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 207 [82].
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 208 [84].
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 208 [88].
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 208 [86].
HB – OCR191-23, vol
Vincent Pennisi, Affidavit,
Affidavit in
Legal Services Commissioner v Pennisi,
OCR277-23, 2 July
2025, [67] (‘Affidavit of Mr Pennisi sworn 2 July 2025’).
Affidavit of Mr Pennisi
sworn 2 July 2025, [68], [71].
Affidavit of Mr Pennisi
sworn 2 July 2025, [76]-[77].
HB – OCR191-23,
vol 1, 15-6.
HB – OCR191-23, vol
1, 17, [47].
HB – OCR191-23,
vol 1, 18, [49].
[2008] LPT 13.
[2011] QCAT 209.
[2012] QCAT 583.
[2023] QCAT 401.
[2024] QCAT 489.
[2023] QCAT 291.
See Legal Service
Commissioner v Pennisi
[2024] QCAT 97)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (718 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter