URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2018/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:47:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LGF, Re [2018] QMHC 9 (18 October 2018)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of LGF
[2018] QMHC 9
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
18 October 2018
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
19 October 2017; 11 December 2017; 3 April 2018; 28 June 2018; 10 August
2018, and 10 September 2018.
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr ASB Davison and
Dr RE Phillipson
DETERMINATION:
1. In relation to the charge of stealing on 24 November 2014
the defendant was not of unsound mind.
2. In relation to the charge of murder on 2 January 2015 the
defendant was not of unsound mind.
3. In relation to the charge of murder on 2 January 2015 the
defendant was of diminished responsibility.
4. The defendant is fit for trial.
5. The charge of stealing on 24 November 2014 and the charge
of manslaughter on 2 January 2015 should proceed according to law.
K Prskalo for the defendant
J Tate for the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist
MB Lehane for the
Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the defendant
Crown Law for the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Qld)
defendant is charged with the murder of her mother, Ruth Agnes Dodd, on 2
January 2015. She is also charged with stealing
on 24 November 2014. The
evidence does not establish any defence to the stealing charge. The remainder
of this judgment deals with
the murder charge. It is not contended by any
party, nor does the evidence establish, that LGF was of unsound mind at the time
the killing. On the evidence before this Court she was of diminished
responsibility at the time of the killing.
psychiatrists reported to the Court. Dr Voita made a report pursuant to s 238
Mental Health Act 2000
dated 18 June
Dr Grant made a report
pursuant to s 422 of the Act dated 22 January
and Dr Heffernan made a report
pursuant to s 422 of the Act on 22 June
[3] The autopsy
report shows that the deceased died from a stab wound to her left neck which
severed her carotid artery. She had
a bruise on the right side of her face, and
an irregular bruised area measuring 15 x 12 x 7 centimetres on the left side of
There were also bruises on the deceased lady’s forehead.
attending the scene found a black handled knife located next to Mrs Ruth
Dodd’s body, with bloody footprints (the
defendant’s) leading to the
bathroom. There was a quantity of the defendant’s hair found in the
deceased lady’s
[5] Mrs Ruth
Agnes Dodd was 71 years old at the time she was killed. Her daughter, the
defendant, was 36 years old. The defendant
was one of five children and
the family was troubled and unhappy. The defendant had a history of alcohol and
drug use. She ran
away from home aged 14 and was then maintained in a sexual
relationship by a man aged 40 to whom she had two children. Aged 30,
defendant began a relationship with a man named Dennis. The relationship lasted
three years. The defendant and Dennis used
drugs together. At age 34 the
defendant began a relationship with a man named Vern. The relationship with
Vern seems to have been
more sexual than domestic. They both used drugs.
Notwithstanding her relationship with Vern, apparently Dennis continued to
the defendant. She was living with Dennis up until he was jailed in
October 2014.
defendant had an antagonistic relationship with her mother for most of her life.
Mrs Ruth Dodd very much disliked Vern. The
defendant’s relationship
with him was a source of conflict in which all three participated. Once Dennis
was jailed in October
2014, the defendant was forced to live rough, or to stay
either with Vern or her mother. The defendant’s possessions were
mother’s place, but the defendant disliked staying there. Sometimes she
slept in a park and other times she stayed
in a motel. Vern lived with his
brother and the defendant was not welcomed (at least) by Vern’s brother.
[7] At the time
of the killing the defendant was using drugs on a daily, or almost daily, basis,
as she had been for years. She was
also, in the unanimous opinion of the
psychiatrists reporting to the Court, psychotic, independently of the
intoxicating effects
of this drug use. In addition, she has Borderline
Personality Disorder. Drugs, psychotic illness, the defendant’s
dysfunctional
personality, and the longstanding antagonism between the defendant
and her mother all played a role in producing the state of mind
in which the
defendant killed her mother.
[8] I canvassed
the law as to diminished responsibility in some detail in the matter of
and will not
repeat what I said there. The only evidence is that the defendant suffered from
schizophrenia at the time of the killing.
Schizophrenia is an abnormality of
mind within the definition of s 304A of the
Criminal Code.
satisfied that on the evidence before the Court, ignoring the effect of
intoxication, that abnormality of mind significantly
impaired the
defendant’s capacity to control herself at the time of the killing. In
those circumstances, the partial defence
of diminished responsibility is
established.
[9] The Mental
Health Court has no function to determine factual disputes of any significance
– s 268 of the Act. Further,
if factual matters before this Court,
material to the opinions of the reporting psychiatrists, are in dispute, this
Court cannot
determine the reference – s 269 of the Act
reference involves far many more factual uncertainties and contradictions than a
typical matter in the Court. I have had to
consider both s 268 and s 269.
I am convinced that there is no s 268 dispute. Further, I am satisfied that
there is a sufficiently
clear factual basis to support the psychiatric opinion
of Doctors Grant and Heffernan. The facts are sufficiently clear to allow
proper basis to prefer those opinions to that of Dr Voita.
[10] I will now
explain my reasons for the conclusions I have reached. In this judgment,
transcript references are to the hearing
on 19 October 2017 unless otherwise
Defendant’s Arrival at her Mother’s Home on 1
January 2015
deceased lady lived in a two-storey home. Upstairs were three bedrooms and a
living area. The living area was furnished
in the main as a lounge-room.
Between it and the kitchen proper was a wooden table used as a desk. The
defendant slept in a bedroom
downstairs. There were internal stairs.
defendant bought her illicit drugs from drug dealers who were husband and wife.
A statement police took from the female
drug dealer was to the effect that at
claiming to have been
bashed. She says that the defendant then slept on her
couch until at least midday. The defendant then left the house somewhere
between 3.30 and 4.00 pm. Someone picked her up, but the witness did not know
who. Unfortunately the statements taken from the
drug dealers do not say when,
during this time, the defendant took drugs.
[13] The version
of events the defendant gave to Dr Voita was that she was bashed around 1.00 am
on 1 January 2015. She then went
to the home of her drug dealers. She stayed
there until 3.00 or 4.00 pm, when Vern picked her up, and they went for a drive
morphine. Then they had an argument and he pushed her out of his car
close to her mother’s house at 4.00 pm. She went into
her mother’s
house and injected morphine there at about 4.30 pm. She went to sleep at about
6.00 pm. She told Dr Voita about
a police attendance (see below).
Voita’s report is not clear about the defendant’s drug use prior to
the offending. Her oral evidence was that
the defendant said she used
amphetamine on the afternoon before the killing, but then she seemed to
Further, her written
report was that the defendant injected morphine on the morning of the killing,
although it is not clear whether
this was before or after the
A history of these two
occasions of drug use was not obtained by anyone else. On the other hand, Dr
Voita was the only reporting
psychiatrist who did not obtain a history of
amphetamine use at 5.00 or 6.00 am on 1 January 2015.
morphine use on 2 January, Dr Voita’s report says that the defendant
“injected IV morphine 100 milligrams on
the morning of her arrest, and 120
milligrams just before her arrest.” It seems unlikely that she injected
morphine just before
her arrest at about 6.00 pm because at that stage she
was wandering about in the streets, having left her drug dealers’ house
is, on the evidence in this case, a very large
amount of morphine, particularly
as she had taken 100 or 120 milligrams the evening before, which was still
having an effect on her.
As well, Dr Voita records that LGF told her that the
drug dealer gave her morphine and ice when she visited after the killing,
between 1.30 and 2.30 pm on 2
This does not fit with
what Dr Voita records earlier.
[16] In her
conclusion at p 19 of her report Dr Voita says that LGF was intoxicated with
morphine and amphetamine at the time of the
killing. While her report is to the
effect that LGF had used morphine at 4.30 pm on the afternoon before the killing
and perhaps
(unclearly) the next morning before the killing, she gives no basis
to assume intoxication with amphetamine at the time of the killing
except for a
general history she obtained from LGF that she used amphetamine on a daily
Even this is not clear
because Dr Voita says, at another part of her report, that the defendant was
using amphetamine only three
[17] Dr Voita
was not able to clarify these matters in her oral
My view at the time
she was giving evidence was that Dr Voita had no recollection of what LGF
told her and had become confused about
the matter. In the circumstances, I am
not prepared to accept Dr Voita’s version of drug use even as a competing
factual version
to that which the defendant gave to Drs Grant and Heffernan.
The information which she collected is unclear and, in my view, unreliable.
defendant told Dr Heffernan that she went to the residence of some drug
associates and bought amphetamine on the evening
of 31 December 2014. She was
waiting for Vern to pick her up and went to get cigarettes from a service
station. She was bashed
on the way back. Then she went to a friend’s
house (it is unclear whether this is a reference to the drug dealer) and
one point of amphetamine. She said she did not sleep and that she
injected ice again around 5.00 am on 1 January 2015. She stayed
associates (again, perhaps the dealers) for the rest of the day, and at about
5.00 pm in the afternoon, Vern collected
her. They were driving; they
argued; he pushed her out of the car near her mother’s house.
defendant did not want to go to her mother’s house, but she had nowhere
else to go. She felt high on amphetamine when
she arrived there. She injected
herself with 100 mg of morphine at about 5.00 pm at her mother’s house
that afternoon. Then
she felt “good”. Then there was an attendance
at the house by police (see below). Then she fell asleep at about 7.00
This was the first time she had slept for three days.
defendant told Dr Grant that she was bashed at about midnight on 31 December
2014 as she was walking to a service station.
At about 6.00 am on New
Year’s Day she visited her drug dealer, bought amphetamine, and took it
intravenously. After that
she was picked up by Vern. They had a fight in the
car. He kicked her out of the car while it was still moving near her
house. The defendant did not want to stay with her mother but
she had nowhere else to go. She injected herself with 100 mg of morphine
January 2015 Mrs Ruth Dodd rang police to complain that Vern had rung her and
threatened to slit her throat. Two police
officers attended
Mrs Dodd’s house at approximately 6.30 pm on 1 January
The defendant said to Drs
Grant and Heffernan that she called out to police from the house that her mother
was lying about the allegations.
One officer saw the defendant on an upstairs
veranda but reported that she did not say anything. He noted she appeared to be
to her mother as the police left, but did not hear what was said. The
other officer said she could hear a female voice inside the
house; the voice was
talking normally. Mrs Ruth Dodd said to police that her daughter had been
“curled up in a ball and she
didn’t know what was wrong with
her” earlier in the evening. However, she said her daughter was fine now
and was talking
on the phone.
[22] The police
who attended this call seem to have spent some time speaking to Mrs Ruth
Dodd. They both found her hard to understand.
She showed them a two page
letter which she had written to the defendant recently. It was a series of
complaints. The police statements
indicate that the police attendance was
careful and conscientious and it is difficult to think that they would have
missed the defendant
calling out to them if that had occurred.
[23] In amongst
the police crime scene photographs is a photograph of a letter from Ruth Dodd to
the defendant dated 30 December 2014.
It was found on a cabinet in the
defendant’s bedroom. It might be the letter that Mrs Dodd showed police
when they attended.
The content is similar to that which the female officer
recorded in her statement. Unfortunately only the first page of it was
photographed. It reads:
“30-12-2014. pm.
[LGF]. I said I’d give you the day take you where you needed to go. I
have a rite to lock my house securely.
During the day I searched under every pot plant NO key found & now Vern
knows our key arrangement.
You didn’t say you would be home late I waited up until after 10
You awoke me at 10/40 pm. By the time I got the wood out of the track you
running off with accusations & imaginations & beliving what you
You left home at 13 because you couldn’t keep your room tidy and you
still can’t abide by clean living you chose to go
using one parent against
the other by making up stories about the other parent to get your way. You are
still that lazy Rebel. Unreliable.”
(my single underlining)
[24] Mrs Ruth
Dodd kept a diary. Police photographs show an open diary on the table used as a
desk. It records the following at
1 January 2015:
“had a very
I received a ph call from Vern said he’s coming over to cut my throat
you dog. I phoned 000. Then I went down to check the
wood in the track
[security in the sliding door] & found [LGF] lying on the floor between the
wall and the mattress. I thought
she was dead but on checking she began crying
I just want to be left alone I don’t want to talk to anyone. She tried
convince the police I made the story up. [LGF] spent the night talking to
herself non stop & picking what she claims were worms
[25] At the
space for 2 January 2015 was the following entry:
“early AM 6.
A light shower of rain. I found a nectarine seed on floor in front of fridge
& a few cherry trees [sic] in
sink. So at least [LGF] did eat something but
she waited until I went to bed. A wet orange spotted pair of undies were left on
Table – [LGF] took my Filliting knife down to her room. At
9.43 AM I went down & asked if she had a knife of mine in her
She said yes she’d bring it up soon. Then she accused me of taking her
phone. She claimed I always take it. I have
NO interest in her phone &
have never taken it.”
[26] Dr Voita
interviewed Vern on 13 March 2015. He told Dr Voita that after arguing
with the defendant on New Year’s Eve,
he spent some time with the
defendant in the afternoon of New Year’s Day. They looked for her
necklace, and found it, at the
spot she said she had been bashed the night
before. Vern said that he dropped the defendant at her mother’s at about
or 5.00 pm and admitted that he pushed her out of the car because she
did not want to go. He admitted that he rang the deceased
lady on her landline
at some point after that. He said he rang the mother’s landline because
the defendant did not answer
her mobile. He said that at about 6.30 pm the
defendant rang him on the landline and told him that her mother had locked her
the house and that the police were there, as her mother had told the police
that he (Vern) had threatened to cut their throats.
The Morning
of 2 January 2015
defendant told all three reporting doctors that she woke up at about midnight
and went to the kitchen to get a knife to cut
some passionfruit which she wanted
to eat with yoghurt. Each of the reporters either expressly states, or implies,
that the defendant
took the knife downstairs to her bedroom. She told Dr Voita
that the knife in question was a “filleting and pairing [sic]
knife”. The police photos of the defendant’s bedroom show a yoghurt
container and some cut passionfruit. The defendant
told the psychiatrists that
she discovered her phone was missing. She thought her mother had taken it. She
told Dr Heffernan that
she felt angry and trapped because without her phone
she could not ring Vern to come and pick her up.
defendant told all three reporting doctors that on the morning of 2 January, on
finding that Mrs Ruth Dodd was visiting one
of her neighbours, she assumed that
she was complaining about her. She called out to the neighbour that she should
not take any
notice of what her mother said. The defendant told Dr Voita and Dr
Heffernan that she called out from the house. She told Dr Voita
her mother had
locked her in the house, as was her mother’s habit. She told Dr Grant
that after she killed her mother she
had to search for the house keys to let
herself out of the house.
neighbour said she was talking to the deceased that morning at about 10.10 am.
Mrs Dodd came to visit, and the neighbour
asked if she was okay because she
looked a bit pale. Mrs Dodd said she had just had a threatening phone call from
the defendant’s
boyfriend – he had said he was going to stab her to
death. The neighbour said the defendant was in the backyard and yelled
mother and the neighbour over the fence while standing on a garden bed. The
defendant then walked off, mumbling to herself.
The police material shows that
the neighbour was definite about the defendant being in the backyard, not locked
in the house at
the time she
neighbour said that the deceased lady told her that her filleting knife was
missing after the defendant arrived the previous
night, and that the defendant
had told her (on enquiry) that she had it downstairs.
[31] About an
hour later (11.00 am) the neighbour heard yelling and screaming. Another
witness heard an argument between two women
at about 10.25 am at the
deceased’s address. She could identify the deceased’s voice yelling
and screaming and swearing,
very angry. She thought the other participant was
trying to calm the situation.
The Killing
defendant’s account to Dr Voita of the events immediately prior to the
killing was as follows. She said her mother
went to the next-door
neighbour’s house and was talking to her. She said she was locked in the
house by her mother as she
had been on a number of occasions. She said she
yelled out to the neighbour not to trust her mother. Dr Voita’s report
“[LGF] stated she was in the kitchen and took the knife
upstairs to her bedroom
as she wanted it to cut a mango. She
said it was a filleting and pairing [sic] knife.
She that [sic] she then went upstairs again
and looked in her
mother’s room upstairs and saw a camera in her [mother’s] room,
which her mother had accused Vern of
stealing. She stated that her mother came
up the stairs and said, ‘I am trying to help you and I have called the
She stated that she initially grabbed her mother by the neck and
was shaking her. She then grabbed the knife which, was on the
stated that she said to her mother ‘I am sick of this ... here’ and
then stabbed her in the neck. She stated
that she had not planned this in any
way ... She stated that she recalled thinking at the time that she was sick of
her mother calling
the police because she had not done anything. She stated that
her mother always acted like a victim and made up stories and said
people stole
things from her.” (my
underlining)
defendant told Dr Voita she thought this occurred around 11.00 am. She said
that she knew what she did was wrong and she
stated that she had not intended to
kill her mother.
defendant told Dr Grant that after her mother asked for the knife on the morning
of 2 January 2015 she returned it, “placing
it on a kitchen
bench”. Dr Grant was told that when Mrs Ruth Dodd returned to the
house after visiting the neighbour the defendant
became suddenly very angry with
her and said something like, “I’m sick of you trying to hurt
me”. She was angry
because she had found some belongings in her house
which her mother had said Dennis had stolen. The anger was also fuelled by
longstanding issues.
“... describes suddenly grabbing her mother by the
neck and squeezing her neck in a stranglehold. Her mother was shouting out
she was hurting her and they struggled. [LGF] said her actions were quite
She was not sure what she intended. She had not thought that she
would want to kill her mother. Her thinking about her actions was
fully formulated
During the struggle, [LGF] turned and picked up the knife from the bench,
saying, ‘Here’s your fucking knife that you
made a punching motion with the knife, not really aiming particularly for any
part of her mother’s body
, but the knife entered her mother in the
neck and blood immediately spurted everywhere. Her mother went down to the
floor and was
very clearly dead. Nothing more had been said.” (my
underlining)
defendant told Dr Heffernan that after visiting the neighbours her mother came
back upstairs and told her, “the police
are coming”. Dr Heffernan
“She said she was scared, fearing a similar event
to her previous interaction with police. [LGF] recalled becoming overwhelmed
anger and grabbing her mother round the neck, shouting ‘I am sick of you
hurting me’. She recalled her mother saying
‘I was only trying to
the knife was and at
this point ‘I grabbed the knife and stabbed her and
said “here is your fucking knife”’. [LGF] told me ‘I
didn’t mean to kill her’. ‘I don’t know why I did what
[LGF] told me that after she stabbed her mother she saw her fall to the
ground and that she knew she had died because of the blood
[37] The crime
scene photographs show that the deceased lady was killed in the lounge-room.
This is evident both from her position
on the floor, but also the blood pattern
on the wall and curtain. There is a discrepancy between accounts as to whether
knife had been left on the kitchen bench or on the table. The table
is perhaps two metres from the position of the deceased lady’s
closest part of the kitchen bench is perhaps four metres.
268, Intention to Kill
Prosecutor submitted that from the descriptions given by the defendant to all
three reporting psychiatrists, but particularly
from the description
Dr Grant gave, underlined in the extract at [35] above, that there was a
dispute of fact about whether the defendant
had an intention to kill or do
grievous bodily harm at the time of the killing. Such a dispute would prevent
the Mental Health Court
making a finding of diminished
responsibility.
defendant told the reporting psychiatrists that she did not intend to kill her
mother, I do not think that she meant she
was raising the defence of accident or
saying that she stabbed without forming any intention to act. The doctors did
not understand
it that way.
the contrary, she told them that she was very angry with her mother; had
strangled her, and had then picked up the knife and
used it deliberately.
Further, counsel for the defendant submitted, correctly in my opinion, that on
the facts of this case there
could not be any dispute that the actions of the
defendant were intended at least to cause grievous bodily harm.
After the Killing
defendant told Dr Grant that she showered and then searched for the house keys
because she was locked in the house. Then
she took her mother’s car,
intending to drive to Castle Hill and kill herself. Then she decided that she
needed to have some
drugs before she could kill herself and went to see her
dealers. After that, she said that she was driving around in a disorientated
way looking for Dennis, even though Dennis was in prison. She told much the
same thing to Dr Voita and Dr Heffernan.
[40] There are
numerous witness statements from this time. They bear on an assessment of the
defendant’s state of mind at the
time of the killing.
[41] The 17 year
old daughter of one of the defendant’s friends received a visit from the
defendant sometime after 11.00 am.
She thought that the defendant did not want
to leave, even after being told her friend was not home. She thought she
sounded desperate,
but she did not really want to talk to her. She describes
that, “there was something weird about [LGF] that day, more than
can remember that as soon as possible I went back inside. I locked the front
door behind me.”
[42] A shop
assistant recalls that the defendant came into the shop which she visited
regularly. CCTV times put this visit as starting
at 12.10 pm and finishing at
She thought the
defendant was acting “a bit weird, but she was always a bit
strange”. She put her head down when she
talked and said, “They
took the only thing that I love away from me.” She said this a couple of
times. The defendant
also said, “They want to get my block of land off me
but they won’t get it.” The defendant walked around in circles
asked, “What is this”, pointing to a chalkboard.
[43] Then the
defendant walked off. She got into a small blue car (which had belonged to her
mother). She had trouble driving it.
She hit a post and could not put the car
into reverse. The shop assistant followed her out and asked whose car it was.
The defendant
said, “It’s hers and she hates me driving it”.
The shop assistant thought she sounded very strange when she said
shop assistant tried to help her manoeuvre the car but could not. Eventually
somebody from a nearby hotel came and assisted
her. He had a reason to put his
involvement close to 12.30 pm.
defendant’s next stop was a Caltex service station where she bought energy
drinks, a meat pie and a packet of cigarettes.
CCTV showed that the defendant
arrived at 12.44 pm and left at 12.47 pm on 2
Statements made to Female Drug Dealer
defendant’s male drug dealer said that the defendant arrived at their
house around 1.30 pm and her hair looked damp.
The female drug dealer spoke to
the defendant in the kitchen. The defendant used amphetamine. The defendant
said, “I will
be going to jail for a long time.” She started
rocking and she looked strange. She whispered to the witness, “I have
taken care of one of my problems, I have killed my mother.” She
demonstrated a strangling grasp. The defendant acted a stabbing
motion with her
[46] The male
drug dealer was in the lounge-room. His wife started sending texts to him
relaying what the defendant was telling her.
When the defendant went to the
toilet the two dealers had a brief conversation. She told her husband there was
a blue car parked
down the road, so he went to look at it. He knew the car to
be the defendant’s mother’s car and had never seen the defendant
drive it. As a result of his concern he called triple 0 at 2.22 pm on 2
January 2015.
[47] The female
drug dealer continued to talk to the defendant in the kitchen. The defendant
said her mobile phone was missing when
she woke up that morning. The defendant
told her that she was using a knife and that her mother asked her for the knife
mango. Her mother would not use another knife because her mother said
that the defendant had her favourite knife. According to
what the defendant
said, this “set her off”.
defendant made abusive remarks about her mother and said, “My mother and
Vern are working to get [me] locked up and
take my land from me.” This
statement was likely not a wholly psychotic
The defendant said
something to the effect that she found things which belonged to her at her
mother’s house that she thought
Dennis had taken, and which caused
arguments between the defendant and Dennis. She had now discovered that it was
her mother who
had taken them. There is no evidence that this was a psychotic
defendant said she saw a psychiatrist once who told her that she could not
remember anything before the age of five because
she had been abused. The
defendant said that she remembered her mother being pregnant but yet there was
no baby from this pregnancy.
She saw a picture of Vern’s daughter who
looked exactly like “what my sister would have looked like”. The
said, “My mother got rid of my sister as a baby and gave her to
Vern who raised her as a daughter.”
[50] Eventually
the defendant said, “I had better take the car back to Ruth. I have had
it for a while.” She then left;
unfortunately just before police
[51] From the
time her drug dealer rang the police, police were looking for the defendant and
her mother’s car. She was located
at nearly 6.00 pm that night. There
were sightings of her looking for friends or acquaintances and behaving as
though she were lost
or aimless. Presumably she was quite intoxicated with
methylamphetamine. Just before police located her she went to McDonald’s.
Conduct after Arrest
[52] The police
arrested the defendant for murder and immediately warned her. She was able to
explain the warning accurately enough
in her own words. She told them, in
response to enquiries as to her fitness to be questioned, that she had been hit
around the head
on New Year’s Eve. She accurately told police where a
sharp was located in one of her pockets. She told the police that her
ears and head hurt and told them she was supposed to see a psychologist in a
couple of days. She told police:
“... I got told my life was
over yesterday ... got told you’re all finished. Your life’s over.
You’re finished.
And I’ll make sure you lose every single thing.
So far, they did. Oh, at least in the watch-house I won’t get stalked
harassed and mentally and emotionally and physically and sexually tortured and
abused. Just got to worry about my girls. He
doesn’t torture them.
That’s all that worried me ... my girls. You like your job?”
[53] Generally,
the conversation with police was inappropriate on her part. Dr Grant thought
she sounded intoxicated, and fatuous
– t 1-65. She would certainly have
been intoxicated, having so recently used amphetamines.
[54] By 11.00 pm
that night the defendant was much calmer. She was polite but minimally
responsive when police attempted to conduct
a formal record-of-interview.
During the recording the defendant looks and sounds quite collected. She has
put her hair into a
bun and she very calmly and rationally explains her position
to police. She explains that she wants to contact a solicitor because
understands that she is on a very serious charge. She explains this to police
before they give her the formal warnings. She
says that she knows the name of a
particular solicitor. She says she is unsure whether she needs to nominate a
particular solicitor
now. If she does, she would nominate that person.
However, she would prefer to have time to make enquiries to find another
After that, police take her through the lengthy formal warning
process. She sits patiently and agrees to it, notwithstanding she
has already
made her position clear. Then, she reiterates her position and
“Um, I don’t believe at the moment I am, I
will say be honest here, I do not believe much at the moment, I believe I just
experienced a huge a pretty much mental breakdown in the last, you know, say
couple of months. And that I don’t believe that
I am really, I should be
putting myself in a you know, position to you know, yeah you know um ... make
sound judgment, a lot of things
have been very confusing for me so I don’t
want to confuse you or myself any more and ...”
defendant has already expressed the hope that police would respect her decision
not to talk to them. It can be seen that
in this passage she is very rational
and indeed there is a level of sophistication about her – she is astute to
point out that
she is acting not only in her own interests but also in the
police officers’ interests – she does not want to confuse
[56] During the
process of formally identifying the defendant in this interview, police ask her
where she was born. This is after
the time when has indicated that she does not
wish to speak to them unless she speaks to a solicitor first, and her answer
viewed in that context. She says that she has been told that she was
born in Townsville but she is not sure about that. This answer,
and the odd
prevaricating way she gives it, is capable of supporting the idea that she has
in mind doubts about her parentage, although
no doubt other interpretations are
Conversation with Law Enforcement Participant
[57] At the
watch-house an undercover police agent (a LEP) was put into the cell with the
defendant. Sometime around 4.00 pm on 3
January the defendant tells the LEP
that her boyfriend is actually her father and that her mother “just went
along with it”
for three‑and-a-half years – that is, just went
along with the defendant having a sexual relationship with her father
three-and-a-half years. She said she became suspicious because her boyfriend
and mother were talking, and then they put her
in “the nut-house” so
they could get together (she means sexually). She says she realised that her
boyfriend looked
exactly like her younger brother and had the same ears as she
did. She realised that her father had never acted as though he were
and “the penny dropped”. She expressed the view that her mother had
known for 36 years (her age) and been
lying to her all that
She says that she now
remembers her boyfriend from the time she was a child – all her memories
have come back. She saw evidence
for her belief in the fact that her mother
once remarked that her boyfriend had come into her life a bit late. Further,
she thought
that her boyfriend had more or less admitted the fact because he
sometimes signed his texts “Papa Bear”.
[58] In the
context of her boyfriend’s culpability in all this, she says that her
boyfriend is a paedophile
abused her when she was a child and that her mother let him do this. She says
Vern had Dennis put in jail. She says Vern set
up the bashing on New
Year’s Eve. She says her boyfriend was an ex-policeman and a
“dog” and that the police were
aware of the things he did but
protected him.
She says Vern
lies about his age and she thinks he is about 60 years
She says the worst part
[59] In the
context of how this has affected her she says, “They’ll probably
lock me up and throw away the key”
and then, “Who knows maybe
I’ll get put in a mental ward and fucking filled full of drugs and turned
into a fucking zombie
(laughs). Who knows?”
[60] She asks
the LEP why she was in the watch-house. The LEP says that she was on fraud
charges but she thought the police would
not be able to prove it and explains
why: the LEP’s boyfriend alleges she used his credit card, but how will
the police prove
this was without his permission? The defendant gives her the
advice “Don’t talk about it then”. That is, she
gives the LEP
good advice in the circumstances postulated.
defendant blames Vern for dumping her at her mother’s when he knew she did
not want to go there. She says that as
soon as Vern had Dennis put in jail he
kept dumping her at her mother’s even though she hated that. She said:
like he knew I would, it’s like he knew I would explode.
It’s like he knew I would ... I would flip.” She describes
“lost it. Lost it completely.” She describes that Vern and her
mother were “pushing me and pushing me”.
defendant says that she “lost the plot” and did something
“very unthinkable”. She says, “Pretty
much I had a fight with
my mother and now she’s dead”. She says
“They just him and her [Vern and her mother] they were
just pushing me and pushing me. They knew exactly what they were doing
with me. Oh your phone, I don’t know where your phone is. Isn’t
it, hasn’t Vernon got your phone? ...
fucking bullshit ... I fucking had
everything taken away from me. And then Vernon just turned on me ... tells me
and dumps me and
then dumps me at the one place I never wanted to be. For that
for a reason. I didn't want to be there ... if you don’t go
it’s for a reason. You know what I mean? ... for a reason it’s
because you can’t handle those ... handle
it. You know because you
can’t handle that person. Or you don’t like that place.”
[63] Then she
“Oh there’s no excuse. There’s really no
... oh well really I’ll get my psychologist because I ... I’ll
him to do a report because I’m ... he can do a report on everything
that’s happened to me and they fucking use that
report. They can use ...
everything that’s happened to me ... I know it’s no excuse. I know I
gotta take responsibility
for what I’ve done. I know I’ve gotta
take responsibility for the situation. ...”
[64] Talking
“I’m going to bring every fucking thing
up ... I will drag
everything out of the woodworks”. She makes many complaints about her
mother which do not sound psychotic
but, amongst them, lists that she let her
have sex with her own father and did not tell her. She asks, “What kind
would let you do that? A sick one. A sick mother that’s let
the father tamper with the baby.” She explains to the
LEP, “I got
borderline personality and don’t handle stress well. ... I snapped. I
snapped because I don’t handle
it ... I can’t handle stress. I
can’t handle the bullshit.” She makes reference to Vern abusing her
that was the reason, “I couldn’t even remember before I was
five right ...”
Collateral Material as to Motive and State
[65] There is
some further material which might be thought to support a non-psychotic motive
for the killing and to demonstrate a
history of violence by the defendant. I
will summarise that now.
[66] In amongst
the deceased lady’s papers are notes of the defendant being verbally
aggressive to her and occasionally suggestions
of physical violence by her.
January 2015 a passer-by told police outside the deceased lady’s house
that the daughter of the deceased told him
that she was going to kill her mother
approximately six months earlier. The deceased lady did have other daughters,
although it
seems that his statement did most likely refer to the defendant.
[68] A brother
of the deceased lady had dinner with her on 16 November 2014. She told him that
the defendant and Vern had been coming
to her house demanding money and
threatening her. She said that if she did not give them money they got nasty.
The deceased complained
that one of her sons wanted her house and threatened
that if she did not give it to him he would burn it down with her in it. She
thought that this son and Vern were going to kill her and Vern had said this to
[69] Another
brother of the deceased said that the deceased complained that the defendant was
always sneaking Vern into the deceased
lady’s house when she stayed with
her mother. The deceased did not want Vern in her house. This brother said
that over the
years the defendant had made threats to harm and kill her mother.
This brother spoke to the deceased around Christmas 2014. The
deceased said
that Vern and one of her sons had both been threatening her. Vern was
threatening her because she would kick him out
of the house if she caught him
there. Vern had told her that he was going to stab her in the throat and cut
her head off. The deceased
lady said that one of her sons had threatened to
kill her on several occasions since about November
[70] One of the
deceased lady’s nieces gave a statement to police. On 22 November
2014 the deceased told her that the defendant
was using drugs heavily and always
asking for money and that Vern was controlling and manipulative of the
defendant, which affected
her behaviour towards her mother. Mrs Ruth Dodd had
told this witness that the defendant and Vern were living with her and that
had asked Vern to leave but he would not. He had suggested that she move out
instead. She said she was afraid of Vern. She
further complained that one of
her sons was asking her for money and had told her that he owned the house. She
said the son had
threatened to burn down the house with her in it if she did not
[71] One of the
defendant’s brothers described the defendant being physically violent
towards her mother when she was a teenager.
When he spoke to his mother at
getting worse; she was
having arguments with her and with Vern; Vern was
stalking her, and that she was considering getting a domestic violence order
[72] One of the
defendant’s daughters told police that she was aware that the deceased
accused the defendant of verbally abusing
her. Her grandmother also told her
that the defendant and Vern got into physical fights which she found
frightening. This daughter
said that in October 2014 the defendant rang her and
made accusations that she and her sister had slept with Vern. She was aware
that the defendant had made accusations that the deceased lady, Mrs Ruth Dodd,
was sleeping with Vern. The defendant’s second
daughter described similar
things. She remembered that her mother would throw glasses, plates and cups at
Dennis, and hit him with
a closed fist. She recalled that Mrs Ruth Dodd told
her that the defendant had stabbed Dennis. She described Vern being very
including physically violent to her mother.
[73] Notes on
the Justices Examination Order (JEO) file (see below)
“Phone call from Mrs Dodd expressing concern about
[LGF]. She received a call from Vern, [LGF]’s boyfriend, looking for
He informed Mrs Dodd that he had taken her home from hospital when she went to
see another friend Dennis, apparently she stabbed
him requiring suturing. She
also apparently ‘bashed’ a woman who asked Dennis for a cigarette
and was apparently arrested
by QPS. Vern has informed Mrs Dodd that Dennis is
giving [LGF] ice and morphine.”
Prosecutor submitted that when the threats which the deceased had reported
regarding Vern Power, and in particular his threat
to slit her throat the day
before she was killed, are considered, together with the influence which Vern
had on the defendant, there
may have been a motive on the part of the defendant
to carry out Vern’s wishes. The defendant’s propensity sometimes
use violence was relevant to this. Alternatively, if the defendant believed the
accusations by her mother were false, these circumstances
might give a
non-psychotic reason, ie., retribution, for the defendant to carry out what she
regarded as the false accusation levelled
against Vern the day before. In my
view, this thinking is simply speculative.
[75] Further,
while the evidence which I have summarised as to the defendant’s motive
and state of mind and her propensity to
violence is quite extensive, in my
opinion it is not sufficient to seriously raise the prospect of a planned
intentional killing.
However, I do regard this evidence as relevant to the
defendant’s state of mind at the date of the killing because it shows
level of antagonism between the defendant and her mother and the rather
desperate circumstances in which the defendant was thrown
together with her
mother for want of any other accommodation.
[76] I turn now
to the evidence of the defendant’s interaction with mental health care
professionals before and after the killing.
Psychiatric Admission
23-24 October 2014
defendant’s mother took out a JEO against her in October 2014. As it is
recorded, her concerns were the defendant’s
mental state including
“erratic behaviour, drug use and previous paranoia”. Police had
trouble finding the defendant.
When they did, she was irritable and demanded a
solicitor look at the JEO before she would engage in any assessment. She
to abscond and had to be physically restrained.
admission on 23 October 2014 she was examined by a psychiatrist. Because she
seemed to have no obvious mood or psychotic
disorder, she was taken off the
involuntary JEO but agreed to stay overnight on a voluntary basis. She was
examined again on 24
October. Once again there was no evidence of any
acute mental illness found and she was discharged. On 27 October 2014 a nurse
saw the defendant as part of the follow-up post-JEO. It appeared to the nurse
that the defendant was mildly intoxicated and that
her thinking was slightly
tangential at times, but she thought that may have been related to intoxication.
The nurse could find no
signs of mental illness and discharged the defendant
from follow-up. She did make a note, “mother concerned re behaviour and
bizarre thoughts”.
Attendance on a Psychologist
September 2014 the defendant contacted a counselling service which she had
attended in the past, asking to speak to the particular
psychologist she had
spoken to in the past. There is evidence that this psychologist was the
psychologist to whom she attributed
the statement that sexual abuse before the
age of five might lead to a lack of memory before that time. There is a note of
“So this is an unusual
phone call. [LGF] called saying she needed some help as she had had her
identity stolen, she doesn’t
know what to do, someone is using her name
for the doctor and the bank, someone has stolen her money. Someone keeps
breaking into
her apartment. ... She said she was seeing [the named
psychologist] but he said he can’t help her anymore. She doesn’t
have a phone but you can call her on Van’s [sic] phone, she said she is
always with him ...”
[80] There are
records of the service unsuccessfully attempting to contact LGF and make an
appointment for her from mid‑October
2014, until finally on 23 December
2014 the defendant attended upon the psychologist who she had seen in the past.
The psychologist’s
“Client presented as being
agitated and emotionally distraught, claiming she wanted to resume counselling
in relation to
early childhood memories about potential sexual abuse as a
child under five years of age
. She also said that she remembered
experiences of abandonment, when her mother was away and she still had it today,
waking up at
night in a panic and nobody was around her.
Client questioned whether the man she considered being her father, a
former Vietnam veteran, was her real dad, as he looked differently.
that she had questioned her mother about it, but she did not give her a clear
Client also mentions that she misses her former boyfriend, with whom she
still has sexual relations, as he was in prison for the last
months.” (my underlining)
Assessments of Mental State after Arrest
At the watch-house the defendant was assessed by a nurse on 5
January 2015. Amongst other things, she said that she believed that
her partner
(Vern) was having an affair with her mother and also that her partner was her
biological father because one of her brothers
and partner had similar body
parts, and her mother had said, “he came into my life too late”.
The defendant was transferred to jail and seen by Dr John Reilly
(now the Chief Psychiatrist) from Prison Mental Health Services on
2015. It is apparent that the examination was a detailed one. Dr Reilly
returned and conducted another detailed examination
the next day with another
experienced forensic psychiatrist, Dr Neillie.
January 2015 the defendant told Dr Reilly that in October 2014 she had read a
book “How to Unlock Your Subconscious
Mind”. She told him that a
psychologist had told her that because she could not recall what happened to her
before the age
of five years, she may have been sexually assaulted. She said
that reading the book bought this back and she realised that Vern
face to a fantasy I’d had all my life”. Recently Vern had said,
“You don’t know who I am”
and she had considered this had a
special meaning. Further, she thought Vern’s ears looked like her
brother’s ears.
She described having visited a room and felt that she had
been there before and that perhaps she had been taken away from her mother
there. She said that she thought that the man who was married to her mother had
never accepted her or her younger brother who “looked
different” to
the rest of the family.
watching Vern communicating with her mother, she started to believe that Vern
might have been her father, and might have
abused her as a child. She accused
her mother of abusing her. It was as though she had something to hide. Her
mother looked like
she was “always pregnant”. The defendant gives
the psychiatrist the correct year of birth for both Vern and her mother.
described that she could get thoughts from people around her “like they
were interconnected in my mind”. She
said that the government had the
scientific ability to put thoughts in other people’s minds. She said she
thought there were
cameras watching over the whole world. She said sometimes
she thought she was in an experiment where she was possibly put “with
another family to see if I can remember things”.
[86] She thought
her mother had no soul and she thought she could usually tell whether people did
have a soul. She could feel souls
of dead people and gave specific instances
where at particular locations in Townsville she thought there were the souls of
who had been raped, and a sacred site where Aborigines were buried. She
said all these experiences began six months ago when she
read the book. When
she read the book she made a connection to the Egyptian moon goddess Isis. She
also read a book about freemasons
and realised that she “was linked to
this universe”.
[87] She told
the doctor all about her meliodonis (a serious skin infection from which she did
suffer) and gave a quite sensible history
of it. Then she said that she thought
that she now had a flesh-eating infection related to a brain coral which she had
that she knew that meliodonis was from the sea and she thought that
this infection was in her chest and, “I think it is affecting
[88] She gives
quite a long and apparently non-psychotic history of her drug use and how that
resulted in her losing fingers from
her right hand.
[89] She was
assessed as having some pressure of speech and being fatuous. Her thought was
noted as being coherent, notwithstanding
its content. There were no perceptual
disturbances evident. It was thought that her judgment was poor and her insight
was minimal.
Dr Reilly’s diagnosis was, “psychotic disorder likely
with prominent delusions of reference and possible thought alienation
of early onset substance use especially cannabis and more recent heavy
amphetamine use”.
[90] The next
day, 16 January 2015, Dr Reilly asked the defendant again for the reasons she
thought Vern was her father. She said
she had the feeling that he might be her
father; “It was a memory I got from when I was little”. She called
Bear”. She said her mother resented her and punished her
every night. The book, “How to Unlock Your Subconscious Mind”
her realise that her current behaviour was affected by past events. She was
angry with her mother. Her mother would never
tell her the truth and was
“a bad, bad liar”. She was also angry with Vern because, if he was
her father, why did he
leave her? He had said to her for years that she did not
know who he was. After reading the book she examined her own emotions
to think she was an islander girl. She thought her mother did not really know
the whole family history and said, “Who
knows what we are really, I
suppose the police will find out, they took my DNA”. She thought that
perhaps she had come from
a long line of royal blood that had “come out
and mated with islanders, maybe from Ireland”. She had told this to Vern
and he had told her that she was a special person.
[91] During this
interview she told Dr Reilly that eight months ago she saw an object ascending,
a beam of light, into something which
could not be seen. Sometimes she saw
horrible different colours that seemed to follow her. “It’s like
a different life up there, whoever it is they’re invisible,
like the predator movie”. She said she could see these aliens
“very high up people” who wear invisible cloaks. She was pretty
sure it was another life-form which was watching
over her. They wanted to
communicate with humans and with her, although they have not done so.
[92] Dr Reilly
initiated antipsychotic medication and began liaising with High Security
In‑patient Services.
Treatment at The Park
[93] At The Park
the defendant was diagnosed with “likely schizophrenia”. From 26
February 2015 she was treated by Dr
defendant told Dr Voita she thought that Vern was having a sexual relationship
with her mother. She had believed that since
October 2014. Her mother told her
that Vern was used to “being with a mother and a daughter”. She
said that her mother
had put her into the psychiatric unit in the Townsville
Hospital in September 2014 and that this is when her mother had “got
together” with Vern. She made allegations of sexual abuse in her
childhood, interspersed with comments about Vern and Dennis.
defendant told Dr Voita she started hearing voices in October 2014 when someone
gave her synthetic ice. She said the voices
told her to give away
Dennis’s dog. She said she could still hear the voices, but they were
decreasing and now sounded more
like background chattering. She did believe
that she received simple greetings from Dennis by telepathy, for example, that
say good morning to her every morning. She thought that before her
arrest she received messages from the television and radio and
television and radio were talking about her, but this experience was no longer
present. She said she could feel other people’s
energies and read their
[96] Dr Voita
obtained a history of longstanding use of illegal drugs, including amphetamine,
cannabis, morphine and benzodiazepine.
The defendant told her she had become
addicted to heroin when she was 20 years old. She told her that until 2010 she
well enough but then became impaired because of the extent of her
substance use. She said that she used amphetamine about three
times a week from
2012 until the day of the killing and that she had been abusing morphine since
2010 and using cannabis several
times a week (a few cones every couple of
Dr Voita’s Opinion
[97] Dr Voita
did not think that any one of the defendant’s capacities was impaired by
schizophrenia at the time she killed
her mother. She
“In my opinion [LGF] was not impaired or deprived of any
of the relevant capacities in relation to the alleged offences.
There appears to be long standing animosity and conflict between [LGF] and
her mother. Although there is evidence that [LGF] did
hold delusional beliefs
actions of the day
were not driven
by her psychotic illness. [LGF] was
under the influence of amphetamines and morphine at the time of the alleged
offence and by her
own account did not intend to kill her.
It appears that an argument ensued related to [LGF] having been locked in the
house by her mother and [LGF] having found a camera
her mother had accused her
ex‑partner of stealing. [LGF] stated that she was also angry as her
mother was threatening to call
the police. Based on her account of the events,
[LGF] impulsively stabbed her mother in the neck with a knife but appears to
not preplanned the harm her mother.
She was clearly aware of the
wrongfulness of her actions and could control her actions
not appear to be any motivation for the offence related to symptoms of her
mental illness
.” (my underlining)
[98] In the
passage set out above, Dr Voita looks to whether psychotic illness
“drove” the killing and whether or not
there was a psychotic
motivation for the offending. In some cases there is such a clear connection
between a defendant’s psychotic
beliefs and the offending that the beliefs
can be seen to motivate, cause, or drive, the offending. In such cases that
is clearly relevant to the question of whether at the time of the
offending the defendant was deprived of, or impaired in, any of
the relevant
capacities. However, the legal question for this Court is never whether the
offending was driven by psychotic beliefs.
The legal question for the Court in
this case is whether or not at the time of offending the defendant was
substantially impaired
in one of the three capacities made relevant by s 27 of
the Criminal Code.
[99] It does
appear that Dr Voita gave her opinion based on a wrong enquiry. I do not
believe this was simply a matter of words or
expression on the part of Dr Voita,
for she said this in her oral evidence:
“I suppose one of the
issues for me were that in spite of the fact that I thought she was fit for
trial and wasn’t impaired
or deprived, I still recommended that the matter
be referred to Mental Health Court because I was aware that she actually had
of no relationship. But I interviewed her about that very
issue a number of
times, and she still gave this kind of account.
Further, Dr Voita said she did not support a defence of diminished
responsibility “because I still couldn’t link the account
psychotic symptoms ...”.
See also her comment, “... she did have psychotic symptoms about her
mother, but I can just rely on the account that she gave
me as to her
motivation.”
[100] Further,
in her oral evidence Dr Voita said that although she accepted the defendant was
psychotic and that she had psychotic
symptoms which incorporated her
“I did not form the view that her illness
substantially impaired her. I think it was of a minor sort of relevance, but
so intoxicated
at the time that I actually formed the view that
that was more pertinent or a very large component of what
underlining).
It was this comment about the defendant’s state of intoxication which
led to exploration of her understanding of the defendant’s
drug use at
accurate or clear understanding of what drugs
the defendant had taken at or
Dr Grant’s Opinion
defendant told Dr Grant that she had been experiencing psychotic symptoms for at
least six months prior to the killing.
She thought she could hear Dennis
talking to her even though he was in jail – he would say things like,
“Good morning
babe” in her head. She gave away Dennis’s dog
because voices told her that it was a police dog and had a bug implanted
She believed she could read other people’s minds. She thought that Vern
was her biological father and she thought
that her mother had had an affair with
Vern. She thought that Vern’s fingers, face and other body parts looked
like her or
her brother. She thought people were wearing invisibility cloaks.
She thought that there were predators coming from spaceships
and that she could
telepathically communicate with these creatures. She would stare at the stars
and believe that these creatures
were looking at her. She thought she could see
their invisible outlines. She had an idea that freemasons had created her as a
and she believed that some moles on her back were chisel marks put there
by freemasons when they made her.
Grant’s opinion was as follows:
“In my opinion, that
psychotic illness would in itself have been causing significant impairment in
[LGF’s] capacities
to control her actions and to know that she ought not
do the act. In my opinion, the degree of impairment would be sufficient to
labelled substantial according to the relevant sections of law.
Whilst there was a long history of conflict and disagreements between [LGF]
and her mother, which would be giving rise to anger and
resentment, I believe
the paranoia and delusional beliefs which had involved her mother, at least
intermittently over a period of
six months, would have had a significant
influence upon her mental status and behaviour at the time and that that
psychotic process
was therefore a necessary factor in the offending behaviour.
This is particularly relevant given that [LGF] has no history of previous
violence, either generally or in the community or to her mother
specifically.”
[103] In his
oral evidence Dr Grant elaborated:
“I think if you consider
that this woman had been getting increasingly unwell over a six-month period,
that she had chronic
delusions relating to her mother – and other people,
but specifically relating to her mother. She believed that her mother
all sorts of things to undermine her relationships and her life and damaging her
life in various ways and she believed
that her mother was having an affair with
the man that she was also seeing and that she was perhaps that person’s
so her thinking was substantially impaired by those beliefs, I
But they were there, they were – if not being expressed at
that moment [of the killing], they were a substantial part of the
way she would
be able to react to her mother because of those underlying delusions and
, which were expressed immediately afterwards in the cells and even
though she wasn’t saying, you know, that, “I’m
child and you had an affair.” at that moment, there was all sorts of
conflicts going on with her and those things
would’ve been looming
reasonably large in her mind on a constant basis, I think. So I think you
I would say that they were substantial factors in
motivating her anger and rage, which might’ve also been triggered by
things and conflicts about the knife and about what she was saying to
neighbours and whether she’d stolen Dennis’ camera
and so on and so
on. All of those things had happened on that day. ... So there’s a lot
of evidence that she was very disordered
in her thinking and her mother loomed
large in that thinking and that it would’ve contributed substantially, in
my view, to
the loss of control and the loss of her ability to understand that
she ought not do that to her mother
underlining).
[104] Dr Grant
thought that the defendant was intoxicated at the time of the killing with both
amphetamines and morphine. His view
was that while amphetamines had not been
taken for close to 30 hours, so that the intoxicating effect of them would be
to reduce, it would still have been present. Similarly, the effect of
the morphine taken the night before would be reducing but
“still possibly
significant, and that would be more likely to be sedative, but could also be
having some disinhibiting effect
... The amphetamines are more likely to
increase anger, aggression, impulsivity and so on so that those two drugs are
certainly relevant,
but I don’t think they could be seen on their own,
given the underlying psychosis and history of conflict.” – tt
1-57-58. See also t 1-62 on the effects of morphine.
[105] As to the
interaction between illness and intoxication Dr Grant
“MR TATE: Thank you. Doctor, my last question –
and as I understand your report, the abnormality of mind, the psychotic
which is indicated substantially impaired, didn’t require the addition of
the intoxicant or the intoxication?‑‑‑No,
I think that –
that substantial impairment was there. The intoxicants would’ve
contributed to some extent to loss of
control, but I think that there was a
substantial impairment from the illness itself.” –
tt 1‑48‑49.
Dr Heffernan’s Opinion
Heffernan also thought that the defendant suffered from schizophrenia. His
conclusions were as follows:
“In relation to the charge of
murder I believe [LGF] had a number of processes occurring at the time that this
offence occurred.
She was angry with her mother for reasons that were not psychotic including a
perception of mistreatment from her mother and the alleged
abuse of her
daughter. She was also distressed by the perception that her mother unjustly
involved mental health services and police
in her apprehension. She also had
psychotic beliefs that included the belief that her mother may have had a
relationship with her
partner Vern, that Vern may have in fact been her father
and also the bizarre belief that her mother and Vern were somehow in a
to have her liver removed.
In the period prior to the alleged offence [LGF] had also used substances;
amphetamines by her account at approximately 0500 on the
morning of New
Year’s Day (approximately 28 hours prior to the alleged offence) and had
used morphine approximately 16-18 hours
prior to the alleged offence.
[LGF’s] account of the effect of these substances was that they had
prolonged intoxicating effects
upon her. She reported that the use of
amphetamines would generally keep her feeling intoxicated for several days. It
is therefore
likely that intoxication with these substances impacted on her
mental state to some extent and affected her judgement.
The act itself was an impulsive unplanned act that appeared to be motivated
by anger towards her mother and impaired judgement related
to substance use. I
believe the contributions to the anger included the long term impacts of
childhood and adolescent trauma and
the perceived neglect and mistreatment from
her mother. The more proximal stressor of anger and fear associated with her
that her mother had contacted the police and, finally, the anger that
resulted from her psychotic beliefs.
In summary it is my view that [LGF] had a mental disease and I believe there
were a number of contributing factors including her mental
disease that impaired
her capacity to know that she ought not do the act. I do not believe that she
was deprived of any of the capacities.
Diminished Responsibility
It is my view that [LGF] had an abnormality of mind and this included
Schizophrenia and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). At
the time of the
alleged offence she had psychotic symptoms and also the chronic impact of
symptoms of PTSD. I believe that the symptoms
of mental disorder were
sufficient to cause a substantial impairment in her capacity to know that she
ought not do the act. These
factors would have been significant contributors to
the mistrust, sense of perceived mistreatment and anger that she felt towards
her mother.
Intoxication was also likely to have been a factor to some extent and would
have further impaired her capacity.
Therefore I believe that she was substantially impaired of the capacity to
know that she ought not do the act as a result of an abnormality
Heffernan originally said he thought the defendant’s capacity to know she
ought not do the act was impaired but that
her capacity to control herself was
intact. Then he accepted that on the evidence her capacity to know she ought
not do the act
was not impaired.
Then he contradicted himself again, but settled on an opinion that due to
“fear and anger” she was impaired in her ability
to reason about the
He saw the anger and fear
as substantially a product of her
269 – Factual Uncertainties Bearing on State of Mind
[108] This Court
cannot determine questions which are for a jury on a criminal trial. It must
have a safe factual basis for decision.
The Court of Criminal Appeal dealt with
this point in
R v Schafferius
[1987] 1 Qd R 381.
After explaining his
reasons, Thomas J (with whom the other members of the Court agreed) concluded as
“Proceedings before the Mental Health Tribunal afford
a clear example of proceedings that call for the application of a principle
is sometimes called the Briginshaw principle, namely that the degree of
satisfaction to a civil proceeding may vary according
to the gravity of the fact
to be proved. ...
The above considerations lead to the view that there is no warrant for the
application of a standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt,
but that findings
should be made only in reliance on clear and convincing evidence, and upon a
firm satisfaction consistent with
the gravity of the proceeding. In short, [a
proceeding in the Mental Health Tribunal] is a proceeding at the
end of the Briginshaw principle. Indeed, in cases where it
seems that the facts are so in dispute that it would be unsafe to make
determination the Tribunal is required to stay its hand (s. 33(2)). This is
consistent with the view the Tribunal should proceed
to a finding only in clear
cases, and that it is not intended to be a substitute for a criminal trial,
although in appropriate cases
it will render a criminal trial unnecessary.
Quite often the precise details of the alleged crime will be critical to the
of the alleged offender’s mental condition at the relevant
time, and if those details are in any way in dispute the only way
them is by the adversarial scrutiny of a criminal trial before a jury.”
[109] Section
33(2) of the Act being spoken of there provided:
reference made to it the Mental Health Tribunal is of the opinion that the facts
are so in dispute that it would be
unsafe to make a determination such as is
referred to in provision (a) or (b) of subsection (1), it shall refrain from
determination but shall inquire and determine whether the person in
question is fit for trial.”
[110] The Court
of Appeal considered this dicta in
Attorney-General (Qld) v Kamali
[1999] QCA 219
106 A Crim R 269
, [9]. It was said:
“The standard of proof in
these matters is on the balance of probabilities with the
qualification, as confirmed in
Schafferius. Schafferius
should not be
read as excluding a finding in all but the clearest of cases. Certainly the
gravity of such proceedings warrants the
Tribunal’s exercising caution.
But if the judge constituting the Tribunal is sufficiently satisfied that there
is evidence
which, if accepted, would warrant the finding, and believes that the
evidence should be accepted, then the finding should be made,
notwithstanding
that there may be other contrary evidence in the case which the judge is
disinclined to accept.”
[111] Then in
DAR v DPP (Qld) & Anor
[2008] QCA 309
, [83]ff, the Court of Appeal
“The first point to be made here is that this Court in
A-G (Qld) v Kamali
did not deny that the cautious approach suggested in
R v Schafferius
was the correct approach. The MHC did not err in
approaching its fact finding function by searching for clear and convincing
of the direction in which the balance of probabilities
[112] There are
three significant factual disputes in the evidence about the events prior to the
[113] First, the
defendant gave a version of events to all reporting doctors which contained some
details about her being locked in
the house by her mother prior to the killing
and being without her mobile phone because her mother had taken it. She said
her phone she could not ring Vern to come and get her. At The Park she
said: “She [the deceased] walked around with the keys
in her pocket and
locked me up, took my phone, took my
[114] It seemed
to me that this feeling of being trapped, as she put it when she spoke to
Dr Heffernan, must have been relevant to
the defendant’s state of
mind at the time of the killing. However, the neighbour’s statement
raises a dispute about
whether the defendant was locked in the house on the
morning of 2 January 2015. Further, wherever her mobile phone was, she used
landline to speak to Vern the evening before the killing.
[115] All the
reporting psychiatrists described the long-term unhappy relationship between the
defendant and her mother. All of them
described the defendant as being angry at
the time she killed. All the reporting psychiatrists recognised that some of
which the defendant felt at the time of the killing was due to the
real, non-psychotic, circumstances that she had been “dumped”,
she put it, at her mother’s house by Vern; did not want to be there, but
had nowhere else to go in circumstances where the
relationship with her mother
had been characterised by antagonism since she was a young child. There had
been recent antagonism
with her mother over Vern’s alleged threats to her
mother; the whereabouts of the kitchen knife, and whereabouts of the
defendant’s
mobile phone. None of the reporting psychiatrists believed
the defendant was deprived of any capacity at the time of the killing,
while she was psychotic, they did not understand her to be totally out of touch
with reality.
[116] Secondly,
when regard is had to the crime scene photos, the killing cannot have happened
as the defendant told the three psychiatrists
who examined her: she did not stab
her mother next to the table or the kitchen bench. One of the difficulties
encountered when trying
to explore this factual dispute with the reporting
psychiatrists was that they reacted by looking about for tables in the
photographs
which were consistent with the defendant’s version of
Because the reporting
psychiatrists were never briefed with the crime scene photos, no-one had asked
what the defendant meant by
table or kitchen bench when she gave her history to
each of the reporting psychiatrists. I do not think this uncertainty in the
factual matters assumed by the reporting psychiatrists disappears by speculating
as to whether or not when she said table the defendant
actually meant coffee
table, or when she said kitchen bench, she actually meant a set of wire drawers
at the junction of the kitchen
and the hallway. To begin with, that sort of
speculation rather betrays a lack of forensic attitude in the minds of the
psychiatrists. Their job was not to search around for some
circumstance which might conceivably make the defendant’s version
was to look objectively at the evidence, including the plain words the defendant
used to them. But in any event, that sort
of speculation simply highlights the
fact that the factual basis as to the events immediately prior to the killing
was not clear.
This is something which might bear significantly on the
defendant’s state of mind at the time of the killing, see the dicta
Schafferius
, “Quite often the precise details of the alleged crime
will be critical to the assessment of the alleged offender’s mental
condition at the relevant time, and if those details are in any way in dispute
the only way to resolve them is by the adversarial
scrutiny of a criminal trial
before a jury.”
is left with the unsatisfactory position that one can only speculate as to the
exact circumstances of the killing.
Heffernan found it “hard to imagine” that he would arrive at a
different conclusion as to impairment even if
the killing happened in a
different way which, for example, may have had the defendant strangle her mother
in the lounge-room; desist,
and then walk to the kitchen or the hallway table
and then back to her mother to use the
Dr Grant’s opinion
was to the same effect,
I must say, I was left with the impression that Dr Grant really had not come to
grips with what was being put to him both
locked house and the denial of access to a
[118] On this
point I think my assisting psychiatrists also struggled, but ultimately thought
that, even though the precise events
immediately preceding the killing were not
known, the fact that the defendant was suffering from a psychosis at the time
meant that,
however those events unfolded, she was substantially
This idea is not
terribly satisfactory, but perhaps it is a case where lawyers simply have to
accept that psychiatrists giving psychiatric
opinions about the matter can feel
certain enough that knowledge of the events immediately preceding the killing
are not necessary
for them to come to a conclusion about impairment. On that
basis I am prepared to decide this reference notwithstanding these first
factual uncertainties.
[119] The third,
and last, area of factual uncertainty arises because there are differences about
the delusions which the defendant
reported to the reporting psychiatrists. It
will be remembered that Dr Grant examined the defendant on 23 December 2015.
one year after the offending. She had been discharged from The Park
and returned to prison because she no longer needed to be treated
in-patient. Dr Grant was the first doctor she had seen who was not a treating
doctor. Dr Grant (as is normal practice) explained
the purposes of his
assessment to the defendant. Having regard to the defendant’s statements
to the LEP, and her statements
to the police at the time of her arrest, I have
no doubt that the defendant understood the significance of Dr Grant’s
She reported to Dr Grant several delusions she claimed to have held at
the time of the offending, which she had previously reported
to no-one. These
included that her mother was trying to poison her. Her mother was carrying out
operations in the backyard taking
out people’s livers to sell. Her mother
and Vern were in league to take her liver. Sometimes when she saw Vern eating
she thought he was in fact eating human tissue.
defendant spoke to Dr Heffernan on 3 June 2016 – six months after she
spoke to Dr Grant. Again the report was for
use in this Court proceeding
and LGF was aware of that. The defendant told Dr Heffernan that she found it
difficult to believe “how
crazy I was” at the time of the offending.
She told him she had psychotic symptoms from around 2011 and that they escalated
so that they were prominent and distressing from mid-2014. She told him that
before the offending she suffered from a delusion that
her mother and Vern were
collaborating to remove her liver and allow a liver transplant for Vern.
[121] I suspect
the veracity of the reports to Dr Grant and Dr Heffernan of the delusions
mentioned in [119] and [120] above. Had
the defendant really believed that her
life was in danger because her mother and Vern were planning to remove her
liver, I cannot
credit that she would not have mentioned it at some time before
seeing Dr Grant. Dr Grant was not sure how to explain
One of the possible
explanations must be that she was dishonest in the account she gave to the
reporting psychiatrists.
defendant has Borderline Personality Disorder. Personality traits referable to
that disorder include dishonesty and manipulation.
She has several criminal
convictions herself and has lived amongst people who have criminal histories.
At all times she has been
well aware of the legal issues which bore on her
rights. She told the police who presented the JEO that she wanted a solicitor
look at it. She gave the LEP good advice to stay silent when she spoke to
police. She told police who conducted the record‑of‑interview
she would remain silent and that she needed a solicitor. She says these things
before she is given her rights. For all that
she is inappropriate and
intoxicated on her arrest, she does not say anything which harms her legal
position. She tells the LEP
that she might end up in jail for a long time or
might end up on a “mental ward”. She tells the LEP that in
the charge of murder she will rely upon her psychiatric condition;
that she will bring everything up and “drag everything out
woodworks”.
[123] These
matters were explored with Drs Grant and Heffernan and both of them considered
that their opinions would remain unchanged,
even if they had regard only to the
psychotic symptoms which had been reported by the defendant to
Prime among these
delusions was the delusion that Vern and the defendant’s mother had been
having a relationship; that the
defendant was in fact Vern’s child; that
there were other children of the relationship between Vern and the
defendant’s
mother; that Vern had abused the defendant when she was a
child and that her mother had been complicit in this. My assisting
psychiatrist,
Dr Phillipson, described these delusions as “very deeply
disturbing delusions about the defendant’s sense of self”
1-26. Dr Voita agreed with
satisfied to the high standard described in
Schafferius
defendant did have, in the months before the killing, deteriorating mental
health and was experiencing the delusions described
at [123] above as to her
mother and Vern. There is evidence concerning the JEO and the notes of
conversations with the psychologists’
service, that the deceased lady was,
from October 2014, reporting that the defendant was experiencing a deterioration
in her mental
health. It is in October 2014 that Dennis was imprisoned and the
defendant was essentially homeless from that time. The instability,
need to stay with either her mother or Vern can, I think, be seen as
circumstances contributing to a deterioration in the
defendant’s mental
health. Assisting psychiatrist Dr Davison discussed this in his advice to
me. The fact that this deterioration
involved the defendant becoming psychotic
I think is evidenced in the letter which the deceased lady wrote to the
defendant dated
30 December 2014. She spoke there of the defendant making
accusations based on her imaginings and that the defendant now believed
imaginings, see [23] above.
defendant herself gave a history that her mental health began deteriorating in
she gave to the psychiatrist who saw
her in Townsville on the JEO. That she had a genuine belief to this effect is
evident in her
attempts to see the psychologist, referred to above. I think
that these attempts from September through to December 2014 also demonstrate
level of disorganisation on the part of the defendant. Even though she wanted
to make an appointment, she had great difficulty
actually making one and
attending it.
[126] Crucial to
my being satisfied about delusions described at [123] above are the
psychologist’s notes of 23 December 2014.
I think it clear that the
psychologist has not understood the defendant’s presentation the way the
evidence before this Court
enables it to be understood. The defendant presented
as “agitated and emotionally distraught”. She spoke about early
childhood memories about potential sexual abuse when she was a child less than
five years of age. The significance of that as an
integral part of the delusion
that Vern was her father and abused her as a child is evident in what she tells
the female drug dealer
immediately after the killing; the LEP after arrest, and
Drs Reilly and Neillie soon after arrest. Further, the note the psychologist
made on 23 December 2014 clearly raises the defendant’s belief that
her mother’s husband was not her real father. Again
this is central to
the delusion she had formed about Vern and her mother. The part of the note
“as he looked differently”
is, in my view, very likely to be related
to the sort of comments which the defendant makes to the drug dealer, the LEP
and Drs Reilly
and Neillie – that there are similarities in features such
as ears, etc, between Vern, the defendant’s siblings and Vern’s
[127] Whatever
scepticism I may have about the defendant’s honesty and reports to
Drs Grant and Heffernan, I cannot credit that
eight or nine days before the
killing the defendant attended upon the psychologist in order to lay a false
trail, in effect fabricating
a psychiatric defence she planned to use after she
killed her mother. The defendant was by that time effectively homeless and
disorganised.
I also note that the defendant’s daughter was aware the
defendant accused the deceased of sleeping with Vern – see [72]
For these reasons I do not think the third factual uncertainty I have outlined
means that s 269 of the Act prevents me dealing
with the reference.
[128] Once it is
accepted that the December 2014 attendance upon the psychologist was a genuine
one at which the defendant was distraught
and describing matters central to the
delusion she held about her mother and Vern, I do not think there can be any
doubt that she
held this delusion at the time of the killing. She does not make
any reference of it operating on her mind at the exact moment of
her attack on
her mother. However, it is evident that it was very much in her mind at about
this time: the attendance on the psychologist
shows this, as do the statements
she made to the female drug dealer after the killing and to the LEP in the
watch-house. In those
circumstances, I accept Dr Grant’s opinion, which I
have outlined at [103] above, that the holding of this delusion must have
substantial effect on the defendant’s mental state when other more mundane
matters triggered her becoming angry, and
then full of rage, with her mother at
the time of the killing.
[129] Both Drs
Grant and Heffernan talked about the defendant killing in a psychotic rage. I
accept the advice of Dr Phillipson,
my assisting psychiatrist, that this must be
an overstatement; if the defendant killed in a psychotic rage, one would expect
psychiatric opinion would support unsoundness. Nonetheless, the defendant
was certainly very angry at the time she killed. It seems
to me that the
capacity which was impaired was the capacity to control herself, rather than the
capacity to know that what she was
doing was wrong. Both to Dr Heffernan
and to Dr Grant she describes an impulsive, angry act. Both LGF’s counsel
and the Prosecutor
agreed in oral submissions that they saw the case in terms of
capacity to control, rather than capacity to know that the defendant
do the act. Again, Dr Phillipson’s advice to me was that he
preferred that part of Dr Grant’s view which was
to the effect that the
capacity which was impaired was the capacity of control.
[130] Particularly
I note the version which the defendant gave Dr Voita involved her saying that
she knew at the time of the killing
that what she did was wrong. I note the
confusion in Dr Heffernan’s evidence, referred at [107] above. At least
part of his
inconsistency was due to the Crown Prosecutor putting to him matters
which illustrated that the defendant did in fact know that what
she did was
The defendant’s
own account of herself was that she “lost it completely” when Vern
and her mother were “pushing
me and pushing me”; that she lost the
plot and that she snapped.
assisting psychiatrists advise I ought prefer the evidence of Drs Grant and
Heffernan. In all the circumstances, my finding
must be that the
defendant’s state of mind at the time of the killing was such that her
capacity to control her actions was
substantially impaired by her illness.
Current Circumstances
[132] I have a
report from Dr Mohiuddin, a psychiatrist with the Prison Mental Health Service.
He reports that the defendant is currently
diagnosed with schizophrenia and
treated by the Prison Mental Health Service in jail. She has been stable since
she was discharged
from the High Secure unit back to prison. She is insightful
as to her illness and was taken off an involuntary treatment order in
2016. Since then her engagement with Prison Mental Health Services has been
voluntary and satisfactory. Because she is in
prison she is abstinent from
drugs. Outside the controlled setting of prison she would be vulnerable to drug
and alcohol abuse and
relapse of her mental illness. Currently she is stable
and she is fit for trial.
Orders and Determinations
relation to the charge of stealing, the defendant was not of unsound mind at the
time of the offending; is fit for trial,
and the proceedings should continue
according to law.
relation to the charge of murder, the defendant was not of unsound mind at the
time of the killing; was of diminished responsibility
at the time of the
killing, and is fit for trial. Proceedings for manslaughter ought continue
according to
Interview 6 March 2015.
Interview 23 December
Interview 3 June 2016.
[2017] QMHC 4.
p 13 of her report.
p 11 of her report.
p 14 of her report.
tt 1-3 – 1-5.
Statements Brown and
Statement paragraph 6 and
an addendum statement from the neighbour, and statement of Cupitt.
I think Dr Voita has
misunderstood the layout of the house. She assumes that the bedrooms were
upstairs and the living areas were
downstairs – see the underlined
[2002] QMHC
per Wilson J, followed in
Hansen v Director of Public Prosecutions &
[2006] QCA 396
Dr Voita, tt 1-30-32; Dr
Heffernan, tt 1-76-77, and Dr Grant tt 1-50-53 and t 1-62.
Statement of Hogan.
This is the time Dr Voita
cites. I cannot see where she got it from, but it fits with the police
witnesses Dobinson and Cheeseman
who were tasked to attend the deceased’s
Her mother had recently had
her taken to a psychiatric ward for assessment. The evidence is that Vern had
to be restrained by police
as he tried to prevent this. The records at The Park
show that the defendant did own land and it may not be too unrealistic to think
Vern may have wanted it. While she was at The Park arrangements were made for
the defendant’s father to be her agent to deal
with the land, and there
does seem to be some element of prophylaxis in this.
The defendant was 36 years
old; Vern 44, and the deceased 71.
Vern has a criminal record,
but no convictions of this type.
Vern has never been a
This is incorrect. Vern
was born in 1969.
This son had been staying
in the downstairs bedroom in November and December 2014. He had put nine
kitchen knives between the mattress
and the floor. He told police he did that
because he was frightened his mother would attack him: she had waved a knife at
anger. The police never had these knives examined for fingerprints. The
defendant slept on this mattress. There was a base between
the mattress and the
floor. The knives were found between the base and the floor. In the absence of
fingerprints, I am not prepared
to infer that the defendant knew the knives were
See also his explanation of
much the same thing at tt 1-56-57.
t 1-83 and t 1-89.
t 1-19 (28 June 2018).
There was a coffee table
near the place where the [deceased lady] lay dead on the lounge-room floor.
There was also a very low
set of wire baskets with a solid top somewhere near
the wall which might or might not be closer to the deceased lady’s body
than the table used as a desk.
Above, p 383.
t 1-21 (28 June 2018).
t 1-7, t 1-10 and t 1-15
(10 August 2018).
tt 1-10-12 (10 August
t 1-20 per Dr Phillipson
and t 1-23 per Dr Davison (10 September 2018).
Voita, t 1-23; Grant tt
Grant, t 1-50 and t 1-62.
Dr Voita said that had she obtained the more flamboyant history of persecutory
delusions concerning the
defendant’s mother, she would have considered
that there was “at least some impairment” of the defendant’s
capacity to control herself at the time of the killing but would still not have
found a substantial impairment – tt 1-24-25.
Part of the difficulty Dr
Heffernan had was that, rather than address the statutory test: whether or not
the defendant had the capacity
to know she ought not do the act, he asked
questions about morality, and addressed the topic of whether or not at the time
killing the defendant could have reasoned with a moderate degree of
composure. This latter concept certainly comes from the case
law concerning the
capacity to know one ought not do the act complained of. But it is a common
thing in the Mental Health Court
for reporting psychiatrists to treat it as
definitive and not look to how the statute defines the capacity. It is
something which
might be useful to consider, in some cases, when testing whether
or not the capacity to know one ought not do the act is considered.
is a good illustration of why the dicta ought not be used in substitution for
the capacity itself. Someone who is impaired
in the capacity to control
themselves because they are enraged will not have the ability to reason with a
moderate sense of composure.
This does not mean they are impaired in their
capacity to know they ought not do the act.
See paragraphs [61]-[64]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (412 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter