URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/169.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Leeson v Jackson & Ors [2025] QDC 169 (14 November 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Leeson v Jackson & Others
[2025] QDC 169
DARREN ANCEL LEESON
(First plaintiff)
SCOTT ANTHONY JACKSON
(Second plaintiff)
DALE ROBINSON
(Third plaintiff)
LYNGOLD PTY LTD t/as ZAMMITS REARING AND SPELLING FARM ACN
(Defendant)
PROCEEDING:
Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court of Queensland, Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
14 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
29 September 2025
first and third plaintiffs pay the defendant’s costs of and incidental to
the review hearing of 29 September 2025 on an
indemnity basis
plaintiffs’ solicitors, Wright Law, are, within seven days of receipt of
these reasons, to provide to the first and third
plaintiffs a copy of these
CATCHWORDS:
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
COSTS – INDEMNITY COSTS – PARTICULAR CASES –
where first,
second and third plaintiffs commenced proceedings against the defendant for
damages for breach of contract, or alternatively,
negligence – where
errors were caused by the plaintiffs’ solicitor in filed material on the
Court file – where
unnecessary interlocutory proceedings were caused as a
result of these errors – where the defendant seeks the plaintiffs pay
costs of the interlocutory hearing on an indemnity basis and/or the
plaintiffs’ solicitor repay those costs under
Civil Procedure Rules 1999
– where costs usually follow the event
– whether the conduct on behalf of the first and third plaintiffs, and/or
representative, is unreasonable enough to depart from the ordinary order
as to costs.
LEGISLATION:
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) rr 69, 690, 702, 704
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Colgate-Palmolive Pty
[2020] FCA 598
Bale v Kimberley Developments Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2022] NSWSC 1009
Colgate-Palmolive Co v Cussons Pty Ltd
(1993) 46 FCR 225
Oshlack v Richard River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR
Smits v Tabone
[2007] QCA 337
The Beach Retreat Pty Ltd v Mooloolaba Marina Ltd
[2009] QSC 84
[2009] 2 Qd R 356
Wallis v Hunt
[2019] QDC 33
SOLICITORS:
Wright Legal for the first and third plaintiffs
Shand Taylor Lawyers for the defendant
Introduction
[1] On 20 June
2024, the first, second and third plaintiffs (collectively, the
) commenced proceedings against the defendant for damages for
breach of contract, or alternatively, negligence. At the time proceedings
commenced, all three plaintiffs were represented by Bennett & Philp
[2] At some
point, the first and third plaintiffs changed their representation and, from at
least 27 September 2024, were represented
by Alexander Law. The solicitor in the
then-employment of Alexander Law who had carriage of the matter was Mr Jacob
O’Shaughnessy.
A notice of change of solicitors was filed on 8 October
2024 confirming the Alexander Law acted on behalf of the first and third
plaintiffs. Then, on 19 November 2024, a notice was lodged informing the Court
and the parties that the second plaintiff was now
acting in person.
[3] On 24 April
2025, an incomplete (missing pages) amended statement of claim was filed by
Alexander Law. The amended statement of
claim provided that it was filed on
behalf of the “plaintiff
(emphasis added). There was no
indication on the amended statement of claim that it was filed on behalf of the
first and third plaintiffs
[4] Four months
later, on 28 August 2025, a notice of change of solicitor was filed. That notice
provided that Wright Law now acted
in place of Alexander Law. The notice stated
that it was filed on behalf of the “plaintiffs”. The notice of
solicitor was signed by Wright Law with the following description:
“solicitor for the first and second plaintiff”.
[5] At this
stage there had been no notice lodged that Alexander Law was no longer acting
for the third plaintiff, and no notice lodged
that Alexander Law was now acting
for the second plaintiff. Mr O’Shaughnessy was still the solicitor with
the carriage of the
file, albeit he was now engaged by Wright Law.
[6] In September
2025, two requests for subpoena were filed and requested to be issued on behalf
of the first, second and third plaintiffs.
The subpoena requests were prepared
by Wright Law. One of the subpoenas was directed to a Director of the defendant,
Mr George Zammit.
Mr Zammit is not a party to the proceeding. Mr Zammit, having
received a personal subpoena, applied to the court for an order that
subpoena to produce documents be set aside. Shand Taylor Lawyers, solicitors for
the defendant, informed the Court that Wright
Law did not provide them with a
copy of the Subpoena, or any notice that a Subpoena had been issued in relation
to these proceedings.
September 2025, Wright Law, purportedly on behalf of all of the plaintiffs, also
filed several notices of non-party disclosure.
Zammit’s application to set aside the subpoena was listed for hearing on
24 September 2025.
September 2025, the Court sought clarity from Mr O’Shaughnessy as to which
of the three plaintiffs Wright Law represented.
A review of the Court file
showed that Wright Law is only on the record as acting for the first and third
plaintiffs. There had been
nothing filed to indicate Wright Law was acting for
the second plaintiff. Despite this, email correspondence sent from Mr
O’Shaughnessy
to the Court on 24 September 2025 stated he acted for the
second plaintiff. Mr Zammit responded that he would like verification of
before proceeding further and that he was confused. The defendant’s
confusion was understandable.
[10] The Court
was not informed that Wright Law was not acting on behalf of all plaintiffs at
the 24 September 2025 hearing. Upon
becoming aware of this, the Court informed
the parties that until the issue of representation was resolved, the directions
discussed at the hearing could not be finalised. The second plaintiff
had not had an opportunity to appear and be heard at that hearing.
[11] The second
plaintiff, Mr Jackson, emailed the parties on 25 September 2025 and informed the
Court that he had:
(a) never spoken to, or paid, Mr O’Shaughnessy;
(b) never agreed to being represented by Mr O’Shaughnessy; and
(c) had no legal representation.
[12] The Court
notified the parties that there appeared to be two errors in the Notice of
Change of solicitor dated 28 August 2025.
First, it named Mr Zammit personally
as the first defendant. There has been no application made to the Court to join
Mr Zammit to
the proceeding (as would have been required pursuant to the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
Second, the
notice stated that Wright Law ILP, in the place of Alexander Law, now acts for
the first and second plaintiff. This notice
was consistent with the email from
Mr O’Shaughnessy dated 24 September 2025 but contradicts the
correspondence the Court received
from Mr O’Shaughnessy on 25 September
2025 stating that Wright Law ILP does not act for the second plaintiff.
[13] Owing to
the ongoing confusion in this matter, the Court brought the matter back on for
review on 29 September 2025 to remove
the confusion and to permit the
second plaintiff to be heard on the proposed applications and directions (the
Review Hearing
[14] At the
Review Hearing on 29 September 2025, Mr Jackson appeared and confirmed he had
not been made aware of the 24 September
2025 hearing and that Wright Law was not
acting on his behalf. Mr Jackson confirmed that he had mailed a notice of
discontinuance
to the Court, and the defendant confirmed they had consented to
the discontinuance by the second plaintiff. Mr O’Shaughnessy
confirmed he
made errors in his communications with the court and with respect to the Court
documents filed. Mr O’Shaughnessy
apologised for the errors and agreed to
file an affidavit to explain the cause of the errors. The Court noted that it
been stressful for Mr Zammit to have been suddenly named as a
personal defendant in the matter (the plaintiffs are claiming $1,060,000).
O’Shaughnessy again acknowledged that naming Mr Zammit as a party to the
proceeding on a Court document was an error.
O’Shaughnessy communicated with the Court concerning the Application and
other procedural matters regarding the proceeding
(a) 23 September 2025 at 1:41pm;
(b) 24 September 2025 at 2:50pm;
(c) 24 September 2025 at 4:24pm; and
(d) 25 September 2025 at 9:11am .
Taylor Lawyers, solicitors on record for the defendant, were not copied into any
of those communications referred to above.
Shand Taylor Lawyers submits those
communications were made without regard to regard to rule 22.5 of the
Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules 2023
prohibits a
solicitor from communicating with the Court about the substance of a case
without the opponent being present and having
proper notice.
accordance with the orders made on 29 September 2025, Mr O’Shaughnessy
filed and served an affidavit on 3 October 2025
explaining the errors that have
been made in the court documents filed and served including that:
(a) Mr Zammit had been personally named as a defendant in the proceeding in
circumstances where he had not been joined to the proceeding;
(b) the references to notices of non-party disclosure and request for subpoenas
being issued in the names of the first second and
third plaintiffs in
circumstances where Wright legal does not act for the second plaintiff; and
(c) in the notice of change of solicitor filed 27 August 2025, it describes
Wright Legal as acting for the first and second plaintiffs,
in circumstances
where Wright Legal does not act for the second plaintiff.
O'Shaughnessy explained that some of the above errors arose during the
transition of his clients’ file from Alexander
Law to Wright Law.
O’Shaughnessy explained that Alexander Law had gone into receivership in
August 2025 and that initially he was locked
out of the firm’s client
management system and had no access to client files. There was a stressful
period of trying to physically
move files and obtain client authorities during
this time under the guidance of the Queensland Law Society. Mr
O’Shaughnessy
says he was finally provided access to digital files on 3
September 2025 and that the errors occurred during this highly disruptive
challenging transition period when files were being migrated from Alexander Law
to Wright Law. Mr O’Shaughnessy describes
the errors as administrative and
clerical mistakes. Mr O’Shaughnessy says he has taken steps to correct
those errors. On 2
October 2025, Wright Law filed an amended notice of change of
solicitor to correctly reflect that Wright Law is only representing
and third plaintiffs. Mr O’Shaughnessy has apologised to the court, to the
parties and to Mr Zammit for the errors
and has also acknowledged that the
errors should have been identified and rectified during the review process.
[21] In response
to the explanation provided, the defendant
“12. While the defendant acknowledges that the
transition may have presented certain challenges, it is noted that:
(a) Mr O’Shaughnessy of Wright Law has had conduct of the file since at
least September 2024:
(b) the eCourt portal was available to Mr O’Shaughnessy and have been used
to confirm the identity of the parties to the proceeding;
(c) there was no apparent urgency to advance the matter in the circumstances
alleged, particularly if access to the plaintiffs’
file was limited; and
(d) the explanation does not justify the unnecessary time and expense incurred
by the defendant's solicitor in seeking to identify
and address the number of
errors and advise the defendant as to their nature and implications.
defendant submits that the need for addressing the various errors and receiving
advice to the nature and implications of the errors
described above, arose
because of the conduct on the part of the plaintiffs’, or alternatively,
the plaintiffs’ solicitor,
Mr O'Shaughnessy, in failing to exercise
appropriate diligence and facilitate the just and expeditious resolution of the
real issues
in the proceeding at a minimum of expense to the parties in
accordance with
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) (UCPR).
defendant ought to have its costs of and incidental to the application, on the
indemnity basis of assessment, or alternatively
on the standard basis of
assessment.
if her Honour Judge Grigg considers that the defendant's costs have been
incurred by reason of the plaintiff's solicitor's
conduct, the Court may
consider making an order under
[22] Following
receipt of Mr O’Shaughnessy’s affidavit, the parties were then given
the opportunity to address on the
costs of and incidental to the Review
defendant submits that the costs of the review hearing should be paid by the
applicant on an indemnity basis and, further,
or alternatively, that Mr
O’Shaughnessy pay those costs personally.
defendant proposed the following orders be made:
(a) the plaintiffs pay the costs of and incidental to the Review Hearing on an
indemnity basis; and/or
(b) the plaintiffs’ solicitor repay the
plaintiffs’ costs ordered to be paid to the defendant pursuant to
of the UCPR.
submissions were received from the first and third plaintiff or Mr
O’Shaughnessy regarding costs.
Consideration
starting point is that costs usually follow the event and are ordered to be paid
on a standard basis.
However, costs
may be ordered to be paid on an indemnity basis under r 704(1) of the UCPR.
[27] The issue
is whether the circumstances of this matter warrant an indemnity, as opposed to
a standard, cost order.
[28] Principles
relevant to the exercise of a discretion to order indemnity costs are set out in
numerous authorities, including
Smits v Tabone
[2007] QCA 337
, Cullinane J summarised the
principles by reference to
Colgate-Palmolive Co v Cussons Pty
(1993) 46 FCR 225 as follows:
“42. The normal
order for costs is on the standard basis and some special reason is required for
any departure from that.
Colgate-Palmolive Co v
Cussons Pty Ltd
(1993) 46 FCR 225 discussed the subject generally
and identified categories of cases in which it would be appropriate to make such
an order. These categories were not meant to be
exhaustive:
"Notwithstanding the fact that that is so, it is useful
to note some of the circumstances which have been thought to warrant the
of the discretion. I instance the making of allegations of fraud
knowing them to be false and the making of irrelevant allegations
of fraud (both
referred to by Woodward J in Fountain and also by Gummow J in
(1989) 92 ALR
evidence of
particular misconduct that causes loss of time to the Court and to other parties
(French J in Tetijo);
the fact that the proceedings were commenced or
continued for some ulterior motive
(Davies J in Ragata) or in
disregard of known facts or clearly established law
(Woodward J in Fountain
and French J in J-Corp (supra));
the making of allegations which ought never
to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions
(Davis J in Ragata); an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise (eg
Messiter v Hutchinson
(1987) 10 NSWLR 525
Hospital v Fisher (No 2)
(1992) 27 NSWLR 721
Crisp v Kent (unreported, Court of Appeal, NSW, Kirby P, Priestley
JA, Cripps JA, No
40744/1992, 27 September 1993) and an award of costs of an
indemnity basis against a contemnor (eg Megarry V-C in EMI Records (supra)).
Other categories of cases are to be found in the reports."
Rosniak v Government Insurance
(1997) 41 NSWLR 608
, the New South Wales Court of Appeal sounded
a cautious note at
the Court requires some evidence of unreasonable conduct, albeit that it need
not rise as high or vexation. This is because
party and party costs remain
the norm, although it is common knowledge that they provide an inadequate
indemnity. Any shift to a
general or common rule that indemnity costs
should be the order of the day is a matter for the legislature or the
rule-maker."”
(emphasis added).
[29] With the
above caution in mind, the issue comes down to whether the first and third
plaintiffs’ conduct, engaged in through
their solicitor, was conduct
warranting an indemnity costs order.
defendant submitted it was unnecessarily put to the inconvenience and cost of
instructing its solicitors to prepare for and
appear at the Review Hearing to
address the various errors in the documents filed and served by the plaintiffs.
[31] Correct
Notices of change of solicitors contain
relevant address and contract details
for service of relevant material so that all other parties, and the court, are
appropriately
and accurately
This prevents confusion
and delay. Failure to keep contact and representation details up to date and
accurate has the potential to
deny a party procedural fairness, as could have
occurred here.
[32] It is clear
that, at the very least, costs should follow the event and that a costs order in
favour of the defendant is warranted
in this instance. The issues are whether it
should be an order for indemnity costs as pressed by the defendant and against
an order should be made.
[33] Is the
conduct on behalf of the first and third plaintiffs, and/or their
representative, unreasonable enough to depart from the
ordinary order as to
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Colgate-Palmolive Pty
[2020] FCA 598
ACCC v Colgate-Palmolive
J said unreasonable conduct alone is not
sufficient:
unreasonableness must be not only present, but sufficient to warrant a departure
from the ordinary award of costs...”
[35] The Court
ACCC v Colgate-Palmolive
described the level of the unreasonable
conduct required, as a “high hurdle to
[36] There is no
explanation provided from the first or third plaintiffs, as Wright Law has
shouldered the entire blame for what has
[37] The conduct
of Wright Law was not in wilful disregard of the law or motivated by some
ulterior purpose, but it did cause delay,
distress, and unnecessary
inconvenience and expense to the second plaintiff, the defendant and Mr Zammit.
The discretion to award
indemnity costs might be exercised where there is what
is referred to as a “relevant delinquency”:
Oshlack v Richard
River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
, at [44]. In
Kimberley Developments Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2022] NSWSC 1009
explained that ““relevant delinquency” does not mean moral
delinquency or some ethical shortcoming, but
delinquency bearing a relevant
relation to the conduct of the
Ward CJ set out
circumstances in which indemnity costs may be awarded,
where a party has made allegations that ought never to have been made; where an
action has been commenced or continued
where the plaintiff, properly advised,
should have known the applicant had no chance of success; and where proceedings
commenced in wilful disregard of known facts or clearly established
law. An award of indemnity costs serves the purpose of compensating
fully for costs incurred when the Court takes the view that
unreasonable for the party against whom the order was made to have subjected the
innocent party to the expenditure of the case.
(emphasis added)
[38] Martin J in
The Beach Retreat Pty Ltd v Mooloolaba Marina Ltd
[2009] QSC 84
, observed that the discretion to order costs must be exercised
judicially in accordance with general legal principles pertaining
to the law of
costs. The exercise of the discretion comes down to a “fact-specific
inquiry informed by various relevant
considerations”.
Should an order be made under
690 Lawyer’s delay or neglect
The court may order a lawyer to repay to the lawyer’s client all or
part of any costs ordered to be paid by the client to another
party if the party
incurred the costs
because of the lawyer’s delay, misconduct or
(emphasis added)
[40] The errors
resulted in two hearings being required instead of one, or none.
[41] While the
circumstances here could not be described as a serious dereliction of duty, such
as failure to properly investigate
facts or law, they could be described as
inattentive mismanagement, or administrative failure that has resulted in
unnecessary litigation
costs being incurred by the defendant.
[42] I consider
the errors and delay resulting from the administrative oversight, or failure to
take sufficient care, constitute carelessness
and failure to pay due attention.
It is unreasonable for the defendant to have been subjected to this totally
unnecessary expenditure.
[43] In my view,
this matter is an appropriate situation in which to order indemnity costs.
[44] The Court
notes that Mr O’Shaughnessy has taken the necessary steps to correct the
record and that the requests for leave
to issue the subpoenas have been
[45] It is clear
from Mr O’Shaughnessy’s affidavit that the first, second, and third
plaintiffs are not responsible for
the errors in the filed court materials. It
may therefore seem unfair to order that the first and third plaintiffs are
responsible
for the costs incurred by the defendant as a result of these errors
and issues having to be addressed. In my view, Wright law should
compensate the
first and third plaintiffs for these costs orders.
[46] I believe
an appropriate order is one along the lines made by Reid DCJ in
[2019] QDC 33
within seven days of receipt of these
reasons, Wright Law is to provide to the first and third plaintiffs a copy of
these reasons.
[47] In the
circumstances, the first and third plaintiffs should pay the defendant’s
costs as thrown away by reason of the review
on an indemnity basis.
Uniform Civil Procedure
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v Colgate-Palmolive Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 598
Bale v Kimberley
Developments Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2022] NSWSC 1009
The Beach Retreat Pty
Ltd v Mooloolaba Marina Ltd
[2009] QSC 84
; 2 Qd R 356 at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (229 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter