URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Johnston, B. H. v Qbsa [2003] QBT 29 (30 June 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 029
JOHNSTON v Queensland Building Services Authority[2003] QBT
JOHNSTON Brian Henry
Queensland Building Services Authority
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
30 June 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
25 June 2003
DECISION OF:
Mr P. Lohrisch
CATCHWORDS:
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
, sections 88, 106, 105 &
REPRESENTATION:
SOLICITORS:
Winchester Young & Maddern
RESPONDENT:
In house-lawyer
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Introduction
This is an application by the Applicant
for orders:
That an order made by this Tribunal on 25
March 2003 dismissing application Q221-02 (this application) be re-opened
pursuant to section
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
(“the Act”);
The decision of the Queensland Building
Services Authority (“the Authority” in the event that all other
orders sought
by the Applicant are decided in his favour) made 25 March 2003 to
cancel the Applicant’s licence be annulled or
The decision to cancel the
Applicant’s license be stayed pending the hearing of this
application;
The enlargement of all necessary time
limits to permit the hearing of this application;
Such further or other orders the Tribunal
may see fit to ensure fairness to the Applicant and
Respondent.
Additionally the Applicant seeks (without
challenge by the Authority) that the Authority’s application made 25 March
dismiss this application (successful at the time) be dismissed. This
would have the effect of allowing the Applicant’s application
categorised as a
“permitted individual”
in the terms of
section 56AF of the
Queensland Building Services Authority Act
primary application) to proceed without further delay.
To expand upon what is required by the
Applicant to reach that point it is I think necessary to first relate the facts
which essentially
are undisputed.
By application (the primary application)
brought by the Applicant’s then solicitors Barrell Lawyers on 22 November
Applicant sought orders that the Applicant be catergorised as a
“permitted individual”
in terms of the
Queensland Building
Services Authority Act
1991, and that, as a result, avoid categorisation as
an excluded individual which would lead to cancellation of his
The primary application, whilst being
filed with the Tribunal, was apparently not served on the Authority, the
Authority obtaining
of a copy of the application from the registry of the
Nonetheless directions were given in the
matter of the primary application, the Directions Hearing being on 6 February
2003 attended
by the Applicant’s then legal representative Mr Barrell.
Relevantly the directions required the Applicant to file material
in support of
the primary application and in response to the Authority’s statement of
reasons by 14 March 2003. Additionally
the matter was adjourned for a further
directions hearing on 25 March 2003.
Not only did the Applicant, through his
solicitors, not file material pursuant to the above mentioned direction, but
also neither
the Applicant nor his legal representative attended the Directions
Hearing on 25 March 2003.
As a result, and on the above grounds (and
as well the ground of non-service by the Applicant of the primary application)
the Authority
made application to the Tribunal on 25 March 2003, pursuant to
section 51 of the Act, that the primary application be dismissed.
application was successful.
There was accordingly then no application
on foot seeking orders that the Applicant be catergorised as a
“permitted individual”
. The result was that, pursuant to
section 56AF of the
Queensland Building Services Authority
Authority was at liberty to cancel the Applicant’s license which it did on
25 March 2003 (the cancellation), notifying
the Applicant of that cancellation
by letter dated that same day.
Section 105 of the Act required the
Applicant to lodge a review application for review of the Authority’s
decision to cancel
his license within 28 days after receiving written
notification of the cancellation. It is common ground that no such application
was lodged by or on behalf of the Applicant prior to the application lodged with
the Tribunal by the Applicant through Mr Young,
solicitor, on 17 June
In making the current application through
Mr Young solicitor, the Applicant filed three affidavits, one by himself, the
Mr Young and the third by Mr Barrell, the Applicant’s former
By his affidavit the Applicant said that,
in or about November 2002, he instructed his then solicitor Alan Barrell to file
an application
with the Tribunal for the Applicant to be categorised as a
“permitted individual”
(the primary application). That of
course, as I have indicated, was done. The Applicant said that he then left the
matter entirely
in the hands of Mr Barrell as he had trust and confidence in
him. The Applicant said that he next received the letter of 25 March
the Authority advising that his license had been cancelled. To his affidavit
the Applicant annexed copies of facsimiles
to his former solicitor both prior to
and subsequent to 25 March 2003, both chasing up his solicitor as to what was
happening, and
also, in letters dated 2 April and 28 February, providing the
substance of material necessary to prepare supporting documentation
primary application.
It is clear that the material annexed by
the Applicant shows increasing concern and frustration by the Applicant in not
being informed
by Mr Barrell as to what was happening. Indeed it would appear
from the affidavit from Mr Barrell that Mr Barrell simply accepts
that, other
than preparing and filing the primary application on 22 November 2002, he had
done nothing including not attending at
the directions hearing on 25 March 2003.
Indeed in his affidavit Mr Barrell
attributes the failure of the Applicant to attend to the Tribunal’s
directions as entirely
his own fault and not in any way attributable to the
Applicant himself. Mr Barrell said further that he had obtained all the
instructions from the Applicant prior to 14 March 2003 for him to
prepare material required by the directions. Mr Barrell attributes
his failure
to do so as being due to other pressing matters within his practice, he being a
sole practitioner, preventing him from
giving the Applicant’s matter the
attention it deserved. He said that as a result he surrendered carriage of the
As appears from Mr Young’s
affidavit, Mr Young notified the Tribunal of the change of legal representation
on or about 16 June
2003, having been appointed by the Applicant as his
solicitor on or about 3 June 2003.
Submissions and
Given the above scenario the Applicant,
in order to reach the stage where the primary application can proceed, requires
orders from
the Tribunal as follows:
An order pursuant to section 88(1) of the
Act that, the order made on 25 March 2003 on application by the Authority be
An order pursuant to section 44(2)(a) of
the Act, for the purposes of (1) above that the time within in which such an
application
be made be extended to the date of the filing of this current
application, namely 17 June 2003.
An order pursuant to section 106(1) of
the Act that the Authority’s decision to cancel the Applicant’s
licence (in the
Authority’s letter dated 25 March 2003) be stayed.
Consistent with that section there has already been an application for review
that decision pursuant to section 104(1)(c) and section 105 included in the
current application.
An order pursuant to section 44(2)(a) of
the Act that the time for bringing an application to review cancellation of the
Applicant’s
license be extended beyond the 28 day period set down in
section 105 and up to and including 17 June 2003.
Before time can be extended pursuant to
section 44(2)(a), the Applicant must establish three
An adequate explanation for the
The substantive merits of the primary
application; and
There has been no prejudice
to the Authority.
Satisfying these criteria must also
justify revoking the Tribunal’s order of 25 March 2003 pursuant to section
88(1) application.
I should say in respect
to the third criteria that the Authority concedes there is no prejudice. I
should say also that, contrary
to the Authority’s submission, I am not
satisfied that the time limit imposed by section 88(2) is mandatory in the sense
it cannot be subject of a claim for an extension of time pursuant to
section 44(2)(a).
The Authority also submits that there has
not been adequate explanation for the delay, as the actions of Mr Barrell must
as the actions of the Applicant, Mr Barrell being the Applicant’s
solicitor or agent.
Whilst it might be that a solicitor is
his client’s agent, a client is, in my view, entitled to rely upon the
solicitor or agent
to protect that person’s rights in a matter entrusted
to that solicitor, particularly where, as is the case here, the Applicant
demonstrated by copies of facsimiles and letters having chased up his solicitor
several times and further having provided that
solicitor with all necessary
instructions to allow that solicitor to perform the works required of that
solicitor to protect that
persons interests.
It seems to me that there is little more
that the Applicant could reasonably have been expected to have done to protect
his interests,
save perhaps withdrawing his solicitor’s retainer sooner
than he did. Nonetheless it is clear that such earlier action would
served to have reduced the extension of time required rather than to have
eliminated entirely the problem involved with
the solicitor’s inactivity.
The Authority further submits that Mr
Barrell’s affidavit does not establish inactivity after 25 March
2003. Whilst that is
strictly correct, it is clear from the Applicant’s
annexed material that the Applicant was pursuing his solicitor for information
subsequent to 25 March 2003 but was, it seems, getting
In all of the circumstances I consider
that there has been more than adequate explanation by the Applicant for the
delay in respect
of each of the necessary applications for an extension of time.
The next matter involves the substantive
merits of the Applicant’s primary application. This does not involve a
me that, given that the Applicant is permitted to proceed with the
primary application, he will be successful. All that is necessary
Applicant to establish that the Applicant has reasonable prospects or an
arguable case.
Whilst the material before me,
particularly the statement of reasons, suggests that there is some disagreement
between the Authority
and the Applicant’s advisers as to what the
Applicant is required to demonstrate, nonetheless both the material annexed to
the statement of reasons and the two letters from the Applicant to his former
solicitor Mr Barrell annexed to the Applicant’s
affidavit supporting this
application, demonstrate, to my mind, that the Applicant’s primary
application has merit and that
the Applicant should be given the opportunity to
pursue that application through to a hearing. That is more particularly so, in
my view, given the gravity that cancellation of the Applicant’s license
would have on the Applicant’s ability to maintain
livelihood.
I should say that I do not agree with the
Authority’s submission that its decision to cancel the Applicant’s
licence pursuant
to section 56AF is a decision which, although it is strictly
reviewable, has not been addressed by the Applicant in his material
in the sense
that there has been established reasonable grounds for, and upon which, that
decision could be reviewed.
In my view, put simply, the cancellation
of the license pursuant to section 56AF resulted from the order Tribunal’s
of 25 March
2003 dismissing the Applicant’s primary application, there
than being no primary application in existence or impeding action
Authority pursuant to section 56AF. Such a scenario does not, in my view, mean
that, in terms of section 56AF(3)(b)(ii)B,
the primary application was
“not proceeded with”
. I consider that the words
“not proceeded with”
in that sub-section
essentially that the application had been discontinued or withdrawn by the
Applicant, not, as was the case here, dismissed on
application by the Authority.
Given my conclusions above, I consider
that the circumstances are such that I should additionally, pursuant to section
106(1) of the
Act, order that the Authority’s decision to cancel the
Applicant’s licence be stayed pending the hearing of the Applicant’s
primary application, or until further order by this
In that regard, in the event that the
Applicant is successful in the primary application and he is catergorised as a
“permitted individual”
, the basis for the Authority’s
decision to cancel his license would no longer exist and a continuation of that
decision would
not be maintainable.
Accordingly the application for review of
the Authority’s decision to cancel the Applicant’s licence would
event, as it were, of the primary
application.
Orders/Directions
The Authority’s decision of the 25
March 2003 to cancel the Applicant’s licence (as contained in its letter
to the Applicant
of that date) is stayed pending the hearing of an application
by the Applicant (the primary application) to be catergorised as a
“permitted individual”
in terms of section 56 AD of the
Queensland Building Services Act
1991 or until further order of this
That, pursuant to section 44(2)(a) of the
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
2000 (the Act), time be extended to and
including 17 June 2003 for the purposes of an application by the Applicant under
section 88(1)
of the Act to review the order of this Tribunal made 25 March
That pursuant to section 44(2)(a) of the
Act, time be extended to and including 17 June 2003 for the purposes of an
application by
the Applicant under section 105 of the Act to review the decision
of the Queensland Building Services Authority of 25 March 2003
cancel the Applicant’s licence.
The Applicant’s application
pursuant to section 88(1) of the Act to review the order of the Tribunal of 25
March 2003 be allowed
and that the Tribunal’s order be
I direct that the Applicant file in the
registry two copies and deliver to the Respondent one copy of statements upon
which he seeks
to rely in support of the primary application
4:00PM ON 18 JULY 2003
The primary application is adjourned to
the registry for a further directions hearing to assess the state of the
material filed by
the Applicant at a time and date to be advised by the registry
but subsequent to 18 July 2003.
The Applicant shall pay to the Respondent
its costs of and incidental to this application to be assessed on an indemnity
accordance with the District Court Scale.
The parties are given leave to re-list
this matter in the event that there is no agreement as to costs.
..................................................
P. LOHRISCH - MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 029
Application No:
Brian Henry Johnston
C/- Winchester Young & Maddern
WOOLLOONGABBA Qld 4101
Respondent:
Queensland Building Services Authority
11 Edmondstone
SOUTH BRISBANE QLD 4101
- Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
Upon hearing Mr Young on behalf of the applicant and Mr Robinson on
behalf of the respondent, the Queensland Building Tribunal makes
the following
The Authority’s decision of the 25
March 2003 to cancel the Applicant’s licence (as contained in its letter
to the Applicant
of that date) is stayed pending the hearing of an application
by the Applicant (the primary application) to be catergorised as a
“permitted individual”
in terms of section 56 AD of the
Queensland Building Services Act
1991 or until further order of this
That, pursuant to section 44(2)(a) of the
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
2000 (the Act), time be extended to and
including 17 June 2003 for the purposes of an application by the Applicant under
section 88(1)
of the Act to review the order of this Tribunal made 25 March
That pursuant to section 44(2)(a) of the
Act, time be extended to and including 17 June 2003 for the purposes of an
application by
the Applicant under section 105 of the Act to review the decision
of the Queensland Building Services Authority of 25 March 2003
to cancel the
Applicant’s licence.
The Applicant’s application
pursuant to section 88(1) of the Act to review the order of the Tribunal of 25
March 2003 be allowed
and that the Tribunal’s order be
I direct that the Applicant file in the
registry two copies and deliver to the Respondent one copy of statements upon
which he seeks
to rely in support of the primary application
4:00PM ON 18 JULY 2003
The primary application is adjourned to
the registry for a further directions hearing to assess the state of the
material filed by
the Applicant at a time and date to be advised by the registry
but subsequent to 18 July 2003.
The Applicant shall pay to the Respondent
its costs of and incidental to this application to be assessed on an indemnity
accordance with the District Court Scale.
The parties are given leave to re-list
this matter in the event that there is no agreement as to costs.
......................................................
MR P. LOHRISCH - MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Date: 30 June 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (128 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter