URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Edgemill Pty Ltd v Qbsa [2003] QBT 27 (27 June 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 027
Edgemill Pty Ltd v QBSA
[2003] QBT Q009-03
EDGEMILL PTY LTD
QUEENSLAND BUILDING SERVICES AUTHORITY
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
27 June 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
9 May & 12 June 2003
DECISION OF:
Ms L Bradford-Morgan
CATCHWORDS:
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
– Subsidence Policy
– contractor “reasonable care” – Category 1 defect
REPRESENTATION:
SOLICITORS:
Watson & Quinn Lawyers
RESPONDENT:
Mr Budden - In-house solicitor
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Edgemill Pty Ltd (“the
Applicant”), commenced proceedings against the Queensland Building
Services Authority (“the
Authority”) on 8 January 2003 seeking a
review of its decision of 13 December 2002 to issue a Direction to Rectify
in premises constructed by the Applicant for Mr Averono (“the
Direction to Rectify and/or Complete No. 24648 dated 13 December 2002
(“the Direction”) required the Applicant to
perform rectification
work necessary to rectify the following
“Dwelling is suffering from excessive
movement causing cracking to internal
At paragraph 1(A) of the Application
(Exhibit 1) the Applicant contended that it carried out the construction of the
dwelling in accordance
with the engineer’s design and that he relied upon
the skill of Soiltest Australia, Consulting Engineers, who designed the
and slab for the dwelling and undertook soil testing, and Building Approvals and
Inspection Consultants Pty Ltd, who carried
out inspections of the slab and
footings during construction.
It is the Authority’s submission
that the Applicant failed to take reasonable care to ensure that subsidence or
settlement would
not occur as the slab was placed on more than 400mm of fill in
some areas, contrary to the design engineer’s express
instruction.
It is accepted that the dwelling was
completed in March 2001. At paragraph 1(A)(vi) of the application the Applicant
submitted that
the Homeowner notified it of cracking to the exterior mortar and
interior linings in March 2002 and, following an inspection, the
formed the view that the rectification works were not the result of its
defective work.
Further, it is the Applicant’s
contention, at paragraph 1(A)(ix) that the cause of the cracking to the interior
linings of the
dwelling is movement in the slab due to site conditions. The
Applicant concedes that the levels taken of the slab indicate movement,
it asserts that the slab and footings were constructed in accordance with the
engineer’s design and certified during
construction. It is the
Applicant’s case that the movement of the slab appears to have been caused
or contributed to by dry
conditions and a lack of drainage surrounding the
At paragraph 1(B) of the Application the
Applicant submits that the decision of the Authority should be
“stayed” as the
cost of work required to rectify defects in the
dwelling is substantial and would involve significant time and expense and
that the Applicant is not aware of any danger to the structure or
dwelling or safety to the occupants. Further, at paragraph 1(B)(i)c
Applicant submitted that
“on the balance of hardship, the inconvenience
of the work being delayed does not outweigh the inconvenience to the Applicant
being required to carry out substantial works in circumstances where the
Applicant claims it ought not be required to do
THE AUTHORITY’S CASE
The Authority delivered its Statement of
Reasons on 3 February 2003 (marked Exhibit 4). It is the Authority’s case
9 August 2002 it received a complaint from the Homeowner, and upon
inspecting the premises on 9 September 2002, the Authority’s
inspector Mr
Robert Clayton observed cracks to wall linings and floor tiles and concluded
that the foundations of the premises were
moving. Further, Mr Clayton
recommended a programme of monitoring the site by taking levels, and
subsequently Soiltest Australia,
consulting engineers (the engineer’s that
had designed the footings and slab of the premises), were commissioned to
investigate.
The report by Soiltest Australia Consulting Engineers dated 27
September 2002 (Annexure “SOR8” to the Statement of Reasons)
concluded as follows:
“Soiltest ... has
undertaken additional works to determine moisture profiles and to also establish
if the private certifier
has correctly identified the foundation founding
material as laid out within our design documentation ...
been confirmed by both a field technician and our structural engineer that the
piers were not installed as per our documentation.
We have also
determined that there has been significant moisture loss in the clays from the
areas of concern and it appears that
the trees may also have contributed to the
subsidence observed.
Please find logs with moisture contents
The Soiltest report attaches
correspondence from Axis Surveys, consulting surveyors, of 25 September 2002
which contains a schedule
of level variations at the premises at 30 different
points taken on 4 July 2002 and 24 September 2002.
The inspection report by Mr Clayton of the
Authority of 9 September 2002 (Annexure “SOR4”) also concluded that
a difference in levels across the slab of approximately 40mm and,
after consideration of the Soiltest report, he formed the view
that the licensee
had failed to construct in accordance with the engineer’s design. Mr
Clayton also noted a failure to install
any articulation in an end wall which
spanned 9610mm. The inspection report also
Site drainage is not satisfactory
water is ponding around dwelling but this may be from
Trees are on property
and on adjoining
Concrete to paths and
Findings and
Probable Causes:
That movement has occurred and
indications suggest either foundation failure or movement caused by wetting and
drying of surrounding
Recommendation:
Monitor for several months to
determine if movement warrants further action.”
At paragraph 3.4 of the Authority’s
Statement of Reasons (Exhibit 4) it is submitted that the Authority had taken
into account
its Subsidence Policy which provided that contractors would not
usually be held responsible for subsidence or settlement of a building
“... in the opinion of the Authority, the contractor has taken
‘reasonable care’ to ensure that subsidence or settlement
. In the explanatory notes to the Subsidence Policy the term
“reasonable care”
is defined to include the requirement that
“the contractor has constructed the footings and slab of the building
in accordance with the design prepared by the designing
engineer and that the
contractor must comply with all components of the engineer’s
The Authority concluded that the
Applicant had failed to construct the dwelling in accordance with the design
documentation prepared
by Soiltest Australia, as the slab under the
hexagonal-shaped dining room (with bay windows) was placed on up to 800mm of
the design included a requirement not to exceed 400mm of fill. Further
it concluded that the design had been changed by the Applicant
consultation with Soiltest Australia, and consequently the Authority issued the
Direction to the Applicant.
The annexures to the Authority’s
Statement of Reasons include correspondence to the Applicant dated 13 September
2002 (Annexure
“SOR5”) which required the installation of
articulation joints to the external brickwork to Bedroom 1 and requested a
of the soil test and footing slab design, floor plan layout and inspection
certificates and drainage tests on all surfaces.
The inspection report by Mr
Clayton of the Authority (Annexure “SOR4”) records that the
Applicant’s representative,
Mr Tony Kempe, failed to attend the on-site
inspection convened by the Authority on 9 September 2002.
Annexure “SOR9” to the
Authority’s Statement of Reasons is a letter from Mr Kempe on behalf of
the Applicant to
the Authority enclosing the Foundation report from Soiltest
Australia dated 9 October 2000 (“the Foundation report”)
classifies the site as a Class “M” site and further provides (at
page 2) as follows:
PREPARATION
The construction pad is to be cleared of
vegetation and loose material. The pad is to be prepared in accordance with the
site preparation details as indicated to Soiltest Australia Consulting
Engineers Pty Ltd (ie cut/fill, total cut etc). ...
It is recommended that the edge beam (footing) and
slab are constructed as indicated on the attached design details. It is also
recommended that the edge beam is founded at least 200mm into suitable founding
On this site the suitable founding material
NATURAL STIFF SILTY CLAY
Where the depth to suitable founding
material is significant, excavated or drilled piers can be adopted. It is also
required that
2/Y12 bars are located at the intersection of the slab thickenings
and the edge beam, projecting 400mm into the edge beam and lapping
the thickening reinforcement (as detailed on foundation sketch). Where the
length of drilled footing piers exceeds 1500mm,
they are to be reinforced with
4/Y12 bars tied to an R6 spiral at 150mm pitch or equivalent and tied into the
edge beam footing cage.
FILL BENEATH THE
Organic material, highly reactive clays and large rocks
are not suitable for use as fill. Fill is to be spread in 150mm deep layers
extensively track-rolled with a Drott.
fill depth is not to
exceed 400mm
PAD FOOTINGS FOR POSTS AND
POINT LOADS
These footings are to be founded in the same
material as the edge beam. The minimum depth of these footings is to be 750mm.
depth may be reduced where refusal on shallow rock is encountered
MASONRY ARTICULATION
All masonry walls,
except retaining walls, require full height (footings to eaves) articulation at
8 metre spacings (maximum) regardless
of corners ...
Proper maintenance of such clay sites requires that
the moisture content of the clay should be kept reasonably constant. At no time
during construction or subsequently should water be allowed to pond on or near
the footing.”
The Foundation report attaches a
foundation sketch at page 4 which shows an estimated cut/fill line and piers on
the perimeter of
the dwelling on the right side of the fill line which includes
the area of the hexagonal dining room.
Annexure “SOR10” to the
Authority’s Statement of Reasons is a memorandum by Mr Robert Clayton of
the Authority of
his meeting with Mr Williamson of Soiltest Australia. The file
memorandum records that there had been no attendance by Mr Kempe
certifying engineer, Mr Chandra and records Mr Williamson’s statement that
as design engineer he is not responsible
for changes to his design that were not
approved, and further records his opinion that the footings are sited in silty
and not into suitable founding material. The memorandum also records
the Authority’s decision to direct the Applicant to perform
rectification
works and annexes the Queensland Building Services Board Policy on
Subsidence/Settlement.
Evidence of Mr
The Authority relied upon the statement
of Mr Clayton (marked Exhibit 5) dated 21 March 2003. It was the evidence of Mr
Clayton that
after consideration of the report of Soiltest Australia of 1
October 2002, which concluded that the dwelling had not been constructed
accordance with its Foundation report, he formed the view that the Applicant was
responsible for rectification as the movement
in the slab due to subsidence or
settlement was a consequence of the Applicant’s failure to construct in
accordance with the
engineering design. At paragraph 7 of his statement Mr
Clayton concluded that it was appropriate for a Direction to issue, independent
of whether or not the movement experienced was within the allowable limits of
20mm to 40mm for an “M” Class site after
weighing the extent of
movement, the damage to the premises, and the potential for further movement due
to subsidence of the premises
where placed on uncontrolled
During cross-examination Mr Clayton
agreed that his initial inspection report noted that lack of drainage may be a
factor, but noted
that at that stage he kept an open mind as he could not form a
view without further investigation. Mr Clayton was referred to the
Authority’s Subsidence Policy and stated that the damage to the premises
could not be processed as a subsidence claim as it
was his view that the
contractor had not built in accordance with the engineer’s design. Mr
Clayton was referred to subparagraph
(c) of the Subsidence Policy which
“Contractors will usually not be held
responsible for the subsidence or settlement of a building
(c) in the opinion of the Authority,
the contractor has taken ‘reasonable care’ to ensure that subsidence
or settlement
would not occur”
Mr Clayton referred to the explanatory
notes to paragraph (c) of the Subsidence/Settlement Policy and expressed the
view that the
Applicant had not exercised reasonable care as, in his view, there
was a failure of supervision to allow construction of the hexagonal
dining room
on 700mm to 800mm of fill when the design engineer’s Foundation report
stipulated a maximum of 400mm fill. Mr
Clayton gave evidence that
my levels the front of the house has dropped”
It was Mr Clayton’s evidence in
cross-examination that the damage to the premises required the stabilisation of
the front of
the house and provision of adequate site drainage. Mr Clayton
expressed the view that if the rectification was limited to improving
drainage on the
“high side”
(cut side) of the house that
there would be a structural failure within the next twelve months. Mr Clayton
was referred to the Australian
Standard 2870 which indicated the permissible
range of movement of 20mm to 40mm and he responded that the deflection was not
the whole of the slab and in concluding that a Direction should issue, he
had considered the serviceability and liveability of the
Evidence of Mr Williamson
The Authority relied upon the statement
of Mr Williamson of Soiltest Australia dated 28 March 2003 (Exhibit 7). Mr
Williamson’s
statement responds to the report of Mr Woffinden of Cardno
MBK in the following terms:
“... We refute the
comment on page two section B ‘Footing and Slab Design’. Internal
beams depart from deemed
to comply requirements of the Code AS2870 design
criteria for a stiffened raft for the following reasons,
I. AS2870 design criteria are based upon 400 Mpa steel strength. Steel strength
supplied within the SE Queensland area is 500Mpa.
dimensions both vertically and width differs from the AS2870 indicative
Attached are the engineering
calculations proving compliance with AS2870 by first principles for a class
‘M’ clay site.
Soiltest Australia
... state that the foundations were not founded 200mm into the specified
‘Natural Stiff Silty Clay’
as per design documentation, but piers
were founded on top of and not into the specified material. It has been
identified in three
test pits out of four pits where this was the case –
refer to the report by Foundation Engineering Services dated 21
January 2003.
We also emphasize that there had been no slab piers
installed. However there was 700mm to 800mm of fill identified both in the
MBK and Foundation Engineering Services Report. The design documentation
of Soiltest ... for the abovementioned site on page 2 it
is stated ‘Fill
depth is not to exceed 400mm’.
Given the depth of fill in
these circumstances, slab piers are required. The absence of slab piers results
in a significant weakening
of the slab and is contrary to
We also point out that within the design documentation of
Soiltest ... page 1 we clearly state that ‘
should soil conditions
vary significantly from those indicated in this report, or if the proposed
building design or proposed site
preparation details are changed Soiltest ... is
to be notified immediately in order to present amended
recommendations’
For these reasons we are of the
opinion that the engineer has varied from the actual design by us and the intent
of the design documentation
and as a result has taken liability for the changed
foundation design which now exists in the structure.”
During cross-examination Mr Williamson
stated that he believed that the engineer (Mr Chandra) retained by the Applicant
and inspect the footings did not fulfil his obligations as the
construction was not built in accordance with his design. Mr Williamson
expressed the view that the absence of slab piers was a
“contributing
but not the only factor contributing to the damage to the premises”
Mr Williamson was referred to his company’s letter to the Homeowner of 5
April 2002 (Annexure “TK8” to the statement
of Mr Kempe –
Exhibit 2) which provided:
‘... Investigation
revealed a noticeable mortar crack of approximately 3mm maximum width beginning
from the bottom left hand
corner of the front study window and continuing
diagonally down to slab level very near the porch entry. Damage in this region
also evidenced by the entry door sticking and a 1500mm length of cornice
lifting from the entry hall. Besides some extremely minor
cracks evident in two
corners of Bedroom 4 and near the doorway cornice of Bedroom 2, the only other
damage worth noting is a 1mm
wide crack in the Bathroom which is both a tension
and displacement crack due to a twisting of this wall. ...
Damage of this nature aligns with Damage Category 2 in
accordance with AS2870 and is deemed to be expected on reactive clay sites.
It is our considered opinion that this damage is due to
slight ground movement. The most likely cause of which, being either an
settling of the slab, or through a change in moisture conditions brought about
by relatively poor and ‘non-uniform’
drainage conditions around the
slab perimeter ... It is recommended that site drainage be improved so as to
stabilise the moisture
conditions on site ...”
Mr Williamson agreed that it had been his
“drainage on the cut side of the premises was a
and therefore that laying of concrete paths around the
perimeter of the slab would assist. During cross-examination Mr Williamson
refuted the contention that the absence of slab piers did not impact upon the
level of movement. Mr Williamson referred to the Foundation
expressed the view that there should have been seven slab piers installed
(predominantly around the hexagonal dining room)
as the depth of fill in this
area significantly exceeded 400mm.
APPLICANT’S CASE
The Applicant relied upon the evidence of
Mr Kempe, a Director of the Applicant Company (Exhibit 2) and the statement of
Mr Chandra,
Consulting Engineer (Exhibit 3).
of Mr Kempe
At paragraph 5 of Mr Kempe’s
statement he referred to the specifications (page 3) which provided that
“At completion of the home the Builder will grade the ground level
surrounding the slab, over the first metre for the building
to fall of 50mm.
Landscaping/Earthworks to the rest of the property is the client’s
responsibility ...”
At paragraph 9 of Mr Kempe’s
statement he contends that the ground level surrounding the slab was graded over
the first metre
from the building to a fall of 50mm. It is the
Applicant’s case that Mr Chandra of Building Approvals and Inspections
Consultants
Pty Ltd, Engineer, provided inspection certificates for the slab and
footings to certify that the slab and footings were constructed
in accordance
with the engineer’s details.
Mr Kempe, at paragraph 13, records that
when he was contacted by the Homeowner in March 2002 regarding cracks in the
interior of the
the CSIRO Australia, as it was his view that the problem might be related to
drainage. Mr Kempe referred to the report of Soiltest
Australia of 5 April 2002
which recommended the repair of visual damage which was undertaken by the
Applicant, together with ongoing
monitoring of levels.
At paragraph 15 Mr Kempe records that it
was his view that the damage that was occurring was not acceptable and, for this
he continued to monitor the performance of the dwelling. At paragraph
20 Mr Kempe records that after discussions with consulting
engineers and
Soiltest no agreement could be reached on the cause of the movement and the best
means of rectification. Mr Kempe
was referred to the conclusion of Soiltest
Australia that piers were not founded to natural stiff silty clay, and he
responded that
Mr Chandra did not concur with this conclusion. It is the
Applicant’s contention that the building was constructed in accordance
with the design engineer’s specification for slab and
The Applicant also relied upon the
conclusion of Mr Woffinden of Cardno MBK that the structure has
sustained any structural distress at this time and the movement should be
controlled by management of site moisture content
(paragraph 26)”
paragraphs 27 and 28 of his statement Mr Kempe took issue with the conclusion of
Soiltest Australia that the Applicant did not
construct the slab and footings in
accordance with its design, and expressed the view that
“the movement
is the result of poor drainage and environmental conditions and/or
During cross-examination Mr Kempe
conceded that Mr Woffinden found that the fill was to a depth of 0.7 to 0.8
metres near the pier
on the hexagonal shaped dining room. During
cross-examination Mr Kempe conceded that he did not measure the depth of the
fill before
construction, and he responded
“70% of the house is on
natural ground”
. Mr Kempe admitted that one pier was on an outcrop in
700mm of fill. On several occasions Mr Kempe made the statement that he had
“hired a design engineer and a certifying engineer – what more
could I do?”
Mr Kempe conceded that he was not on site
when the footings were poured, however he expressed the view that the
construction had been
built in accordance with the engineer’s design,
notwithstanding his concession that a pier had been placed on 700mm of fill
(without the installation of slab piers) in circumstances where the Foundation
report expressly stipulated that the depth of fill
was not to exceed 400mm. Mr
Kempe stated that his conclusion was based upon information from his site
supervisor, however he conceded
that his site supervisor was not giving evidence
in these proceedings. Mr Kempe conceded that he did not contact the design
to advise that the fill would exceed 400mm. Mr Kempe conceded that
construction had occurred, notwithstanding that an additional
300mm to 400mm of
fill was placed over the 400mm maximum depth of fill stipulated in the
Foundation report.
Mr Kempe was referred to the report of Mr
Williamson which concluded that the foundations were not founded 200mm into
natural stiff
silty clay, but on fill. Mr Kempe maintained that the fill
material used was better than the soil on site, however he conceded that
piers had been placed in areas where the fill exceeded 400mm by up to
Evidence of Mr Woffinden
The Applicant relied upon the statement
of Mr Woffinden of 7 March 2003 (Exhibit 6). Mr Woffinden is a principal of the
engineering
firm Cardno MBK, Maroochydore office. Mr Woffinden’s
statement records that he was engaged by the Applicant to report on the
conditions and structural performance of the slab of the premises and his
statement annexes his report of 26 February 2003.
Mr Woffinden’s report
(Annexure “GW1”), records excavation to expose one footing pier, the
drilling of three bore
holes next to the dwelling, removal of a soil sample for
laboratory testing and a level survey of the floor and visual inspection
cracked wall linings. The report provides at page
“The results of borelogs, laboratory test
result, and level survey are attached ...
Inspection of the
structure noted cracks in some wall linings, cornice line of the ceiling,
skirting boards and significant misalignment
of the front
Cracks within the brick courses were also noted in external
brickwork below the window, beside the front door.
classified category 1 and 2 in accordance with AS2870. They are slight and by
themselves not indicative of a structural
defect. ...
observed, while slight, does indicate that the structure has been subject to
additional stresses throughout. The cracking
patterns in ceiling cornice and
wall linings indicate compressive stress has occurred in the ceiling as a
response to movement in
the floor slab.
To determine the nature
and cause of this movement the existing construction and ground conditions have
been reviewed and we comment
on these aspects as follows.
CLASSIFICATION
With reference to the borelogs
(Folio 1) and the results of laboratory testing by CSI, we classify the
predominantly silty clay soils
as ‘M’ in accordance with
This classification is the same as determined by Soil Test
Australia ...
FOOTING AND SLAB
The design specified by Soil Test is for
a stiffened raft slab ... The design departs from the deemed to comply
requirements of the
code in two areas.
Internal beams are specified 300 deep,
not 400 deep.
Edge beam continuity is
not maintained at the front doorway patio and at the rear wall, rumpus eaves
Our opinion is that the raft slab, due
to these departures, is not as stiff as desirable, but is still able to maintain
the performance
requirements of the code. Localized differential movement could
be enhanced where beam continuity is not provided, such as at the
CONSTRUCTION
Certificates
that the construction is in accordance with the design have been provided by a
Registered Engineer.
Our investigation of the exposed footing and
pier at the front bay window where the floor slab is supported on the filled
the cut and fill building platform, found the fill depth to be of
approximately 0.7 to 0.8m
. (my emphasis)
The borelogs,
indicated some surface soils present beneath the fill, however these were not
organic or compressible topsoils likely
to compress under the fill loading. The
slab pier was found to extend into stiff to hard silty clays at a depth of 1.20m
into natural soils.
We found no indication that the floor
slab, footings, piers or fill material placement was not in accordance with the
design specification
provided by Soil Test.
The house is
constructed on a platform of soil, levelled by cut on the high side and fill on
the low side. With this type of construction
the area of the building located
on the cut ground is founded on the Class ‘M’ reactive clays that
were originally 0.5m
or more below natural surface level.
clays, by now being at surface, are more exposed to take up moisture and as a
result swell in volume.
The part of the building supported on
filled ground is founded on the less reactive soils excavated from above the
clays. These footings
are therefore founded and piered into a well drained
drier soil that is less likely to swell or shrink in
MANAGEMENT/GROUND PERFORMANCES
With reference
to our levels taken on 24 February 2003 and to previous levels taken by the
Builder, it is our opinion that the differences
measured in floor level are a
result of swelling of the clays beneath the house on the cut ground side of the
house and over time
then beneath the centre of the house.
Initial installation of subsoil drainage could have slowed the
take up of moisture, but it is inevitable that the moisture content
increase over time, given the location and surface exposure.
At present the level differences across the house are in the
order of 35 to 38mm on the long diagonal, and 20mm across the
All relative level differences are within the movement
range of 20mm to 40mm for a class ‘M’ site, subjected to edge heave
of the soil.
The structure has not sustained any structural damage
as a result of this movement.
Some serviceability problems have occurred at
the front doors which have required realignment of the doors a number of times,
it could be expected that future differential movement within the
structure will become more uniform and cause less differential
(my emphasis)
Construction of paving on the cut side clays would
assist in maintaining a more constant moisture profile of the soils and reduce
any impact of the high side clays drying out and shrinking in future seasonally
dry weather.
As the structure has not sustained any structural
distress at this time, it is our opinion that that the movement should be
by management of site moisture content. There is no requirement for
remedial construction such as underpinning or jacking at this
During cross-examination Mr Woffinden
agreed that the design engineer’s specification of a 300mm deep beam could
be accepted
as being in accordance with the Australian Standard and the edge
beam not being continuous was
“a fairly minor departure”
was Mr Woffinden’s evidence that Mr Chandra told him that construction had
been in accordance with the design engineer’s
details. It was put to Mr
Woffinden that the Foundation report prescribed fill of no more than 400mm and
that in his report he recorded
fill of between 700mm and 800mm. Mr Woffinden
expressed the view that where fill exceeded 400mm, then the use of mass concrete
would have been acceptable with piers at less than 2 metres centres if the
fill exceeded 400mm. Mr Woffinden expressed the view
that the movement was due
to seasonal heave due to the exposed clay on the cut side of the premises
becoming excessively moist.
Mr Woffinden conceded that, if site
preparation details (for example the cut/fill line) were changed, design
engineers required notification
of such changes prior to construction to ensure
that the design did not require amendment.
It was Mr Woffinden’s evidence that
at page 4 of the Foundation report there was the provision for the installation
piers at 2 metre centres if fill exceeded 400mm. Mr Woffinden agreed
that the Foundation report under the heading “Edge beam
“where the depth to suitable founding material is significant
excavated or drilled piers can be adopted”
and stated that he inferred
“significant”
meant more than 400mm, however it is
pertinent that he agreed that no slab piers had been installed. Mr Woffinden
stated that as
a matter of prudence design engineers required notification if
there were changes arising out of construction, however when it was
that the design engineers should have been contacted if fill was to exceed 400mm
he responded
“no, it is a little bit grey”
. He did however
concede that the Applicant had departed from the Foundation report’s
stipulation that the fill depth was not
to exceed 400mm.
Mr Woffinden stated that he did
“not see a fault with the design or construction, however he believed
that the construction had contributed to movement over
the front door
. It was Mr Woffinden’s view that the stresses to the
ceiling indicated that there had initially been edge heave, however the
now tilting as the fill side was locked with the footings, but the cut side was
dropping. Mr Woffinden stated that it would
be of assistance to install a 1.5m
wide concrete path along the cut side (22 linear metres) to achieve fall away
from the clay soils
under the cut side of the house.
In my view the evidence of Mr Woffinden
that if fill was to exceed 400mm that the contractor should have contacted the
design engineer
and, if he had done so, he would have been instructed to install
a slab pier, supported the Authority’s submission that the
Applicant had
not taken reasonable care to prevent settlement of the premises. Mr Woffinden
expressed the view that there would
be no detrimental effect through the
omission to put in slab piers due to the reactivity of the clay, as slab piers
would only be
required some the centre of the house at the zero fill point
extending to the piers (over the hexagonal dining room) which ended
on 800mm of
Evidence of Mr Chandra
Mr Chandra’s statement annexes his
certificates of the footings and slab and he contends at paragraph 6 that the
slab and footings
were constructed in accordance with the design of Soiltest
Australia. At paragraph 12 Mr Chandra referred to the report of Cardno
then provides
“I would agree that the dwelling would appear to have
been affected by lack of proper site management by the owner and drainage
not by construction”
. In cross-examination Mr Chandra was asked to
identify the basis for this opinion which, in my view, does not accurately
the conclusions by Mr Woffinden of Cardno MBK. Mr Chandra responded
that it was his interpretation of Mr Woffinden’s
During the conduct of the hearing the
Applicant on a number of occasions asserted that works had been performed by the
affected the on site drainage on the cut side of the building
platform and, after discussion with the legal representatives for the
it was agreed that a view be convened.
During cross-examination Mr Chandra was
asked if the edge beam was founded 200mm into natural stiff clay. He responded
that it had
been, based upon a visual inspection of the trench. Mr Chandra
agreed that the cut/fill line on the Soiltest Australia foundation
incorrect and did not reflect what occurred on site. It was the evidence of Mr
Chandra that the platform was cut in accordance
with the design, but the
cut/fill line was different, as site conditions were not in accordance with the
plan, and the placement
of the house was not shown on the foundation sketch. Mr
Chandra contended that the placement of the cut/fill line was not a change
the design, but a consequence of the on site conditions. Mr Chandra was
referred to the Foundation report which stipulated that
with the design engineer if there was any change to the design. Mr Chandra
responded that he did not think
there would be any change to the design based
upon the changes on site.
Mr Chandra was referred to the statement
of Mr Williamson of 24 March 2003 (Exhibit 7) which annexed the report of Mr
Thomas of Foundation
Engineering Services which concluded on page
“... at least three modes of movement appear
to be influencing the house. These are envisaged as acting in
The left hand side and rear of
the house are in cut: no drainage has been provided. The site surface in the
vicinity of the house
is very flat and it is doubtful that drainage close to the
house complies with the requirements of Australian Standard 2870 ...
water draining off the slope at the rear left hand corner can clearly drain
along the rear wall.
The right hand side and front
of the house have been filled. The floor slab below the front entry sounds
hollow when tapped and some
cracking has occurred within the tiled surface at
the entry. The front doors are understood from the owner to be continually
(resulting, according to the owner in damage to the door) and
currently, the doors are out of plumb. Additionally the internal plaster
wall to the right hand side close to the entry shows some separation at the
coving indicative that the wall is dropping. Such
tends to indicate that the
fills below the floor slab have subsided. This may have been the result of
inadequate compaction or consolidation
of the top soil, or both. A fill
thickness of 0.65metre puts the site into the ‘Problem’ category.
As such, in the
absence of fill supervision and certification, in accordance
with Appendix B of Australian Standard 3798 ... the fills must be regarded
‘Uncontrolled’; as such, the floor slab should have been pier
supported into competent natural soils (stiff clay)
as well as the
The site has been denoted as
having shrink/swell characteristics within the ‘Moderate’ range (20
to 40mm). For such characteristics,
existing trees on the right hand side and,
in all probability, the rear of the house, are too close to the building and
should have
been removed, prior to construction. The presence of these trees
induces extreme drying conditions relative to reactive movements
As a further opinion, had:
The block in close proximity to the
house been adequately
Existing trees at the right
hand side and rear of the house been
The house slab been provided
with pier or pad support through the fills into underlying natural clays of at
least stiff consistency;
piers taken into the natural clays as
stipulated.
the house would not be in its present
condition and the current situation would have been avoided.”
It was put to Mr Chandra that three of
the four piers inspected had not been founded 200mm into natural stiff silty
clay and piers
but placed on top of the specified material. Mr Chandra stated
that, in his view, this did not represent a departure from the
On 12 June 2003 a site view was
conducted. The view was scheduled to commence on the afternoon of 12 June 2003
following the conclusion
of another part-heard application. The view commenced
35 minutes after the scheduled time, as the previous case failed to conclude
prior to 2.30pm. Upon arrival Mr Kempe informed the Tribunal that he needed to
collect goods from a Southport store prior to 5.00pm
and consequently he could
not attend the view. The Homeowner, Mr Averono, Mr Bob Clayton and Mr Shane
Budden, a legal officer of
the Authority, attended the view. The Tribunal was
referred to the areas of internal damage which notably included cracking in the
interior walls in the hexagonal dining room, and extensive misalignment of the
front door which precluded it locking effectively
and made opening and closing
the door extremely difficult, and damage to the door due to prolonged sticking
was evident.
It was asserted by the Applicant that the
upon the drainage
of the site. Whilst landscaping has been performed by the
performed adjacent to the perimeter of the slab which would impact upon
drainage. Based upon a visual inspection I formed
the view that the Applicant
had failed to provide adequate fall to divert water away from the edge of the
I accept the evidence of Mr Williamson
that the Applicant failed to construct the Homeowner’s premises in
accordance with the
design of the slab and footings in the Foundation report.
The Applicant’s engineering consultant, Mr Woffinden, concluded
had been 700mm to 800mm of fill on the building platform under the exposed
footing and pier and the front bay window.
It is not in issue that the
Foundation report prepared by Soiltest Australia (SOR 9 to the Statement of
Reasons) expressly stipulated
that fill depth was not to exceed 400mm and, also
at page 2, stipulated that the edge beam be founded
“at least 200mm
into suitable founding material, being natural stiff silty clay”
find that the evidence adduced by the Applicant did not controvert the
Authority’s conclusion that the premises were constructed
on up to 800mm
of fill. In my view this departure clearly contravened the engineer’s
design for the slab and footings.
I find that the Authority adduced
overwhelming evidence in support of its conclusion that the Applicant contractor
failed to construct
the dwelling in accordance with the design of the footings
and slab for the premises. I accept the Authority’s submission
were three (3) significant omissions or errors:
constructing the premises on fill
exceeding 400mm;
failing to install slab piers in
accordance with the foundation sketch at page 4 of the Soiltest design in areas
where fill exceeded
failing to found the edge beam into at
least 200mm into suitable founding material, being natural stiff silty
In addition to these significant
departures from the engineer’s design, it is my view that the Applicant
failed to exercise
reasonable care to ensure that subsidence and settlement
would not occur by failing to contact the design engineer when the location
the cut/fill line changed to require up to double the maximum depth of fill. I
note that page 1 of the Foundation report provided
“should soil
conditions vary significantly from those indicated in this report, or if the
proposed building design or proposed
site preparation details are changed,
Soiltest Australia Consulting Engineers is to be contacted immediately in order
amended recommendations”
I accept the testimony from Mr Williamson
that the foundation design stipulated that fill depth was not to exceed 400mm,
page 4 the foundation sketch had provided details for slab piers to
cover the contingency that the depth to suitable founding material
significant, which would require slab piers.
I accept the evidence of Mr Chandra that
all sites vary, and consequently a change to the cut/fill line may be necessary,
I reject his contention that it was not necessary to contact the design
engineer in circumstances where the fill depth was precisely
stipulated maximum to be placed beneath the slab, particularly in circumstances
where slab piers were not installed to
accommodate the additional depth of fill.
No explanation was advanced by the Applicant for this
I find the allegation by the Applicant
that the Homeowner has contributed to the damage to his premises by a failure to
install adequate
site drainage to be unsupported by any evidence. The Applicant
did not adduce testimony from the site supervisor and, in my view,
Kempe’s assertion that the Applicant graded the first metre from the edge
of the slab to a fall of 50mm (at paragraph 9
of Exhibit 2) was unsupported by
any evidence. I accept the evidence of Mr Woffinden that the installation of a
concrete path on
the cut side of the slab would assist to divert water from the
edge of the slab, however it is the contractor’s responsibility
at the completion of construction that a fall is achieved away from the edge of
the slab. In my view any grading works
performed by the Applicant failed to
achieve an adequate fall away from the edge of the slab.
Having considered the testimony of Mr
Clayton concerning the impact of the defects upon the serviceability of the
premises, and the
evidence of Mr Williamson concerning the departure from the
design for the slab and footings, I find that the Direction to Rectify
confirmed. I note that the Applicant failed to adduce evidence to rebut the
Authority’s case that the fill depth,
particularly under the bay window in
the dining room, was uncontrolled, and that it should have been supported by
piers into suitable
material. I find that the Authority has exercised its
discretion properly in reaching its decision that the Applicant had failed
take reasonable care to ensure that subsidence or settlement would not
It is the Authority’s policy that
the method of rectification is a matter for the contractor responsible for
rectification of
defects. In my view the conclusion by Mr Thomas of Foundation
Engineering Services annexed to the statement of Mr Williamson (Exhibit
succinctly identifies the adverse affect upon the structure consequent upon the
depth of fill without the installation of slab
In my view the Applicant’s request
for the Direction to be stayed until there was more significant damage, to be
devoid of merit.
The Homeowner has deferred landscaping works pending a
determination of this matter and remains unable to use the font door and
defects, in my view, are clearly Category 1 defects that must be rectified in
the short term.
Summary of Findings
The Direction to Rectify is confirmed. I
am satisfied that a period of 42 days from the date of this order is reasonable
for rectification
works to be
I have considered the submissions by the
Applicant in relation to costs (as set out in the application - Exhibit 1). In
my view the
evidence adduced by the Applicant did not refute the
Authority’s contention that there had been a departure from the
design, and consequently this review application was
unsuccessful. In my view, given my findings, it is appropriate that the
pay the Respondent’s costs of and incidental to this
application. In my view, given the likely costs of rectification, costs
be awarded on Magistrates Court Scale
............................................................................
L BRADFORD-MORGAN – DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
BUILDING TRIBUNAL
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 027
Application No:
EDGEMILL PTY LTD
C/- Watson & Quinn Lawyers
MAROOCHYDORE QLD 4558
Respondent:
QUEENSLAND BUILDING SERVICES AUTHORITY
11 Edmondstone
SOUTH BRISBANE Q 4101
Section 93 –
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
Upon hearing Mr Simpson on behalf of the
Applicant and Mr Budden on behalf of the Respondent, the Queensland Building
Tribunal makes
the following orders:
That Direction to Rectify No. 24648 dated
13 December 2002 be confirmed.
That the Applicant pay the
Respondent’s costs of and incidental to this application assessed on the
Magistrates Court Scale
of Costs, Scale “G”.
That in the event that the parties fail
to reach agreement on the quantum of the Respondent’s costs within
fourteen (14) days
of a request for payment, the Respondent will deliver a short
form Bill of Costs to the Applicant and request the Registrar to convene
...............................................................................
L BRADFORD-MORGAN – DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
Queensland Building
Date: 27 June 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (175 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter