URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/170.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kent v Commissioner of Police [2025] QDC 170 (10 October 2025)
[2025] QDC 170
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Indictment No 2400 of 2025
KENT Appellant
THE COMMISSIONER OF
POLICE Respondent
OCTOBER 2025
: This is an appeal pursuant to the provisions of
Justices Act 1886
by Mr Kent against the severity of the
sentence imposed upon him on the 18
of August 2025 in the
Magistrates Court at Brisbane. The broad circumstances were that the appellant
pleaded guilty to three offences
of stealing, which was aggravated by the
circumstance that it followed a previous conviction.
The parole eligibility date was set at the date of sentence. That is, the
of August 2025. Of course, the exigencies of needing to
prepare, lodge and have approved an application for parole meant that it
inevitable that Mr Kent would serve a significant period in immediate
custody. As at the date of the hearing of this appeal
he has served 53 days,
which is about a week short of two months, in prison.
His offending falls, unfortunately for everyone, including him, against the
background of his criminal history, which does him no
credit. He was born in
Gosford and is now 31 years of age. He has been before the Queensland courts
since 2011. Very often for
property offending such as shop stealing and similar
dishonesty type offences.
There are also some unusual and disturbing entries on his criminal history,
which become more understandable when one considers his
apparent medical
history, to which I will return in a moment but, for example, he was dealt with
in 2013 for begging for money or
goods in a public place.
There was at least two similar entries in August of 2013. He has also
breached bail on a number of occasions, and he has been sentenced
to probation
and breached probation. He has entries on his criminal history for fraud and
other dishonesty offences. He does not
seem to have any particular history of
violence, although he did in 2019 apparently contravene some provision of a
domestic violence
He has been sentenced to suspended imprisonment previously, but the primary
feature of the present circumstances affecting the disposition
of this appeal is
that on the 6
of December 2024 he was placed, in effect, on a
nine-month immediate parole release order in the Magistrates Court in Brisbane,
which attracted the ire of the sentencing magistrate on the occasion
with which I am concerned.
That nine-month period of imprisonment referred to a number of stealing
counts, and as I have mentioned, the present appeal concerns
stealing after a
previous conviction. Because he was on parole at the time of committing the
offences, he could only be given a
parole eligibility date, rather than a parole
release date, something which the magistrate realised.
What it seems it is very unlikely he realised was the further ramifications
of the way in which section 209 of the
Corrective Services Act
namely, that because his existing parole order was cancelled by reason of his
conviction when he pleaded guilty to the later
offences, the effect of the
cancellation was to cancel his parole as at the date of the offending.
What those concerned with sentence calculation have calculated as a result is
that he will not be released until a date in 2026, which
it seems results in the
effect that as a result of being dealt with for these matters, the overall
period of imprisonment became
16 months, or 491 days. His full-time release
date is the 11
of April 2026 because a period of 218 days, between
of January 2025 and the 17
of August 2025, was
added to his overall period of imprisonment.
That is, by imposing the sentence he did, the magistrate was sentencing
Mr Kent to a period of imprisonment that was in excess of
the nine months
he was already serving, even adding cumulatively the six months that his Honour
imposed. That is, it was more than
This seems to have escaped the attention of everyone at the sentencing
hearing, with the possible exception of the police prosecutor,
who submitted for
a wholly suspended sentence. Part of the material before this court is the
transcript of the submissions made
in the Magistrates Court on the
Having outlined the facts at page 1-6 of the transcript, the catalogue of the
facts included that Mr Kent’s co-offender, his
Ms Holstein, when they were apprehended with a trolley of groceries stolen
from Coles, she said to investigating police
that she and the appellant are
diabetics and have no money so they had to steal food.
In that context the prosecutor said that she was seeking a suspended
sentence, which attracted the rejoinder by the magistrate, “He’s
parole when he did it with these. He got sentenced about two weeks before he
did the first heist.” A curious choice of
nouns. And his Honour went on,
“I meant – I mean, it’s very compassionate of you, but you
need to get a bit real.”
It emerged that Ms Holstein, who was not on parole at the time, received
three months’ imprisonment, with immediate parole release,
but she was
sentenced for one less offence than the appellant.
What the magistrate was also told, however, is that Mr Kent is in
receipt of a disability support pension which goes to the Public
Unfortunately, he has not been able to access those funds through the Public
Trustee and that is why he does face homelessness
at this time. He suffers from
mental health conditions, including – the solicitor having clarified with
his support worker
through NDIS – what she described as schizophrenia
affective disorder. It may well be that she meant schizoaffective disorder
in any case, he’s in receipt, apparently, of a package through NDIS. It
seemed that his money, which goes to the Public
Trustee, had not been accessible
to him at the time when this occurred. The words used by the solicitor were,
“Unfortunately
he’s not been able to access those funds through the
Public Trustee and, in any event, that’s why he does face this
at this time.”
In that context Ms Robertson, for the appellant, argues that it is a
case where one considers the result through the lens of the well-known
principles from
, that the result demonstrates the error.
Stealing of groceries to feed oneself, even on three occasions, even with a
criminal history,
when someone has no funds and suffers from schizoaffective
disorder and is at risk of becoming homeless, would not normally attract
16-month period of imprisonment.
One of the observations from
[1936] 55 CLR at page 499,
includes discussing a judicial discretion of this kind:
“It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the
discretion. If the judge acts upon a wrong principle, if he
allows extraneous
or irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he
does not take into account some material
consideration, then his determination
should be reviewed and the appellate court may exercise its own discretion in
substitution
for his if it has the materials for doing so. If upon the facts
the result is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court
may infer that
in some way there has been a failure to properly exercise the discretion which
the law reposes in the court in the
first instance.”
Ms Robertson agitates the argument that when considered in context it is
quintessentially a House-type case, in that particular error
may be difficult to
identify, but the result is unreasonable and plainly unjust, such that the
appellate jurisdiction is invoked.
In my conclusion that submission should be accepted, but it also blends into
– although no specific error is identified in the
notice of appeal –
those introductory words of, “if the judge acts upon a wrong
principle”. That is, with due
respect to his Honour and everyone present
at the time, in dealing with what are sometimes complex interactions of the
provisions, no one it seems particularly realising, including the
magistrate, that the effect of what was happening would be that
would be required to serve something in the order of 16 months’
imprisonment. That is actually more than any courts
had sentenced him to at
that stage. That result demonstrates the application of the wrong principle and
indeed what seems to have
been an unintended consequence.
In my view the appropriate conclusion is that the appeal should be allowed.
I do note that Ms Lewis, for the respondent, resists
the appeal, arguing
that the magistrate was aware, which is certainly correct, that there was a
breach of parole and that is why
an eligibility date had to be applied. But
there does not seem to have been any real grappling with the true effect of
section 209
Corrective Services Act
and, in any case, my
conclusion is driven by the conclusion that the result, to use the words of
, is unreasonable or plainly unjust. Thus, in my conclusion the
appeal should be allowed.
The orders will be that the appeal is allowed. The sentence imposed on the
of August 2025 is set aside. I take into account that as a
result thereof Mr Kent has served 53 days in custody, between that day
yesterday. Because of Mr Kent’s mental health challenges and the
uncontradicted observation that he had been performing
reasonably well on
parole, other than reoffending, in my conclusion both he and the community would
benefit from him being supervised
in the community for an ongoing period.
My conclusion is I should take the 53 days into account, but not impose any
further custodial term, and instead offer Mr Kent 12 months’
probation. That will achieve the result of having him supervised, and indeed
one would hope, to a degree, supported in the community
for a period of time
and, of course, the 53 days that he has served, in my view, more than meets the
punitive elements of the purposes
of sentencing.
So the probation order which I speak of will contain the general requirements
that he must not commit another offence during the period
of the order, which
will be 12 months. He must report to an authorised corrective services officer
at Spring Hill within two business
days of his release from prison. He must
report to and receive visits from an authorised corrective services officer as
they direct.
He must take part in counselling and satisfactorily attend other
programs directed by his authorised corrective services officer
period of the order. He must notify an authorised corrective services officer
of every change of his residence or employment
within two business days of the
change happening. He cannot leave or stay out of Queensland without their
permission, and he must
comply with every reasonable direction of his authorised
corrective services officer.
I am empowered by section 94 to impose additional requirements and given
Mr Kent’s diagnoses I am inclined to do so. They are
that he submit
to medical, psychiatric and psychological treatment and comply during the whole
of the period of the order, with conditions
otherwise necessary to cause him to
behave in a way acceptable to the community, to stop him from again committing
the offence or
offences for which the order is made, and to stop him from
committing other offences.
The purpose and effect of the order, it should be explained to Mr Kent,
who is not present, I know, are to have a process of rehabilitation
supervision continue in the community, rather than in custody. If he
contravenes the requirements of the order, as he otherwise
knows because he has
been dealt with for breach of probation order, it is an offence to breach
probation, and he can be prosecuted
for it. Further, he can be brought back
here and resentenced for this matter again.
Finally, he needs to be informed that – and again, I assume that he
knows that – and that Ms Robertson has probably told
him this, and
that he will probably be told again – the order may be amended or revoked
on an application by he, corrective
services, or the Director of Public
Prosecutions, if someone thinks it is no longer of utility.
Considering all of the features, including his criminal history, convictions
are recorded. There are no exhibits, Ms Robertson, before
this court, that
would be appropriate to send to corrective services, I don’t think.
MS ROBERTSON
: I have not got any reports or anything.
MS ROBERTSON
: There’s no reports or anything.
: Yes. Okay. So those are the orders. Anything else
arising out of any of that?
: No, thank you, your Honour.
MS ROBERTSON
: No, thank you, your Honour.
: Okay. Thanks for your help.
______________________
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (67.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter