URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:47:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re BZY [2024] QMHC 1 (15 July 2024)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT OF
[2024] QMHC 1
PROCEEDING:
Application
DELIVERED ON:
15 July 2024 (
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
15 July 2024
Application allowed.
The applicant appeared on his own behalf
G Morgan for the Chief
Psychiatrist
J Aylward for the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
SOLICITORS:
Office of the Chief Psychiatrist
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
NOTE: This judgment is published pursuant to
Mental Health
(Qld). It has been anonymised and redacted to preserve anonymity.
HER HONOUR:
By notice of reference filed the 16
August 2013, Legal Aid Queensland referred to this Court the mental condition of
BZY at the time of the alleged offence of possessing
child exploitation material
on the 25th of July 2011. There was no dispute that he was not suffering
unsoundness of mind at the
time of the alleged offence. An issue that needed to
be determined was whether the defendant was fit for trial. On the 12th of
September 2014, the Court ultimately found that BZY was fit for trial and
consequently, the matter was returned back to the criminal
justice system for it
to be determined.
A judgment was published in this matter in the Mental Health Court with the
citation being [redacted]. That is referred to in my
submissions as [redacted],
and this judgment set out the Court’s reasons. I note that the
applicant’s reference at that
point in time was made under the
now-repealed
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld) where relevantly, section 413
of that Act provides that the hearings of references are open to public. A
similar provision
subsists within the
Mental Health Act 2016
) where both Acts refer to hearings of references in relation to
minors as an exception to the general position that hearings of references
open to the public. Neither Act contains provisions regarding the publication
of written decisions or how they might be made
available, and equally, the
practice directions of the Mental Health Court do not address this issue.
BZY has made an application to this Court for the [redacted], the judgment,
to be removed from publication as it does not have any
current or ongoing
precedent or record value, and in the alternative, should this Court find that
there is precedent or record value,
then [redacted] should be anonymised. BZY
pleaded guilty to these offences and was sentenced to probation with no
conviction being
recorded. I note that in the sentencing remarks by the
sentencing Judge, his Honour Judge Koppenol, he stated:
“In the exercise of my discretion, no conviction is recorded. I am
giving you a chance today, [BZY]. You don’t get many
chances in life, but
this is yours, so you have to do the right thing now for the period of probation
and put this behind you and
get on with your life.”
BZY wrote to the Court a letter which sets out his concerns, and he also
provided extensive written submissions. He states that he
last wrote to his
Honour Justice Boddice, who made the decision in [redacted] back in 2014. He
states that he wrote to Justice Boddice
regarding this matter on the 7th of June
2018 to exercise his Honour’s judicial discretion to either remove the
decision from
publication or anonymise its contents.
And in response to that request, Justice Boddice refused the request and
determined that there was nothing contained in the judgment
or circumstances to
warrant removing the decision from publication or to anonymise its contents.
BZY accepted and respected that
determination.
However, he has now reagitated the issue once more. He states that by
inputting his name, BZY, or its other forms, into a search
engine returns
results that places the Supreme Court Library of Queensland hyperlink PDF copy
of the decision high up in the search.
And without doubt, he states, that the
result is not buried and remains in prominent view.
And he states that this poses a real risk of ongoing exposure given current
and prospective clients routinely Google the names of
recommended lawyers as
well as professionals’ businesses generally. I should add that since
being sentenced for these offences
– and I think since his letter to
Justice Boddice in 2018 – he has qualified as a lawyer and has been
admitted as a legal
practitioner.
He states that his circumstances have changed considerably since Justice
Boddice considered the matter back in 2018. And he believes
it requires
reconsideration. He sets out what he regards as the serious impediments to
employment as a solicitor a publication of
the decision that is posing to him
and that whilst he has always suspected accessibility of the decision has
impacted his job applications.
On the 19th of March 2024, this was definitively confirmed when his
employment at a solicitors’ firm as a workplace relations
lawyer was terminated. He set out the termination letter that relied on
probationary termination which did not state
a reason for the dismissal.
However, he was informed during the dismissal meeting that the
solicitors’ firm considered the optics of the decision’s
publication
were severe and would jeopardise current and prospective client relations, as
well as the business reputation generally.
The solicitors’ firm said that
it was particularly so given many of his clients who work educational facilities
such as private
schools with children.
BZY, in a reasonable way, states that he does understand and sympathises with
the solicitors’ firm’s concerns and he acknowledges
understandable that any law firm or business would harbour such concerns for its
reputation regardless of the composition
of its client base.
It is a fundamental principle of justice system that court proceedings are
heard in public. As Rogers in
Nationwide News Pty Ltd
[2003] HCA 52
[2003] 216 CLR 327
stated, the underlying policy is that it is in the public interest that there
should be an open administration of justice, and a
court should only depart from
this principle where adherence to it would frustrate either the administration
of justice or there
is being some other public interest protected by statutory
provisions modifying its application, or where it is necessary to secure
proper administration of justice.
The source of a court’s power to limit the application of the principle
of open justice can derive from either express statutory
provisions or from any
inherent jurisdiction in the case of state Supreme Courts, or implied powers in
the case of a statutory court.
The parties disagree whether the removal or
anonymisation of the reasonings would be a judicial or administrative act. The
and the Director’s Office regard it as an administrative act,
where the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist regards it as a judicial
I have had consideration of all of the material that has been placed before
me, and in my view, the publication of reasons by a court
is a judicial
function. The delivery of those reasons by a court is part of the proceedings
of that court and they are reasons themselves,
and those reasons are then made
available for examination by others. That is, the court makes the part of its
public proceedings
compromised by the reasons available for inspection of the
public, and that can occur in a variety of ways. It can occur when hard
are presented to persons that are present in court, or you can make copies of
the reasons, then they can be available on court
websites, and as the Office of
the Chief Psychiatrist notes, each of those is likely to involve administrative
But the current circumstances that I am dealing with is that this matter was
conducted in open court, reasons were delivered in open
court and those reasons
are available for inspection on the court website. Access to the court file in
the registry is restricted
and its inspection requires the grant of leave and I
am satisfied that in all of the circumstances it is likely that a request to
remove or anonymise the reasons invokes the Court’s judicial power to
restrict the publication of all or part of its proceedings
to the public.
As I have said, no party contends that I do not have the power to remove or
anonymise the reasons. I note that neither the Director’s
Office or the
Office of the Chief Psychiatrist takes a position in respect of the application
but they helpfully have provided written
submissions that set out the
legislative framework and common law principles. The legislative scheme of the
Act evidences a distinction
between on one hand the protection of the rights of
other hand the treatment of information relating to the Court’s hearings
and determination of references made to it in relation
to the mental state of
persons charged with serious offences.
There are some proceedings before this Court which are generally not open to
the public. They relate to detention reviews and appeals
against decisions of
the Mental Health Review Tribunal each involving persons subject to involuntary
treatment under the Act and
the exercise of rights of review or appeal. As I
said, these hearings are generally not open to the public which is subject to
Court’s power to order that the hearing or part of the hearing be open
to the public. However, such an order may only be made
if the Court is
satisfied the person subject to the proceedings has agreed to the order and that
the order will not result in serious
harm to the person’s health or risk
and safety of anyone else.
Publications of either report of such a proceeding, or of information which
may identify a party to the proceedings is an offence
and a Court may grant
leave for publication but only upon the Court being satisfied that specific
matters including those relating
to particular risk and the public interest are
established. In relation to the proceedings that are open to the public, in
the hearings of a reference by the Court is generally open to the
public and that would be subject to the Court’s power to
order that a
hearing or part of a hearing not be open to the public. However, such an order
may only be made if the Court is satisfied
it is in the interests of
The publication of reports or proceedings or the Court’s decision in
the proceedings are restricted only to the extent necessary
to allow for the
finalisation of any associated appeal or criminal trial to occur prior to
publication. And the Court may also give
leave for the report to be published.
Those restrictions on publication do not prevent the disclosure of information
disclosed in
the hearings of a Court. Absent a clear legislative intention,
courts have power to control their own proceedings.
In the context of the Mental Health Court, such a power may also be implied
by the provisions governing the Court in particular from
the jurisdictional
provisions particularly section 639 which sets out the jurisdiction of the
Court. And then 640 gives this Court
general powers which states:
“Without limiting the powers conferred on it under this or another Act,
the Mental Health Court may do all things necessary
or convenient to be done for
the exercise of its jurisdiction.”
In this matter, as the submissions that have been made by the Office of the
Chief Psychiatrist states:
“If the Court considers that restriction of the publication of
proceedings requires an exercise of judicial power the source
of that power
appears to be section 693 of the Act...”
Which states that:
“(1) The hearing of a proceeding for a reference is open to the public
unless the Mental Health Court, by order, directs that
the hearing or part of
the hearing not be open to the public.
(2) However, the court may make an order directing that the hearing or part
of the hearing not be open to the public only if the
court is satisfied it is in
the interests of justice.”
Alternatively, the source of power to restrict the publication of proceedings
conducted in an open court may be implied to the extent
necessary for its
exercise and that is with reference to
Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 243 CLR 506.
In whatever case it is, this Court’s determination involves consideration
of whether the exercise of the power is in the interests
of justice. I have
referred to the principle of open justice and the importance of this principle
is such that no unnecessary restriction
upon public access to proceedings is
permissible. Different degrees of restriction may be imposed depending on the
particular circumstances
of the exercise of the power to restrict access to
proceedings including for example the anonymisation of a witness’s
identifying
particulars.
J v L & A Services Pty Ltd
[1995] 2 Qd R 10
a case which considered the issue of whether a party to proceedings should not
be publicly named. At page 5 of the judgment
the plurality noted the following
considerations would seem to have application to the present matter. Where the
Court stated:
“Even so, information may not be withheld from the public merely to
save a party or witness from loss of privacy, embarrassment,
distress, financial
harm, or other “collateral disadvantage”, to use the expression
adopted in R v. Tait.”
J v L & A Services
, the judgment then went to state later on
“It is common for sensitive issues to be litigated and for information
which is extremely personal or confidential to be disclosed.
It is of obvious
concern that such a paramount principle as the requirement of open justice
should not be whittled away on a case
by case basis according to individual
judges’ subjective views of the merits or demerits of the claims to
litigants.”
Accordingly, the Director’s Office submits that the decision to
prioritise a person’s privacy in a particular case would
not be made
lightly as doing so is contrary to the principles of open justice. Counsel for
the Director’s Office notes:
“It is not to say the decision cannot be made but rather a decision to
do so should only be made in circumstances where there
are strong factors which
outweigh the legislative presumption.
If a decision is reached that the competing favours [sic] favour protection
of the applicant’s privacy the next issue would
be is how that aim should
be achieved.”
As I have stated, the applicant seeks a removal of the decision in its
entirety and suggests that anonymisation of the decision may
not be sufficient.
R v Dempsey (No. 3)
[2017] QSC 338
Justice Applegarth observed
“Pseudonym orders restrict the disclosure of the identity of a witness
or party, but allow the court to remain open and the
proceedings to be reported.
The use of pseudonym orders is therefore considered a minimal incursion on the
principle of open justice
in a case where a witness reasonably fears death,
injury, unnecessary loss of liberty or some other evil.”
In a District Court matter of
Rowley & Ors v Dell’Osa &
[2024] QDC 30
, his Honour Judge Byrne KC DCJ at paragraph 14 referred
to his Honour Justice Applegarth’s observations and noted that a greater
need must be demonstrated in order for a judgment to be supressed as opposed to
anonymisation of the judgment.
However, his Honour also noted that what the Court of Appeal found in
[2012] QCA 271
was this when he added the:
“...lesser threshold for anonymisation does not mean that such an order
will be easily obtained. The interests of justice must
“so clearly favour
anonymisation”, not merely be preferable or convenient.”
Measures such as anonymisation of proceedings may therefore represent a less
of an incursion on the principle of open justice than
removal of a decision
entirely. However, the interests of justice must still clearly favour that
course and not be merely preferable
or convenient.
As I have stated, generally, suppression of information merely to save a
party or witness from loss of privacy, embarrassment, distress,
financial harm
or other collateral disadvantage will be insufficient to withhold information
from the public. And a substantial
concern underpinning this principle is the
risk of erosion of the fundamental requirement of open justice if it were not
These general provisions appear congruent with the scheme of the Act which
provides for increased protection of rights to privacy
and confidentially of the
health information for those subject to involuntary treatment under the Act and
a higher emphasis on the
public interest in such protections. And in contrast,
the provision relating to proceedings for references represents far less of
legislative incursion to the principle of open justice.
The counsel for the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist’s view is that the
Court would require reasonably compelling factors to
be satisfied that it would
be in the interests of justice to supress or anonymise the judgment of the Court
in [redacted]. In the
absence of legislative intention, the policy
considerations at common law strongly favour the requirement the Court be
in an open manner, and that legislative intent in the Act does not
appear to favour suppression or anonymisation.
I have considered all of this in coming to my decision. I have considered
the competing factors that I must, and in my view, they
do favour the protection
of the applicant’s privacy. And in my view, there are circumstances where
there are strong factors
which do outweigh the principle of open justice. I
have not come to the decision lightly, but for the following reasons which I
regard as, cumulatively as compelling factors. First, the judgment is nearly 10
years old. Second, it has no precedent value.
Third, as the reasons set out,
he was found not of unsound mind and fit for trial. And in coming to its
conclusion, there were significant
personal details of BZY that were set out in
the reasons.
The matter – because he was found not of unsound mind and fit for trial
– was returned to the criminal justice system.
And in the criminal
justice system, BZY was sentenced to probation where no conviction was recorded.
And pursuant to section 12
subsection (3) subsection (b) of the
Penalties and
Sentences Act 1992
Penalties and Sentences Act
Queensland, the presumption is that the conviction must not be entered into any
records except for the matters that are set out
in the records of the court
before which the offender was convicted, and in the offender’s criminal
history but only for the
purposes of
section 4(b).
There is section 3A of
Penalties and Sentences Act
“Despite subsection (3)(b), the conviction may be entered in a record
kept by a department, a prosecuting authority or the offender’s
representative if it is necessary for the legitimate performance of the
functions of the department, prosecuting authority,
representative.”
The position is, then, the details of his criminal matters are prohibited
from being published, but the Mental Health Court reasons
are published where
the outcome was that it was returned to the criminal justice system. And to
this end, though, I do note Ms Aylward’s
point of view that if there was a
journalist in the back of the court at his criminal sentence, which was
conducted in open court,
that that journalist could report on the matter, and
that would not be in breach of
section 12.
In this matter, I have taken into account also that BZY has, since the
judgment, has finished a law degree and has been admitted as
practitioner, and indeed, this process was completed following the decision of
Justice Boddice back in 2018, and it is, I
think, to be taken on notice that
such a decision would have detrimental effects on his employment prospects.
I have considered whether the judgment should be anonymised. However, to do
so properly and to protect his privacy would infect and
neuter the reasons to
the extent that they are meaningless, as there is so much personal information
included in the reasons that
BZY would be linked to the reasons based on the
unique facts of the decision. Accordingly, in this application, I will allow
judgment to be taken down from the Court.
Okay. And then, I suppose, we should have an argument about whether these
matters should be published. I have not given a reason
– they will not be
published automatically on the website unless I decide to do so. Not too sure
it is the right vehicle at
this point in time, so – anyone has got any
– and if they were, I would obviously have to anonymise them in accordance
with my decision. Ms Morgan, do you have a view whether I should publish
MS MORGAN: Your Honour, I might take some instructions on that. The issues
that preliminarily arise when your Honour has raised
that is this one –
this decision may indeed have some precedential value as it being the first
decision we are aware of where
your Honour has exercised the power to take down
a judgment. It certainly would need to be anonymised if your Honour - - -
HER HONOUR:
MS MORGAN: - - - was minded to do so, but - - -
HER HONOUR:
Yes. The parties can come back to - - -
MS MORGAN: - - - might take some - - -
HER HONOUR:
- - - me in relation to that.
MS MORGAN: - - - instructions. Thank you, your Honour.
HER HONOUR:
Okay. Okay. Okay. Thank you, BZY.
APPLICANT: Thank you, your Honour.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (167 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter