URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2023/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re FYS [2023] QMHC 3 (22 September 2023)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the Matter of FYS
[2023] QMHC 3
MHC No. 0170 of 2023
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
22 September 2023
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
15 September 2023; 18 September 2023
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
DETERMINATION:
The appeal is dismissed.
The decision of the MHRT made on 30 August 2023 is confirmed.
CATCHWORDS:
HEALTH LAW – MENTAL HEALTH GENERALLY – GENERAL LAW AFFECTING
PERSONS WITH MENTAL
ILLNESS OR IMPAIRED CAPACITY – where the appellant is subject to a
treatment authority for the involuntary treatment of his
mental illness –
where the Mental Health Review Tribunal approved 12 treatments of ECT for the
appellant, over a period of
90 days – where the appellant appealed that
decision – where the critical issue is the appellant’s capacity to
give informed consent to ECT in the context of his delusions – human
rights considerations – evaluation of capacity to
give informed
PBU & NJE v Mental Health Review Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
In the matter of ICO
[2023] QMHC 1
K Prskalo KC for the Appellant S Robb for the Chief Psychiatrist
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the Appellant
Office of the Chief Psychiatrist for the Chief Psychiatrist
NOTE: This judgment is published pursuant to
section 790
Health Act 2016
(Qld). It has been anonymised. Leave is given generally for
the whole or part of the judgment in this anonymised form to be further
his appeal against a decision of the Mental Health Review Tribunal raises as
the critical issue the appellant’s capacity to
consent to treatment for
his mental illness by way of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT).
he appeal is to be determined having regard to Australia’s most
significant human rights decision on mental health law: the
decision of Justice
Bell of the Supreme Court of Victoria in
PBU & NJE v Mental Health
[2018] VSC 564
; 56 VR 141. That decision has been applied in this
Court by its President, Wilson J, in
In the matter of ICO
[2023] QHMC
ecause there has already been a delay in my dealing with this appeal, I will
not discuss
in detail in these reasons. And indeed, I have
the benefit of Wilson J’s analysis of it in
n addition to the decisions of
been further assisted by the academic consideration of
“Electroconvulsive therapy, law and human rights
PBU & NJE v Mental
Health Tribunal
[2018] VSC 564
, Bell J” by Ian Freckelton
s Bell J explained in
, in the context of involuntary
treatment for mental illness, there has been a paradigm shift away from
best-interests paternalism
to the least- restrictive kind of treatment, which
draws upon elementary human rights concepts. Where reasonable, the views and
preferences
of the person with a mental illness must be considered. And the
treatment decision is not to be based upon purely medical grounds
– where appropriate – it is to encompass the holistic considerations
of persons with mental illness in their
entire personal and social setting.
s Wilson J explained in
the following human rights are engaged in
a decision to approve treatment by way of ECT under the
Mental Health Act
(Qld) (MHA):
he right to recognition and equality before the law;
he right to privacy;
Psychiatry, Psychology and the Law, 2019 26(1), 1 –
he right to liberty and security of person;
he right to humane treatment when deprived of liberty; and
he right to access health services without discrimination.
s Wilson J further explained, under the MHA, if a person subject to
involuntary treatment for their mental illness has
the capacity
informed consent
to ECT but does not consent to it, then the MHRT must
respect their decision.
f a person subject to involuntary treatment for their mental illness does
have capacity to give informed consent to ECT, then the test for
approving treatment by way of ECT is the same for that person as
it would be for
any other adult without the relevant capacity.
ell J held that threshold for capacity is relatively low. The question is not
whether the person is able to make a balanced, sensible,
rational, or
well-considered decision. A person with mental illness is not to be found
lacking the capacity to give informed consent
simply because their decision
health. Those with mental
illness should have the same dignity of risk in
relation to personal health-care decision making as other people.
he presence in a person of: delusional thinking; irrational fears; or a lack
of belief or insight into the person’s illness,
is capable of depriving
the person of capacity, but it need not.
fter a thorough review of the relevant provisions of the MHA, as amended by
Health and Other Legislation Amendment Act
considering relevant authority (including, but not only,
Wilson J set out the principles relating, directly or indirectly, to informed
consent in this context at [116] – [119] of
respectfully, paraphrased and re-ordered those principles to suit this appeal,
ne of the objects of the
Mental Health Act
(Qld) is to improve
the health and wellbeing of a person who has a mental illness but does not have
the capacity to consent to treatment
for their illness.
Which, in effect, replaced a “best-interests”
approach to this matter with a human rights-based approach.
his object is to be achieved –
n such a way as to
safeguard the human rights
of the person;
n the way which is least restrictive of the rights and liberty of the person;
y the promotion of the recovery of the person, and the person’s ability
to live in the community, without the need for involuntary
treatment and
person with a mental illness has the same human rights as a person without a
mental illness.
person with a mental illness has the same right to respect for their human
worth and dignity as a person without a mental illness.
o the greatest extent practicable –
person (with mental illness) is to be encouraged to take part in making
decisions which affect their life – especially decisions
treatment and care; and
n making a decision about a person with mental illness, the person’s
views, wishes and preferences are to be taken into account.
apacity to give informed consent is to be tested in a non-discriminatory
manner, to ensure that a person with mental illness is
deprived of
their right to exercise their capacity on the basis of contestable value
judgments relating to their illness, decisions,
or behaviours. The test is not
to be applied to produce social conformity at the expense of personal
he criteria set out in
section 233(2)
of the MHA must be applied neutrally
– that is, there must be a neutral determination as to whether the person
has the ability
to: (a) understand the nature and effect of a decision relating
to treatment; (b) freely and voluntarily make the decision; and (c)
communicate
the decision.
n determining whether a person has the ability to understand the nature and
effect of a decision relating to ECT the following matters
are relevant:
person is presumed to have capacity to make decisions about the
person’s treatment and care.
he test for capacity to give informed consent to ECT is decision and time
specific. It is different from the test of capacity which
applies to the
imposition of involuntary treatment.
apacity to give informed consent to ECT must be established on the balance of
probabilities. No party bears the onus of proof on
the matter.
dditionally, to have the capacity to give informed consent, a person must be
able to understand information relevant to the decision
, including the
options and their consequences. Accordingly,
section 234
of the Act requires the
person be given a full explanation, in a form and language they are able to
understand,
by the doctor proposing the treatment,
urpose, method, likely duration and expected benefit of treatment; and
ossible pain, discomfort, risks, and side effects associated with the
treatment; and
lternative methods of treatment available to the person; and
onsequences of not receiving treatment.
his explanation provides the context for determining whether a person has the
ability to understand the nature and effect of a decision
the doctor’s explanation and the person’s response
recorded, so that they can be considered and assessed.
apacity exists where a person has an
to: identify the
advantages and disadvantages of the available options; understand their
consequences;
weigh the consequences
, and make a decision.
apacity to give informed consent does
require the person to give
careful consideration
to the advantages and disadvantages of
apacity to give informed consent does not require the person to make a
rational and balanced decision. It is enough that the person
is able to make and
communicate their decision in broad terms.
hose assessing capacity under
section 233
vigilantly ensure
that the assessment is evidence based, patient-centred, criteria focused and
judgmental, and not made to depend, implicitly or explicitly, upon
identification of a so called objectively reasonable
hose assessing capacity under
section 233
of the MHA must not reason that, if
a person does not wish to receive ECT when objectively they
they do not have the ability to understand the nature and effect of a decision
relating to ECT.
ection 233 does not require an assessment of whether a person is capable of
understanding that they have an illness, or symptoms of
an illness, that affects
their mental health and wellbeing.
However, such an assessment
may be relevant
to the question whether the person has the ability to
understand the nature and effect of a decision relating to ECT.
lack of insight may impact upon a person’s ability to understand
relevant information, but the presence or absence of insight
A for the presence or absence of decision-making capacity.
person’s lack of insight into their mental illness may – as a
relevant fact – support a conclusion that a person
does not have the
ability to understand the nature and effect of a decision relating to ECT. But
the lack of insight is not a determinative,
normative criterion.
person who lacks insight into, or does not accept or believe that they
have, a mental illness, or that they need ECT, may nevertheless
capacity to give informed consent.
Those assessing the capacity to consent
must consider how the lack of insight et cetera affects the person’s
ability to understand
the nature and effect of a decision relating to ECT.
cceptance, or belief in, or insight into, the diagnosis of mental illness and
the need for treatment may vary significantly depending
on the person and their
he presence of thought disorder or psychotic thinking which clouds a
person’s judgment, or delusions about treatment, may lead
conclusion that a person does not have the relevant capacity.
at [206(6)].
Compare the definition of “capacity to consent to be
treated” in
of the MHA.
ut if a person subject to involuntary treatment has the capacity to provide
informed consent to ECT and decides not to receive ECT,
then their decision must
be respected.
he decision to approve treatment by way of ECT for a person
relevant capacity is to be made having regard to –
he person’s views, wishes and preferences, to the greatest extent
hether treatment by way of ECT has clinical merit;
hether it is appropriate in the circumstances;
hether evidence supports its effectiveness for the particular person’s
mental illness; and
here the person has previously received treatment by way of ECT – its
effectiveness for the person.
he “best-interests” paradigm has been rejected in this
ack of the capacity to give informed consent is to be established according
standard, having regard to the seriousness of the issue
– namely the fundamental human rights of a person to self-determination;
to be free of non-consensual treatment; and to personal inviolability.
The appellant and the background to this appeal
he relatively young adult appellant has a history of bipolar affective
disorder (BPAD).
n 9 June 2023, he required medical evacuation from his home, which is outside
Queensland, to a hospital in Queensland because of a
relapse of his illness. He
had ceased his medications in the months before his evacuation. He was sedated
pon hospitalisation in Queensland in the Mental Health Unit of a major public
hospital, he required management in the high dependency
unit for over a month
because of his vulnerability and his risk of aggression towards others. The
appellant’s delusional content
was considered more severe than upon his
previous admissions.
His delusions were grandiose and paranoid.
Which had followed non-compliance with medications and a relapse
he appellant had a limited response to psychotropics and, on 3 July 2023, the
MHRT approved the administration to him of 12 sessions
of ECT over 90 days. The
appellant appealed that decision to this Court.
CT was administered to the appellant on 9 occasions between 5 July 2023 and
26 July 2023, before his appeal was allowed. His symptoms
reduced considerably,
and he was able to be nursed in the open ward from 20 July 2023.
is appeal was allowed on 28 July 2023. On that date, the treating team
identified that his circumstances had changed, and that clozapine
possible alternative treatment, which the appellant was prepared to receive.
lthough the appellant informed his treating team, and the Court, that he was
prepared to take clozapine, there were some difficulties
associated with his
taking it. More significantly though, he developed myocarditis on 12 August 2023
and required transfer to the
Coronary Care Unit for close monitoring and
support. He was returned to the Mental Health Unit on 15 August 2023. Thus,
is no longer a treatment option for the appellant.
he clinical notes made before and after the appellant received ECT in July
2023 reveal numerous attempts by hospital staff to discuss
ECT with him.
Speaking generally, the appellant was not often open to discussions about ECT
and when he did engage in discussions
However, the clinical notes do not always reveal the
discussions with the appellant about ECT.
n 19 June 2023, the appellant was said to be unable to weigh up
decisions regarding treatment, including ECT, due to the severity of his
condition “
and as such lacks the capacity to consent
pause here to note that the test of capacity does not require an ability to
decisions; and the severity of an illness
does not equate to a lack of capacity to consent to ECT.)
n 24 June 2023, the appellant was noted to be terrified of the idea of ECT.
On 30 June 2023, he was noted to be fixated on ECT; voicing
a strong dislike for
it and threatening to kill himself if it were administered to him. On 4 July
2023, he was adamant that he would
not be having ECT and that it would break his
heart and affect his musical abilities.
n 18 August 2023, after his cardiac episode, the appellant was advised that
further ECT might lead to a faster discharge from hospital.
The appellant said
he did not need ECT. He became extremely agitated and left the room and smashed
the door. He returned after five
minutes but was unable to meaningfully engage
in a conversation about his mental health.
n 27 August 2023, the appellant said he was really stressed about the
prospect of ECT and became teary when discussing it. He spoke
of “getting
off his TA”.
he following was recorded about the appellant’s consultation with his
psychiatrist on 4 September 2023 –
Doctor ... explained Bipolar Affective Disorder to pt, pt denied he fit in
the criteria
Pt agreed to take tablets regularly after discharge in maybe a month time to
avoid coming back
Doctor ... explained ECT to pt, pt states he does not want ECT, “Andrew
number 9 on my Spotify”...
e then continued with delusional themes.
he most recent written clinical report explained that the appellant remained
unwell under his current treatment regime:
When reviewed by the registrar on 18/8/23, [the appellant] could not engage
in a meaningful conversation about treatment options and
his mental illness; he
significantly escalated in his behaviour and broke the vent/window of the door.
Since then, [the appellant]
has been switched from IM paliperidone to IM
zuclopenthixol depot. Valproate has also been reintroduced as a second mood
stabiliser,
given LFT dysfunction from chlorpromazine has fully resolved.
Lithium has been decreased due to supratherapeutic levels. While [the
appellant’s] agitation during reviews has decreased, nursing staff report
continued intrusiveness, thought disorganisation,
and fixation on his grandiose
and persecutory delusions.
n 30 August 2023, the MHRT approved another course of 12 sessions of ECT,
over 90 days, for the appellant. This is the decision under
t the hearing of the ECT application, the appellant told the MHRT, among
other things, the following –
e did not believe he had a mental illness; he did not need medication or
treatment; his mental health was clear and straight; when
he was off medication
for 4 to 5 months at home, he was fine.
eing medicated by law was hurtful.
e could maintain good mental health and be in charge going forward as a self-
empowered musician without medication.
is life’s work depended on his memory, and he does not like what ECT
does to his mind.
e does not know that ECT helped him, although he acknowledged that (during
ECT) he said it helped him.
e might consider treatment, but that would depend on what it was. He liked
sedatives; he liked a low stimulus mindset.
e thought the treating team were trying to kill him.
o one in hospital thought he was unwell: they thought he was a good guitar
lso, he expressed some of the concerns set out in the document he relied upon
at the stay application and the appeal (see below).
e expressed delusional beliefs at the MHRT hearing, including in his written
self- report.
is treating doctor, and a doctor asked to provide a second opinion for ECT,
found him to lack the capacity to consent to ECT.
he MHRT found that the appellant’s symptoms were “preventing him
from understanding and weighing the risks and benefits
of ECT, the risks and
benefits of other treatments, and the consequences and risks of not receiving
medication treatment or ECT”.
The MHRT found that the appellant lacked the
capacity to give informed consent to ECT.
he MHRT found that ECT was an appropriate treatment for the appellant on the
basis of the medical/psychiatric evidence before it.
That evidence was to the
effect that the
appellant had a treatment refractory illness which had not improved with
trials of various medications. Antipsychotics had only initially
improved his
mania but had not shifted his delusional beliefs. Without ECT, the risks to the
appellant included cognitive damage;
medical toxicity (which was already an
issue); carer burnout, affecting accommodation; recurrent, traumatising hospital
(including in the high dependency unit); a poor psychosocial
trajectory and quality of life; misadventure and reputation risk; and
assault by others (in response to the appellant’s intrusiveness and
behavioural dysregulation). It was difficult
to identify a treatment with more
clinical merit than ECT, given that the appellant had had the most promising
result to it, and
without it, he would need a prolonged admission, which carried
the risks already referred to, including from a high load of medication.
he appellant’s ground of appeal is:
I do not wish to receive ECT and
I’m worried about memory side effects. I can maintain a healthy state of
he MHRT’s decision was stayed on 7 September 2023, pending the final
hearing of the appeal.
n exercising jurisdiction on appeal, I am required to inquire into the matter
and inform myself in relation to it in any way I consider
appropriate. Appeals
are by way of re- hearing. I may consider the evidence before the MHRT as well
as any other evidence, including
evidence which has emerged since the
MHRT’s decision.
rawing on Bell J’s judgment: I have taken into account, in deciding
this appeal, that the provisions of the MHA are predicated
upon the central
purpose of ensuring that persons with mental illness have access to and receive
medical treatment, consistently
with their right to health. Where – having
regard to relevant principles – a person does not have the capacity to
informed consent and where there is no less restrictive way for the person
to be treated (and treatment is appropriate et cetera),
then the MHRT must grant
an application for approval for ECT because under the Act, and subject to its
safeguards, this is a necessary
means of ensuring a person is given that
15 September 2023, the date on which the appeal was heard, I stayed the
MHRT’s decision until delivery of this judgment.
deciding this appeal, I have borne in mind the following from Freckelton
QC’s interpretation of Bell J’s decision:
At the heart of Bell J’s decision is a requirement for clinicians and
bodies such as mental health tribunals and administrative
tribunals on review to
be rigorous in their analysis of legislation which impacts upon mental
patients’ rights. There is a
risk that ‘best interest’
considerations and extra-legislative notions, such as insight and compliance,
will intrude
into decision-making without legislative warrant ... [T]he dignity
and autonomy of capacity for error should be extended to those
with mental
illness as it is to those without mental illness ... [T]he presence of
symptomatology of psychiatric pathology, such
as paranoia, delusions or
hallucinations, may deprive or substantially impair the capacity for informed
consent but ... this does
not necessarily follow. The question is what the
correlation is between symptomatology and capacity, whether or not the capacity
is ultimately exercised irrationally – there should not be
consequentialist drawing of inferences ...
Evidence given at the hearing of the application for a stay of the
n 7 September 2023, the appellant told this Court that he believed he did not
need ECT; nor did he feel it was for him; and it scared
e read out (and added a little too) a document scribed for him by the
Independent Patients’ Rights Advisor as follows (the appellant’s
additions are in square brackets. The part he did not read out is struck
My wishes and views with regard to ECT
If I had a choice, I would rather not have the depot (Abilify) or ECT. The
depot makes me feel different from others and makes me
feel singled out in
However, if I have to choose, I would 100% choose the depot over anymore ECT
treatments.
I also cannot have clozapine as it had side effects on my heart and nearly
The reasons I do not want ECT are:-
do not want to experience any memory loss, whether it’s short or long
term [as my memory is my life’s work].
am also worried about ECT affecting my heart as I have already had heart
problems and a medical emergency as a result of clozapine.
When I had ECT, it
was every second day, and I felt like my life was skipping or the days were
skipping. So I couldn’t maintain
knowledge of what day of the week it was
let alone who I am –
you forget everything.
uring my last ECT, I was paranoid with distrust with the medical system, with
medical malpractice being in my [medical] history, and
I was writing notes in my
jacket so I wouldn’t forget things. I have never done this before
[I’ve never written notes
down and I’ve never put them in my jacket
am a superstitious person and the thought of having more than nine ECTS
scares me as I have nine songs on my first and only album
on Spotify (Love and
Liberty [Re-imagined]).
I woke this morning (7/9/23) [and this is my report of how I was – my
diary [indistinct] entry of how I was feeling this morning:
exhausting being in hospital – It’s exhausting helping to fix other
people’s problems. It feels
like everyday is the same and I am on repeat.
I’m not a nurse and I don’t want to be here. I’m feeling
in here without the support of family and friends. When I wake up I
just want to close my eyes again and disappear to a different
place and I am not
t the hearing of the stay, the appellant’s treating doctor informed the
Court that those treating the appellant had been able
to manage him on
reasonable doses of benzodiazepines, mood stabilisers, and antipsychotics. She
continued –
Initially when the first course of ECT was approved, there was a high level
of agitation, and [the appellant] was in the high dependency
unit, and with the
in his current stage of illness,
the agitation has settled. However the
delusions and – the persecutory delusions and the grandiose delusions,
which are impairing
his functioning, have largely remained, and so that’s
why I’m requesting a course of ECT to work on his treatment-resistant
illness so that he can have a better psychosocial trajectory after discharge
from hospital.
Further evidence given, and arguments made, at the appeal hearing
he appellant was represented by a King’s Counsel from Legal Aid
Queensland on this appeal.
he update report of 13 September 2023, created for the purposes of this
appeal, sets out the appellant’s wishes as follows:
[The appellant] has expressed his wish that he does not receive ECT. He has
expressed fears that ECT would impact on his “guitar
magic” and that
he would incur memory loss, specifically in relation to his grandiose delusional
beliefs that he intimately
knows [a famous actress] and the Royal Family. In a
opinion review for ECT, [the appellant] similarly expressed that
he did not want to receive ECT to the consultant psychiatrist. When
he specified a preference for “natural” treatment. On discussion
around alternatives for ECT, he stated his
to not take any medication at all, reporting all medications destroyed his
“creativity”. He continues to insist on discharge
s at 13 September 2023, the appellant was receiving two mood stabilisers,
antipsychotic medications and Valium. The medications had
not attenuated his
symptoms, to allow for his safe discharge into the community. He had required
occasional time in the high dependency
unit to deescalate his verbal and
behavioural aggression.
he update report states that the appellant has some understanding of ECT
– in that he understands that it involves receiving
anaesthesia and
“electrocuting” the brain with the possible side effect of memory
loss. It continues (my underlining)
He does not understand the purpose of ECT in his circumstance
he does not believe he has a mental illness that requires any treatment at all.
When the team have engaged [the appellant]
in conversation around his concerns
[the appellant’s] specific concerns pertain
to his losing his ‘memories’ of meeting [a famous actress] and
interacting
with the Royal Family, which are delusions part of his
psychotic process
T. He also mentions losing days during ECT treatment, and
worries about losing his ability to create songs. He is unable to understand
that there are provisions to test his cognition, and if memory deficits are
noticeable, then modifying the treatment in terms of
its intensity, electrode
placement, reducing pulse width, spacing the treatment and even terminating the
treatment altogether is
an option as well.
[The appellant
] has continued insisting that he should be discharged
directly home, viewing this as the alternative to ECT
I. When the team
have explained to [the appellant] that the alternative is a protracted admission
during which further medication
regimes are trialled and that, at this point,
those medication regimes will be combinatorial [the appellant]
is unable to
accept this
D. He is unable to understand how his current belief system may
prevent his integration in society to make him vulnerable to be taken
of and cause further cognitive decline.
n oral evidence before me, the appellant’s treating doctor made the
following points –
mental state examination of the appellant on 13 September 2023 revealed that
his psychomotor agitation had recently resolved, and
his speech was less
pressured than before. His mood was quite labile and ranged from happy to sad
and teary – depending on
his circumstances – and it was of higher
here was no evidence of formal thought disorder, but his grandiose delusions
remained, and he had acted on them (by attempting to
social media).
e was on the open ward, although there were times when he had to be moved to
the high dependency unit when he became upset. He had
been accessing leave with
a peer support worker now and then.
is current treatment was mainly targeted at his delusions and his mood, but
it also induced a sense of calmness and reduced his agitation.
t was difficult to talk to the appellant about ECT and his concerns about its
impact on his memory because it was distressing for
him: he does not want it.
She had attempted to remind him that he was still able to play his guitar after
the nine sessions of ECT
and to challenge his fears, but it was difficult for
him to accept.
e understood what he was told about memory loss – but his concerns
f he received ECT, the likely trajectory was that his agitation would be
reduced and even if his delusions were not to go away, he
would be less
pre-occupied by them/fixated upon them. Then, he would be able to return to his
there were limited supports there, he
would be able to engage with his treating team in some capacity.
f ECT were not given, then he would require a lengthy admission for his
complex, treatment resistant, illness and the stage might
be reached where it
would not be safe to send him home outside of Queensland. The doctor referred to
the potential for an application
to QCAT, I assume for the appointment of a
s to whether the doctor had explained (or tried to explain) to the appellant
the different treatment trajectories, the doctor said
“probably not to
that detail” but she had had numerous and multiple discussions with the
appellant about no ECT resulting
in a longer admission. She had explained to him
that his support services outside of Queensland were concerned about him
in his [current] mental state and that his mother was exhausted and
concerned for him.
he doctor agreed that while he literally
what the doctor
told him about ECT, he did not think it applied to him because he was waiting
for his delusional “truth”
to come out.
n the doctor’s opinion, the appellant was unable to weigh the benefits
and nature of the decision he had to make. While he listened
to the information
given to him,
he thought it was wrong; and did not accept it, so he could not weigh the
risks, benefits, alternatives, and consequences.
e was not capable of understanding the nature of his mental illness; nor that
it required treatment; nor that his circumstances would
not change without
intervention.
n the doctor’s opinion, the appellant’s beliefs “served
him” in some way (in the context of past trauma) and
he was not ready to
let them go. She hoped that ECT would relieve him of his delusions and allow him
to see that he was a good young
man who could achieve a lot, with the right
evidence-based treatment.
nder cross-examination, the doctor said that the appellant’s agitation,
every time ECT was mentioned to him, was driven by his
illness. Although there
was, at one point in time, a suggestion that treatment by way of ECT and
treatment by way of a psychotropic
regime would take the same time to lead to
improvements, it was now apparent that the results of the appellant’s
psychotropic
treatment results had plateaued.
he doctor clarified that her opinion was that he was unable to understand the
information she provided to him about ECT because of
his delusions and his
mental state.
Submissions
ounsel for the
C submitted that there was evidence that the
appellant could make decisions about treatment – he had decided to accept
He said that, if he had a choice, he would not receive any treatment,
but he’d “100 per cent” prefer medications
to ECT. He was
accepting of treatment generally – just not of ECT for the reasons given
in his written document.
e was to be presumed to have capacity. All that was required was an
understanding of the nature and effect of the decision about ECT
he had demonstrated. His right to make a decision included his right to make a
bad decision.
he also submitted that I might find that there had not been full compliance
section 234
of the Act. She acknowledged that the update report dealt more
fully with the question of informed consent than the other material
Court – but it did not contain what the appellant had been told.
ounsel for the
Chief Psychiatrist
C submitted that the evidence could
not support a finding that the explanation required by
section 234
had not been
given but there was no clear repository, in the clinical notes, including the
update report, of the sort of information
which Wilson J indicated the Court
expected to see.
he also observed the obvious difficulty which arose if a person was not
willing to receive full information about ECT but that, in
this case, the
appellant had experienced it.
hile not taking a position on the outcome of the appeal, counsel for the
Chief Psychiatrist identified the issue for the Court as
whether the
appellant’s inability to accept what he was told about ECT [insofar as it
might apply to him] and lack of insight
into his illness affected his capacity.
She submitted that, on the evidence, the appellant was “so taken with his
own delusional
framework ... in circumstances where he doesn’t accept that
he has an illness ... [or] that he requires treatment for his illness
it would seem that he cannot weigh up the benefits or risks of treatment
he appellant wanted to go home, but he could not engage upon the issues he
had to engage upon “to make that happen”. He
could not weigh up and
understand the nature and effect of the decision he was being asked to make
because of the severity of his
r Iqbal advised the Court that the appellant suffered from a very severe
mental illness. His treatment with typical and atypical anti-psychotics,
three months, had not resulted in the benefit one would hope for or ordinarily
expect. There were few options left. The number
of various combinations of
medications which had been trialled had been more than reasonable, which left
ECT as the treatment to
be considered. The previous nine sessions of ECT
resulted in some improvement, but not the complete resolution of his
s to capacity, Dr Iqbal advised me that the evidence supported a finding that
the appellant knew what ECT did and did not do. As the
treating doctor
explained, the appellant had been shown a certain movie about ECT and he had
experienced it.
owever, Dr Iqbal advised me that while he could literally understand the
other information he was given: the import of it was lost
on him because of his
Consideration of outcomes in comparable matters
ppreciating that every matter is different, I nevertheless considered the
outcomes in the cases of ICO, PBU and NJE.
CO experienced a deterioration in her mental health in the two years prior to
the approval to treat her with ECT. She had declined
functionally overall and
suffered more severe symptoms over that period, during which she had never been
in full remission. Her judgment
was acutely impaired. ICO had no insight into
her chronic mental illness or her need for treatment. She demonstrated no clear
of thought form, but her thought content consisted of paranoid and
grandiose themes. She could not make rational and self-serving
decisions. She
believed she was “fine in the head” and suitable for discharge
– even though she was clearly not.
CO had been provided with a good explanation of ECT and its benefits. ICO had
been consistently clear that she did not want ECT. She
described it as draconian
and expressed concerns that, in effect, it was over-used.
n her self-report to the Mental Health Review Tribunal (MHRT), ICO
acknowledged that she had a mental illness but wanted a second
opinion. During
the MHRT hearing, the symptoms of ICO’s illness were obvious. For example,
she interrupted frequently, she
had difficult following direction, and she was
highly elevated.
he did not want ECT because of her concerns that it would cause memory and
cognition problems. She would prefer to have psychotherapy
or psychoanalysis,
rather than medications. Her plan was not to have ECT and to be eventually
discharged.
t was submitted that she had been weighing up the information given to her
them, or a connection
to real life and were not delusional. Even though she had disordered thought,
she understood the nature and
effect of her decision. While others might think
her decision was not rational – that was not the test.
ilson J acted on evidence to the effect that, while ICO could listen to
information about ECT, she was not receptive to it because
she did not believe
that ECT would be good for her because she did not believe that she had mental
illness – even though she
would glibly say that she had paranoid
schizophrenia.
ilson J accepted that ICO had no insight into the complexity of her chronic,
relapsing mental illness and its effects on her moods,
thoughts, and behaviours.
Her lack of insight into her chronic mental illness or her need for treatment
affected her ability to understand
the nature and effect of a decision to give
consent for ECT. She did not have the ability, in general terms, to identify the
and disadvantages of the available options; or to understand their
consequences; or to weigh their consequences and reach a decision.
aving found ICO lacked capacity, her Honour went on to consider the matters
section 509(4)
of the Act.
n the evidence, her Honour was not satisfied that there were no other
treatments available for ICO apart from ECT. Her Honour observed
applications for ECT should include comprehensive material about the medications
which have been considered for a person, and
used or not used, and the reasons
for doing so. That was absent from the evidence and her Honour was not satisfied
that ECT was appropriate
in the circumstances.
er Honour indicated that further investigation into the appropriateness of
treatment with clozapine or other anti-psychotics was required.
It might be that
the treating team concluded thereafter that there was no other alternative to
ECT, in which case, another application
could be made to the MHRT. Her Honour
allowed the appeal and set aside the existing decision of the MHRT to approve
ECT for ICO.
ell J found that the decisions of VCAT in the case of PBU and NJE were
affected by various errors of law. His Honour quashed those
decisions. By the
time his Honour had done so, PBU and NJE were being treated in the community.
Compulsory ECT was no longer sought
and there was therefore no need for remitter
orders. Bell J did not need to embark on an assessment of the capacity of either
Consideration
he critical issue raised by this appeal is that of the appellant’s
capacity to consent to ECT when he has no, or very limited,
insight into his
mental illness and his need for treatment, and where the delusional symptoms of
his illness are prominent.
or the following reasons, I find that the appellant does
capacity to give informed consent to ECT.
began with the presumption that the appellant did have capacity.
acknowledged that where delusions are present, the capacity assessment must
consider the relationship between the delusion and the
capacity. The least
restrictive principle is to be applied with recognition that persons with mental
illness are dignified rights-
bearers, not welfare cases. However, as Bell J
As a patient’s health, medical treatment and
self-determination are interrelated, this can cut both ways: discriminatory
of capacity and paternalistic medical treatment can undermine
patients’ dignity, autonomy and prospects of recovery in the
subject to safeguards,
compulsory medical treatment may presently
be necessary as a last resort to improve
those prospects and contribute
to the realisation of patient autonomy and self-
actualisation
” (my underlining)
s this is an appeal by way of re-hearing, I was first to determine, in a
neutral way, whether the appellant
had the ability to
understand the
nature and effect
of a decision relating to treatment:
that is, whether he had an ability to:
identify the advantages and
disadvantages of the available options
consequences;
those consequences.
was to ensure that I did not place the threshold for capacity too high. I
was not assessing whether the appellant was able to make
a balanced, sensible,
rational, or well-considered decision.
n this case, on the facts, the question of the appellant’s capacity
reduced to whether the appellant’s lack of insight
into his illness, or
the presence in the appellant of delusional thinking, or both, had deprived him
of the ability referred to above,
and therefore his capacity.
he relevant “capacity” requires an ability to understand the
“nature” and “effect” of a decision
interpreted a reference to the “nature” of a decision relating
to ECT as a reference to the basic features of the decision.
interpreted a reference to the “effect” of a decision relating
to ECT as a reference to the result or consequences of
the decision.
n my view, currently, the appellant has the ability to understand the
of a decision about ECT. He understands he is being asked to
consent to treatment by way of electro- convulsions under anaesthetic.
understands that, if he says he will have it, it will be administered to him as
it has been administered to him in the past. He
knows what ECT involves and its
risks for his memory. Neither his illness nor his delusions interfere with his
understanding of what
is involved/the
of electroconvulsive
owever, subject to one complication, I found that, on the evidence tendered
at the hearing of the appeal on 15 September 2023, the
appellant did not have
the ability to understand the
of a decision relating to ECT
because his illness affected his ability to understand
the result or
consequences of his decision
hat complicated my assessment of the appellant’s ability to understand
the effect of a decision relating to ECT was the application
of the statement in
that the explanation required by
section 234
provided the context for
determining whether a person is able to understand the nature and effect of a
decision about ECT.
n the present case, as at 18 September 2023,
the explanation was
incomplete, because although the appellant had been informed about a more
protracted admission if he did not
receive ECT, he had not been told that
without another course of ECT, there was a risk, if not a likelihood, that he
would not be
able to return to his home outside Queensland. Nor had he been
expressly told that it was unlikely that, on medications alone, his
mental state
would settle to the point at which he could be safely managed at home.
The day I intended to give my decision in this matter.
had to consider whether the appellant’s obvious
engage in a discussion about the
other consequences
of a decision
regarding ECT (which had been explained to him), because of the prominence of
his delusions and other symptoms and his
lack of insight into his illness and
the need for its treatment, could be used by me as a proxy for determining
whether the appellant
had the capacity to give informed consent in the absence
of the full explanation required. Expressing it another way, I had to consider
whether the appellant ought to be given a last chance to demonstrate capacity in
the face of information that he had not been given
previously, that he might not
get home if he did not receive ECT.
earing in mind all that has been said in these reasons, and the judgments
referred to therein, about the human rights of a person
such as the appellant,
and the significance of the decision which I am making in this case; and without
dissent from the appellant’s
counsel, I adjourned the appeal to allow the
appellant’s doctor to inform him of that consequence of not receiving ECT
section 234(d)).
I considered that I could not simply discount the
that the appellant could demonstrate capacity when informed of a
consequence of not receiving ECT which might be meaningful to him
in a concrete
n 20 September 2023, the appellant’s doctor had a conversation with him
told the appellant and
his reaction to it. It was apparent from the notes that, because of his illness,
the appellant was unable
to tolerate the conversation long enough to be informed
of the consequence for his return home were he not to receive ECT. He became
pressured, agitated, and thought disordered. He said the conversation was making
him suicidal. He could not be re- directed. He fought
his diagnosis and any
treatment relating to it. The conversation was traumatising for him.
t seemed to me that the appellant had less capacity on 13 September 2023 than
he appeared to have on 7 September 2023, when he dictated,
and later read out,
his wishes when it came to ECT. He had even less capacity on 20 September 2023.
I acknowledge that this may well
be a consequence of the loss, over time, of the
gains made after his treatment in July with ECT.
o recap: On 13 September 2023, the appellant’s fears around ECT related
impact upon his
“guitar magic”, his creativity and his relationships with persons of
status about whom he had delusions.
He could not understand that his treating
team could test for memory loss and adjust ECT accordingly. He insisted that he
be discharged immediately and could not understand that the absence of
ECT would result in a prolonged admission. However, he was
not told that without
ECT he might not be able to return home.
y 20 September 2023, his illness and its symptoms had disabled him from
understanding
effect of his decision about ECT; and any attempt at a
full explanation was futile. The appellant’s
explanation given to him on that date – that is, his inability to sit
through it or to listen to it without becoming
traumatised – proved, to
the requisite standard, evidence of his inability to understand the effect of a
decision relating
ccordingly, I found that he was not an adult able to give informed consent to
section 509(3)
of the MHA applied and I was required to consider the
matters listed in
section 509(4)
, as the MHRT had done.
acknowledge the views and wishes of the appellant. However, on the evidence,
ECT is an effective treatment for BPAD, and it has clinical
merit for the
appellant. It had been effective to some extent when last administered to him
and I accept that his mental state deteriorated
after its cessation in July. It
is an appropriate treatment for the appellant, because the numerous psychotropic
treatment combinations
trialled have not been successful; the medication load
required to improve (or attempt to improve) his mental state carries serious
risks to the appellant’s physical health; and clozapine is not an
am therefore satisfied as required by
section 509(4).
It follows that the
appellant’s appeal is dismissed and the decision of the MHRT is confirmed.
For completeness: the stay of
the MHRT decision ceased upon the pronouncement of
my orders and the publishing of these
IIABTIOBIWHIIITIIBHOHWWISIIIAHADTWSSHTUIHITAIIHIHHTAIIHOFITTTTHHANHHHHHBHAOTHTOOOOTAHETOTLTwwwwtTBAAASTTCCCTcappACTAITCiaTAAbiiTATBIAttttAAIBTT
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (383 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (205 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter