URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Adcock v Workers' Compensation Regulator [2025] ICQ 14 (4 August 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Adcock v Workers' Compensation Regulator
[2025] ICQ 14
Adcock, Malcolm
(Appellant)
Workers' Compensation Regulator
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
4 August 2025
Hartigan DP
On the papers
Pursuant to
s 562(1)(a)
Workers' Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act 2003
, the decision of the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission delivered on 15 September 2023 in Matter Number WC/2019/64 is
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – QUEENSLAND – APPEALS – APPEAL TO
INDUSTRIAL COURT – WHEN APPEAL LIES – where the Appellant
appeal against a decision of the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission
– where the Appellant sought costs –
where the Commission granted
the costs application against the Respondent – where the Appellant appeals
the costs decision
– whether the Commission has power to award costs
– whether the Commission made an error of law in assessing the costs
the proceedings below – decision of the Commission
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY
COURTS – COSTS – APPEALS AS TO COSTS – OTHER MATTERS
where the Appellant contends that the Commission should have ordered costs with
respect to closing written submissions –
where the Appellant contends that
there should have been an uplift to costs – whether the Commission made an
error of law –
whether the appeal should be granted – whether an
uplift of the costs should be awarded to the Appellant – decision of
Commission confirmed
LEGISLATION:
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Relations (Tribunals) Rules 2011
(Qld), r 18
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld), r 681, sch 2
Workers' Compensation
and Rehabilitation Act 2003
, s 114A, s 114B,
Workers' Compensation and Rehabilitation Regulation 2014
(Qld), reg 132, reg 133
Adcock v Workers' Compensation Regulator
[2017] QIRC
Adcock v Workers' Compensation Regulator
[2021] QIRC
Adcock v Workers' Compensation Regulator
[2023] QIRC 266
Anderson v Pickers Auctions Pty Ltd
Ball v State of Queensland (Department of Justice and
Attorney-General, Queensland Corrective Services
[2019] ICQ 23
[2018] HCA 26
(2018) 266 CLR 1
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR
Martin v Rowling & Anor
R v Magennis; R v
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507
Simon Blackwood (Workers' Compensation
Regulator) v Pearce
[2015] ICQ 12
Smith v The Queen
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
The Ombudsman v Laughton
[2005] NSWCA 339
(2005) 64 NSWLR
Turay v Workers' Compensation Regulator
[2023] ICQ 13
Workers' Compensation Regulator v Adcock
Workers Compensation Regulator v Queensland Nurses and Midwives'
Union of Employees (No 2)
[2021] ICQ 13
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
[1] Malcolm
Adcock ('the Appellant') appeals against an order for costs issued by the
Queensland Industrial Relations Commission ('the
Commission').
[2] Relevantly,
the Appellant seeks, on appeal, to set aside the decision issued by the
Commission on 15 September 2023 which is in
the following terms:
The Respondent pay the Appellant's costs of the hearing fixed in the sum of
$ 2,792.65.
[3] Whilst the
Appellant has the benefit of the costs outlined in the decision, he seeks to
appeal the order on the basis that the
Commissioner erred,
not awarding additional costs sought by the Appellant.
The Appeal to this Court
Section 561
Workers' Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
(Qld) ('the
') confers on a person aggrieved by a decision of an industrial magistrate or
the Commission a right of appeal to this Court and is
set out as follows:
561 Appeal to industrial court
(1) A party aggrieved by the industrial magistrate's or the industrial
commission's decision may appeal to the industrial court.
Industrial Relations Act 2016
applies to the
(3) The appeal is by way of rehearing on the evidence and proceedings before
the industrial magistrate or the industrial commission,
unless the court orders
additional evidence be heard.
(4) The court's decision is final.
v Workers' Compensation
President Davis J
concluded that an appeal pursuant to
is not limited to
errors of law or want of jurisdiction by
Industrial Relations
(Qld) ('IR Act').
provides that in deciding an appeal, the Industrial Court
may confirm the decision,
or set aside the decision
and substitute it for another
Regulator submits that as the current appeal lies against the exercise of a
discretion by the Commission, the principles from
House v The
are engaged. This
requires that the relevant grounds of review must include either: establishing
an error of law; the taking into
account of irrelevant considerations; failure
to take into account a relevant consideration; or a factual
[8] The grounds
of appeal, as they appear in the Appellant's Application to Appeal, are as
(a) the Commissioner erred in her interpretation of costs of the appeal and
costs of the hearing, when she decided whether the written
closing submissions,
and consideration of same, were not part of the hearing;
(b) the Commissioner erred in her interpretation of "jurisdictional error" and
so also erred in her reliance and interpretation of
the case law she relied on
to make her finding; and
(c) if the Appellant is wrong on the above two appealable points, then the
Appellant respectfully submits that the decision by Davis
Compensation Regulator v Queensland Nurses and Midwives' Union of Employees (No
'QNMU (No 2)
erroneous based on the President's interpretation of "costs of the appeal" and
"costs of the hearing."
[9] Without
seeking the Court's leave, the Appellant purported to amend the grounds of
appeal in his written submissions, which stated,
"[w]e do not press any further
our Appeal point 2 which was lodged in our Application to Appeal..." and
instead, sought to include
the following ground of appeal:
(a) the Commissioner gave no reasons so far as it relates to the Commission's
discretion under reg 132(3) of the
Workers' Compensation and Rehabilitation
Regulation 2014
(Qld) ('the
Respondent objects to the amendment and contends that the Appellant should not
be permitted to amend the grounds of appeal
out of time. However, the
Respondent, on the basis that leave may be granted, has also provided fulsome
submissions in response to
the amended ground two.
[11] Just prior
to the hearing date of the appeal, the parties by consent, requested that the
appeal proceed on the papers. Consequently,
it can be inferred that the parties
did not wish to make any further submissions that went beyond the content of
their respective
written submissions including with respect to the amendment to
ground two sought by the Appellant.
[12] Beyond the
objection contained in the Respondent's written submissions, it does not raise
any distinct matter of prejudice that
would arise if leave was to be granted.
[13] Indeed, the
Regulator has provided written submissions addressing the amended appeal ground
on the basis that leave may be granted
and, consequently, it is difficult to
conceive of any prejudice arising if leave to amend was
[14] Whilst it
is noted that the Appellant has failed to comply with r 18 of the
Relations (Tribunals) Rules 2011
(Qld) ('IR Rules'), in the circumstances of
this matter, including the provision of submissions by the Regulator addressing
the amended
ground, the Court will waive the Appellant's non-compliance with r
18 of the IR Rules and grant leave to amend ground two of the
Application to
The Power to Award Costs
[15] The power
to award costs for an appeal to the Commission brought pursuant to the
is found in
Section 558
relevantly states:
558 Powers of appeal body
(1) In deciding an appeal, the appeal body may—
(a) confirm the decision; or
(b) vary the decision; or
(c) set aside the decision and substitute another decision; or
(d) set aside the decision and return the matter to the respondent with the
directions the appeal body considers appropriate.
(2) If the appeal body acts under subsection (1)(b) or (c), the decision
is taken for this Act, other than this part, to be the decision
(3) Costs of the hearing are in the appeal body's discretion, except to the
extent provided under a regulation.
[16] Relevantly,
reg 132 of the Regulation states:
132 Costs—proceeding before industrial magistrate or industrial
(1) A decision to award costs of a proceeding heard by an industrial
magistrate or the industrial commission is at the discretion
of the magistrate
or commission.
(2) If the magistrate or commission awards costs—
(a) costs in relation to counsel's or solicitor's fees are as under the
Civil Procedure Rules 1999
, schedule 2,
, scale C; and
(b) costs in relation to witnesses' fees and expenses are as under the
Civil Procedure (Fees) Regulation 2019
(c) costs in relation to bailiff's fees are as under the
Uniform Civil Procedure
(Fees) Regulation 2019
, schedule 2,
(3) The magistrate or commission may allow costs up to 1.5 times the amounts
provided for under subsection (2)(a), in total or in
relation to any item, if
the magistrate or commission is satisfied the amounts are inadequate having
(a) the work involved; or
(b) the importance, difficulty or complexity of the matter to which the
proceeding relates.
, Davis J held that the power to award costs in workers' compensation
matters was vested in the
and not restricted by
The Costs Decision
Relevant Background
[18] Previously,
the parties have been involved in two workers' compensation appeals matters in
the Commission below, as well as another
Industrial Court appeal regarding the
substantive decision in
WC/2019/64.
[19] Mr Adcock
commenced employment with KJM Contractors Pty Ltd on 8 October 2008 as a casual
employee and converted to full-time
employment on 29 October
[20] Mr Adcock's
role was that of a cook/chef in remote camps with the arrangement that he would
"Fly-In-Fly-Out" on the basis of
two weeks on, two weeks off.
August 2015, whilst getting some product in the form of a box of bacon and
frozen cake mix, Mr Adcock misjudged the step
which led to his left foot
rolling, and he fell down which caused immediate pain up his left ankle and to
decision of the Commission on 22 September 2017, the Commission found that
the Appellant had suffered "a personal injury in the form of a 'lateral
ankle ligament sprain, most likely a partial tear to the calcaneal
ligament'" which arose out of, or in the course of, his employment with the
employment being the significant contributing
factor to the
[23] In 2018,
the Regulator varied the decision of WorkCover and determined that the Appellant
did not have an entitlement to payments
of weekly compensation after
August 2016, however, has an entitlement to payment of medical expenses and
hospitalisation until 21 February 2019. The Appellant
filed a further workers'
compensation appeal in the Commission to review this decision made by the
[24] On 25 June
2021, the Commission found that the Appellant's incapacity is determined to have
ceased at 30 November 2017, and that
his requirement for medical treatment
continued until 27 February 2018.
Regulator appealed this decision to the Industrial Court. The Court dismissed
the appeal.
[26] Following
the appeal decision on 24 May 2022 and correspondence from the parties, the
Commission issued a Directions Order dated
30 November 2022 seeking submissions
on the issue of costs in WC/2019/64 which were subsequently filed by the
Commission determined the costs decision on 15 September 2023 as follows:
The Respondent pay the Appellant's costs of the hearing fixed in the sum
Commission provided written reasons with respect to the Primary
[29] Relevantly,
a preliminary matter dealt with by the Commission was in respect to an earlier
order issued in the proceedings that
the Respondent pay the "costs of the
Commission noted that such an order had historically, as a matter of general
practice, been issued by members of the Commission
with respect to appeals
brought pursuant to the
prior to the Industrial Court's decision in
QNMU (No 2)
, Davis J considered the Commission's power to award costs in workers'
compensation appeals and relevantly concluded as follows:
[26] The power
to award costs is not a common law power. It is one granted by statute.
Consequently, if the QIRC does not have a power
vested by statute to award costs
of the appeal beyond the costs of the hearing, then it cannot do so.
[27] There is an
additional power to award costs under
[28] However,
the QIRC's only power to award costs in this case probably comes from the
, not restricted by
. In determining the proper
construction of
, and in particular the meaning of the term "costs of
the hearing", regard must be had to the context and purpose of the section
regard to the statute as a whole.
[29] In my view,
the legislature has clearly deliberately limited the costs which can be
recovered on an appeal to the QIRC. It has
drawn a clear distinction between
different parts of the appeal process. While the legislation envisages that the
appeal process
may involve a conference, no power to award costs associated with
a conference is given. The costs are limited to the "costs of the
Commission properly had regard to
QNMU (No 2)
and several authorities
considering the issuing of orders made outside the grant of a statutory
[33] Having had
regard to the relevant
authorities,
the Commission
concluded that the original order granting "costs of the appeal" was an order
made outside jurisdiction and, consequently,
is not a decision at
Commission then proceeded to award costs to the Appellant pursuant to
, being costs of the hearing.
Commission's reasons for allowing (and not allowing) particular items of costs
appears in the reasons as follows:
[37] Pursuant to
r 132(2) of the WCR Regulation the appropriate scale for solicitor's fees is
schedule 2, part 2 scale C of the UCPR
and for witness' fees and expenses,
Uniform Civil Procedure (Fees Regulation)
Appellant's costs outlined in correspondence to the Respondent dated
November 2022 is as follows:
Description
Costs incl GST
Claim and Statement of Claim and service
Trial preparation, up to and including settlement conference
Balance of trial preparation, no counsel
Solicitor on hearing
(a) Appearance without counsel on hearing – first day
(b) Appearance without counsel on hearing – second day
Written submissions (12 hours)
Consider written submissions Respondent
Applicants written submissions in reply
Instructions –
(a) for disclosure, preparing list of documents and making inspection and copies
of documents –
Allowance to
party requesting disclosure
Allowance to
party making disclosure
Disbursements
Particulars
Amount incl GST
Return flight to Qld for worker
Accommodation for worker
Return flight to Qld for solicitor
Accommodation for solicitor
Dr Suyapto invoice
Dr Suyapto invoice
Dr Suyapto invoice
circumstances where the substantive matter did not involve complex issues or
work warranting uplift of costs, the Appellant
is awarded solicitor's costs as
(a) Item 9 (a) Solicitor appearance at hearing without counsel (first day)
– $1,255.00; and
(b) Item 9 (b) Solicitor appearance at hearing without counsel (second day) -
Appellant is entitled to costs for professional witness fees pursuant to
132(2)(b) of the Regulation and
Uniform Civil Procedure (Fees)
Regulation 2019
(Qld) in the amount of $95.70 for absence from their
employment of a period of three hours or less.
Appellant is entitled to costs for the professional fees for Dr Dion Suyapto's
evidence at the hearing pursuant to
Uniform Civil Procedure
(Fees) Regulation 2019
(Qld) in the amount of $576.95.
[42] There is no
entitlement to costs associated with items outlined at A, B, C and I, as these
items are costs of the appeal rather
than costs of hearing. Similarly, there is
no entitlement to travel expenses associated with the Appellant's claim and the
of Dr Suyapto's reports as these are incidental to the appeal rather than
the costs of hearing.
difficulty with the Appellant's request for costs associated with the written
submissions for the substantive appeal (F,
G and H in table above) is that such
costs are not contemplated by sch 2
scale C of the UCPR. Accordingly, such
an order cannot be
[36] It is this
decision that the Appellant appeals to this Court.
Statutory Construction of the Relevant Scheme
[37] The grounds
of appeal are premised on the Appellant's contentions as to what amounts to the
proper statutory construction of
within the context of the
relevant statutory scheme. For that reason, it is convenient to consider the
statutory construction of
together with reg 132 of the
Regulation at this juncture.
relevant principles with respect to statutory construction were considered and
summarised in
R v Magennis; R v
method to be applied in construing a statute to ascertain the intended meaning
of the words used is well settled. It commences
with a consideration of the
words of the provision itself, but it does not end there. A literal approach to
construction, which requires
the courts to obey the ordinary meaning or usage of
the words of a provision, even if the result is improbable, has long been
by this Court. It is now accepted that even words having an apparently
clear ordinary or grammatical meaning may be ascribed a different
legal meaning
after the process of construction is complete. This is because consideration of
the context for the provision may point
to factors that tend against the
ordinary usage of the words of the provision.
Consideration
of the context for the provision is undertaken at the first stage of the process
of construction. Context is to be understood
in its widest sense. It includes
surrounding statutory provisions, what may be drawn from other aspects of the
statute and the statute
as a whole. It extends to the mischief which it may be
seen that the statute is intended to remedy. "Mischief" is an old expression.
may be understood to refer to a state of affairs which to date the law has not
addressed. It is in that sense a defect in the
law which is now sought to be
remedied. The mischief may point most clearly to what it is that the statute
seeks to achieve.
is not to suggest that a very general purpose of a statute will necessarily
provide much context for a particular provision or
that the words of the
provision should be lost sight of in the process of construction. These
considerations were emphasised in the
decisions of this Court upon which the
Court of Criminal Appeal placed some weight.
joint judgment in
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
rejected an approach which paid no regard to the words of the
provision and sought to apply the general purpose of the statute, to
revenue, to derive a very different meaning from that which could be drawn from
the terms of the provision. The general purpose
said nothing meaningful about
the provision, the text of which clearly enough conveyed its intended operation.
Similarly, in
Saeed v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
below was held to have failed to consider the actual terms of the section. A
general purpose of the statute, to address
shortcomings identified in an earlier
decision of this Court, was not as useful as the intention revealed by the terms
of the statute
Baini v The Queen
, it was necessary to
reiterate that the question of whether there had been a "substantial miscarriage
of justice" within the meaning
of the relevant provision required consideration
of the text of the provision, not resort to paraphrases of the statutory
in extrinsic materials, other cases and different legislation.
cases serve to remind that the text of a statute is important, for it contains
the words being construed, and that a very general
purpose may not detract from
the meaning of those words. As always with statutory construction, much depends
upon the terms of the
particular statute and what may be drawn from the context
for and purpose of the provision.
of these cases suggest a return to a literal approach to construction. They do
not suggest that the text should not be read in
context and by reference to the
mischief to which the provision is directed. They do not deny the possibility,
adverted to in
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
, that in a
particular , "if the apparently plain words of a provision are read in the light
of the mischief which the statute was
designed to overcome and of the objects of
the legislation, they may wear a very different appearance". When a literal
words in a statute does not conform to the evident purpose or policy
of the particular provision, it is entirely appropriate for
the courts to depart
from the literal meaning. A construction which promotes the purpose of a statute
is to be preferred.
v Minister for Immigration and Border
the High Court
identified that consideration of context may include consideration of statutory,
historical and other context as follows:
The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory
provision is the text of the statute whilst, at the same time,
regard is had to
its context and purpose. Context should be regarded at this first stage and not
at some later stage and it should
be regarded in its widest sense. This is not
to deny the importance of the natural and ordinary meaning of a word, namely how
is ordinarily understood in discourse, to the process of construction.
Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise that,
understood in its
statutory, historical or other context, some other meaning of a word may be
suggested, and so too, if its ordinary
meaning is not consistent with the
statutory purpose, that meaning must be rejected.
[40] Additionally,
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(Qld) provides that, when
interpreting a provision, the interpretation that best achieves the purpose of
the Act is to be preferred.
[41] Relevantly,
in this appeal a controversy has arisen with respect to the meaning of the words
"costs of the hearing" as referred
Section 558
falls within ch 13
div 1 entitled, "Appeal to industrial magistrate or
industrial commission".
Section 558
sets out the powers of an appeal body hearing an appeal commenced
pursuant to ch 13
div 1 with respect to the type of decision that may be
provides that the appeal body may award costs of the
hearing "except to the extent provided under a regulation". The exception
places a fetter on the exercise of the discretion to
award costs of the hearing.
statutory context of
was considered and conveniently set
QNMU (No 2)
as follows:
Section 550
prescribes a procedure for the appeal.
Section 552
provides that notice must be
given of the "time and place for hearing".
Sections 552A
"552A Conference
(1) If the appeal is to the industrial commission, the industrial commission
may, before the hearing of the matter, call a conference
of the parties.
(2) The parties must attend the conference.
552B Legal representation at appeal or conference
A party may be represented by a lawyer
at a conference
called under
section 552A
at the hearing of an appeal
, but only with—
(a) the agreement of the parties; or
(b) the appeal body's leave." (emphasis added)
obvious then from those sections that there is at least a possibility that the
parties will be represented by lawyers,
both at the conference called under
, or at the "hearing of an appeal".
Section 554
concerns the exchanging of evidence before the "hearing".
Section 555
that the "hearing" may be adjourned.
Section 556
concerns "additional medical
evidence". Importantly,
"556 Additional medical evidence
(2) The appeal body may, at any time
before or after the start of the
, order the claimant or worker to submit to a personal examination by
1 or more specified registered persons." (emphasis added)
Section 558
provides as follows:
"558 Powers of appeal body
(1) In deciding an appeal, the appeal body may—
(a) confirm the decision; or
(b) vary the decision; or
(c) set aside the decision and substitute another decision; or
(d) set aside the decision and return the matter to the respondent with the
directions the appeal body considers appropriate.
(2) If the appeal body acts under subsection (1)(b) or (c), the decision is
taken for this Act, other than this part, to be the decision
of the insurer.
Costs of the hearing are in the appeal body's discretion, except to
the extent provided under a regulation
." (emphasis added)
, what is "in the appeal body's discretion" (here the QIRC) are the "costs
of the hearing". The "costs of the hearing" may be quite
a different thing to
the "costs of the appeal".
[46] The words
"cost of the hearing" as they appear in
are not defined within the
. The ordinary meaning of the word "hearing" includes, "the presentation of a
matter before a tribunal".
[47] As noted
above, the Court has the benefit of the consideration of
undertaken in
QNMU (No 2).
, Davis J considered the meaning of the terms "costs of the hearing"
compared to "costs of the appeal" in the
as follows:
[28] ... In
determining the proper construction of
, and in particular the meaning
of the term "costs of the hearing", regard must be had to the context and
purpose of the section having
regard to the statute as a whole.
[29] In my view,
the legislature has clearly deliberately limited the costs which can be
recovered on an appeal to the QIRC. It has
drawn a clear distinction between
different parts of the appeal process. While the legislation envisages that the
appeal process
may involve a conference, no power to award costs associated with
a conference is given. The costs are limited to the "costs of the
[30] The law of
costs recognises "costs of action" and "costs of trial". In my view, they equate
to "costs of appeal" and "costs of
hearing" respectively. The distinction is
explained by Professor Dal Pont in his work Law of Costs in these terms:
"1.19 An order for 'costs of the action' includes not only costs of the trial
but also those of interlocutory proceedings and their
preparation (such as costs
relating to interrogatories, notices to produce and admit and preparation of
counsel's brief). These represent
the costs to which the successful party in the
action is entitled on taxation or assessment, in the absence of an order to the
The 'costs of the trial' cover only the costs incurred in the conduct
of the trial itself, not any interlocutory matters preceding
the trial. In any
case, as an action ends with judgment, each of these orders excludes costs
incurred after final judgment. Costs
of executing the judgment are therefore not
costs of the action (or of the trial) but are payable of the execution."
[31] I accept
that distinction. I consider that the term "costs of the hearing" in
is equivalent to "costs of trial" recognised by the law of costs and
explained by Professor Dal Pont.
[32] Consequently,
when the QIRC is exercising a discretion under
order which should be made is not "costs of the appeal" but "costs of the
hearing" and costs assessors should assess the "costs
of the hearing" as they
would "costs of trial" as explained by Professor Dal
[49] Accordingly,
the "costs of the hearing" cover the costs incurred in the conduct of the
hearing of the appeal itself and does
not cover matters preceding the hearing
such as interlocutory matters. However, costs of the hearing will only be
allowed to the
extent provided by a regulation.
[50] In this
appeal, a tension arises in the submissions between
reg 132(1) of the Regulation in so far as s 558(3) refers to a discretion,
within the context of an appeal, for an appeal body
to award "costs of the
hearing" and reg 132(1) which refers to a discretion, within the context of a
general provision of the
, of an industrial magistrate or commissioner
to award "costs of a proceeding".
[51] As noted
is the statutory source for the power to award
costs in relation to a workers' compensation appeal to the Commission brought
div 1 of the
is a general provision relating to the exercise of a discretion by an
industrial magistrate or industrial commissioner to award costs
of a proceeding.
The Appellant seeks to rely on reg 132(1) as an alternate source of power for
the Commission to award costs of the
appeal that go beyond the costs of the
[53] Where there
is a conflict between a general and a specific provision, the specific provision
generalia specialbus non
Ombudsman v
Spigelman CJ
stated the principle that the general provision is subservient to the specific
as follows:
The maxim of statutory construction generalia specialibus non
derogant reflects an underlying principle that a legislature, which
created a detailed regime for regulating a particular matter, intends that
regime to operate in accordance with its complete
terms. Where any conflict
arises with the general words of another provision, the very generality of the
words of which indicates
that the legislature is not able to identify or even
anticipate every circumstance in which it may apply, the legislature is taken
not to have intended to impinge upon its own comprehensive regime of a specific
is a specific provision dealing with the award of costs
with respect to an appeal decision made in accordance with
. Whilst the
, including reg 132(1), falls within the same
statutory scheme, it deals with an award of costs in a general
[56] It could
not have been the intent of the legislature to deprive s 558(3) of its intended
content and operation to provide for
a discretionary power to award costs to an
appeal body in a workers' compensation appeal.
[57] To the
extent to which reg 132 of the Regulation applies, it does not operate to extend
the scope of
to beyond "the costs of the hearing".
[58] The use of
the words "... except to the extent provided under a regulation" in
provides that the exercise of the appeal body's discretion to award
costs of the hearing is constrained by the
and reg 132(2) of the Regulation operate to award a
successful party in an appeal the costs of the hearing with the allowable costs
being those set out in reg 132(2), including costs in relation to counsel's or
solicitor's fees. Regulation 132(3) also provides
for the potential uplift of
1.5 times on those costs. For completeness, reg 133 also applies to the payment
of an additional amount
for costs of a medical practitioner or a witness who
gives evidence of a professional nature as set out in reg
Ground One – Error in Law
[60] Ground one
contends that the Commissioner erred in her interpretation of "costs of the
appeal" and "costs of the hearing", when
she decided that the written closing
submissions, and consideration of same, were not part of the hearing.
[61] In his
written submissions, the Appellant submits that "the Commissioner wrongly
asserts that costs of closing written submissions
are not contemplated by
Schedule 2, Part 2, Scale C" of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) ('UCPR').
Appellant concedes that the scale provided for in the UCPR sch 2
('Scale C'), does not specifically refer to closing written submissions,
however, he submits that it is "abundantly clear
that closing submissions form
part of the hearing proper".
Appellant argues that the hearing cannot be decided until the parties are given
the opportunity to make final submissions
in their case.
Appellant asserts that Item F and/or G of Scale C of the UCPR should not be
taken "literally".
Appellant submits that the scale should be read with the context and purpose of
the section having regard to the statute
as a whole. He submits that "it cannot
be conceivable that by omission of the word 'Trial' in Part G, the intention was
subsequent trial days, after the first day, yet provide costs for
Appellant further submits that r 681 of the UCPR sets out:
681 General rule about costs
(1) Costs of a proceeding, including an application in a proceeding, are in
the discretion of the court but follow the event, unless
the court orders
(2) Subrule (1) applies unless these rules provide otherwise.
Appellant submits that the UCPR does not provide otherwise.
Appellant argues that it would not be the intention of Parliament to create a
narrower or literal interpretation of the subordinate
legislation.
Appellant seeks to rely on
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) as providing clarity around "how" interpretation of statute occurs.
Appellant submits:
In interpreting a provision of an Act, the interpretation that would best
achieve the purpose or object of the Act (whether that purpose
or object is
expressly stated in the Act) is to be preferred to each other
interpretation.
Appellant argues that in
Anderson v Pickers Auctions Pty Ltd
Queensland Court of Appeal considered r 137 of the UCPR and determined that it
"should not be construed as constituting an exhaustive
list of recoverable
Appellant argues that
is authority for the allowance of costs
not expressly stated in subordinate legislation.
Consideration
[73] Regulation
132(2)(a) of the Regulation is relevant to ground one of the appeal. It provides
that if the Commission awards costs
then costs in relation to counsel's or
solicitor's fees are under Scale C.
[74] Scale C
relevantly provides:
Costs (up to $50,000)
$5,001 to $20,000
Instructions
to sue—claim and statement of claim and service
Instructions
to defend—notice of intention to defend and defence and
in court in undefended proceedings (or in defended proceedings in which a claim
or defence is not proceeded with—additional
to costs for instructions to
sue but including costs under item 4) to obtain judgment
judgment by default
for trial, up to and including settlement conference—
(a) including brief for counsel to appear at conference
(b) if no counsel appears at conference
of preparing for trial—
(a) including trial brief if counsel engaged
(b) if no counsel at trial
for trial, if no settlement conference—
(a) including trial brief if counsel engaged
(b) if no counsel at trial
(a) to settle claim and statement of claim, counterclaim, notice of intention to
defend or notice of appeal
(b) to settle special affidavit, reply or particulars that the magistrate,
registrar or costs assessor is satisfied are reasonably
necessary or proper
(c) to settle interrogatories or answers to interrogatories that the magistrate,
registrar or costs assessor is satisfied are reasonably
necessary or proper
(d) on conference, inspection of works or other site inspection, or a similar
attendance that the magistrate, registrar or costs
assessor is satisfied is
reasonably necessary or proper—each hour
(e) to advise on evidence or for any other opinion
(f) on trial or hearing (other than an application in a proceeding)—first
(g) on each subsequent day of hearing (if the matter occupies 2 or more hours of
the day and the appearance is certified for by the
(h) on each subsequent day of hearing not included in paragraph (g)
(i) if a proceeding is heard outside the town where counsel ordinarily
practises, a further fee by way of out-of-chambers fee (not
less than $60.00 a
day) may be allowed for each day it is not reasonably practicable for counsel to
be in attendance at chambers
for a total of at least 1 hour, between 8.30a.m.
and 5.30p.m.
(j) on an application in a proceeding
(k) to hear deferred judgment
on hearing—
(a) appearance without counsel on hearing—first day
(b) appearance without counsel on second and each subsequent day of hearing (if
the matter occupies 2 or more hours of the day and
the appearance is certified
for by the court)
(c) attendance of clerk with solicitor acting as advocate—each day
Costs under paragraph (c) are not allowed if the court certifies the
attendance of the clerk was not reasonably required.
hearing with counsel—
(a) attendance of solicitor with counsel (if the attendance is certified for by
the court)—each day
(b) attendance of clerk with counsel—each day
Costs under paragraph (b) are not allowed if the court certifies the
attendance of the clerk was not reasonably required.
hearing with counsel—
(a) counsel's fees (if no fee is payable under item 8(f))
(b) solicitor for appearance without counsel
Application
to the court (other than an application for an adjournment
Instructions—
(a) for disclosure, preparing list of documents and making inspection and copies
of documents—
(i) allowance to party requesting disclosure
(ii) allowance to party making disclosure
(b) for interrogatories and answers to interrogatories (including preparation,
filing and perusing)—
(i) allowance to party delivering interrogatories
(ii) allowance to party answering interrogatories
Enforcement
(a) counsel's fees
(b) if no counsel engaged
Enforcement
(a) costs of preparing warrant and attending issuing and for return—to be
marked on warrant (exclusive of court or other fees)
(b) costs of registration of warrant against land
(other than enforcement warrant)—costs of preparing warrant and attending
issuing and for return
having had regard to Scale C, the Commissioner concluded at paragraph 43 of the
Primary Decision as follows:
The difficulty with the Appellant's request for costs associated with the
written submissions for the substantive appeal (F, G and
H in table above) is
that such costs are not contemplated by sch 2
scale C of the UCPR.
Accordingly, such an order cannot be made.
[76] In forming
this decision, the Commissioner had regard to the items listed in Scale C and
concluded that Scale C did not allow
a claim in relation to written
submissions.
Appellant's criticism of that conclusion is premised on the argument that the
written submissions formed part of the hearing
and, indeed, the hearing had not
concluded until the submissions were filed. That in and of itself is not a
particularly controversial
submission. The difficulty, however, in the
Appellant's argument arises because the award of costs of the hearing is not
unfettered.
[78] Relevantly,
provides that the award of costs of the hearing will be
allowed to the extent provided under a regulation. As noted above, reg 132(2)(a)
limits the recovery of counsel's and solicitor's fees to those fees prescribed
pursuant to Scale C. Scale C does not allow for costs
for the preparation,
delivery, or filing of written submissions.
[79] Subsequently,
there is no error in the approach adopted by the Commissioner or in her
conclusion that costs for written submissions
are not contemplated by Scale
Appellant's reference to r 681 of the UCPR is misplaced and does not assist in
this appeal. Relevantly, the UCPR has no application
div 1 of the
, except for the limited purpose provided for in
It is unnecessary to set
out in detail the exception provided in
other than to note that it is not
relevant to the issues in this appeal.
[81] Similarly,
the Appellant's reliance on
to argue that the decision is
authority for allowing costs not expressly stated in the Regulation is not
relevant to these proceedings
and, further, mischaracterises the affect of the
decision in
unlike this appeal,
involved an appeal of costs arising from a common law
proceeding.
the Court of Appeal identified that the issue was
whether, as a matter of statutory construction,
div 2 of the
excludes counsel's fees as a recoverable
It further identified
that more particularly, does reg 137, which falls within
div 2, provide for
an exhaustive list of outlays that may be recovered by a claimant on an
assessment of costs for a claim for damages
for personal injury arising from a
work-related injury.
[84] The Court
of Appeal relevantly concluded as follows:
As Pt 8, Div 2 of the Regulation deals specifically with the issue of costs,
the change in the usage of the terms from "legal professional
costs" in regs 135
and 136 to "legal costs" in reg 137, indicates that the change in language was
intentional. This is consistent
with the rule that where a legislature could
have used the same term but chose to use a different term, the intention was to
the meaning. If the term "legal costs" in reg 137 is given the same
meaning as that in s 290A of the Act, it would encompass outlays
disbursements under the UCPR which are not specified as outlays in reg 137. If
the term is interpreted in this way, it supports
a construction of reg 137 that
it is concerned with specific outlays referrable to the nature of the
proceedings under the Act which
are allowable upon an assessment of costs. Such
an interpretation does not require reg 137 to be construed as constituting an
list of recoverable outlays so as to prohibit outlays that would
ordinarily be recoverable under Part 17A of the
cannot be relied on, as the Appellant contends, as going "one step further for
allowing costs not expressly stated in subordinate
legislation".
clearly involves the statutory construction of different terms and
provisions, namely the construction of the term "legal costs" in
reg 137 of the
Appellant's submission with respect to the application of
rejected on the basis that the decision in
is not authority for
the "principle" contended for by the Appellant and further the determination of
the relevant issues in
are not relevant to this
[87] Ground one
of the appeal is dismissed
Ground Two – Inadequate Reasons
Appellant contends that the Commission erred in law by providing "no reasons ...
so far as it relates to the Commission's
discretion under r 132(3) regarding
Appellant argues that the Commission below failed to give adequate reasons
regarding the Commission's decision not to award
up to 1.5 times of the costs
due to the work involved or the importance, difficulty or complexity of the
matter to which the proceeding
Appellant refers to paragraph 39 of the Primary Decision which states:
circumstances where the substantive matter did not involve complex issues or
work warranting uplift of costs, the Appellant is
awarded solicitor's costs as
(a) Item 9 (a) Solicitor appearance at hearing without counsel (first day)
– $1,255.00; and
(b) Item 9 (b) Solicitor appearance at hearing without counsel (second day)
Appellant submits that whilst he had filed submissions pointing towards the
complexity of the matter in the proceedings below
and other matters to uplift
the costs, "the Commissioner failed to make any findings on either of these
points other than to say
at paragraph 39 of the directions [sic] that the
substantive matter did not involve complex
Consideration
v State of Queensland (Department of Justice and Attorney-General, Queensland
Corrective Services)
J referred to relevant principles to be applied by courts and quasi-judicial
tribunals in ensuring adequate reasons for decisions
are provided. These
principles include the following:
[15] I have, in
other decisions, set out the principles relating to the requirement for reasons
to be given which are adequate in
the circumstances. Decisions of tribunals do
not attract the same degree of scrutiny as those of the ordinary civil courts.
general principles still apply even though they may not be enforced with
the same degree of rigour. I will repeat some of them which
are particularly
relevant in this case:
(a) the content and detail of reasons will vary according to the nature of the
and of the particular
matter the subject of the decision,
(b) one reason for the obligation to provide adequate reasons is so that an
appellate court can discharge its statutory duty on an
appeal from the decision
and so that the parties can understand the basis for the decision for purposes
including the exercise of
any right to appeal,
(c) a tribunal member will ordinarily be expected to expose his or her reasoning
on points which are critical to the contest between
the parties – this
applies both to evidence and to argument,
(d) where a party relies on relevant and cogent evidence which is rejected by
the tribunal, then the tribunal should provide a reasoned
explanation for the
rejection of that evidence, and
(e) where parties advance conflicting evidence on a matter significant to the
outcome, both sets of evidence should be referred to
and reasons provided for
the preference of the tribunal of one set of evidence to the other.
particular relevance to this case is the observation by Nettle J in
where he said:
" ... in providing reasons, the judge is required to make apparent the steps
he or she has taken in reaching the conclusion expressed,
for reasons are not
intelligible if they leave the reader to speculate as to which of a number of
possible paths of reasoning the
judge may have taken to that conclusion. Failure
sufficiently to expose the path of reasoning is therefore an error of
the High Court
relevantly observed:
At one extreme, reasons for decision will not be inadequate merely because
they fail to address an irrelevant dispute or one which
is peripheral to the
real issues. Nor will they be inadequate merely because they fail to undertake
"a minute explanation of every
step in the reasoning process that leads to the
judge's conclusion". At the other extreme, reasons will often be inadequate if
trial judge fails to explain his or her conclusion on a significant factual
or evidential dispute that is a necessary step to the
final conclusion. In
between these extremes, the adequacy of reasons will depend upon an assessment
of the issues in the case, including
the extent to which they were relied upon
by counsel, their bearing upon the elements of the offence, and their
significance to the
course of the trial. In particular:
"Ordinarily it would be necessary for a trial judge to summarise the crucial
arguments of the parties, to formulate the issues for
decision, to resolve any
issues of law and fact which needed to be determined before the verdict could be
arrived at, in the course
of that resolution to explain how competing arguments
of the parties were to be dealt with and why the resolution arrived at was
arrived at, to apply the law found to the facts found, and to explain how the
verdict followed."
[94] In the
Commission below, the Appellant argued that an uplift be applied to the costs
awarded pursuant to reg 132(3) of the
Commission had regard to and summarised the Appellant's submissions as
[23] ... In
support, the Appellant submits that:
(a) there were legal issues that was considered relating to a capacity to sell
labour in the open labour market and references were
made to High Court
authorities where the High Court commented on a similar complexity;
(b) the date regarding when the Appellant's incapacity ceased was not simple and
required multiple expert medical doctors to comment
on that issue;
(c) the facts were complex and required a thorough examination of the Appellant,
and the pre-injury employer;
(d) a further degree of complexity arose with the tendering of evidence, with
the industrial issues that pre-dated the workers' compensation
(e) there were issues relating to mitigation which needed to encapsulate the
multiple erroneous decisions made by the compensating
authority throughout the
Appellant's claim, which commenced in
paragraph 39 of the Primary Decision the Commission concluded that:
circumstances where the substantive matter did not involve complex issues or
work warranting uplift of costs, the Appellant is
awarded solicitor's costs as
(a) Item 9 (a) Solicitor appearance at hearing without counsel (first day)
– $1,255.00; and
(b) Item 9 (b) Solicitor appearance at hearing without counsel (second day)
[97] Whilst it
is accepted that the obligation to give adequate reasons does not require the
reasons to be necessarily lengthy or
elaborate, they should disclose and
articulate the essential ground or grounds upon which the decision
Commission clearly had regard to the Appellant's argument. Further, the
Commission's reasons state that the grounds for the
refusal to grant an uplift
is that the matter did not involve complex issues or additional work. In
referring to these matters, the
Commission relevantly had regard to the matters
required to be considered for an uplift to apply pursuant to reg 132(2)(a) and
However, the basis for that conclusion is not apparent, particularly with
respect to why, in forming that conclusion, the submissions
made by the
Appellant were rejected. Accordingly, the ground or grounds upon which the
decision rests are not apparent from the reasons.
Appellant has established an error of law with respect to the adequacy of the
reasons. Accordingly, the Court will consider
the exercise of the discretion to
allow costs for an uplift pursuant to reg 132(3) of the Regulation
[100] For the
discretion referred to in reg 132(3) of the Regulation to be enlivened, it must
be established that the amounts provided
for under reg 132(2)(a) are inadequate
having regard to:
(a) the work involved; or
(b) the importance, difficulty or complexity of the matter to which the
proceedings relate.
[101] This may
require consideration of the work that was required to be undertaken with
respect to the appeal or the assessment of
the importance, difficulty or
complexity of the matter to which the proceedings relate and then a
determination as to whether the
costs provided in Scale C were adequate having
regard to those matters.
matters the Appellant relied on below were referred to by the Appellant before
this Court who contended that the uplift
should apply as the matters he referred
to established that the matter was complex and for "other reasons existing to
uplift costs".
directly apparent what "other reasons" the Appellant is referring to and whether
they are matters that fall within the
contemplation of reg 132(3)(a) and
[103] On appeal,
the Appellant argued that the following maters were relevant:
(a) there were legal issues relating to a capacity to sell labour in the open
market which had to be considered in reference to High
Court authorities where
the High Court commented on a similar complexity;
(b) the dates where the incapacity stopped were not simple and required multiple
expert medical doctors to comment on that issue;
(c) the facts were complex and required a thorough examination of the worker and
the pre-injury employer was even called;
(d) a further degree of complexity arose with the tendering of evidence and with
the industrial issues that predated the workers
compensation claim; and
(e) there were issues relating to mitigation which need to encapsulate the
multiple erroneous decisions by the compensating authorities
throughout the
workers claim.
analysis of the Primary Decision does not reflect that the proceedings had the
level of complexity suggested by the Appellant.
Indeed, several of the matters
the Appellant relies on were not considered in detail by the Commissioner. It
can be inferred from
the absence of any detailed consideration of these issues
that they did not add to the complexity of the matter in the
proceedings.
[105] The appeal
was with respect to a decision terminating the Appellant's entitlement to
compensation pursuant to
prescribes when weekly payments stop.
Section 144B
prescribes when payment of medical treatment, hospitalisation and
expenses stop.
Commission identified the issues requiring determination on the appeal were as
(a) whether the Appellant had an incapacity for work after 26 August 2016
arising from the effects of the injury to his left ankle
sustained at work on 25
August 2015; and
(b) whether the Appellant had an entitlement for medical treatment after 21
February 2018.
hearing of the appeal took place over the course of two days. The Commission
heard the evidence of two lay witnesses, with
one being the Appellant. The
Appellant and the Regulator both called two medical expert witnesses
evidence of the two lay witnesses was summarised by the Commissioner in
paragraphs. It is not apparent from the summary of the evidence that there was
any great contest between the evidence given or
any significant and complex
factual disputes that needed to be resolved.
[110] As is not
unusual in appeals of this nature, a degree of consideration was had to the
medical evidence before the Commissioner.
There was some conflicting medical
evidence in relation to the date on which the Appellant's incapacity stopped.
This required the
Commissioner to consider the evidence that was before her and
to make an assessment as to the best evidence available to establish
the date on
which the incapacity stopped. The reasons for that decision do not identify
anything about the assessment that made the
matter a complex
[111] The other
matters raised by the Appellant in his submissions before this Court were simply
not matters that called for any significant
consideration by the Commissioner in
the decision. Consequently, they cannot be found to have added to the complexity
of the matter.
[112] Finally,
the fact that written submissions were filed is not, without further relevant
information, a matter which would support
a conclusion that the matter was
[113] For these
reasons, I do not consider that the discretion under reg 132(3) of the
Regulation has been enlivened. The Commissioner's
findings that an uplift was
not warranted is confirmed.
Ground Three
Appellant relies on ground three as an alternate ground of appeal to ground one
and ground two. Ground three of the appeal
is that the decision of Davis J in
QNMU (No 2)
is erroneous based on the President's interpretation of
"costs of the appeal" and "costs of the hearing".
Appellant submits that the decision in
QNMU (No 2)
was wrongly decided in
reliance on several grounds.
[116] Firstly,
the Appellant contends that
does not refer to costs
unrelated to the hearing.
Appellant submits that there are powers in addition to the powers set out in
, for instance, powers relating to the issuing of
interlocutory orders, discovery, case management and submissions.
Appellant submits that
"cannot be read in isolation of the
Act as a whole".
[119] In this
respect, the Appellant submits the
"talks generally about proceedings
when discussing the issue of costs".
Appellant appears to rely on a provision of the UCPR (r 681) to argue that r 681
applies to costs of the proceeding which
would include the costs of this appeal.
Appellant further contends that the intention of Parliament was to incorporate
all of Scale C otherwise it would have been
expressly stated.
Appellant contends that
should be interpreted so that
the costs of the hearing is in the appeal body's discretion or "in other words
they can increase (in
accordance with
of the Regs [sic]) or decrease, as
they wish, the costs in the schedule relating to the
Appellant concludes that "it does not then mean that costs for the remainder of
the Appeal are not paid."
[124] Secondly,
the Appellant contends that in interpreting
consideration of "context and purpose include consideration of legislative
history and extrinsic material, as well as the
'mischief' the legislation was
intended to remedy."
Appellant refers to s 6.7(3) of the
Workers' Compensation Act 1990
This provision provides:
Subject to the
, costs of the appeal are in the discretion of the
Industrial Court.
Appellant also seeks to rely on the further enactments in 1996 and 2003 that he
contends support his position.
Consideration
[127] Several of
the matters raised by the Appellant with respect to ground three, including the
Appellant's misplaced reliance on
the UCPR, including r 681, have previously
been dealt with in these reasons when considering ground one and
[128] It is
accepted that this Court does have the ability to reconsider its decisions
particularly where to not do so would be to
perpetuate an
[129] However,
the Appellant has not established a sound basis upon which the Court considers
it appropriate to reconsider the decision
[130] At the
outset of these reasons, an analysis of the relevant statutory scheme was
undertaken. This included considering the proper
construction to be attributed
and to reg 132 of the
statutory construction given to
in these reasons accords
with, and in part applies, the reasoning of Davis J in
[132] Consequently,
it follows that the construction of
including with
respect to what amounts to "costs of the hearing" in
QNMU (No 2)
[133] Ground
three of the appeal is dismissed.
[134] For the
reasons I have given, grounds one and three of the appeal are dismissed. Ground
two of the appeal establishes an error
of law which required the Court to
reconsider the exercise of the Commission's discretion to award an uplift
pursuant to reg 132(3)
of the Regulation afresh. For the reasons referred to
herein, and consistent with the Commissioner's decision below, no uplift
to reg 132(3) is warranted.
[135] Accordingly,
the Court makes the following order:
s 562(1)(a)
Workers' Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
the decision of the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission delivered on 15
September 2023 in Matter Number WC/2019/64 is confirmed.
Adcock v Workers'
Compensation Regulator (No. 2)
[2023] QIRC 266
('Primary Decision').
[2023] ICQ 13.
Workers' Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act 2003
s 562(1)(a)
('WCR Act').
s 562(1)(b).
s 562(1)(c).
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[2021] ICQ 13
Malcolm Adcock, 'Appellant's
written submissions', Submission in
Adcock v Workers' Compensation
, C/2023/38, 21 November 2023, 3 ('Appellant's written submissions
filed 21 November 2023').
QNMU (No 2)
Workers' Compensation
Regulator v Adcock
[2022] ICQ 16
Workers' Compensation Regulator v
Adcock v Workers'
Compensation Regulator
[2017] QIRC 86
Adcock v Workers'
Compensation Regulator
[2021] QIRC 227
Workers' Compensation
Regulator v Adcock
Primary Decision (n 1)
QNMU (No 2)
[26]-[29] (citations omitted).
See Primary Decision (n 1)
Local Government
Association of Queensland v Queensland Services, Industrial Union of Employees
[2020] QIRC 68
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v
[2002] HCA 11
(2002) 209 CLR 597
v The Commonwealth of
[2003] HCA 2
(2003) 211 CLR 476
Hossain v Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection
[2018] HCA 34
(2018) 264 CLR 123
Jadwan Pty Ltd v Department of
Health & Aged Care
[2003] FCAFC 288
(2003) 145 FCR 1
BM Alliance Coal Operations Pty
Ltd v BGC Contracting Pty Ltd & Ors
[2015] 1 Qd R 228.
Primary Decision (n 1)
Primary Decision (n 1)
[37]-[43] (emphasis in original) (citations omitted).
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507
[32]-[37] (citations omitted).
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
(n 23) [14] (Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordan
QNMU (No 2)
[21]-[25] (emphasis in original).
(online at 3 July 2025) 'hearing' (def 4).
QNMU (No 2)
[28]-[32] (citations omitted).
Smith v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 338
, [348] (Mason CJ, Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ).
[2005] NSWCA 339
(2005) 64 NSWLR 114.
Appellant's written
submissions filed 21 November 2023 (n 9) 2.
(2023) 17 QR 134
WCR Act (n 3) s 553.
(n 32) [36]
(Flannagan JA).
Workers' Compensation
and Rehabilitation Regulation 2014
(Qld) reg 132(3)(a)-(b).
Primary Decision (n 1)
Appellant's written
submissions filed 21 November 2024 (n 9) 4.
[2019] ICQ 23
[2018] HCA 26
(2018) 266 CLR 1.
Primary Decision (n 1)
Martin v Rowling &
[2005] QCA 128.
Appellant's written
submissions filed 21 November 2023 (n 9) 3.
Adcock v Workers’
Compensation Regulator
[2021] QIRC 227
Appellant's written
submissions filed 21 November 2023 (n 9) 7.
Repealed by
Queensland Act 1996
Simon Blackwood
(Workers' Compensation Regulator) v Pearce
[2015] ICQ 12
, [21]-[31].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (755 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter