URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/208.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Freemantle [2025] QCA 208 (31 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
R v Freemantle
[2025] QCA 208
FREEMANTLE, Neil Leslie
(applicant)
CA No 30 of 2022
SC No 1497 of 2020
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Sentence Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane – Date of Sentence: 27 January 2022
(Boddice J)
DELIVERED ON:
31 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
5 June 2025
Bond JA, Freeburn and Sullivan JJ
The application for leave to appeal is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE
– GROUNDS FOR INTERFERENCE – SENTENCE MANIFESTLY
EXCESSIVE OR
INADEQUATE – where the applicant pleaded guilty to one count of
trafficking in a dangerous drug, two counts of
supplying a dangerous drug, two
counts of possessing a dangerous drug in excess of 2 grams, one count of
possessing a dangerous drug
in excess of 200 grams, one count of possessing a
dangerous drug in excess of 500 grams, two counts of possessing a dangerous
and one count of possessing a thing used in connection with the commission
of a crime – where the applicant was sentenced to
10 years’ imprisonment with a parole eligibility date some eight
years into the future for count 1 – where the applicant
was sentenced to
one month’s imprisonment for count 8 – where the applicant was
convicted and not further punished on
counts 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10 –
whether the head sentence of 10 years is manifestly excessive – whether
the application
for leave to appeal against the sentence should be granted
, considered
R v Carlisle
, considered
, considered
, considered
R v Johnson
, considered
R v KAQ; R v KAQ; Ex parte Attorney-General (Qld)
(2015) 253 A Crim R 201
, considered
, considered
, considered
, considered
R v Tran; Ex parte Attorney-General (Qld)
, considered
E J Coker for the applicant (pro bono)
D Kovac for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Guest Lawyers for the applicant (pro bono)
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Queensland) for the respondent
I agree with the reasons for judgment of Freeburn J and with the order
proposed by his Honour.
[2] FREEBURN
On 10 December 2021 the applicant, Mr Freemantle, pleaded guilty to 10
counts, namely:
(a) count 1 – trafficking in a dangerous drug (between 1 November 2017 and
11 September 2018);
(b) count 2 – supplying a dangerous drug (cannabis – 17 February
(c) count 3 – supplying a dangerous drug (cannabis – 10 September
(d) count 4 – possessing a dangerous drug in excess of 2 grams (cocaine
– 10 September 2018);
(e) count 5 – possessing a dangerous drug in excess of 200 grams
(3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (‘
September 2018);
(f) count 6 – possessing a dangerous drug in excess of 500 grams (cannabis
– 10 September 2018);
(g) count 7 – possessing a dangerous drug in excess of 2 grams (MDMA
– 10 September 2018);
(h) count 8 – possessing a dangerous drug (diazepam – 10 September
(i) count 9 – possessing a dangerous drug (testosterone – 10
September 2018); and
(j) count 10 – possessing a thing used in connection with the commission
of a crime (heat sealer, black suitcases, money counter
and cryovac packaging
– 10 September 2018).
January 2022, Mr Freemantle was sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment on
count 1 with a parole eligibility date some
eight years into the future
– 27 January 2030. On count 8 Mr Freemantle was sentenced to one
month’s imprisonment.
On counts 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10 Mr Freemantle
was convicted and not further punished.
Freemantle seeks leave to appeal against those sentences. If leave is granted,
the sole ground of appeal to be relied on is
that the head sentence of
10 years’ imprisonment was manifestly excessive in the
circumstances.
[5] The parties
agreed to a statement of facts at the sentencing hearing. That statement
recorded that Mr Freemantle conducted his
drug trafficking activities from a
unit in New Farm. He resided there with his girlfriend.
Freemantle trafficked in high-level ‘wholesale’ quantities of
cocaine, cannabis, steroids, MDMA and 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine
) for approximately 10 months between November
2017 to 11 September 2018. In respect of the first nine months or so of that
from November 2017 and 29 August 2018, the evidence against Mr
Freemantle was limited to his excessive expenditure on luxury items,
holidays, unexplained income and a drug supply that took place on
17 February 2018 (which formed count 2). In respect of
the period from 29
August 2018 until 10 September 2018, the evidence included recordings obtained
by means of a listening device.
Those recordings show that Mr Freemantle
engaged in approximately 30 drug transactions over that period of 12 days or so.
The recordings
also show that Mr Freemantle engaged in conversations with
associates designed to hide the cash proceeds of the drug trafficking
activities.
The Agreed Statement of Facts
agreed statement of facts records that Mr Freemantle participated in the drug
trafficking as part of a drug syndicate, and
that his role escalated over the
trafficking period.
beginning of the period, Mr Freemantle’s primary role was to store both
dangerous drugs and illegally obtained cash
on his premises for others. His
residence was used by others for drug transactions. Initially Mr Freemantle did
not have any direct
involvement in the transactions at his residence, but he was
[9] Over time,
Mr Freemantle became more involved in the transactions. By the time the
listening device was installed at the end
of August 2018, Mr Freemantle was
engaging in all transactions. Mr Freemantle had a small network of
‘runners’ who moved
drugs from Brisbane to interstate. Mr
Freemantle informed a customer that another customer owed him “
”. He offered customers a “
100% return
”. Count 3 involved Mr Freemantle selling a customer 8.91
kilograms of cannabis for approximately $50,000.
[10] The value
of the dangerous drugs located at Mr Freemantle’s residence was
considerable. A table forming part of the statement
of facts is as
Amount of drug
44.725 kilograms
If sold in ounces between $191,678 and $479,205
If sold in pounds between $118,329 and $394,640
432.7 grams gross (170 grams pure)
If sold in grams between $151,445 and $259,620
If sold in ounces between $69,541 and $139,082
2004.2 grams gross (600 grams pure)
If sold in grams between $300,630 and $601,200
If sold in half ounces approximately $472,418
MDA (used price of MDMA)
84.477 grams (10.618 pure)
If sold in grams between $12,671 and $25,343.1[0]
If sold in half ounces approximately $19,912.43
Testosterone
Approximately $5,000
Between $681,336 and $1,031,052
[11] The Crown
accepted that the dangerous drugs located in Mr Freemantle’s residence
belonged to others. However, despite
a lack of ownership, Mr Freemantle had
knowledge of the existence of the drugs and exercised control over them.
Freemantle was sentenced on the basis that he had no knowledge that the
commercial quantity of MDMA was located at his premises.
He believed those
drugs were left at his residence at the time that other drugs were delivered
there for distribution.
[13] The drugs
other than MDMA were possessed by Mr Freemantle for a commercial purpose.
[14] Police
located a total of approximately $1.5 million in cash at the premises. Some of
that cash was stored for persons above
Mr Freemantle in the drug syndicate, but
a portion was owned by Mr Freemantle personally.
[15] Police
seized some luxury items which the Crown contends were tainted property
including three Rolex watches, a Breitling watch,
a Versace watch and Louis
Vuitton luggage.
Freemantle’s tax returns showed an average income of $64,561 per annum in
the period 2012 to 2017 but in the period
between November 2017 and September
2018 he spent $65,000 renting a luxury house in New Farm. Police analysis
showed that Mr Freemantle
and his girlfriend received $346,573 during the
trafficking period – excluding his interest in the $1.5 million found at
Submissions of Counsel
Crown referred the primary judge to
(discussed below).
Crown conceded that in Mr Freemantle’s favour was his plea of guilty. The
Crown submitted for a sentence of between 9½
and 11½ years
imprisonment.
[18] The primary
judge expressed his concerns to defence counsel:
“Of course, I
can [have regard to Mr Freemantle’s undiagnosed schizophrenia] and I will,
but I’m struggling to see
why that necessarily would bring this case to
under 10 years. In fact, I’m struggling to see how the Crown could be
that this case is anything other than a case in the order of 11 to 13
years. This is very serious offending over an extended period
of time where your
client has gone from, in any effect, the keeper of drugs and money...to being an
active participant in the trafficking
operation which was escalating but for the
fact that the police shut it down. He would have been going – making
enormous sums
[19] Defence
counsel relied on the Crown’s submissions as to penalty and submitted
that, taking into account the factors in
his favour, the appropriate penalty
could involve a penalty of under 10 years – at the lower end of the
range contended for
by the Crown.
The Sentencing Remarks
his Honour’s sentencing remarks the primary judge:
(a) noted Mr Freemantle’s pleas of guilty which had saved the community
and court time and resources;
(b) said he regarded the offending as very serious drug offending involving a
10-month period trafficking multiple drugs in high
volumes for large cash
(c) accepted that initially Mr Freemantle’s role was as the keeper of the
drugs and the money, but his involvement morphed
into being an active
participant so that by the time of the closure of the operation Mr
Freemantle’s role in the trafficking
had some intensity;
(d) noted the evidence that Mr Freemantle received $346,573 – quite
separately from the $1.5 million found at the premises;
(e) observed the magnitude of the operation by reference to the cash found and
the very significant amounts of drugs.
[21] The primary
judge noted Mr Freemantle’s age, his largely irrelevant criminal history
and the deterioration in his mental
health at the time of the offending.
However, his Honour was doubtful the evidence established that Mr
Freemantle’s undiagnosed
schizophrenia had any relationship with his
offending. That finding is not challenged.
[22] The primary
judge considered the yardsticks of 9½ to 11½ years and decided that
this very significant drug trafficking
called for a sentence “
the upper end of those yardsticks
.” His Honour specifically
considered whether Mr Freemantle’s personal circumstances would warrant
the imposition of
a sentence of less than 10 years imprisonment, notwithstanding
the overall criminality. His Honour expressly considered that factor
the consequence of the legislation was that, if the court imposed a sentence of
10 years of more, Mr Freemantle must serve
80 per cent of that sentence.
[23] His Honour
concluded his sentencing remarks in this way:
“That requires
this Court, therefore, to consider whether all of circumstances, including your
personal circumstances, your
cooperation by your pleas of guilty, and the
consequences of imprisonment for a person who suffers from a significant mental
in circumstances of, particularly, the COVID restrictions that are
imposed, would represent a just balance between the sentencing
principles.
Ultimately, I am satisfied that, even allowing for your personal
circumstances, your criminal conduct warrants a sentence of imprisonment
excess of 10 years.
As a consequence of your personal circumstances and the cooperation shown by
your pleas of guilty, I intend to impose, instead, a
sentence of 10 years
imprisonment. That will have the consequence that you must serve 80 per cent
because there will be an automatic
declaration of a serious violent offence.
Whilst that is unfortunate in your particular circumstances, I am
satisfied the circumstances are such that a sentence of less than
would not properly reflect your criminality, even allowing for your personal
circumstances.”
Applicant’s Submissions
Freemantle contends that the range of appropriate sentences, taking into account
both the objective features of the offending,
and the subjective features
personal to Mr Freemantle, did not extend to a sentence of 10 years’
imprisonment. Instead, Mr
Freemantle submits that a sentence of 9 to
9½ years imprisonment should have been imposed.
[25] It is a
narrow window. The contention is that 9 or 9½ year is within
‘range’ but the sentence of 10 years is
permissible bounds
Chesterman JA explained in
succeed the applicant must demonstrate that the sentence imposed was beyond the
permissible range, not that it was severe,
or that a lesser punishment
would have been appropriate, or even more appropriate that the one in fact
imposed. There is no one “right”
penalty in any case. There is
always a range of permissible sentences. Different judges legitimately put
weight on different circumstances
and their opinions must be respected unless
the sentence imposed is beyond the allowable range or is otherwise affected by
of fact or law.”
[27] As counsel
for the Crown submits:
“Comparable cases provide a benchmark
to help ensure general consistency in sentencing decisions. However, sentencing
take into account the unique circumstances of each individual case,
including any material differences from the cases being compared.
As emphasized
by the Court in
R v Muirhead; Ex parte Attorney-General (Qld)
, the use of
comparable cases is meant to offer flexible guidance rather than impose strict
rules, acknowledging that no two cases
are exactly alike.”
[28] Counsel for
Mr Freemantle acknowledged that to demonstrate a ground of manifest excess Mr
Freemantle was required to:
(a) show more than that the sentence imposed was different, or even markedly
different, from sentences imposed in other similar matters;
(b) satisfy the court that there has been a misapplication of principle, even
though the particular misapplication cannot be
circumstances of the case do not support the conclusion that there was a
misapplication of principle.
The Yardstick Cases
case relied on by the Crown before the primary judge was
In that case the
applicant trafficked in methylamphetamine for a period of 15 months,
predominantly at a ‘wholesale level’
although also at ‘street
level’. A financial analysis showed that her expenditure exceeded her
income by about $300,000.
Ms Malone had the benefit of a plea of
and had made commendable
efforts at rehabilitation since she had been in custody. The head sentence was
[31] On the
appeal, counsel for Ms Malone submitted that:
(a) the sentencing range open to the judge was between 9½ and 11½
(b) the automatic declaration of a serious violent offence if the term was 10
years or more should have been moderated by imposing
a sentence at the lower end
of the range;
(c) whilst the primary judge has recognised the impact of the declaration, the
sentence that was imposed (12 years) was insufficiently
moderated for that
[32] McMurdo JA
(with whom Sofronoff P and Boddice J agreed) reviewed a number of yardstick
cases and concluded as follows:
“By those yardsticks, it
fairly appears that the sentence in the present case was a heavy sentence.
Nevertheless, this was an
offence over a relatively lengthy period
involving the wholesale distribution of the drug, and it was an enterprise in
applicant persisted, despite close encounters with investigating
police. It might be safely inferred that her profit was in excess
of $300,000.
There were mitigating factors, as the judge recognised, but the applicant was a
mature person with an extensive criminal
history. A lower sentence may well have
been imposed in her case. Ultimately, however, this sentence is not demonstrated
high that it indicates that the judge has made some unidentified error
in arriving at it. I would refuse the application for leave
[33] Before the
primary judge, Mr Freemantle’s counsel relied on six further Court of
Appeal decisions, namely:
(a) R v Barker
[2015] QCA 215
(b) R v Gordon
[2016] QCA 10
(c) R v Jacobs
[2016] QCA 28
(d) R v Tran; Ex parte Attorney-General (Qld)
[2018] QCA 22
(e) R v Carlisle
[2017] QCA 258
(f) R v Luu
[2018] QCA 281.
there was a context as to the trafficking period, but the
primary judge found that the relevant period was nearly 10 months. The
trafficking involved methylamphetamine. A sum of nearly $1 million in cash was
found on the applicant’s property. A report
established unexplained
income of nearly $1.8 million for a 16-month period. There was a timely guilty
plea and a limited criminal
[35] Philippides
JA (with whom Morrison JA and Carmody J agreed) acknowledged the sentencing
judge’s reference to
as suggesting a range of 10 to 12
years for similar drug trafficking.
Her Honour considered that the head sentence of 10 years’
imprisonment was within the sound exercise of the sentencing discretion.
involved a young offender who participated in escalating trafficking
in methylamphetamine and cannabis over a lengthy period of nearly
Mr Gordon was involved in the production of methylamphetamine. He claimed
to be able to make $335,000 from each production
run. The sentencing judge
R v Galeano
imposing a head sentence of
Gotterson JA
(with whom Fraser and McMurdo JJA agreed) was not persuaded that the sentence
was manifestly excessive.
the offender was trafficking in
methamphetamine.
The head penalty
imposed was for 10 years. Mr Jacobs, who had a lengthy criminal history,
instructed his lawyers to admit to trafficking
over a four-month period but he
submitted that by mistake he was sentenced on the basis of a trafficking period
of eight months.
The court accepted eight months as accurate. McMurdo JA (with
whom Fraser and Daubney JJA agreed) concluded that the sentence could
be described even as a heavy one and was not manifestly excessive.
was an application by the Attorney-General for leave to appeal on the
basis of the inadequacy of the primary judge’s sentence
years’ imprisonment, with a parole eligibility after 3 years and 2
months, for trafficking in methamphetamine over
a five and one-half month
period. Mr Tran had boasted of moving $50,000 per week. Boddice J (with
whom Philippides and McMurdo
JJA agreed) considered that:
(a) Mr Tran’s criminal conduct would have attracted a sentence of
10 years imprisonment but for the guilty plea;
(b) the primary judge’s reduction of the sentence to 9½ years was
very significant because it meant that Mr Tran was not
subject to an automatic
declaration that he had been convicted of a serious violent offence which would
have required him to serve
80 per cent of the head sentence of 10 years;
(c) the primary judge’s fixing of parole eligibility at 3 years and 2
months further ameliorated the sentence and had the effect
of giving Mr Tran a
‘double benefit’ for his guilty plea;
(d) there was no proper basis for affording Mr Tran such a double benefit.
[39] The Court
of Appeal set aside the parole eligibility date but did not disturb the
imprisonment term of 9½ years.
the primary judge had fixed a nominal sentence of 12 years
for trafficking over a period of eight
The primary judge reduced
that nominal sentence to 10 years by reason of an early plea and a year spent in
custody which could not
be declared. Mr Carlisle had been engaged by another
participant in the enterprise to be in charge of large quantities of drugs
cash held in two storage sheds. Large quantities of MDMA and cash ($426,000)
were found in the sheds. There was a very early
[41] Applegarth
J (with whom Gotterson and Morrison JJA agreed) analysed a number of similar
cases. He distinguished between ‘subordinates’
as compared with
‘principals’. His Honour summarised the cases in this
“The cited cases indicate that when the principals of
large scale drug operations like
Jacobs, Barker
they often receive sentences of around 10 years, and when they do not plead, or
plead very late, they receive sentences of
, a late plea which he sought to withdraw),
) and 12 years (
On that basis, the starting point for a subordinate like the applicant should
be substantially less than 13 to 16 years without the
Cases of trafficking by defendants on their own account in apparently smaller
operations than the one in which the applicant was engaged
cluster around the 10
is an example of an effective sentence of 11 years
for someone who was 24 to 25 years old, with a significant criminal history
who was in business on his own account. He was not an addict but a drug
[42] His Honour
decided that an effective sentence of 11 years with a non-parole period was
manifestly excessive. The sentence was
reduced from 10 to 9 years’
imprisonment. The automatic serious violent offence declaration was set
important to note that in
R v Carlisle
Applegarth J was not
intending to divide the cases into cases where the offender is the
‘principal’ and those cases where
the offender is a
‘subordinate’. The precise nature of the offender’s
participation will vary, as will the nature
and scale of the criminal
enterprise.
, the applicant was charged with trafficking in a number of
dangerous drugs.
trafficking occurred over a lengthy period of nearly four years. She allowed
her home to be used to warehouse drugs but there
was no allegation that she was
engaged directly in the supply of drugs. Nearly $1.8 million in cash was found
in her premises.
An analysis showed that she had unsourced income of $834,765
over the trafficking period. She was sentenced to nine years’
imprisonment for the trafficking offence and convicted and not further punished
for six associated possession charges. She was also
sentenced to two
years’ imprisonment for fraud offences to be served concurrently on the
nine years for trafficking. Her parole
eligibility was set at a date after
5½ years (that is, after one-half of the total of 11 years).
, the applicant argued that the sentence was excessive because, given the
early plea of guilty, genuine remorse and the steps towards
rehabilitation, the
applicant was entitled to the ‘double benefit’ discussed in
. Douglas J (with whom Sofronoff P and Fraser JA agreed) considered
that the sentence of nine years’ imprisonment for the trafficking
considerable benefit to the applicant because it removed the requirement that
she serve 80% of the sentence before being eligible
for parole. The
circumstances did not require the primary judge to set an earlier parole
eligibility date.
further cases can be mentioned. In
McMurdo P (with whom Holmes and Fraser JJA agreed)
[2009] QCA 376
, the applicant pleaded guilty to trafficking in an
assortment of Sch 1 and Sch 2 dangerous drugs and to other related drug
He applied for leave to appeal against his 10 year sentence. He was 30
and 31 when he offended and 34 at sentence. He had some relevant
criminal history. The trafficking was committed in breach of a good behaviour
bond when he was subject to “drug diversion”.
His offending
consisted of supplying drugs on 11 particularised occasions over a seven month
period to covert police operative. He
supplied 32 grams of cocaine, almost 5,000
tablets containing 330 grams of the then Sch 2 drug MDMA, and 110 grams of the
MDEA. His benefit from drug related activity was over $56,000 and
period. His
trafficking was commercially motivated. After reviewing the cases of
[2005] QCA 70
R v Assurson
(2007) 174 A Crim R 78
R v Rodd; ex parte A-G (Qld)
[2008] QCA 183
[2004] QCA 359
this Court noted that, absent
extraordinary circumstances, in cases of trafficking in Sch 1 drugs on this
scale mature offenders
who have pleaded guilty can expect a sentence of at least
10 years imprisonment. Younger offenders without a significant criminal
and with excellent rehabilitative prospects may be sentenced to slightly lesser
had a grossly dysfunctional upbringing and had made real
efforts to overcome his dependence on cannabis and other drugs so that he
promising prospects of rehabilitation. Whilst a sentence of nine years
imprisonment could have been imposed, the 10 year sentence
was not manifestly
excessive.”
passage was quoted with approval in
where Fraser JA
not necessary to discuss all of the many cases to which the Court was referred
because the most relevant sentencing decisions
have been extensively analysed in
recent decisions of this Court:
R v Galeano
[2013] QCA 51
[2014] QCA 78
– [45], and
R v Johnson
[2014] QCA 79
. Of course there are various differences between
this case and each of those cases and the cases examined in them, and each
must be determined by an exercise of discretion with reference to the
distinctive facts and circumstances of the particular case.
Even so, significant
guidance for this case can be derived from those analyses. They reveal that for
substantial trafficking in a
Sch 1 dangerous drug of the order of the
trafficking in this case, offenders who have pleaded guilty and invoked a range
of mitigating
factors have commonly been sentenced to terms of imprisonment
upheld on appeal of between ten and twelve years (with the automatic
declaration
that the offence was a serious violent one).”
KAQ; R v KAQ; Ex parte Attorney-General
Holmes JA and
Dalton J analysed the authorities and concluded that engagement in serious
drug trafficking on the level in that case
called for a head sentence in the
range of 10 to 15 years’
imprisonment.
They concluded
that the principles of major drug trafficking operations often receive sentences
of 10 years or slightly more when
they have the advantage of a plea.
Some Conclusions
non-exhaustive survey of the cases illustrates that:
(a) there are frequently differences in the nature of the criminal enterprise,
as well as the nature of the offender’s role;
(b) there are also a range of mitigating factors which will bear on the
discretion;
(c) the cases provide some guidance for ‘principals’ in a range of
10-15 years without a plea or with a late plea;
(d) those offenders with the advantage of a plea or with a
‘subordinate’ role might receive a sentence either side of
(e) the court will often give weight to the effect of an automatic serious
violent offence declaration which involves the mandatory
non-parole period.
[50] As the
Crown submits, comparable cases provide a benchmark to help ensure general
consistency in sentencing decisions, but sentencing
must still take into account
the unique circumstances of each individual case. As emphasised in
Muirhead; Ex-parte Attorney-General (Qld)
the use of comparable
cases is meant to offer flexible guidance rather than impose strict rules,
recognising that no two cases are
[51] The maximum
penalty for trafficking in dangerous drugs is 25 years’ imprisonment. In
imposing the head sentence in this
case, of 10 years’ imprisonment, the
primary judge took into account the seriousness of the offending, the mitigating
the plea of guilty, the yardstick cases and the consequences of a
serious violent offence declaration if the penalty imposed was
of 10 years or
applicant has not established any misapplication of principle, or that the
sentence is plainly unreasonable or unjust. An
appeal against sentence on the
ground that it was manifestly excessive would be unsuccessful.
application for leave to appeal should be dismissed.
[54] SULLIVAN
I agree with the reasons for judgment of Freeburn J and with the order
proposed by his
[2021] QCA 76.
[2011] QCA 103
[2018] QCA 189
[2021] QCA 76.
The plea was described by the
primary judge as not being a timely plea.
[2009] QCA 376.
[2014] QCA 79.
[2009] QCA 376
[2013] 2 Qd R 464.
[2016] QCA 28.
[2017] QCA 258.
[2018] QCA 281.
[2014] QCA 79
[2015] QCA 13
[2015] QCA 98.
The trafficking in that
case was for a period of nine months. He was described as the “
leader of the Townsville drug trafficking syndicate
”. He used a
number of people to assist in the criminal enterprise.
[2019] QCA 244
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (272 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter