URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIRC/2025/305.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:40:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Margetts v State of Queensland (Queensland Health) (No 2) [2025] QIRC 305 (10 November 2025)
QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Margetts v State of Queensland (Queensland Health) (No 2)
Margetts, Craig
(Appellant)
Queensland (Queensland Health)
(Respondent)
PSA/2025/20
PROCEEDING:
Public Sector Appeal – Fair Treatment
DELIVERED ON:
HEARING DATE:
10 November 2025
16 April 2025
The orders contained in paragraph [321] of these Reasons for Decision.
CATCHWORDS:
PUBLIC SECTOR – EMPLOYEES AND SERVANTS OF THE CROWN GENERALLY –
PUBLIC SECTOR APPEAL – where the appellant employed
by Queensland Health
as a senior health administrator – where allegations of misconduct made
against the appellant arising
from private conduct – alleged conduct
involved private conversations by text or messenger – where disciplinary
have been substantiated – fair treatment appeal against a
disciplinary finding – where disciplinary action yet to be
where the appellant appeals against the substantiation of the allegations
–– whether the decision to substantiate
the allegations was fair and
reasonable – the decision was not fair and reasonable.
LEGISLATION:
APPEARANCES:
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Public Sector Act 2022
Code of Conduct for Queensland Public Service
Discipline Directive 05/23
cl 7 and cl 9
Performance Management: Directive 15/20
cl 1.2, cl 4, cl 5, cl 6 and cl
Positive Performance Management: Directive 02/24
cl 1.1, cl 5
AB v State of Queensland (Department of Education)
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
[2009] HCA 41
Australia Meat Holdings Pty Limited v
[2007] ICQ 44
(2006); 186 QGIG 527
Barker v Barker
(1976) 13 ALR 123
Benn v State of Queensland (Department of
[2025] QIRC 236
Berenyi v Maynard & Anor
Bobrenitsky v Sydney Trains
[2023] FCAFC
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
v State of Queensland (Queensland Police Service) (No 2)
[2022] QIRC
Comcare v Banerji
[2019] HCA 23
(2019) 267 CLR 373
Donaldson v
TAFE Queensland
[2025] QIRC 146
Etherton v Public Service Board of
(1983) 3 NSWLR 297
Fisher v Gaisford
(1997) 48 ALD
Gaisford v Fisher & Ors
Gilbert v Metro North Hospital Health Service & Ors
[2021] QIRC 255
Gill v Department of Industry, Technology &
[1987] VicRp 58
[1987] VR 681
Goodall v State of Queensland
Court of Queensland, Dalton J, 10 October 2018)
Hunt v State of
Queensland (Department of Agriculture and Fisheries)
[2022] QIRC
Hutchinson v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
Johnson v Department of Justice and Attorney-General
[2005] QIRC 163
(2005); 180 QGIG 934
Keenan v Leighton Boral Amey
Joint Venture
(2015) 250 IR 27
[2015] FWC 3156
Laws v London
Chronicle (Indicator Newspapers) Ltd
[1959] 2 All ER 285
State of Queensland (Department of Education)
[2025] QIRC
Malcolm v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2024] QIRC
Margetts v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2025] QIRC
McManus v Scott-Charlton
(1996) 140 ALR 625
Board of Australia v TXA (No 2)
[2023] QCAT 115
Melbourne City
Link Authority v Teford Pty Ltd
[2001] VSCA 54
(2001) 113 LGERA 102
Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection v WZARH
(2015) 256 CLR
MyEnvironment Inc v VicForests
[2013] VSCA 356
(2013) 42 VR
Newton v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2021] FWCFB
Nield v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC
North v Television Corporation Ltd
[1976] CthArbRp 1465
(1976) 11 ALR
O'Hearn v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC
Page v John Thompson and Lesley Dwyer, As Chief Executive Officer,
West Moreton Hospital and Health Service
[2014] QSC 252
[1996] FCA 1446
Public Employment Office Department of
Attorney General and Justice (Corrective Services NSW) v Silling
NSWIRComm 118
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs; ex parte Lam
(2003) 214 CLR 1
Rose v Telstra
Corporation Limited
[1998] IRCommA 1592
Schubert v State of
Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2024] QIRC 128
Starr v Dept of
Human Services
[2016] FWC 1460
State of Queensland (Queensland
Health) v Hume (No. 3)
[2024] ICQ 3
State of Queensland
(Queensland Health) v Nield
[2025] ICQ 021
Sydney Trains v
Bobrenitsky
[2022] FWCFB 32
Vanmeld Pty Ltd v Fairfield City
[2000] NSWCA 51
(2000) 106 LGERA 454
Wirth v Mackay HHS
[2016] QSC 39
Dr C. Margetts
Mr D. Marskell of
Metro North Hospital and Health Service for the Respondent
Reasons for Decision
[1] This appeal
raises the issue of the extent to which an employer can address alleged conduct
by an employee in their private life
as a workplace disciplinary matter. In
particular, the appeal raises the issue as to the extent to which private online
conversations
between an employee and someone unrelated to the workplace, which
occur outside of work hours, can be the subject of disciplinary
action by an
[2] Dr Craig
Margetts ('the Appellant') is employed by Metro North Hospital and Health
Service ('MNHHS') as a Director of Medical
Services Reliever.
Appellant has been continuously employed by Queensland Health since 16 July
2001. The Appellant first commenced working for
MNHHS in 2014 and has been in
the role of Director of Medical Services Reliever since April
[4] On 19 June
2023, a complaint was made to MNHHS regarding the Appellant's engagement with
two members of the "public".
Appellant was requested to attend a meeting with the Chief Medical Officer, Dr
Elizabeth Rushbrook and Mr Brett
to discuss the complaint on
27 June 2023.
[6] In a letter
dated 23 May 2024, the Appellant was afforded an opportunity to show cause as to
why two allegations should not be
substantiated
The allegations were:
various occasions in or about January 2023, you sent inappropriate text messages
to a member of the public, specifically Ms
various occasions in or about June 2023, you engaged with members of the public,
including Ms ABW and Mr KM, in an inappropriate
explanation has been provided for the delay of approximately eleven months in
issuing SC-1 to the Appellant following the meeting
on 27 June 2023.
Appellant provided a response to the allegations outlined in SC-1 on 5 September
2024 via correspondence from his solicitors
('Show Cause
Response').
disciplinary finding decision dated 20 January 2025, Dr Rushbrook advised the
Appellant that the two allegations were substantiated
decision').
It is this decision
that is the subject of the appeal.
[10] No decision
has been made with respect to the imposition of the proposed disciplinary
action. These reasons will only address
the disciplinary findings and will not
touch upon the proposed disciplinary penalty of termination of Dr Margetts'
employment.
Appellant filed his appeal against the decision of Dr Rushbrook on 5 February
[12] The issue
to be determined in this appeal is whether the decision dated 20 January 2025,
which found the two allegations to be
substantiated, was fair and reasonable.
[13] For the
reasons that follow I am not satisfied that the decision to find Allegations 1
and 2 to be substantiated was fair and
reasonable. I have set aside the
disciplinary finding and substituted a decision that Allegation 1 and Allegation
2 are not substantiated.
Appeal Principles
[14] Section
562B(3) of the
Industrial relations Act 2016
(Qld) ('the IR Act')
provides that a public sector appeal is to be decided by reviewing the decision
appealed against and the purpose
of the appeal is to decide whether the decision
appealed against was fair and
reasonable.
[15] A public
sector appeal is not a fresh hearing, but rather, a review of the decision
arrived at by the decision-maker.
[16] The issue
for my determination is whether the decision appealed against was fair and
reasonable.
What decisions can the Commission make?
[17] Section
562C(1) of the IR Act prescribes that the Commission may determine to
the decision appealed against;
set the decision
aside and return the matter to the decision maker with a copy of the decision on
appeal and any directions considered
appropriate; or
set the decision
aside and substitute another decision.
Relevant Legislation
Public Sector Act 2022
') defines the following
terms (emphasis added):
disciplinary finding
a finding that
a disciplinary
ground exists.
disciplinary ground
a ground for disciplining a public
sector employee
section 91.
sets out the grounds for discipline as follows:
91 Grounds for discipline
(1) A public service employee's chief executive may discipline the employee
if the chief executive is reasonably satisfied the employee
(a) engaged in repeated unsatisfactory performance or serious under
performance of the employee's duties, including, for example,
by performing
duties carelessly, incompetently or inefficiently; or
(b) been guilty of misconduct; or
contravened, without reasonable excuse, a relevant standard of conduct in
a way that is sufficiently serious to warrant disciplinary
(Emphasis added)
(2) A disciplinary ground arises when the act or omission constituting the
ground is done or made.
(5) In this section—
(a) inappropriate or improper conduct in an official capacity; or
(b) inappropriate or improper conduct in a private capacity that reflects
seriously and adversely on the public sector entity in
which the employee is
of misconduct—
victimising another public sector employee in the course of the other
employee's employment in the public sector
Section 1.5
Code of Conduct for the Queensland Public Service 2011
Code of Conduct'
) relevantly states:
1.5 Demonstrate a high standard of workplace behaviour and personal
We have a responsibility to always conduct and present ourselves in a
professional manner, and demonstrate respect for all persons,
whether fellow
employees, clients or members of the public.
(a) treat co-workers, clients and members of the public with courtesy and
respect, be appropriate in our relationships with them,
and recognise that
others have the right to hold views which may differ from our own
(b) ensure our conduct reflects our commitment to a workplace that is inclusive
and free from harassment
(c) ensure our fitness for duty, and the safety, health and welfare of ourselves
and others in the workplace, whether co-workers
ensure our private conduct maintains the integrity of the public service
and our ability to perform our duties
(e) comply with legislative and/or policy obligations to report employee
criminal charges and convictions.
(Emphasis added)
Relevant provisions of the Directives
05/23: Discipline
'Discipline Directive'
) relevantly
4. Principles
4.2 Chief executives are required to act in a way that is compatible with
the main purpose of the Act and how the main purpose is
achieved, including fair
treatment of public sector employees.
4.3 Under the
Human Rights Act 2019
decision makers have an
obligation to:
a. act and make decisions in a way that is compatible with human rights,
b. give proper consideration to human rights when making a decision under
the Act and Public Sector Commissioner (Commissioner)
directives.
4.7 A disciplinary process is not a substitute for management action and the
need for managers to undertake early intervention to
address unacceptable
conduct. Early intervention, even in the context of a likely disciplinary
process, provides the best opportunity
a. the end of unacceptable conduct
b. early resolution
c. preserving working relationships
d. avoiding an unnecessary and disproportionately protracted dispute
4.8 Discipline is not appropriate for matters that may be dealt with through
management action, which may include use of alternative
dispute resolution, use
of warnings, or other management action that is reasonable in the
circumstances.
4.9 A chief executive must not take disciplinary action against an employee
for a matter relating
to the employee’s performance until they have complied with the
positive performance
management directive in relation to the matter.
4.10 Discipline under chapter 3 of the Act must:
a. be conducted in in a timely way, to the extent that is within the
control of the chief executive, and without any unreasonable
unexplained delay,
b. be fair, appropriate and proportionate to the seriousness of the work
performance matter, and
c. comply with the requirements of the Act, the provisions of this
directive and the
principles of procedural fairness
Requirements
to commence a discipline process
7.1 Section 91 of the Act provides that a chief executive may discipline an
employee if they are reasonably satisfied a ground for
discipline arises. A
disciplinary ground does not arise in relation to a public sector employee only
because the employee’s
work performance or personal conduct fails to
satisfy the work performance and personal conduct principles, or the public
principles as set out in section 91(4) of the Act. An act or omission
that is not compatible with a principle on its own, does not
give rise to a
disciplinary ground if the act or omission does not meet the threshold of the
disciplinary grounds at section 91.
7.2 Where a work performance matter arises that may constitute a ground for
discipline under section 93 of the Act, a chief executive
must determine whether
to commence a disciplinary process. In making this determination, the chief
executive must assess:
a. the seriousness of the employee’s personal conduct and/or work
performance, and
b. whether the matter should be resolved through management action instead,
c. whether the matter is a Public Interest Disclosure under the
Interest Disclosure Act 2010
and/or whether the matter must first be
referred to the Crime and Corruption
Commission, Queensland Police
Service or other regulatory agency for assessment, and
d. whether management action would alleviate or mitigate the impact of the
alleged conduct on the employee, their colleagues, the
workplace, the
complainant, and the reputation of the public sector, and
e. whether management action has recently been taken for previous similar
instance/s of inappropriate conduct, and the management
action did not result in
sustained correction of the employee’s conduct, and
f. if the contravention is of a more serious nature, but is a single and/or
isolated incident of poor conduct (that is, not a pattern
of unreasonable
behaviours), whether the chief executive has reasonable concerns about the
employee’s potential for modified
behaviour through management action that
clarifies the expected standards of conduct and provides the opportunity and
support for
the employee to demonstrate sustained correction of their conduct,
g. whether further information is required to make a decision to commence a
disciplinary process, and
h. for a breach of relevant standard of conduct under section 91(1)(h) ,
that it is sufficiently serious to warrant disciplinary
action because the chief
executive forms a view that management action is not likely to adequately
address and/or resolve the work
performance matter.
7.3 Section 86 of the Act provides that a chief executive must not take
disciplinary action against an employee for a matter relating
employee’s performance until the chief executive has complied with the
directive about positive performance management.
for conduct in a private capacity
8.1 In addition to
considering the requirements listed at clause 7, a chief executive must consider
whether they are reasonably satisfied
alleged conduct could amount to misconduct
which reflects seriously and adversely on the public sector entity in which the
is employed in determining whether to commence a discipline process in
relation to an employee’s conduct in a private capacity.
8.2 In making a determination under clause 8.1, a chief executive must give
consideration to the way in which the person’s
alleged conduct in a
private capacity, if it became known to a reasonable person, reflects seriously
and adversely on the entity
taking into account all the circumstances
(a) the person’s role in the entity, and
(b) the entity’s functions and responsibilities, and
(c) the responsibility on government entities to act with integrity,
accountability, in the public interest and in a way that maintains
public trust.
8.3 A chief executive must also ensure that proper consideration is given to
human rights under the HR Act.
9.3 Show cause process for disciplinary finding
a. the chief executive is to provide the employee with written details of
each allegation and invite the employee to show cause
why a disciplinary finding
should not be made in relation to each allegation (a show cause notice on
disciplinary finding)
b. written details of each allegation in clause 9.3(a) must include:
i. the allegation
ii. the particulars of the facts considered by the chief executive for the
iii. the disciplinary ground under section 91 of the Act that applies to
the allegation
c. when providing the written details required at clause 9.3, a chief
executive should not include more than two possible disciplinary
grounds for the
same allegation. In making a disciplinary finding at clause 9.4, a chief
executive must choose the most suitable
ground for discipline as no more than
one disciplinary ground is to apply to an individual substantiated
d. a copy of all evidence relevant to the facts considered by the chief
executive for each allegation in clause 9.3(a) must be provided
to the employee,
including, where relevant, specific reference to page or paragraph numbers that
comprise the relevant evidence
e. the chief executive must provide the employee with a minimum of 14 days
from the date of receipt of a show cause notice on disciplinary
consider and respond to the notice, having regard to the volume of material and
complexity of the matter. The chief executive
may grant, and must consider any
request for, an extension of time to respond to a show cause notice on
disciplinary finding if there
are reasonable grounds for extension
f. if the employee does not respond to a show cause notice on disciplinary
finding, or does not respond within the nominated timeframe
in clause 9.3(e) and
has not been granted an extension of time to respond, the chief executive may
make a decision on grounds based
on the information available to them.
Discipline Directive
includes a definition section at the end of the
Directive where the following relevant terms are defined:
Balance of probabilities
refers to the civil standard of proof. For an
allegation to be substantiated on the balance of probabilities, the evidence
must establish
that it is more probable than not that the alleged conduct
occurred. The strength of evidence necessary to establish an allegation
balance of probabilities may vary according to the:
• relevance of the evidence to the allegations
• seriousness of the allegations
• inherent likelihood or improbability of a particular thing or event
• gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding.
Management action
is independent of the disciplinary process
should be considered as the first response and/or alternative to the
disciplinary process in managing unacceptable conduct or
performance
Following a disciplinary finding (refer to section 90), management action can
accompany or substitute for disciplinary action. If
appropriate, management
action can replace an ongoing disciplinary process at any stage. While not
limited, management action is
predominantly focused on corrective action.
(emphasis added)
Procedural fairness
is a concept used interchangeably with natural
justice and is a right recognised and defined by law that involves two key
elements–the
hearing rule (the parties shall be given adequate notice of
the case against them, and a right to respond) and the
bias rule (everyone is
entitled to a decision by a disinterested and unbiased adjudicator)
(emphasis added)
Is the Appellant entitled to appeal?
disciplinary finding decision that allegations have been substantiated is not a
disciplinary decision as defined in
. In the present case
disciplinary action has not yet been taken against the Appellant.
[24] Pursuant to
s 132(4)(b)
a fair treatment appeal is available regarding a
finding made pursuant to
that a disciplinary ground exists
for the person.
Section 131
lists the types of decisions against which an appeal may be made.
Section 131(1)(d)
outlines that a fair treatment decision may be
appealed. Fair treatment decisions are defined within
relevantly states:
fair treatment decision
means a decision a public sector
employee believes is unfair and unreasonable.
satisfied that the Disciplinary Finding Decision is one that can be appealed
pursuant to
, and further, that the Appellant is entitled to
[27] Section
564(3) of the IR Act requires an appeal to be lodged within 21 days after the
day the decision appealed against is given.
Appellant received the decision letter on 20 January 2025 and the Appeal Notice
was filed in the Industrial Registry on 5
February 2025. I am satisfied that the
appeal has been brought within the required time.
Disciplinary Finding Decision
[29] In the
decision dated 20 January 2025 the delegated decision-maker, Dr Rushbrook, found
that both allegations were likely to
have occurred and were therefore
substantiated. Dr Rushbrook further found that there were grounds to discipline
the Appellant under
decision-maker's reasons were set out in an
to the decision
Allegation 1: On various occasions in or about January 2023, you sent
inappropriate text messages to a member of the public, specifically
decision-maker noted that the Appellant did not deny sending ABW the messages
referenced in SC-1. The decision-maker went
on to note that the Appellant had
allegedly admitted in the meeting with her on 27 June 2023 that he directly
informed ABW of his
role and employment with the Health Service to build trust
with her. The decision-maker noted that the Appellant refuted making this
statement, but she had conferred with Mr Brett Bourke, A/Chief People and
Culture Officer who had the same recollection.
[32] This lead
the decision-maker to find that the Appellant had "inappropriately and
improperly attempted to leverage [his] position
and senior leadership status
with the Health Service to inappropriately engage with a member of the public".
The decision-maker found
that the manner in which the Appellant (allegedly)
chose to leverage his employment was not respectful to his role within the
Service, the services that the Health Service provides to the community
or to ABW. The decision-maker also found that it lacked integrity.
decision-maker noted that as a medical specialist and senior leader within the
Health Service's Medical Administration Team,
he could be required to
participate in recruitment processes for any roles within the Health Service,
including Administration Support
decision-maker noted that during an intimate conversation with ABW (ABW had
disclosed that she was applying for an administration
role in a private health
facility), that the Appellant made statements to ABW about what she should do if
interviewed by him, specifically
should proceed to take [her]
kickers (sic) off put them on the table with [her] skirt up and put [her] feet
up on the death (sic)
with [her] legs apart'
decision-maker held that the Appellant had failed to reflect the Health
Service's values and commitment to ethical public
administration. Further, by
making statements such as this, the Appellant brought the Health Service into
disrepute and questioned
the Health Service's ability to conduct open and
transparent recruitment and selection processes.
decision-maker also found (in support of the substantiation of Allegation 1)
that as a trained and skilled Medical Administrator,
the Appellant ought to have
identified ABW as suffering from mental health concerns following her messaging
the Appellant on 4 January
2023 at 6:54pm and 6:56pm disclosing that she
had a history of illicit psychedelic drug use, toxic relationships, emotional
specifically stating that she went through a traumatic and financially
ruinous six years.
decision-maker found that instead of ceasing communications with ABW, he had
continued to engage in numerous inappropriate
conversations/comments with ABW
that were not conducive to her mental health and wellbeing, arguably linking
those discussions to
the Appellant's employment with the Health Service.
Allegation 2: On various occasions in or about June 2023, you engaged with
members of the public, including ABW and KM, in an inappropriate
decision-maker premised her findings about Allegation 2 by again relying upon
the alleged admission by the Appellant in the
meeting on 23 June 2023 that he
had disclosed his employment with the Health Service to "
build trust
and therefore, inappropriately and improperly attempted to leverage his position
and status with the Health Service to engage with
a member of the
decision-maker confirmed that she had not been provided with copies of the
messages that KM had sent to the Appellant. The
decision-maker went on to find
that regardless of the context in which the Appellant was messaging ABW in June
2023, in circumstances
where the Appellant had already directly used his
employment with the Health Service as a strategy to "
build trust
not appropriate or respectful for the Appellant to question a member of the
public's sexuality, as he had done in his message
to ABW on or about 17 June
2024 at 10:24am.
decision-maker then addressed the text messages to ABW on 18 June 2024 and found
that these were inappropriate because the
Appellant questioned her employment as
a "sex worker", and the frequency with which she solicited people and the number
she had. The decision-maker observed that as a Health Service
... we all have an obligation to ensure we communicate respectfully,
appropriately and with integrity and impartiality when we engage
with any member
of the public
where we have made them aware of our employment with the Health
. Given you opted to interlink your conversations with ABW with your
employment, these requirements applied to your
conversation.
[41] In response
to the Appellant's contention that ABW did not reveal mental health issues until
her message on 18 June 2023 at 4:40
pm, the decision-maker found that this was
inaccurate.
decision-maker made the same finding for Allegation 2 as that noted in paragraph
[36] of these reasons for decision.
decision-maker found that having been a registered medical practitioner for more
than 20 years and as an experienced specialist
Medical Administrator/Director of
Medical Services, the Appellant ought to have identified these concerns at the
time and treated
any ongoing communication and engagement with ABW sensitively,
so as to not further impact ABW's mental health.
[44] The last
matter relied upon to substantiate Allegation 2 was a message sent to ABW on 18
June 2023, at 5:57 pm, directed to KM.
The decision-maker notes that in that
message the Appellant called KM a "pimp" and that following KM's messages the
Appellant stated
that he had reviewed and enjoyed the images ABW had shared with
decision-maker found that the Appellant made this statement to someone who knew
of his employment with the Health Service,
and to further antagonise and inflame
an already heated discussion.
Grounds of Appeal
Appellant in his Appeal Notice contended that the disciplinary finding decision
was unfair and unreasonable and relied on
the following grounds to support his
Executive failed to take into consideration the Appellant's submissions made on
5 September 2024 and the material in its
possession.
Executive's determination to substantiate Allegation 1 and 2 is plainly unsound
and unsupported on the evidence.
Executive's overarching determination that the Appellant inappropriately and
improperly attempted to leverage his position
and senior leadership status with
the Health Service to inappropriately engage with a member of the public is
plainly unsound and
unsupported on the evidence.
Executive's reliance on a recollection of an alleged statement by the Appellant
in a meeting on 27 June 2023 is unsatisfactory
where he was denied procedural
fairness in that meeting and plainly unreasonable as it disregards the balance
of the material in
its possession.
Appellant contends that the decision should be set aside, and in lieu thereof,
an order declaring that the decision-maker's
determination to substantiate
Allegation 1 and 2 was not fair and reasonable and no grounds for discipline
exist under
Submissions
Directions Order was issued on 6 February 2025 inviting the parties to file
submissions in relation to the Appeal. A further
amended Directions Order was
issued on 13 February 2025, in response to a request for an extension of time
from the Appellant.
[49] Written
submissions were filed by the parties in accordance with the Directions Order
dated 13 February 2025.
[50] On 1 April
2025, the Respondent via email correspondence to the Industrial Registry made a
request to make oral submissions before
[51] A mention
was held before me on 7 April to discuss the Respondent's request and leave was
granted for the Respondent to make
oral submissions.
submissions were heard before me on 16 April 2025.
[53] I have
considered all of the submissions provided by the parties. Although some of that
material may not be specifically referred
to in these reasons, it has been
considered in deciding the appeal.
Appellant's Submissions
Appellant's submissions were filed on 12 March 2025 and can be summarised as
The Appellant
contends that the Respondent failed to take into consideration numerous salient
points relating to the nature of the
relationship between the Appellant and ABW
private, consensual and intimate nature of their relationship which commenced
through 'Secret Benefits', an online dating website.
messaging online, ABW disclosed that she had a partner who was aware she was
dating other men.
relationship progressed and they began messaging in WhatsApp where they shared
details about themselves, their interests and
their personal lives.
Appellant vaguely disclosed to ABW that he worked in 'Healthcare Management' and
nothing further, though accepts there was an
inadvertent disclosure of his name.
To be clear on this point, the Appellant denies ever informing ABW of his role
or employment
with MNHHS.
The Appellant
submits that had the above factors been appropriately considered, it would have
been evident that the communications
were appropriate to the standard romantic
relationship between two consenting adults.
27 June 2023 meeting
Dr Margetts
contends that the Respondent places disproportionate reliance on its
recollection of an alleged statement by the Appellant
in the 27 June 2023
meeting. The Appellant submits that the alleged statement that Dr Margetts
"directly informed ABW of his role and employment with the Health Service to
build trust with her"
was used to determine that he "
inappropriately and
improperly attempted to leverage his position and senior leadership status to
inappropriately engage with a member
of the public".
The Appellant
contends that there was plainly evidence to the contrary about whether
the Appellant directly told ABW about his name, role and employment at
MNHHS. As noted above, the Appellant denies sharing such details
although he
admits telling ABW in vague terms about working in a healthcare in an
administrative
The Appellant
submits that a number of concerning issues were raised in relation to the
procedural fairness of the 27 June 2023 meeting
as follows:
notice was provided as to what would be discussed during the meeting;
not offered to have a support person present with him;
Margetts contends that the Respondent's recollection of the meeting is not
supported by evidence such as a contemporaneous file
The overarching determination
The Appellant
submits that the crux of the overarching determination is that it is
inappropriate for a public sector employee to share
information about their
employment with the Health Service as a mechanism for 'building trust' to
develop and maintain relationships
with members of the public.
The Appellant
maintains that there is insufficient evidence to suggest that this
occurred, other than an alleged statement made in the 27 June 2023
meeting. The Appellant contends that the evidence in the text
messages suggests
to the contrary – that the relationship developed organically and
genuinely. The Appellant contends that
there is nothing improper or
inappropriate about sharing employment information when commencing a romantic
relationship.
The Appellant
submits that it was not open for the Respondent to conclude that there was
inappropriate conduct by the Appellant where
there is nothing improper or
inappropriate about sharing employment information when commencing a romantic
relationship.
The Appellant
further contends that it is uncontroversial when meeting new people, romantic or
otherwise, that there is an exchange
of information to build connection,
understanding, and naturally, 'trust'. The Appellant contends that the
Respondent's fixation
on the word 'trust' in this context suggests an
exploitative intention by the Appellant with respect to ABW which is entirely
on the evidence.
Applicability of Standard 1.5(d) of the Code of Conduct
The Appellant
disputes the applicability of the above standard to the circumstances of this
case, where an employee deals with, in
their private and personal capacity,
consenting adult partners and other personal relationships in a way that was
entirely appropriate
with community experiences in the circumstances.
The Appellant
contends that the focus of the text of clause 1.5(d) is whether the conduct
'maintains the integrity of the public service'
and the 'ability to perform
The Appellant contends
that these words suggest a connection between the impugned act and whether such
act does two things: fails
to uphold public sector integrity and raises concerns
In relation to
the first part of the clause, the Appellant submits that guidance can be drawn
from previous decisions dealing with
misconduct within the meaning of
The Appellant contends that those decisions relate to conduct which
uncontroversially diminished public confidence in accordance
with community
standards such as relationships between teachers and
and being subject to
criminal charges.
The Appellant
also contends that guidance can be drawn from decisions with breaches of s 11 of
the Australian Public Service Code
where the conduct
undermined the fundamental value of public service integrity in being impartial
and apolitical through online publication
of vitriolic
With respect to
the second part of the clause, the Appellant relies on the decision of
Telstra Corporation Limited
to submit that
there must be a requisite connection between personal conduct and whether it was
incompatible with the employee's
duty as an employee. I will address the
applicability of this decision later in these reasons.
The Appellant
submits that in reliance on the above principles, there was nothing in the
communications inconsistent with the integrity
of the public service or the
values of the Health Service where such communications are consistent with
ordinary community experience
communications in June would be reasonably understood in the context of a
of this relationship and the unexpected and threatening involvement of
a third party.
In relation to
the Respondent's concern about the Appellant continuing as a Senior Medical
Officer Specialist in Medical Administration,
the Appellant contends that the
Respondent has not established any intelligible and real connection with the
duties of this role
but instead relies on an apparent failure to acknowledge
ABW's assertions about her mental wellbeing and a vague finding that the
psychologically safe and appropriate
The Appellant
concludes his submissions by contending that the Respondent's decision was
unsound and unsupported on the evidence.
The Appellant further submits that the
Commission would find that the proposed disciplinary action cannot stand since
the disciplinary
finding decision is fundamentally flawed and the requirements
Discipline Directive
Submissions
Respondent's submissions were filed on 20 March 2025 and are summarised as
The Respondent
maintains that the evidence available supports that the two allegations against
the Appellant are capable of being
substantiated.
In response to
the Appellant submissions in relation to the alleged statement made during the
June 27, 2023, meeting, the Respondent
contends that Dr Rushbrook and Mr Bourke
were both present at the meeting and have a vivid recollection of statement.
the Respondent contends that it was reasonably open to Dr Rushbrook
to consider the alleged statement disclosed to her in the meeting
determining that the two allegations were capable of being substantiated.
The Respondent
contends that the Appellant's conduct was sufficiently serious to warrant
discipline for the following reasons:
Health Service is responsible for providing public health services to members of
the Northern Brisbane community.
Appellant disclosed his employment details (as confirmed by the Appellant in the
27 June 2023 meeting).
Appellant was aware of ABW's vulnerabilities and prior trauma
experiences.
the Appellant's senior position within MNHHS, and his experience in managing
complex discipline processes, it is expected that
the Appellant would model
appropriate behaviour and engagement with the community, especially in instances
whereby members of the
public are aware of his employment.
disclosing his employment with ABW, the Appellant sent the members of the public
a message referring to them as sex worker,
a pimp and insinuating one of the
members of the public could be a paedophile.
The Respondent
submits that the Appellant's conduct is inconsistent with the Health
Service’s interests as a public health service
because the Appellant was
made aware by ABW that she had a history of psychedelic drug use, toxic
relationships and emotional abuse.
The Respondent contends that given the
Appellant’s standing as a Senior Medical Officer, he should have
identified these concerns
and their associated mental health impacts and engaged
with her in a manner that did not cause further mental health conditions.
Respondent submits that this is not aligned with the Medical Board's
expectations to protect and promote the health of individuals
and the community.
The Respondent
contends that the Appellant's conduct eroded the safety and confidence of ABW
and KM in MNHHS. The Respondent contends
that this is evidenced by KM's
complaint to MNHHS and the attack on the Appellant's suitability as a senior
medical officer.
The Respondent
maintains the decision to substantiate the two allegations as a breach of clause
1.5(d) of the
Code of Conduct
was fair and reasonable.
In response to
the Appellant's submissions in relation to procedural fairness, the Respondent
contends that Dr Margetts was provided
with a copy of the evidence that was
before the delegate and that his response on 5 September was genuinely
considered by the Respondent.
Appellant's Submissions in Reply
Appellant's reply submissions were filed on 31 March 2025 and accompanied by an
Affidavit from Dr Margetts. The submissions
are summarised as below:
The Appellant
submits that the Respondent has failed to outline how the communications with
ABW and KM were 'inappropriate'. He contends
that it was not open to describe
the Appellant's communications as inappropriate where there was no evidence of
impropriety, coercion
or undue influence. The Appellant contends that this is
the first determination prior to any finding as to whether there was a
contravention
of clause 1.5(d) of the
Code of Conduct
without reasonable
excuse in a way sufficiently serious to warrant disciplinary action pursuant to
In response to
the Respondent's assertion that Appellant ought to have identified ABW's mental
health concerns and conducted himself
in a psychologically safe way in light of
this, the Appellant contends that this position is unsupported by objective
evidence and
accepts without reservation ABW's subsequent assertion about her
mental health at the time. These assertions when read in context
were aimed at
eliciting an apology from Dr Margetts.
In relation to
concerns about procedural fairness, the Appellant submits that the Respondent
fails to acknowledge the failure to provide
him with notice of the concerns
prior to the meeting on 27 June 2023.
With respect to
the alleged contravention of clause 1.5(d) of the
Code of Conduct
Appellant contends that a link cannot fairly and reasonably be drawn between Dr
Margett's personal conduct and the workplace.
Affidavit, Dr Margetts refers to relevant medical conditions that were impacting
him at the time. He further confirms that
at the time of the communications with
ABW in June 2023, he was not taking his medication. The medication enables Dr
Margetts to
rehearse multiple communication phraseology and assist in
succinctness, reducing impulsiveness, acting on moral outrage and avoiding
oversharing.
The Appellant
contends that he does not usually take this medication outside of work unless he
anticipates a particularly stressful
or interpersonally demanding situation. Dr
Margetts confirmed that his employer is aware of his disability and medication.
Oral Submissions
Respondent's Oral Submissions
Respondent requested the opportunity to make oral submissions to the
Commission.
[58] In its oral
submissions the Respondent sought to distinguish the factual circumstances of
the appeal from those dealt with in
Rose v Telstra Corporation Limited
Respondent firstly noted that the Appellant is a public sector employee, and
that public sector employees are expected to
ensure that their private conduct
does not bring the public sector into disrepute. The Respondent then seeks to
distinguish the decision
on the basis that private and
non-government organisations like Telstra do not have a comparable legislative
framework around private
conduct and how individual instances can bring an
organisation into
Respondent further contends that these organisations typically do not have a
code of conduct that outlines an employee's
obligations when it comes to their
private conduct. The Respondent places reliance on clause 1.5(d) of the
, which the Respondent contends confirms a public sector
employee's obligations relating to their private conduct.
[61] In relation
to the submission made in the preceding paragraph, I would observe that any
close reading of the
decision would reveal that in July 1996 (and
prior to the incident that gave rise to Mr Rose being subject to a disciplinary
and terminated) that Telstra had in fact published a Code of Conduct
Our Company Values and Our Code of Conduct
' which did include a
provision which addressed conduct outside of work.
Respondent contends that the State of Queensland has placed a high level of
responsibility on public sector employees to
ensure that their private conduct
does not bring the employer and their employment into disrepute compared with
private and non-government
organisations such as Telstra. The Respondent cites
the observations of his Honour Vice President O'Connor in
Gilbert v Metro
North Hospital Health Service &
that the public sector
disciplinary regime is designed to protect the public, maintain proper standards
of conduct by public sector
employees and protect the reputation of the public
[63] The second
matter raised by the Respondent were the professional expectations of a senior
medical officer, the Respondent contends
that the Appellant fell short of those
expectations. The Respondent submits that Dr Rushbrook, being the Chief Medical
Officer, was
appropriately qualified to assess the Appellant's conduct as being
inappropriate.
Respondent further contends that in making that decision, the Respondent relied
upon the Australian Medical Board's
Good Medical Practice: A Code of Conduct
for Doctors in Australia
, which states that the Appellant has a
responsibility to protect and promote the health of individuals and the
Respondent contends that the Appellant acted inconsistent with the professional
office he holds when making statements that
were socially offensive, perceived
as threatening and directed at an individual with mental health concerns. The
Respondent concluded
that in those circumstances, it was appropriate for the
Respondent to assess the Appellant's private conduct against the professional
office he holds with the public sector, and to find that he was liable for
discipline. In support of its argument, the Respondent
cites the decisions of
Gilbert v Metro North Hospital and Health Service &
Hutchinson v
State of Queensland (Queensland
Appellant's
Oral Submissions
Appellant submits that the crux of the Respondent's oral argument is that the
decision was fair and reasonable because his
(private) conduct reflected
adversely on the 'integrity' of the Health Service due to his position as
Director of Medical Services
Reliever. The Appellant notes that this position
concentrates on the reputation of the public sector.
response, the Appellant contends that this position fails to engage with parts
which the decision was made under. In relation to the findings
made in the decision that there had been a breach of clause 1.5(d)
Code of Conduct
, the Appellant submits that the decision and the
Respondent's submissions do not address, in any reasonable and balanced
Firstly, how the
communication was inappropriate, in circumstances where they were sent to the
Appellant's romantic partner ABW and
the subsequent messages were in the context
of her husband KM suddenly wanting an apology from him for infidelity many
months after
the relationship with ABW had amicably broken up.
The Appellant
further contends the alleged impropriety arises from a statement (which the
Respondent gave him
notice that the Respondent would use
against him).
The Appellant
notes that he has vehemently denied making this statement throughout the process
and the text messages do not support
this allegation.
The Appellant also submits that the allegation also appears to fully accept
ABW's later assertions about being vulnerable in their
relationship –
which the Appellant alleges were suddenly and suspiciously made many months
after they had amicably broken up
– which he suggests points towards the
complaint being vexatious.
Secondly, if his
communications were considered to be inappropriate, how the communications did
two things:
(1) Did not maintain the integrity of the public service where community
expectations about the conduct of public sector employees
would acknowledge that
they are entitled to pursue their own consensual romantic relationships in their
private lives;
(2) Impacted the Appellant's ability to perform his duty as a Medical
Administrator where his scope of clinical practice does not
include mental
health practice and there is no evidence that he had demonstrated any values
incompatible with his role.
Lastly, how the
communications were sufficiently serious to warrant disciplinary action where it
was completely engaged in his private
capacity, and fell short of conduct which
would be considered serious by the community who would not pass any judgment or
moral standing
on a romantic relationship entered into an employee's personal
life, which involved consenting adults.
[68] In relation
to the Respondent's reliance upon the
decisions, the
Appellant contends that these are of limited assistance because:
They involved
allegations of misconduct which involves a different legal test (as opposed to a
breach of clause 1.5 of the
Code of Conduct
involved a nurse who was convicted on her plea of guilty of the offence of
fraud and who was sentenced to a period of imprisonment.
The Appellant submits
that this is clearly distinguishable. The Appellant further contends in that
case there was a clear and discernible
link between the conduct and public
sector integrity.
To the extent
that these cases assist in determining '
maintenance of the integrity of the
public service
', they must be distinguished. The Appellant contends that
this is not a case where the conduct is considered so morally reprehensible
is inconsistent with the values of the public service. He further asserts that
the Respondent's finding that his communications
lacked 'integrity' and
'respect' finds no support on the evidence except for KM's initiating complaint
in which he makes serious
and unfounded allegations about the Appellant such as
he "taking advantage" of ABW and engaging in "blackmail".
Appellant submits that clause 1.5 of the
Code of Conduct
requires a nexus between the private conduct of a public servant and their role
within the public sector. The Appellant
contends that the Respondent has not
established the nexus between his communications and the performance of his
role. The submission
further notes that the Appellant is not trained to identify
mental health issues.
Appellant's oral submissions conclude by making the following general
The conduct must
be judged for what it actually was, not what the complaint alleged it
Respondent's submissions are accepted, the State of Queensland would be
empowered to take disciplinary action against its employees
for all matters
arising from their private romantic consensual relationships. The Appellant
contends that this would create an untenable
The Appellant
contends that had he conducted himself in the way suggested by the Respondent,
he would have practiced outside the scope
of his practice and breached the
Medical Board's Code of Conduct by engaging in a boundary violation.
The Respondent's
focus on the reputation of the public sector unrealistically assumes the
community's expectations of the public sector.
The Appellant contends that the
community would
unreasonably concern themselves with the private
romantic details of the lives of public sector employees where common experience
says that such matters can be complicated and are therefore intensely individual
matters which do not concern the employer or the
employee's performance of their
role in any way.
The submission
goes on to note that the Respondent's reliance on his medical registration also
attempts to hold him to an unreasonable
standard of conduct in his private life.
On the issue of the community's expectations of certain behaviour by medical
practitioners
consistent with their standing to promote the health of the
community, the Appellant cites the observations of Judicial Member McGill
Medical Board of Australia v TXA (No
That decision involved a professional disciplinary matter in which the
medical practitioner had propositioned the wife of a patient
regarding an
extramarital affair. Judicial Member McGill SC made the following relevant
observations:
[25] I do not consider that the mere fact that the respondent sought to
enter into a sexual relationship with Mrs P, viewed in isolation,
amounted to a
breach of professional standards on his part. The Tribunal, acting under the
National Law, is not a court of morals.
No doubt the community expects medical
practitioners to behave themselves in a general sense, but I do not consider
that community
attitudes today are necessarily hostile to adultery. They would
not be the same as community attitudes one hundred, or even seventy
when Christian standards of morality had much greater influence in the
community. I doubt if many in the community would
be much troubled by the idea
of a married medical practitioner, in private life, making a pass at a married
person. No doubt there
is conduct which is so morally reprehensible that it is
inconsistent with community expectations of a medical practitioner, but I
consider that this falls a long way short of
(citations omitted)
The final matter
raised by the Appellant is that the Respondent's decision is incompatible with a
number of human rights that the
Chief Executive was required to have regard to
pursuant to the
Human Rights Act 2019
– right to be treated equally before the law without discrimination
(given his disability of which his employer was aware);
– right to freedom of expression;
– right to not have privacy unlawfully or arbitrarily interfered
[71] In the
decision letter the delegated decision-maker, in addressing the issue of whether
the Appellant's suspension should be
continued, made reference to her previous
correspondence of 18 October 2024.
[72] By email
dated 1 October 2025, the Industrial Registry requested both parties to provide
information regarding when the Appellant
was first subjected to suspension. The
Respondent did not provide a response to this request.
Appellant provided an email to the Industrial Registry on 2 October 2025 which
set out the following timeline of events relating
to his suspension from
27/6/2023 -
Initial meeting and verbal instruction not to attend the workplace as I was on
"Rostered Not Required" or "RNR" - a form
of suspension that avoids formal
escalation to the CE office.
Reiteration of "RNR" during meeting with Daniel Davidson from Meridian
6/12/2023 -
Formal Suspension #1 - includes references to the meetings on 27/6/2023 and
3/7/2023 - Suspension from duty "on normal
remuneration” - 3 months.
Expiry 6/3/2024. (letter attached)
20/3/2024 -
Formal Suspension #2 – "I have decided to continue with your suspension
from duty on normal remuneration" - Expiry
16/6/2024 (letter
23/5/2024 -
Initial Show Cause Letter
17/6/2024 -
Formal Suspension #3 – "I have decided to continue with your suspension
from duty on normal remuneration" - Expiry
17/6/2024 -
Formal Suspension #4 – "I have decided to extend your suspension from duty
on normal remuneration" - Expiry 19/1/2025
Consideration
required to decide this appeal by assessing whether or not the decision appealed
against is fair and reasonable. This involves
a review of the decision-making
process that has been utilised, and the decision arrived at.
[75] Deputy
President Merrell in
Colebourne v State of Queensland (Queensland Police
Service) (No 2)
') considered the meaning of 'fair and reasonable' and
concluded that it should be construed within the ordinary meaning of the phrase
as used in the context of s 562B of the IR
his Honour further noted that assessing whether a decision was
'fair and reasonable' is not an assessment of whether the decision
unreasonable only by reference to the legal
His Honour concluded
that assessing whether a decision was 'fair and reasonable' permitted
review of both the factual merits and legal reasonableness of both the decision
the process of making that
[77] In the
recent decision of
Benn v State of Queensland (Department of
Commissioner Pratt provided the following observations as to the process in
determining whether a decision is fair and
reasonable:
For a decision
to be fair and reasonable, the conclusion underpinning it must be reasonably
open to be reached. If the conclusions
were reasonably open to the
decision-maker to reach, it is not the Commission's role to disturb that
decision, even if the Commission
would have reached a different
conclusion.
If the decision
is flawed by conclusions that were not fairly and reasonably open to the
decision-maker to reach, then that decision
is prone to being overturned on
disappointment with the outcome of a decision is not enough to establish that it
was not fair and
reasonable.
The decision
must create some practical injustice before an appeal of this nature can
[78] In the
present matter, the Appellant has been found to have breached clause 1.5(d) of
Code of Conduct
in the following circumstances (which I make as
factual findings):
Meeting and
engaging with ABW on a private dating website established to allow members of
the website to meet and interact with other
members in a confidential
Both ABW and the
Appellant were voluntary members of that website.
ABW in fact
first initiated contact with the Appellant through the dating site's messaging
The Appellant
and ABW are both adults.
The Appellant
engaged in private conversations with ABW initially through the mechanism of the
website and then later using either
text messages or the messaging service
conversations between ABW and the Appellant occurred at times when the Appellant
was not working (there is no evidence before
the Commission that any
conversation took place when the Appellant was on duty). That is, he was in his
own personal time.
There is no
allegation or suggestion that the Appellant used a computer or other equipment
owned or supplied by MNHHS to undertake
the communications with ABW, nor is
there any evidence of this.
There is no
evidence that ABW (or her partner KM) were employees or contractors of MNHHS.
There is no
evidence before the Commission of ABW or KM being patients of MNHHS.
conversations between ABW and the Appellant were entirely consensual on both
There is no
suggestion on the material that the conversations between ABW and the Appellant
were unlawful.
tranche of text conversations between ABW and the Appellant were of a highly
personal nature and involved both parties sharing
intimate information and the
parties apparently sharing intimate photographs and/or videos.
ABW appears to
have both a personal motivation and a financial motivation to pursue the
relationship with the Appellant such that
there was both a personal and intimate
aspect to the relationship but also a commercial aspect (consistent with her
operation of
an OnlyFans page).
On the evidence
available to the Commission of the messages passing between ABW and the
Appellant, at no time is MNHHS or the Appellant's
work with MNHHS mentioned (in
the messages available to the Commission).
Other than one
face to face meeting for coffee, the relationship between the Appellant and ABW
occurred online. It is not clear when
the face-to-face meeting took
Approximately
six months after amicably parting with ABW, and without notice, the Appellant is
Margetts did not know and had not previously interacted with.
This led to the
Appellant having some further text message engagement with ABW and that
subsequent engagement became heated with the
Appellant using insulting,
demeaning and rude language towards ABW and indirectly on one occasion, KM,
(once again in a private context).
[79] In light of
that summary it is somewhat difficult to understand how this became a work
related matter which justified a disciplinary
process being commenced against
the Appellant.
[80] How this
occurred will need to be explored further in determining firstly whether the
allegations were a proper foundation for
a disciplinary process to be taken
against the Appellant, and further, whether it was appropriate for the
decision-maker to find
that the two allegations had been substantiated.
[81] As noted
decision confirms that in assessing whether a
decision was 'fair and reasonable', a review of both the factual merits and
legal reasonableness
of both the decision itself and the process of making that
decision can be undertaken. In this matter, the process leading to the
the disciplinary finding decision bears some examination.
determining the appeal, I do not intend to strictly follow the grounds of appeal
set out in the Appeal Notice, however, I
will address the grounds of appeal and
the parties' submissions in determining what I consider to be the key issues
that arise in
this appeal.
standard of proof required in this appeal is on the balance of probabilities. I
note that the
Discipline Directive
defines 'balance of probabilities' in
the following way:
... refers to the civil standard of proof. For an allegation to be
substantiated on the balance of probabilities, the evidence must
establish that
it is more probable than not that the alleged conduct occurred. The strength of
evidence necessary to establish an
allegation on the balance of probabilities
may vary according to the:
• relevance of the evidence to the allegations
• seriousness of the allegations
• inherent likelihood or improbability of a particular thing or event
• gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular
definition effectively imports and applies the decision of the High Court in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
regarding the standard of evidence required to satisfy the burden of proof. In
Dixon J observed that in civil cases the degree of
satisfaction may depend on the nature of the issue at hand. His Honour (in an
quoted passage) said:
Except upon criminal issues to be proved by the prosecution, it is enough
that the affirmative of an allegation is made out to the
reasonable satisfaction
of the tribunal. But reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is
attained or established independently
of the nature and consequence of the fact
or facts to be proved. The
seriousness of an allegation made
inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description
gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding
considerations which must affect the answer to the question whether the issue
has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction
of the tribunal. In such matters
“reasonable satisfaction” should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or
indirect inferences
. Every one must feel that when, for instance, the issue
is on which of two dates an admitted occurrence took place, a satisfactory
conclusion may be reached on materials of a kind that would not satisfy any
sound and prudent judgment if the question was whether
some act had been done
involving grave moral
delinquency.
(emphasis added)
Nexus between the private conduct and the Appellant's
significant issue between the parties is whether there is in fact any nexus
between the private actions of the Appellant and
his employment with MNHHS. This
raises the further issue as to whether the principles identified by Vice
President Ross in
apply to the circumstances of the present
starting point in the determination of these issues, as is usually the case, are
the relevant provisions of the
Discipline Directive
Code of Conduct
sets out the grounds upon which a public sector employee's chief
executive may discipline the employee. In the decision letter the
only ground
relied upon by the decision-maker is
which relevantly
provides that the employee may be disciplined if the chief executive is
reasonably satisfied the employee has
contravened, without reasonable
, a relevant standard of conduct in a way that
is sufficiently
serious to warrant disciplinary action
. (Emphasis added)
[88] I further
relevantly provides:
(4) To remove any doubt, it is declared that
a disciplinary ground does
not arise in relation to a public sector employee only because the
work performance or
personal conduct fails to satisfy
work performance and
personal conduct principles
or the public
sector principles. (Emphasis added)
relevant standard of conduct
(a) for a public sector employee, means—
(i) a standard of conduct applying to the employee under an approved code of
conduct under the
Public Sector Ethics Act 1994
satisfied that the
Code of Conduct
is an approved code of conduct under
Public Sector Ethics Act 1994
provides the personal conduct principles applicable to a public
sector employee in the following terms:
performance and personal conduct principles
(1) In recognition that public sector employment involves a public trust, the
work performance and personal conduct of each public
sector employee should be
guided by the following principles (the work performance and personal conduct
principles)—
(a) achieving excellence in service delivery;
(b) ensuring the effective, efficient and appropriate use of public
(c) giving effect to government policies and priorities;
(d) collaborating with other public sector entities with a focus on public
sector-wide priorities in addition to priorities specific
to particular public
sector entities, if appropriate and while recognising the need for independence
of particular public sector
(e) providing sound and impartial advice to government;
(f) continuously improving work performance, including through training and
development;
(g) carrying out duties impartially and with integrity;
(h) acting honestly, fairly and in the public interest;
(i) interacting with staff members under the
Ministerial and Other Office
Holder Staff Act 2010
respectfully, collaboratively and with integrity;
(j) observing all laws relevant to the employment;
ensuring the employee’s personal conduct does not reflect adversely
on the reputation of the public sector entity in which the
employee is
(l) observing the ethics principles under the
Public Sector Ethics Act
complying with an approved code of conduct and any approved standard of
practice as required under the
Public Sector Ethics Act 1994
section 12H
(Emphasis added)
satisfied that work performance principles identified in s 40(1)(a) to (g), (i),
(j) and (l) all relate to the performance
of a public sector employee's actual
work duties and are therefore not relevant to the present appeal.
may be relevant to the personal conduct of a public
sector employee in some circumstances, however, I am not satisfied that this
paragraph applies to the private conduct of the Appellant which falls for
consideration in this appeal. This then leaves only
and (m) as the
relevant 'personal conduct principles' which may be applicable in the present
circumstances.
[94] In my view,
a proper construction of the interplay between
in the present case is that the private conduct of the Appellant will only give
rise to a disciplinary ground in circumstances where
the private conduct
reflects adversely on the reputation of the public sector entity in which the
employee is employed, or alternatively,
that private conduct fails to comply
with an approved code of conduct.
[95] Clause 8 of
Discipline Directive
largely reflects
relevantly provides:
for conduct in a private capacity
8.1 In addition to
considering the requirements listed at clause 7, a chief executive
consider whether they are reasonably satisfied alleged conduct could amount to
misconduct which reflects seriously and adversely
on the public sector
in which the employee is employed in determining whether to commence
a discipline process in relation to an employee’s conduct
in a private
capacity. (Emphasis added)
8.2 In making a determination under clause 8.1, a chief executive must give
consideration to the way in which the person’s
alleged conduct in a
private capacity,
if it became known to a reasonable person
seriously and adversely on the entity taking into account all the circumstances
person’s role in the entity
entity’s functions and responsibilities
(c) the responsibility on government entities to act with integrity,
accountability, in the public interest and in a way that maintains
public trust.
(Emphasis added)
[96] Misconduct
is defined in the
Discipline Directive
by reference to the definition
provided in
. That definition has been excerpted in
paragraph [19] above. Of relevance to the present appeal is
notes that misconduct means inappropriate or improper conduct in a private
capacity that reflects seriously and adversely on
the public sector entity in
which the employee is employed.
[97] When that
definition of 'misconduct' is considered there is some circularity to clause 8.1
Discipline Directive
. Effectively, it is only conduct in a private
capacity which is
inappropriate or improper
conduct which reflects
seriously and adversely on MNHHS which would enable a disciplinary process to be
commenced against the Appellant.
further made clear by clause 8.2 of the
Discipline Directive
making a determination on the question whether the private conduct reflects
seriously and adversely on the public sector
entity in question, an objective
test is to be utilised.
[99] This then
leaves for consideration the relevant provision from the
Code of Conduct
relied upon by the Respondent in commencing the disciplinary process.
Code of Conduct
commences by setting out principles and values in four
separate clauses. Relevant to this appeal is clause 1 which addresses the
and values regarding 'Integrity and impartiality'. The clause states
as follows:
Public Sector Ethics Act 1994
In recognition that public office involves a public trust, public service
agencies, public sector entities and public officials seek
to promote public
confidence in the integrity of the public sector and –
committed to the highest ethical standards;
and value their duty to provide advice which is objective, independent,
apolitical and impartial;
respect towards all persons, including employees, clients and the general
acknowledge
the primacy of the public interest and undertake that any conflict of interest
issue will be resolved or appropriately
managed in favour of the public
interest; and
committed to honest, fair and respectful engagement with the
Code of Conduct
then sets out in the following five sub-clauses the
relevant standards of conduct. The only relevant standard to this appeal is
1.5 and in particular paragraph (d). This is the only provision from the
Code of Conduct
that the show cause letter alleges that the Appellant
contravened. This clause provides as follows:
1.5 Demonstrate a high standard of workplace behaviour and personal
We have a responsibility to always conduct and present ourselves in a
professional manner, and demonstrate respect for all persons,
whether fellow
employees, clients or members of the public.
our private conduct
maintains the integrity of the public service and our
ability to perform our duties
(Emphasis added)
[102] As noted
above, the decision-maker has not made a finding of misconduct by the Appellant.
The only relevant basis for the decision
that there were grounds for discipline
was pursuant to
premised on an alleged contravention by
the Appellant of the standard of conduct in clause 1.5(d) of the
[103] I accept
the correctness of the Appellant's submission that the words of clause 1.5(d) of
Code of Conduct
not only suggest, but in my view require, a
connection between the impugned act and whether the act does two things: fails
public sector integrity and raises concerns about the employee's
performance of their duties.
[104] There has
been limited judicial consideration in the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission of disciplinary proceedings
arising solely from private conduct.
Hutchison v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
appeal involved a fair treatment appeal from disciplinary findings that Ms
Hutchinson, a nurse employed by Queensland Health
was guilty of misconduct. The
conduct in that matter was wholly private conduct involving the commission of
criminal offences of
fraud. Ms Hutchinson entered a plea of guilty to the
charges and received a sentence which included actual imprisonment.
[106] It is
clear that the private conduct of Ms Hutchinson was of a far more serious nature
than that alleged against the Appellant
in the present appeal and involved a
finding of actual misconduct by Ms Hutchinson.
[107] In the
disciplinary proceedings, the private conduct and the consequent criminal
proceedings and conviction was found to be
inappropriate or improper conduct in
a private capacity that reflected seriously and adversely on the public service
within the meaning
s 187(4)(b)
Public Service Act 2008
and therefore 'misconduct'. This finding was unsurprisingly upheld by Industrial
Commissioner Pidgeon given the nature of the
criminal charges, the criminal
conviction and imprisonment of Ms Hutchinson. In reaching that conclusion the
Commission however noted:
Public servants may engage in less than ideal conduct in their private
capacity but that conduct could not be considered to 'reflect
seriously and
adversely on the public service'
. In this case, Ms Gallagher has determined
that the issues of trust and honesty relevant to Ms Hutchison's conduct was such
it reflected seriously and adversely on the public
(Emphasis added)
[108] For the
reasons which ultimately follow, this is a case which I believe falls within the
Pidgeon was referring to in the
first sentence of the excerpted passage from
[109] For the
disciplinary scheme in the
Discipline Directive
to private conduct, and for that private conduct to constitute a contravention
of some clause in the
Code of Conduct
(and in particular, clause 1.5(d)),
there must firstly in my view be some factual nexus between the private conduct
and the public
sector employment to justify those provisions being enlivened.
Secondly, in the case of clause 1.5(d) of the
Code of Conduct
the private
conduct must actually and objectively in some way:
(a) impugns or fails to maintain the integrity of the public service entity;
(b) prevent or impact in a meaningful way the ability of the employee to perform
his or her duties. (Emphasis added)
[110] This then
raises the question of whether an alleged act of private conduct must satisfy
both limbs of clause 1.5(d) in order
for a contravention of the clause to be
established, or whether it is sufficient for simply one of those matters to be
established.
[111] When used
to link two expressions, the word "and" is usually considered to be used in a
conjunctive sense and the word "or"
disjunctive.
[112] There are
some cases in which it has been concluded, because of absurdity, unintelligible
or unworkable results or inconsistency
with other provisions in the same
document, that the word "and" has been used in error when the word "or" should
have been used.
In such a case
the error may be corrected by a process of construction.
authorities indicate that such cases are exceptional, and that "and" cannot be
read as "or" (or vice versa), simply because
the word used leads to what are
considered to be inconvenient or unacceptable
The replacement of
"and" with "or", or vice versa, cannot occur if it appears that the word has
been used deliberately, and not
[114] There is
no indication on the face of clause 1.5(d) of the
Code of Conduct
"and" has been inserted as the result of a mistake by the draftsperson. Reading
the paragraph in context, there is no reason
why I should not accept that it was
intended that both elements had to be established. I am satisfied that the word
"and" has been
used deliberately in clause 1.5(d). Further, I am also satisfied
that the word was intended to be used conjunctively. As a consequence,
satisfied that for a contravention of clause 1.5(d) of the
to be established both limbs must be established to the satisfaction
of the decision-maker.
[115] For a
contravention of clause 1.5(d) to be established, the decision-maker must be
satisfied to the relevant standard that the
private conduct both fails to
maintain the integrity of the public service and also causes some inability for
a public servant to
perform their duties.
[116] There is a
dearth of judicial authority on clause 1.5(d) of the
Code of Conduct
what would constitute private conduct that would be a failure to uphold public
sector integrity and cause an inability for the
employee to perform their
[117] In noting
this in his submissions, the Appellant contends that this matter is therefore
novel in that it deals with the extent
of the reach of this clause into the
personal lives of employees, which the Appellant contends is a gross overreach
in the circumstances
of this appeal.
[118] As noted
in summarising the Appellant's submissions, the Appellant contends that it is
only private conduct which uncontroversially
diminishes the public confidence
(in the public service) in accordance with objective community standards which
would fail to maintain
the integrity of the public service. The Appellant cites
as examples such as relationships between teachers and
and being subject to
criminal charges
conviction.
[119] It is not
possible to provide an exhaustive list of the type or private conduct which may
fail to maintain the integrity of
the public service or diminish public
confidence in the public service. This will have to be determined on a case by
case basis according
to the facts of each case.
general observation however, I consider that the private conduct must fall
towards the more or most serious end of the
conduct spectrum for it to have this
private conduct
are I believe apposite examples of the type of conduct that may
give rise to a failure by an employee to maintain the integrity
of the public
service (as was the case in
relation to the second element of clause 1.5(d) of the
Code of Conduct
one example I believe is private conduct which gives rise to the cancellation or
suspension of a necessary licence, registration
or authority required for the
employee to perform their duties. A relevant example would be the cancellation
or suspension of a teacher's
registration by the Queensland College of Teachers
arising from alleged misconduct.
relation to the second element of clause 1.5(d), the Appellant refers to, and
relies upon, the principles referred to in
the decision of
involved an application to the Australian Industrial Relations Commission in
respect of an alleged unlawful termination of Rose's
employment with Telstra.
background facts of
were that Mr Rose was employed by Telstra as a
Communications Officer and he agreed to travel to Armidale (from Tamworth) to
because of a backlog in work in that area. Another Telstra employee known
to him, Mr Mitchell was already in Armidale and staying
in a hotel room being
paid for by Telstra. Mr Rose was offered the spare bed in that room.
Thursday, 13 November 1997 Mr Mitchell and Mr Rose went to dinner and then to a
nightclub and both of them were drinking
during the night.
[126] Upon them
both eventually returning to the room, a fight broke out between Mr Mitchell and
Mr Rose during which Mr Rose was
struck in the chest with a piece of glass
causing lacerations which required stitches. There was also damage caused to the
[127] Arising
from that incident Mr Mitchell was criminally charged with malicious wounding,
was convicted and imprisoned. Mr Mitchell
resigned his employment with Telstra
and therefore was not subject to a disciplinary process.
disciplinary process was commenced against Mr Rose which ultimately led to the
termination of his employment.
deciding the application, Vice President Ross considered the extent to which an
employee’s conduct outside of their
working hours can provide a valid
reason for their termination. His Honour analysed the facts of several cases and
concluded that
a valid reason for termination for conduct outside work would
require a “requisite connection to his employment”. His
It is clear that in certain circumstances an employee’s employment may
be validly terminated because of out of hours conduct.
But such circumstances
are limited:
the conduct must
be such that, viewed objectively, it is likely to cause serious damage to the
relationship between the employer and
employee; or
the conduct
damages the employer’s interests; or
the conduct is
incompatible with the employee’s duty as an employee.
In essence the conduct complained of must be of such gravity or importance as
to indicate a rejection or repudiation of the employment
contract by the
Absent such considerations an employer has no right to control or regulate an
employee’s out of hours
[130] His Honour
cited with approval the observations of Finn J in J in
Scott-Charlton
I am mindful of the caution that should be exercised when any extension is
made to the supervision allowed an employer over the private
activities of an
employee. It needs to be carefully contained and fully
President Ross concluded his judgment by saying:
Further I do not accept that the applicant's conduct viewed objectively, was
likely to cause serious damage to his relationship with
his employer. ...
I do not doubt that the applicant’s behaviour (fighting with another
employee) ... was foolish and an error of judgment. He
made a mistake.
employers do not have an unfettered right to sit in judgment on the out of work
behaviour of their employees
An employee is entitled to a private
. The circumstances in which an employee may be validly terminated
because of their conduct outside work are limited. The facts of
this case do not
fall within those limited circumstances. (Emphasis added)
The respondent did not have a valid reason to terminate Mr Rose's
employment.
decision in
is widely regarded as being the leading authority on the
question of the extent to which conduct outside the normal workplace and
normal working hours can provide a valid reason for termination. The decision
has regularly cited and applied in jurisdictions
across Australia, including the
Fair Work Commission, various State Industrial Tribunals and Courts.
decision was restated and accepted and applied by a Full Bench of
the Fair Work Commission in
Newton v Toll Transport Pty
[134] To similar
effect, the Full Bench of the Fair Work Commission in
Sydney Trains v
Bobrenitsky
Bobrenitsky
confirmed the continuing applicability of the principles from
when dealing with a termination of employment arising from private conduct. The
Full Bench confirmed to constitute a valid reason
for dismissal, the conduct
must touch the employment.
Full Bench also confirmed that to determine this question, it is necessary to
consider the entire factual matrix and went on
to provide a list of matters to
be considered in answering this
The Full Bench also
relevantly observed:
[141] There is no indication in
that the out of hours conduct said to constitute a valid reason for
dismissal must be conduct that is a repudiation of the employment
Rather, it is sufficient that the conduct is indicative of repudiation or
rejection of an employee’s contract of
employment. It is axiomatic that
for conduct to indicate a rejection or repudiation of the employment contract,
the out of hours conduct must be sufficiently connected to the
employee’s employment. Not every connection between out of hours
and employment, will constitute a valid reason for
[135] The Full
Bench decision in
Bobrenitsky
was subsequently set aside by the Full
Federal Court in
Bobrenitsky v Sydney
on grounds not
related to the applicability of the principles from
[136] As noted
earlier in these reasons, the Respondent seeks to distinguish the application of
the principles from
on the basis of there being a significant
factual distinction between employees of Telstra and a medical officer employed
State. The Respondent premised its argument on two
Firstly that the
Appellant is a public sector employee, and employees of the State are expected
to ensure that their private conduct
does not bring the public sector into
disrepute. The Respondent attempted to draw a distinction between private and
non-government
organisations like Telstra that do not have a comparable
legislative framework and typically do not have a code of conduct which
addresses the private conduct of employees.
Secondly, the
Respondent relies upon the professional expectations of a senior medical
officer, noting that the decision-maker relied
upon the Australian Medical
Good Medical Practice: A Code of Conduct for Doctors in
, which states that the Appellant has a responsibility to protect
and to promote the health of individuals and the community.
relation to the first contention, I am not satisfied that the fact that the
Appellant is a public sector employee and is
subject to the
and the legislative framework created by the
and the relevant
Directives, is a sound basis to factually distinguish the
from the present appeal.
has been cited with approval and applied in numerous cases, including cases
involving public service employees, both federally and
interstate, who were
subject to similar legislative schemes and codes of
decision was also applied by the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission in
Johnson v Department of Justice and Attorney-General
involving a reinstatement application by an employee of the Department of
Justice and Attorney-General who had been dismissed
in part because of alleged
misconduct in a private capacity.
decision involved conduct with a much closer connection between
the employment and the private conduct in comparison to what is involved
appeal. The private conduct alleged against Mr Johnson was the sexual harassment
of a female co-worker immediately outside
the building in which they both worked
at approximately 5:05 pm on a Friday afternoon, and then a further instance of
sexual harassment
and or inappropriate comments towards two female co-workers
around 8:00 pm the same day at a hotel immediately across from their
decision involved similarly worded provisions from the
Public Service Act
(s 87(1)(f)) and an earlier iteration of the same Code of Conduct that
falls for consideration in this appeal. In determining the
appeal, Industrial
Commissioner Blades considered and applied the principles from
At paragraph (55),
Industrial Commissioner Blades noted in referring to the principles from
The respondent endeavoured to distinguish the facts in that case from the
facts in this case but the principles involved have substantial
application.
Commission ultimately ordered that Mr Johnson's employment should be reinstated
or that he should be re-employed. In considering
the seriousness of his conduct,
the Commission despite noting the comments/behaviour of Mr Johnson were 'vile,
lewd and stupid',
the Commission was not convinced the conduct was serious
enough to justify permitting the employer to interfere in this out-of-work
behaviour, inexcusable though it may have
[143] Industrial
Commissioner Blades whilst noting the applicant's status as public servant and
the obligations of the Department
of Justice and Attorney-General in its
administration of
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
, held that something more
was required to justify the interference (with the applicant's private conduct).
He was also not satisfied
that the conduct reflected seriously and adversely on
the Public service or the
Department.
relation to the Respondent's second contention, I do not accept the contention
that because the Appellant is a senior doctor
and subject to the Australian
Medical Board's code of conduct provides any basis to distinguish the
principles from this case. The Respondent faces a further difficulty
with this contention because the Appellant was not placed on
notice by the
particulars provided to either of the allegations in SC-1 that the Respondent
intended to rely upon his status as a
senior doctor and an alleged contravention
or non-compliance with the Australian Medical Board's code of conduct in
deciding whether
to substantiate the allegations. I will address this issue in
further detail below.
[145] For the
reasons set out immediately above, I am satisfied that in circumstances where
the Commission is dealing with the private
conduct of an employee with minimal
connection to the workplace, the Respondent has not established a sound basis
why the principles
should not apply to the present appeal.
[146] It is then
necessary to consider each of the allegations and their particulars to determine
whether they provided a ground for
a disciplinary process to be initiated
against the Appellant.
Allegation 1: It is alleged that on various occasions in or about January
2023 you sent inappropriate text messages to a member of
the public,
specifically ABW
allegation was particularised in SC-1 as follows:
all material times you worked in the position of Director Medical Services
Reliever at Metro North Health.
all times relevant to the alleged conduct, you were required to ensure that your
private conduct maintained the integrity of the
public service.
a meeting held on 27 June 2023 with Dr Elizabeth Rushbrook and Mr Brett Bourke,
you explained that you had informed ABW of your
name, ·your position and
your employment with Metro North Health to "build trust".
commenced communication with ABW on or about 4 January 2023 that was of a sexual
nature (Attachment 6).
the outset, ABW informed you that she was experiencing financial difficulties,
and was looking for options to support her family.
to ABW's disclosure, you continued engaging with ABW.
informed you that she had an upcoming interview for a role within the field of
medical administration.
informed ABW that you work in medical administration and suggested she work with
then proceeded to provide ABW with advice regarding interview preparation.
During this message exchange, you made a suggestive
statement, "I would have
very strict uniform requirements".
then stated, "And of course, if it's me interviewing you, you should proceed to
take your knickers off put them on the death [sic]
with your legs
observations can be immediately made about Allegation 1, and those particulars.
relation to the contention in Allegation 1 that ABW was a member of the public,
given the manner in which the Appellant and
ABW came into contact via the dating
website and given the fact that a relationship (of some description) was
subsequently established
between them, I am not satisfied that ABW could be
correctly characterised as a "member of the public" for the purpose of Standard
Code of Conduct.
relation to paragraph (3), noting the factual findings I have set out in
paragraph [78], the only matter relied upon by the
Respondent as providing a
requisite connection between the private conduct and the employment with MNHHS
is that alleged in paragraph
(3) of the particulars. This was confirmed by the
Respondent at the
reasons which will be set out in more detail below, I am not satisfied that
there is sufficient evidence to support a finding
that this alleged "admission"
was made by the Appellant in the meeting on 27 March 2023. Even if I was
satisfied to the relevant
standard that this had occurred, I am not satisfied
that this would be a sufficient link to the employment to ground a disciplinary
process being commenced against the Appellant in respect of his private conduct.
My reasons for this conclusion are set out below.
[152] Effectively,
what is contended by the Respondent is that for any public servant employed in
Queensland, if in the course of
attempting to develop a personal relationship
with a potential romantic interest, they reveal their identity, and where they
to build trust with the other person, that alone can justify the employer
investigating and commencing a disciplinary process against
the employee in
respect of their private conversations with a current or former romantic
partner. In my view this cannot be correct.
relation to paragraph (4) of the particulars, the Appellant had commenced
communicating with ABW some unknown time prior
to 4 January 2023. By the time
ABW and the Appellant moved to text messaging and or WhatsApp the evidence
suggests that they had
been communicating for some period of
[154] In SC-1,
paragraph 5 of the particulars of Allegation 1 assert that ABW informed the
Appellant that she was experiencing financial
difficulties and was looking for
options to support her family. In paragraph 6 of the particulars to Allegation
1, it is then asserted
subsequent to ABW's disclosure, the Appellant continued
to engage with ABW.
[155] In light
of the fact that the dating website that both the Appellant and ABW willingly
joined was one where the entire premise
of the site was to link female members
with male members willing to provide financial support, it is entirely
unsurprising that ABW
may have been experiencing some financial difficulties. I
note that other than the assertion of this fact in the messages between
Appellant and ABW, there is no other evidence to corroborate this.
[156] This then
leaves the particulars in paragraphs (7) to (10) which relate to the messages
exchanged on 11 January 2023 regarding
an interview that ABW had upcoming for a
position in medical administration. These particulars will be addressed in more
detail below.
Respondent has not particularised any other part of the conversations that
occurred between the Appellant and ABW between
4 January 2023 and 20 January
2023 as being "inappropriate".
[158] There are
further difficulties with the particularisation of Allegation 1 which are dealt
with in more detail later in these
determining whether Allegation 1 is substantiated, in my view it is necessary to
consider and give context to the entirety
of the conversations between the
Appellant and ABW to reach a finding that the Appellant sent inappropriate text
messages to ABW.
[160] It would
not be an appropriate approach to cherry-pick in isolation a particular message
or series of messages in the absence
of the context provided by the rest of the
communications. There is some indication that the Respondent has in fact
cherry-picked
certain messages and failed to consider the entirety of the
conversations in their context.
addition to the factual findings I have made in paragraph [78], the following
factual findings are also relevant when considering
the entirety of the
conversations between ABW and the Appellant in January 2023 and whether those
conversations were inappropriate:
The Appellant
when initially conversing with the Appellant on the Secret Benefits website used
a pseudonym of 'Oscar' and not his
real name and told ABW that he worked in
'Healthcare Management'.
On 4 January
2023 when their communication switched from the Secret Benefits website to text
messages, the Appellant's first message
was "Hi" and then "Oscar from SB",
consistent with the finding immediately above that the Appellant was taking
steps to keep his
Following the
Appellant explaining why he was using a pseudonym, ABW replied in a message at
3:44 pm on 4 January 2023 'I completely
understand Oscar.'
message exchange later on 4 February 2023 around 4:45 pm and a later message at
5:25 pm ABW told the Appellant:
My limits have been up until now purely online. Moving ahead, l think he
feels really concerned for my ongoing safety if I engage
with any SD-like
individual in person.
My partner's biggest concern is the risk that I will engage with someone who
will not be open about their ultimate intentions and
will put me in an
uncomfortable position. We are also very local to Brisbane and the likelihood
that a mutual friend sees me ostensibly
dating someone else is a
consideration.
I am satisfied that ABW was indicating to the Appellant that her partner was
aware of both her activities on the OnlyFans website
but also the Secret
Benefit's website. The evidence also confirms that ABW's partner, KM,
participated in at least some of the videos
available on ABW's OnlyFans
The Appellant
inadvertently revealed his real name on 5 January 2023 when he and ABW began
communicating on the WhatsApp messaging
[5/1/2023, 5:26:20 am] +61[redacted]: Messages and calls are end-to-end
encrypted. No one outside of this chat, not even WhatsApp,
can read or listen to
[5/1/2023, 5:26:20 am] Craig Margetts: Hi
[5/1/2023, 5:26:29 am] +61 [redacted]:
On the same day
ABW used the Appellant's real name for the first time in a WhatsApp message
[5/1/2023, 7:09:58 pm] Craig Margetts: In broad terms, what did you have in
mind? [5/1/2023, 7:15:43 pm] +61 [redacted]: Honestly
Craig I have no idea
[5/1/2023, 7:15:51 pm) +61 [redacted]: This is all new territory for me.
[5/1/2023, 7:16:05 pm] Craig Margetts: Coffee sounds like a mutual
I am satisfied that ABW became aware of the Appellant's real name via the
WhatsApp messages exchanged between them.
series of messages sent on 4 January 2023 from around 6:45 pm, ABW provided the
Appellant with some background history
noting that following her parents'
divorce, she moved to China with her mother and lived there for seven years
until she turned eighteen.
ABW then went on to note:
My first few years back in Australia were essentially wild and even though I
was committed to finishing my degree I got caught up
in a toxic relationship
with a man who habitually fed me psychedelic drugs and emotionally abused me for
two years. At that time
I conceived my eldest daughter, deferred from University
and began my studies aromatherapy. Fleeing to the women's refuge in 2015
a huge next chapter in my life of growth. Unfortunately, despite his criminal
conviction, the father of my eldest used his
parents considerable resources to
launch a legal campaign in the family courts that savagely defamed both me and
my current partner
so that he could have unrestricted access to our
It has been a traumatic and financially ruinous 6 years: I've picked up the
mantle as best I could and for the last couple of years
solo (as my partner's
mental health began taking the toll and he could no longer pursue work in a
meaningful sense.
I now work as a clerk in different government contracts and trying to rebuild
a home that feels secure and nurturing to my other two
children, as well as my
eldest when she visits
Sorry to give you a brief autobiography but I wanted to give you a better
sense of how I got to this
The Appellant then responded:
Oh my goodness
I'm sorry to hear that
How awful for you
ABW replied:
It's been rough. It's also been honing.
[163] It should
be noted that the period that ABW is referring to appears to be from about 2011
to 2017. There is also no indication
in those passages of ABW suffering from any
current mental health concerns. To the contrary, there is an indication of a
relative stability with her working in various government contracts
and she and her partner building a nurturing home environment
before and after that exchange excerpted above, the Appellant and ABW had been
sharing information about themselves on
4 January 2023 which involved flirtation
and the exchange of personal information consistent with what one would expect
in the development
of a private relationship.
[165] It was
ABW that provided the links to her Instragram account and also to her OnlyFans
page to the Appellant on 4 January 2023.
Later that evening around 9:10 pm ABW
shared with the Appellant an intimate photograph and later around 11:37 pm a
topless image
of herself. Prior to midnight ABW also shared two videos with the
Appellant with sexual content (apparently from her OnlyFans page).
[166] In the
show cause response provided by Meridian Lawyers on behalf of the Appellant, it
is stated that over the course of their
communications in January 2023, ABW sent
the Appellant seventy-two photographs and videos of a sexually explicit nature.
reason to doubt the veracity of this submission and I accept that this
evidence available to me also supports a conclusion that both the Appellant and
ABW were looking for more from the arrangement
rather than simply sexual
gratification or financial benefits. This is confirmed in the text messages
exchanged on 4 January 2023
at 5:02 pm ABW in the context of a discussion about
other OnlyFans girls simply providing a fee for service,
I'm not interested in that. Appreciative of an SD's generosity and time,
absolutely. But frankly they have to be intelligent enough
to have a wide gauge
for companionship rather than just the obvious gratification.
And to what you said above, I'm across the board looking for that sort of
relationship.
Relationship/friendship.
[168] The only
messages that are specifically referred to in the particulars to Allegation 1,
are those that occur on 11 January 2023
relating to ABW's search for a new
[169] By this
time, ABW and the Appellant had now been conversing for some little time both on
the dating website, and via text messages
and WhatsApp.
Wednesday, 11 January 2023 the messaging between ABW and the Appellant confirm
that the Appellant had a day off work. The
messaging between them commences
around 5:23 am in the morning. Later in the morning around 10:00 am there is
flirtatious and sexual
banter between the Appellant and ABW which appears to
confirm that the relationship had moved to a far more intimate level.
[171] At 11:02
am ABW informs the Appellant that she has a first interview the following day
for a medical administration role. The
Appellant seeks to clarify where the
roles are and is able to confirm that they do not involve MNHHS.
[172] At 11:08
am the Appellant sends a message to ABW confirming that he works in 'medical
administration' and she should come and
work for him. I consider this to be
consistent with the banter that had been occurring earlier in the morning and
that this 'offer'
was meant as a joke. I do not accept that this was intended in
any way by the Appellant as being a serious proposal. What is significant
that message is that once again the Appellant only mentions that he works in
medical administration and he does not identify
where he works or what his role
Appellant then goes on to provide helpful advice to ABW about the interview
process and the three key questions she has
to address. This occurs over a
series of messages from 11:11 am to 11:26 am.
[174] Following
that exchange, the Appellant sends a message as particularised in paragraph 10
of the particulars to Allegation 1.
ABW responds to that message with three
laughing emojis and states 'Noted. On both counts.' I take from that response
that ABW was
not offended or shocked by the message.
message which is particularised in paragraph 10 appears to be consistent with
the type of flirtatious banter that had been
taking place between the Appellant
and ABW that day and in the days prior. It appears to have been sent, (and
meant), as a flirtatious
joke. Further, the manner in which ABW responds with
the three emojis, indicates to me that she understood that was the Appellant's
intention and that he was not in any way making a genuine offer of an interview
for employment.
forming my conclusions about Allegation 1, I confirm that I have considered the
entirety of the communications between ABW
and the Appellant which are before
[177] Given the
above analysis, when considering clause 8.1 of the
Discipline Directive
I do not believe that a chief executive could be reasonably satisfied that the
private conduct of the Appellant
seriously and adversely
reflected on
MNHHS in any way.
paragraph (4) of the particulars to Allegation 1 is intended to suggest that it
was inappropriate for the Appellant to engage
in communication of a sexual
nature with ABW at all, this could not in my view be a sound basis for
commencing a disciplinary process
against Dr Margetts. It was entirely a private
[179] As noted
in the passage from
excerpted in paragraph [131] above, employers do
not have an unfettered right to sit in judgment on the out of work behaviour of
their employees. An employee is entitled to a private life.
conversations between the Appellant and ABW were consensual and intensely
personal. In my view they had no relationship
to the Appellant's employment with
[181] Further,
clause 8.2 of the
Discipline Directive
requires a chief executive when
making a determination under clause 8.1, to consider whether the private
conduct, if it became known
to a reasonable person, would reflect seriously and
adversely on MNHHS taking into account:
(a) The Appellant's role as a senior medical administrator in MNHHS;
(b) MNHHS' functions and responsibilities; and
(c) the responsibility on government entities to act with integrity,
accountability, in the public interest and in a way that maintains
public trust.
[182] It appears
from the decision letter that the matters relied upon by the decision-maker to
find that the Appellant's private
conduct did reflect seriously and adversely on
The Appellant
leveraged his position and senior leadership status with the Health Service in a
way which was not respectful to his
role within the Health Service, the services
that the Health Service provides to the community or to ABW. The Respondent
that it also lacked integrity.
In relation to
the conversation on 11 January 2023 particularised at paragraph 10 of the
particulars to Allegation 1, it is alleged
that the Appellant failed to reflect
MNHHS's values and commitment to ethical public administration. It is alleged in
the decision
letter that the Appellant's statement brought MNHHS into disrepute
and questioned MNHHS's ability to conduct open and transparent
recruitment and
selection processes.
[183] In my
considered view, neither of those findings were reasonably open on the evidence
before the decision-maker.
[184] Even if it
is accepted that the Appellant informed ABW about his employment with MNHHS (and
for the reasons set out below I
am not satisfied the evidence supports this
conclusion), I cannot accept that this in any way impacted MNHHS or in any way
poorly on the Appellant's integrity as a senior medical administrator.
The conversations with ABW that are the subject of Allegation
entirely private
conversations between ABW and the Appellant;
personal; and
not related in
any way that I can see to MNHHS, the health services provided by MNHHS or
capable of reflecting poorly on the Appellant's
integrity as a senior medical
practitioner.
The Appellant was entitled to have a private life which remained private.
relation to the Respondent's second finding, for the reasons set out in
paragraphs [168] to [173], I do not think it is an
inference that can be fairly
drawn that the Appellant was seriously proposing that he would conduct an
interview in that way. It
was in my view clearly a fantasy scenario entirely
consistent with the sexual banter he and ABW had been engaging in both earlier
that day and in their previous conversations.
[186] In my
considered view, where the only connection to the employment is that set out in
paragraph [150], reasonable and objective
members of the community would
consider that an employer enquiring into the private and consensual
romantic/sexual conversations
between two consenting adults is a significant
over-reach by the employer.
[187] I am not
satisfied that an objective reasonable person would consider that the
Appellant's conduct in engaging in communications
with ABW in the manner he did,
would reflect seriously on MNHHS taking into account the Appellant's role and
the functions of MNHHS
as a health service.
therefore conclude that there was no basis to commence a discipline process
against the Appellant in relation to the factual
matters set out in Allegation
[189] In terms
of the matters identified by Vice President Ross in
For the reasons
set out above, I am not satisfied that the Appellant's private conduct of
communicating with ABW, viewed objectively,
was likely to cause serious damage
to the relationship between the Appellant and MNHHS.
satisfied that the Appellant's private conduct damages MNHHS's interests. I am
not satisfied that what the decision-maker
has set out in the decision letter is
a sufficient basis to support a finding that the private conduct in any way has
damaged, or
has the potential to damage the Respondent's interests.
satisfied that the private conduct in this matter is incompatible with the
Appellant's duty as an employee of the Respondent.
Once again, for
the reasons set out above, on a proper analysis of the private conduct, I cannot
be satisfied that the private conduct
is of such gravity or importance as to
indicate a rejection or repudiation by the Appellant of the employment
[190] In light
of those findings, I am not satisfied that the Respondent had the right to
regulate the Appellant's private conduct
in relation to Allegation
Further, I am not satisfied
that there was any sound basis to substantiate Allegation 1.
Allegation 2: On various occasions in or about June 2023, you engaged with
members of the public, including ABW and KM, in an appropriate
allegation appears to have been poorly drafted.
[192] It firstly
makes an allegation that the Appellant has engaged with members of the public
that include ABW and KM. This is suggestive
that there are other members of the
public, involved, however, in the particulars to the allegation, no other
members of the public
are identified.
[193] Secondly,
in relation to the allegation that the Appellant had engaged with KM in June
2023, there is in my view no evidence
that supports that aspect of the
allegation.
[194] In the
show cause response provided by the
communicating at anytime with KM. After receiving the first two messages from KM
(and without responding to the messages)
he blocked KM.
[195] There is
no information provided in the particulars to Allegation 2 that indicates that
the Appellant communicated directly
[196] At its
absolute highest, there is the message that is particularised in paragraph (13)
of the particulars to Allegation 2 where
the Appellant prepares a mocking
apology to KM about his involvement with ABW. The evidence is clear that this
was sent to ABW.
[197] There is
no evidence available to me that confirms that KM ever saw this message.
[198] In the
hearing held on 16 April 2025 the Appellant confirmed that at no stage had he
engaged with KM.
[199] That being
the state of the evidence, the substantiation of Allegation 2, as it relates to
KM cannot stand, and on this basis
alone the substantiation of that allegation
must be set aside.
[200] The next
issue with Allegation 2 is the characterisation of ABW as a member of the
public. By the time we get to June 2023,
ABW and the Appellant had experienced a
relatively short, but intense relationship which involved the sharing of
intimate information
and sexual contact online. For the purposes of the
obligations cast by the
Code of Conduct
I do not believe that ABW could
fairly be characterised as a member of the public. Once again this part of the
allegation cannot
be made out in my view.
particular conduct of the Appellant that is alleged to be the sending of
inappropriate text messages for the purpose of
Allegation 2 are particularised
at paragraphs (8), (10), (12) and (13) to (14). These are largely summarised at
paragraphs [40] and
[44] of these reasons.
[202] The text
messages sent by the Appellant over three days on 16 to 18 June 2023 arose in
the context of the Appellant being contacted
unexpectedly by KM wanting to
discuss with the Appellant his earlier relationship with ABW. As noted above,
the Appellant did not
know KM and had never engaged with him. It appears that KM
was seeking some form of apology from the Appellant.
[203] Further
relevant context is that when ABW and the Appellant ceased communicating on 20
January 2023 it was on the basis that
all of their communications would remain
confidential.
messages that KM sent to the Appellant are not in the evidence available to the
Commission.
[205] As is
indicated in the summary of the relevant evidence contained in paragraph [161]
above, in their communications on 4 January
2023, ABW had clearly implied that
her partner was aware of her activities on OnlyFans (and in fact was a
participant in those activities)
and that he was aware of activities on the
dating website. The Appellant was left with the impression that if not actively
ABW's activities, KM at the minimum was condoning those activities.
[206] In light
of this, the Appellant formed a concern that he may be the victim of a
"sextortion" attempt by KM and ABW.
[207] This led
him to contacting ABW again, it appears initially out of concern for her
welfare, but also with some concern that his
been breached.
exchanges between ABW and the Appellant degenerated into an online argument,
particularly from the Appellant's side.
[209] It can be
fairly accepted that in the course of those messages the Appellant said hurtful,
insulting and demeaning things to
ABW. The question remains however, what
business was that of the Respondent, and what right did the Respondent have to
involve itself
in that conduct.
[210] It would
not be a surprise to an objective and reasonable member of the community that in
the course of an argument with a current
or former partner, that a person might
say things that are insulting and demeaning and designed to wound the other
party and that
are often regretted at a later time.
[211] As noted
above, the Respondent appears to contend that all that is required to give rise
to a relevant connection to the employment
to justify an employer involving
themselves in such private matters is that at some earlier time an employee had
informed their partner
of where they worked and the nature of their role in
order to build trust with them.
[212] I cannot
accept this proposition. It is contrary in my view to the authorities I have
discussed earlier in these reasons. If
this is all that is required for an
employer to commence a disciplinary process against an employee in respect of a
private argument
with a current or former partner, it represents a significant
and unwarranted interference with the private affairs of an employee,
what the status of the employee in the organisation.
[213] Similar to
my finding in paragraph [186], I am satisfied that where the only connection to
the employment is that set out in
paragraph [150], reasonable and objective
members of the community would consider that an employer enquiring into a
private online
argument between an employee and their former partner would
constitute a significant overreach by the employer.
[214] I make the
same findings that I have made in paragraphs [187] to [190] in respect of the
Appellant's private conduct which forms
the basis of Allegation 2.
[215] I am not
satisfied that there was a proper basis to commence disciplinary action against
the Appellant in respect of the conduct
that is particularised for Allegation 2,
nor I am satisfied that there was a sound basis to substantiate Allegation 2.
Given these
findings, the decision must be set aside.
Clause 1.5(d) of the
Code of Conduct
leaves for consideration in respect of both allegations, whether a ground for
discipline had been established pursuant
to s 91(h) of the PSA, on the basis
that the Appellant had contravened, without a reasonable excuse Standard 1.5(d)
Code of Conduct
[217] For the
reasons set out above, I am not satisfied to the relevant standard that the
Respondent has established that any of the
private conduct of the Appellant
which forms the basis of Allegations 1 and 2, fails to maintain the integrity of
the public service.
[218] Further,
the decision letter in my view fails to engage in any meaningful way with the
second requirement that the private conduct
impacted the Appellant's ability to
perform his duties as a senior medical administrator employed by
available evidence could not reasonably support a finding that the Appellant's
private conduct impacted his abilities to
undertake his role.
consequence, I am not satisfied that the Respondent has established that there
was a ground to discipline the Appellant
pursuant to s 91(h) of the PSA. Nor am
I satisfied that it has been established that there was a contravention of
clause 1.5(d) of
Code of Conduct
by the Appellant with respect to
the private conduct that forms the basis of Allegations 1 and 2.
[221] In light
of those findings it is inevitable that the decision was not fair and reasonable
and must be set aside pursuant to
s 562C(1)(c) of the IR Act.
Particularisation of the Allegations
Donaldson v TAFE
that it is vital in providing procedural fairness to an employee in a
disciplinary proceeding that the allegations to be
answered are fully and
appropriately particularised in such a way that the employee is apprised of the
case they have to meet.
[223] In support
of that proposition I cited the decision of his Honour Hunt J in
Public Service Board (NSW)
('Etherton')
in which his Honour
In my view, therefore, the plaintiff was entitled to particulars of the
specific acts or omissions relied upon to establish the charge
against him and
to have identified for him specifically whether he is alleged in relation to
each such act or omission to have been
negligent, careless, inefficient or
incompetent.
Berenyi v Maynard &
her Honour Philippides
JA in determining a judicial review application which dealt with the termination
of Ms Berenyi's employment
following a disciplinary process conducted under the
Public Service Act 2008
observed as follows regarding the obligation to
provide sufficient particulars of a charge:
[80] There can be no doubt that natural justice imposes an obligation on an
administrative tribunal hearing a disciplinary charge,
where dismissal may
result on the charge being made out, to furnish particulars of the charge of
breach of discipline: see
R v Little; Ex parte Fong
[1983] VicRp 20
[1983] 1 VR 237.
Street CJ observed in
Public Service Board (NSW) v Ethert
at 432 (endorsing the decision of Hunt J in
Etherton v Public
Service Board of New South Wales
[1983] 3 NSWLR 297
at 307[8]), the
requirements of natural justice impose an obligation on a prosecuting authority
(in that case the Public Service
Board hearing disciplinary charge) to furnish
such particulars as will fairly enable the accused person to understand and to
the case being made against him. Likewise, Samuels JA (at 434) stated,
“I know of no ground in principle or authority which
exempts the Public
Service Board from compliance with those principles of natural justice which
entail that an accused person must
be informed of the nature of the case which
is sought to be made against
[225] As noted
above, in paragraphs (5) and (6) of the particulars, the Respondent has alleged
that the Appellant was informed by
ABW that she had financial difficulties and
that he continued to engage with her following that being disclosed.
[226] In the
decision letter, Dr Rushbrook in finding the allegation to be substantiated,
relied on a finding that the Appellant as
a skilled and specialist Medical
Administrator, ought to have identified that ABW was suffering from mental
health concerns because
of the information she provided regarding her past
history on 4 January 2023 at 6:54 pm and 6:56 pm (which have been excerpted
decision-maker then noted that instead of ceasing communication with ABW, the
Appellant continued to engage in numerous
inappropriate conversations/comments
with ABW that were not conducive to her mental health and
well-being.
[228] The first
difficulty with that finding is that the allegation that the Appellant should
have been aware that ABW was suffering
from mental health concerns and therefore
stopped communicating with her did not form part of the particulars of
Allegation 1.
[229] Instead of
that allegation, the Respondent relied upon a veiled allegation that the
Appellant should have dis-engaged with ABW
following her revealing that she was
experiencing financial difficulties. This allegation was then apparently not
relied upon by
the decision-maker in substantiating Allegation 1.
[230] It is a
fundamental denial of procedural fairness for the Appellant to rely upon an
allegation in substantiating Allegation
1 that did not form part of the
particulars of Allegation 1. The Appellant has been unfairly denied the
opportunity of providing
evidence or submissions to meet that allegation prior
to Dr Rushbrook finding that Allegation 1 had been substantiated. The
substantiation
of Allegation 1 is as a consequence, not fair and reasonable.
[231] The second
difficulty with that finding, is that the decision-maker made a finding
in SC-1 in substantiating Allegation 1 that
following that information
being revealed, the Appellant 'continued to engage in numerous inappropriate
conversations comments' with
ABW that were not conducive to her mental health
and well-being. The numerous inappropriate conversations/comments alleged to
been made by the Appellant have not been particularised in the particulars
provided for Allegation 1.
[232] The only
allegedly inappropriate conversation mentioned in the particulars is that
identified in paragraphs 9 and 10 which occurred
in a short passage of messages
all on 11 January 2023.
[233] The other
numerous inappropriate conversations/comments have not been. Once again, the
Appellant has been found to have committed
conduct that he was not placed on
notice of, and that he had no opportunity to address prior to the allegation
being substantiated.
This also constituted a fundamental denial of procedural
fairness to the Appellant.
[234] There is a
third difficulty with that finding. In assessing the series of conversations
between the Appellant and ABW objectively,
I believe it is necessary to consider
the entirety of the conversations in context.
[235] It is
clear that the events that ABW provided information about were historical, in
that they had occurred some 6 to 12 years
earlier. In assessing the entirety of
the January conversations between the Appellant and ABW (that are available to
me), I am not
satisfied that it could be fairly and objectively determined that
ABW was suffering from mental health concerns at the time she was
communicating
with the Appellant. I am satisfied that this finding by the decision-maker in
relation to Allegation 1 was not open
for the decision-maker to fairly and
reasonably reach. This is a further ground supporting a finding that Allegation
1 should not
have been substantiated.
[236] The same
concerns regarding a lack of particulars occur in relation to Allegation 2. The
decision-maker has again relied upon
a finding that the Appellant, was, or
should have been aware that ABW was suffering from mental health concerns
because of the information
revealed in January 2023 when substantiating
Allegation 2.
[237] This did
not form part of the particulars to Allegation 2 and as a consequence the
Appellant has been denied procedural fairness
in relation to the substantiation
of Allegation 2. The decision to substantiate Allegation 2 was as a consequence,
also unfair and
unreasonable.
relation to both allegations, there seemed to be some suggestion by the
Respondent at the hearing on 16 April 2025 that the
Appellant's obligations as a
senior medical officer under the Australian Medical Board's
Good Medical
Practice: A Code of Conduct for Doctors in Australia
was relied upon by the
delegated decision-maker in substantiating both
allegations.
[239] Whether
this occurred is not clear in the decision letter, however, if the
decision-maker did rely on those matters, this has
also not been particularised
for either allegation, and would therefore constitute a further instance of a
denial of procedural fairness
to the Appellant. Further, it would provide
another ground to find that the substantiation of both allegations was not fair
and reasonable
in the circumstances.
[240] These
findings provide a further ground for concluding that the decision was not fair
and reasonable and should be set aside.
Meeting of 27 June 2023
[241] There are
three issues that arise for determination from the meeting with the Appellant
that was conducted on 27 June 2023.
These are as follows:
circumstances, was there an obligation for the Respondent to afford procedural
fairness to the Appellant, and if so, did this
Whether the
Appellant made an admission in the meeting of 27 June 2023 that he had informed
ABW of his role and employment with the
Respondent? If so, what impact that had
on the disciplinary process? The outcome of this issue will then feed directly
into whether
there was a sufficient connection with the Appellant's employment
for the Respondent to commence a disciplinary process against the
The involvement
of Dr Rushbrook in the meeting of 27 June 2023 and her subsequent role as the
delegated decision-maker in the disciplinary
factual context in which that meeting was called was that the Respondent had
received an email complaint from KM about the
alleged actions of the Appellant.
It appears that in making that complaint KM has provided the Respondent with
some of the messages
that passed between the Appellant and ABW.
Was there an obligation to afford the Appellant procedural fairness on
27 June 2023?
[243] SC-1, the
initial show cause letter dated 23 May 2024, notes in the particulars in
paragraph [3] to both Allegation 1 and Allegation
2 contained in Attachment 1
At a meeting held on 27 June 2023 with Dr Elizabeth Rushbrook and Mr Brett
Bourke, you explained that you had informed ABW of your
name, your position and
your employment with Metro North Health to "build trust".
[244] SC-1 does
not otherwise identify the purpose of this meeting or how it was
[245] SC-1 and
Attachment 1 confirms that at the time of that correspondence Dr Rushbrook was
the Chief Medical Officer for MNHHS,
and Mr Brett Bourke was the General Manager
of Workplace Relations for MNHHS.
[246] In the
Appellant's show cause response dated 5 September 2024 to SC-1, Meridian Lawyers
on his behalf contend that the Appellant
was denied procedural fairness in the
impromptu meeting on 27 June 2023 because:
the Appellant
was not told in advance about the subject matter to be discussed at the meeting
and in fact thought it was about another
the Appellant
was not afforded the opportunity to have a support person attend the meeting
the Appellant's
laptop was confiscated which meant that the Appellant was denied access to notes
he had taken during the meeting.
[247] The show
cause response further notes that it goes without saying that it is inconsistent
with the principles of procedural
fairness and natural justice to require the
Appellant to attend a meeting without the concerns having been provided to him
manner, and to expect him to be able to participate in an interview,
marshal his thoughts on the spot, gather necessary information,
and to formulate
answers to any concerns
allegation of a denial of procedural fairness in the manner in which the meeting
on 27 June 2023 was addressed in the disciplinary
finding decision (which it is
noted was authored by Dr Rushbrook as the delegated decision-maker). In the
decision letter Dr Rushbrook
Furthermore, while you have made specific assertions regarding the meeting Mr
Bourke and I had with you on 27 June 2023, I do not
accept your response as a
factually accurate representation of how this meeting was undertaken.
intention of this meeting was to raise the concerns of your personal conduct
with you locally and informally
allowing me as the delegate to gain a
fulsome understanding of any linkages with or impact on the workplace.
This meeting was undertaken in accordance with the principles of positive
performance management, which guide the management of a
public sector employee's
work performance and personal conduct. These principles include the requirement
to proactively manage the
personal and professional development of public sector
employees and identify at the earliest possible stage, performance that does
meet expectations.
Rushbrook goes on to contend that the Appellant was advised up front of the
intention of the meeting, his entitlement to
have a support person and his
ability to cease the meeting at any point. Dr Rushbrook further contends that
the Appellant declined
to have a support person present and expressed his
willingness for the meeting to go ahead.
[250] In the
Appellant's submissions, the Appellant continues to maintain that the conduct of
the 27 June 2023 meeting was inconsistent
with the principles of procedural
fairness and natural justice. The Appellant submits that those principles, which
the Respondent
has failed to provide any evidence of meeting, ought to have been
substantively addressed by the Respondent before it went on to
Rushbrook's recollection of this meeting to conclude adversely against the
Respondent in its submissions does not address the issue of the alleged lack of
procedural fairness relating to the meeting
of 27 June 2023.
[252] In the
hearing held on 16 April 2025, at the close of the Appellant's submissions, the
Commission sought confirmation from the
Appellant about his allegation that he
was not given notice of the meeting, or afforded the opportunity to have a
support person.
In response the Appellant stated:
APPELLANT: That’s correct. I actually thought it was about some issues
we had with another senior medical practitioner, and
they were there to support
COMMISSIONER: And you also say that you weren’t afforded the
opportunity or weren’t offered the opportunity of having
APPELLANT: Yes. It was sprung upon
Appellant has cited and relied upon the decision of the Federal Court in
Gaisford v Fisher &
support of his contention that he was denied procedural fairness in the meeting
held on 27 June 2023.
[254] Without
delving into the facts of that case in great detail, late on a Friday afternoon
and without notice, Mr Gaisford was
called to a meeting with a number of senior
managers from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and a lawyer from the
Government Solicitor, Mr Tom Howe (who was there allegedly as an
purpose of the meeting was to put a series of allegations (approximately seven)
to Mr Gaisford prior to a decision being
made to suspend his security clearance
(because of concerns he had been leaking information). When he became aware of
the purpose
of the meeting, Mr Gaisford sought an adjournment to enable him to
obtain advice. This was refused and following a further refusal
and upon being
told the meeting would continue, Mr Gaisford walked out of the meeting and
returned to his desk. Mr Fisher then proceeded
to sign an instrument suspending
Mr Gaisford's security clearance.
Gaisford brought an application seeking judicial review of the decision on a
number of grounds, one of which was that he
had been denied procedural fairness.
Finn J in the Federal Court dismissed the other grounds relied upon Mr Gaisford
but found in
his favour that he had been denied procedural fairness. On this
issue Finn J noted:
Turning to the issue of procedural fairness, it was the case that Mr Gaisford
was, and properly perceived himself to be in a position
of considerable
disadvantage when Mr Fisher both confronted him with the reasons for the
interview and required an immediate response
(if any response was to be made) to
the matters raised against him. It was not a position in which he could fairly
be expected to
conserve his own interests through immediate response to whatever
was raised against him.
First, not only were three very senior departmental officials present, the
department's legal adviser was there and he clearly performed
that advisory
function during the events that followed — although he was somewhat
disingenuously described to Mr Gaisford as
being at the interview as an
observer. While not suggesting that in all or most circumstances the presence of
a legal adviser, howsoever
described, would of itself entitle the person
claiming procedural fairness to have his or her own legal representative
present, Mr
Howe's presence in this instance was simply emblematic of the marked
inequality in the positions of the parties — an inequality
Mr Gaisford
appreciated in recognising his own need for legal advice.
Secondly, the very language of Mr Fisher's preamble to what was to be the
particularisation of his concerns, was, in the gravity of
the imputations it
made against Mr Gaisford's character, apt to suggest to Mr Gaisford at the
outset that serious issues were being
raised against him and that he had a
considerable defence to mount if an adequate response was to be made. It was not
that, from the outset, he saw the need for an adjournment for advice.
This, in my view, was what the circumstances cried out
The conclusion is irresistible that Mr Gaisford was denied procedural
fairness. The consequence of this, as the parties accept, is
that not only Mr
Fisher's decision but all of the subsequent decisions impugned cannot stand, ie
the decisions (a) suspending Mr
Gaisford from duty, (b) directing him not to
enter departmental premises, and (c) extending decisions (a) and
decision was then appealed by the Respondents to the Full Federal Court
constituted by O'Loughlin, Drummond and Goldberg
Fisher & Ors v
The Full Federal
Court dismissed the appeal. In the judgment his Honour Drummond J (the other
O'Loughlin and Goldberg JJ concurring)
after providing a brief description of
the seven matters to be raised with Mr Gaisford made the following observations:
The mere description in summary form of the diverse range of matters Mr
Fisher said he intended to raise with Mr Gaisford and to give
Mr Gaisford an
opportunity to answer, in order to decide whether Mr Fisher should temporarily
suspend Mr Gaisford's security clearance,
is sufficient, in my opinion, to show
that if Mr Fisher had thought about it for a moment,
he could not have
expected Mr Gaisford to be in a position, when confronted with this litany of
concerns at 4.45 pm on the Friday
afternoon, to marshal his thoughts on the
spot, to consider whether he needed to gather information to put before Mr
Fisher in response
to the opportunity Mr Fisher told him he was then and there
being given, to gather any such information and, finally, to formulate
answers to Mr Fisher's
(Emphasis added)
Finn J was therefore correct in holding that Mr Gaisford was entitled to
expect a proper opportunity to be heard before the action
Mr Fisher had in mind
was taken against him, if it is assumed that Mr Fisher meant what he said when
he repeatedly told Mr Gaisford
that he would have an opportunity to put forward
anything he wanted Mr Fisher to consider before a decision was made with respect
to his security clearance and that Mr Fisher had not already made up his
[258] In the
present matter, when confronted in the Appellant's show cause response with the
allegation that the Appellant had been
denied procedural fairness in the meeting
held on 27 June 2023, as noted in paragraph [248] above, the delegated
decision-maker Dr
Rushbrook alleged that the meeting was to be an informal
meeting to address the allegations about the Appellant's private conduct
and in accordance with the principles of positive performance
management.
[259] At the
time of the meeting on 27 June 2023 the relevant Directive dealing with positive
performance management was
Positive Performance Management: Directive
('Directive 15/20').
[260] Directive
15/20 is largely silent as to the extent that it applies to the private conduct
of a public sector employee. The relevant
provisions from Directive 15/20 are as
This directive:
(a) outlines the
principles of positive performance management in section 25A of the
(b) details the processes
for managing employee work performance, including during induction and
(c) describes the use of
performance and development agreements
(d) details the process
of managing unacceptable work performance in a supportive way.
4. Principles
Public service
employees work together to build a future focussed, high performing public
service that delivers priority government
services to the community.
and the Code of Conduct for the Queensland public service set out the
principles that guide a public service employee’s work
performance and
personal conduct
. (Emphasis added)
Management of
all employees must be directed towards the positive performance management
principles in section 25A of the
Timely, open and
regular, constructive communication is the mutual responsibility of managers and
employees, who should work together
to improve work performance outcomes.
requires managers to proactively manage employees’ work
performance and to take prompt and appropriate action if unacceptable
performance arises.
Section 186C of
requires a chief executive to apply positive performance management
principles before taking disciplinary action for work performance.
Human Rights Act 2019
, decision makers have an obligation to act and make
decisions in a way that is compatible with human rights, and when making a
under this directive, to give proper consideration to human
performance management
5.1 Section
provides that the management of public service employees must
be directed towards the positive performance management principles:
(a) pro-actively managing
the personal and professional development of public service employees with a
view to continuously building
expertise within the public service
(b) ensuring regular and
constructive communication between public service managers and employees in
relation to the matters stated
(c) recognising the
strengths, requirements and circumstances of individual employees and valuing
their contributions
(d) recognising
performance that meets or exceeds expectations
(e) providing
opportunities and support to employees for improving performance
(f) continuously
improving performance through the provision of training and development
(g) identifying at the
earliest possible stage performance that does not meet expectations
(h) integrating the
matters mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (g) into management practices and
executives are required to integrate the positive performance management
principles into their agency’s management
practices and policies.
5.3 Managers
are required to incorporate the positive performance management principles into
their management practices.
for managing employee work
performance
performance management
must incorporate the positive performance management principles and the
processes detailed in clauses 5.1-5.3 into their
policies and processes about
managing employee work performance to ensure:
set clear expected outcomes linked to organisational performance objectives and
plans, including through the use of performance
development agreements in line
with agency policies
provide regular and constructive feedback on an employee’s work
performance, including recognising work performance
that meets and exceeds
expectations, and feedback on areas of work performance that need improvement,
as is appropriate in the circumstances
promptly communicate and document any gaps between actual and expected work
performance of an employee and allow reasonable
time for the employee to
self-correct
constructive
engagement with an employee to identity development and training opportunities,
to improve work performance, and to build
expertise in the public
[261] Clause
9 of Directive 15/20 contains the definition section and defines 'management
action' as follows:
Management action
is a course of local action that is reasonably open
to a manager to support and correct situations of employee conflict, poor work
performance or unacceptable behaviours at the earliest possible opportunity.
[262] As can be
seen from those excerpts, personal conduct is mentioned once in one dot point
under the heading of principles. Other
than that, the Directive appears to be
focussed upon work performance issues occurring within the work place.
[263] Directive
15/20 was replaced by
Positive Performance Management: Directive 02/24
('Directive 02/24') effective from 27 May 2024. The contrast between Directive
15/20 and Directive 02/24 in relation to the issue
of private conduct is quite
stark. The relevant provisions from Directive 02/24 are:
1.1 This directive:
(a) outlines the principles of positive performance management in section 85 of
the Public Sector Act 2022 (the Act)
(b) sets a positive performance management framework to treat public sector
employees fairly
(c) provides how the positive performance management principles are to be
applied by public sector managers (managers) when managing
the work performance
of public sector employees
and, in some circumstances, the personal
conduct of public sector employees
5. Principles
5.1 Chief executives are responsible for making decisions under chapter 3,
part 2 (Principles) and part 8, division 1 (Positive performance
management) of
the Act and are responsible for ensuring managers within the entity perform
managerial functions in accordance with
the positive performance management
principles.
5.2 Managers must apply the positive performance management principles
(a) proactively managing the work performance
and personal conduct of
public sector employees
(b) constructively engaging with public sector employees to identify
development and training opportunities, improve work performance,
expertise in the public sector
(c) taking prompt and appropriate action to address any unacceptable work
performance
or personal conduct that arises
6. Interpretation of directions
6.1 The Act provides for the management of public sector employees to be
directed towards the positive performance management principles
under chapter 3,
part 8, division 1 (Positive performance management).
6.2 These directions:
(a) provide how the positive performance management principles are to be
(b) detail processes for managing employee work performance and,
circumstances, personal conduct
(c) provide for the use of performance and development agreements
(d) detail the process of managing unacceptable work performance and, in some
circumstances, poor personal conduct in a supportive
(e) should be read in conjunction with the relevant authorising provision/s of
(Emphasis added)
[264] It can be
seen that the ability of a manager to address the personal conduct of a public
sector employee (in certain circumstances)
has been enhanced and emphasised in
Directive 02/24. On a proper construction of the actual terms of Directive
15/20, it appears
that the ability of a manager to address the personal actions
of a public service employee under the positive performance management
principles at the time of the meeting on 27 June 2023 was somewhat
[265] Despite
this, I will assume that there was some ability pursuant to Directive 15/20 to
address purely private conduct by a public
service employee utilising the
positive performance management principles (at the time of the meeting on 27
June 2023).
[266] I do not
accept that the meeting conducted on 27 June 2023 was an informal meeting to
address the allegations locally and in
accordance with the positive performance
management principles. I make that finding for the following
Firstly, the
context to the meeting being called with the Appellant was the receipt by the
Respondent of an email complaint from KM
on Monday, 19 June
The subject line of that
email was 'Possible serious misconduct by Director of Metro North Craig
Margetts'. KM noted in the email
his intention to forward the correspondence to
'the relevant ministers'. KM requested an urgent response. In light of that
I consider it inherently improbable that it would be decided to address
the matter informally and locally.
Secondly, the
presence of Mr Bourke, the most senior human resources officer employed by MNHHS
as an attendee at the 27 June 2023
meeting is inconsistent in with the matter
being dealt with informally. If it was intended to have an informal conversation
the Appellant it is not clear why the General Manager of Workplace
Relations for MNHHS would be at such a meeting. In my view this
is far more
consistent with the matter being considered to have some degree of
Thirdly, there
is no evidence available to the Commission indicating that there was any
management action of the type contemplated
in clauses 5.1 to 5.3 of Directive
15/20 taken in relation to the Appellant arising from the meeting held on 27
June 2023. Once again,
this is more consistent with the meeting not being one
held under the principles of positive performance management.
Fourthly, the
only action apparently taken as a consequence of the meeting on 27 June 2023 was
in effect to stand the Appellant down
utilising the rostered not required
process. The Appellant remained as rostered not required until he was formally
suspended pursuant
in early December 2023 on the basis
that Dr Rushbrook had a reasonable belief that the Appellant may be liable to
discipline under
a discipline law. The Appellant remains suspended from work.
The fact that the only apparent action taken by the Respondent was to
stand the Appellant down from his employment is inconsistent with the meeting on
27 June 2023 being an informal meeting
conducted under the positive management
principles.
Fifthly, in the
decision letter, Dr Rushbrook describes the purpose of the meeting as being to
allow her as 'the delegate' to raise
concerns regarding the Appellant's personal
conduct with him and for her as 'the delegate' to gain a fulsome understanding
linkages with the workplace. This description of the role of Dr Rushbrook
together with her intent as to the purpose of the meeting
is more consistent in
my view of the meeting being part of the disciplinary process, or a pre-cursor
to the disciplinary process.
Rather than a meeting being held under the
principles of positive performance management, the meeting appears to have been
as a quasi-investigative process with the intent of establishing
whether there was some link to the employment.
[267] In light
of those findings, I am satisfied that the Respondent had an obligation to
afford procedural fairness to the Appellant
both prior to the meeting, and
during the meeting on 27 June 2023. In making that finding it is not my
intention to make some rule
of general application as to what is required to
afford procedural fairness to an employee when addressing private conduct. My
is premised upon the particular factual circumstances in this matter.
Did the Respondent afford the Appellant procedural fairness regarding
the meeting held on 27 June 2023?
[268] There is
no evidence before the Commission of the Appellant being placed on notice prior
to the meeting, either orally or in
writing of what was to be discussed at the
meeting, or the purpose of the meeting. There is also no evidence before the
of the Appellant being advised prior to the meeting:
entitlement to have a support person or a representative present; or
that Mr Bourke
was going to attend the meeting or what his role was to be in the meeting.
addition, there is no evidence before the Commission in the form of a
contemporaneous diary note or file note prepared by
either Dr Rushbrook or Mr
Bourke as to the circumstances in which the meeting was called or what occurred
at the meeting. Nor is
there a witness statement from either Dr Rushbrook or Mr
[270] I note
that in the High Court decision of
Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs; Ex Parte Lam
Gleeson CJ in discussing
the way that procedural fairness cases are approached by the Courts wrote the
Fairness is not an abstract concept. It is
essentially practical. Whether one talks in terms of procedural fairness or
natural justice,
the concern of the law is to avoid practical
[271] Authorities
from the Fair Work Commission confirm that an employee does not become obliged
to answer questions from their employer
their private lives merely because those questions are asked whilst the employee
is at work.
Leighton Boral Amey Joint
(as his Honour then was) relevantly observed:
[110] I must say, with respect, that I strongly disagree with the conclusion
of the majority in
. I do not accept the validity of the
proposition that an employer has a right to ask questions of an employee about
private consensual
sexual activity and to expect any answers, let alone truthful
ones. The further proposition that a failure to answer such questions
can lead to a breakdown in the relationship of trust and confidence and
constitute a valid reason for dismissal is equally
unacceptable. There is no
support for either proposition in any of the relevant authorities.
employer does not have the legal right to intrude so far into the private lives
of employees
[272] Given
the context to
the meeting being called was the complaint from KM which is discussed in
paragraphs [242] and [266] above;
the Respondent
considered the meeting, and what was to be discussed at the meeting, important
enough to require the presence of the
General Manager of Workplace Relations;
there must have
been some contemplation even prior to the meeting that the complaint may give
rise to a disciplinary process,
I am satisfied that
procedural fairness required the Respondent to give the Appellant prior notice
of the meeting.
[273] I do not
accept that the Appellant was aware prior to the meeting of what was to be
discussed, indeed, the Appellant has consistently
maintained that he believed
that the meeting was called to discuss another matter.
[274] As noted
earlier in these reasons, in the decision letter, the delegated decision-maker
(for the first time) asserts that during
the meeting the Appellant was advised
upfront of the intention of the meeting, his entitlement to have a support
person and his ability
to cease the meeting at any point.
difficulty with this contention is that other than the assertion by the
delegated decision-maker, there is no evidence to
support that this occurred. As
noted above, there is no contemporaneous diary note or file note prepared either
by Dr Rushbrook or
Mr Bourke in the evidence available to me. Nor is there a
signed statement from either of them.
[276] It is
clear that MNHHS is a large and sophisticated employer. SC-1 confirms that MNHHS
has the benefit of a human resources
section with multiple layers and personnel.
There is reference in Attachment 1 to SC-1 of that correspondence being prepared
Principal Advisor of Workplace Relations, which was then apparently cleared
by AO8 Manager of Workplace Relations and then sent for
WR clearance to Mr
Bourke as the General Manager of Workplace Relations.
[277] It is
therefore somewhat surprising and concerning for such a large and sophisticated
employer that the type of evidence referred
to above is not available in
circumstances where the proposed disciplinary action is a termination of
employment.
[278] Even if I
were to accept that the Appellant was advised of those matters at the
commencement of the meeting, by that time in
my view it was too little and too
late. The Appellant had already been denied the opportunity:
of being on
notice about what was to be discussed at the meeting;
of knowing who
was attending the meeting and their roles in the meeting;
to properly
prepare for what was going to be discussed at the meeting; and
appropriate advice about his rights and obligations regarding the
[279] In those
circumstances I am satisfied that the Appellant did suffer a practical injustice
and that he has been denied procedural
fairness. This is particularly the case
where the only matter relied upon by the employer as a link between the private
conduct and
the Appellant's employment is an alleged admission he made in the
course of the meeting on 27 June 2023.
appears to have been a process that was flawed from the outset and one which has
led to what is in my view a flawed disciplinary
Whether the
Appellant informed ABW of his employment with MNHHS?
[281] In SC-1,
paragraph 3 of the particulars to both allegations alleges that at a meeting
held on 27 June 2023 with Dr Rushbrook
and Mr Bourke, the Appellant explained
that he had informed ABW of his name, his position and his employment with MNHHS
[282] For the
reasons set out above in paragraph [161], I am satisfied that the Appellant
revealed his real name inadvertently to
the Appellant in using WhatsApp to
communicate with her. The documentary evidence in my opinion confirms the
Appellant's version.
This is inconsistent with what is said to be the
Appellant's alleged admission in the meeting of 27 June 2023 that he
deliberately
told ABW what his name was.
[283] In the
Appellant's show cause response from Meridian Lawyers the Appellant denies in
several paragraphs that he at any time
informed ABW of his employment with
[284] At the
time of initially making contact with ABW on the dating website, the Appellant
states that he used the pseudonym Oscar
and that he told ABW he was working in
the Healthcare and Social Assistance
[285] In the
decision letter, Dr Rushbrook states that she has a clear recollection of this
meeting. She further states that she has
conferred with Mr Bourke, Acting Chief
People and Culture Officer who had the same recollection.
[286] It has
been repeatedly noted in these reasons that the only relevant connection alleged
by the Respondent linking the Appellant's
private conduct to his employment role
with the Respondent is the admission he was alleged to have made in the meeting
2023 that he told ABW of his role and employment with MNHHS. This
alleged admission became the key evidence which the Respondent
relied upon in
commencing the disciplinary process. It was confirmed at the hearing on 16 April
2025 that this was the significant
matter relied upon to connect the employment
with the private
[287] Regarding
this key issue, the evidence relied upon by the Respondent comes down to the
An assertion by
Dr Rushbrook as the delegated decision-maker in SC-1 in one paragraph of each of
the particulars to Allegation 1 and
2, that at the meeting on 27 June 2023 the
Appellant made the admission. I note that SC-1 is prepared some eleven months
the meeting held on 27 June 2023.
An assertion by
Dr Rushbrook in the decision letter dated 21 January 2025 that she has a clear
recollection of the meeting. The show
cause response is provided by Meridian
Lawyers on 5 September 2024. It would appear therefore that the attempt by Dr
Rushbrook to
recall the meeting would have occurred sometime in the intervening
five months between receipt of the show cause response and the
finalisation of
the decision letter. That is, some 14 to 19 months following the meeting on 27
version from Mr Bourke that he has the same recollection as Dr Rushbrook. Once
again, Mr Bourke can only have been asked
months following the meeting. This appearing for the first time in the decision
letter, therefore
depriving the Appellant of the ability to address this
"evidence".
[288] What is
singularly lacking, and what one would expect, given the nature of KM's
complaint and the purpose of the meeting as
outlined by Dr Rushbrook is evidence
in the form of contemporaneous diary or file notes from either Dr Rushbrook or
Mr Bourke as
to what occurred at the meeting. Alternatively, a signed statement
from Mr Bourke.
[289] Further,
it is not made clear when it is alleged that the Appellant allegedly provided
this information to ABW.
observations of Dixon J in
be entirely apposite in describing the evidence relied upon by the Respondent
regarding the key issue as to there being
a relevant connection between the
private conduct and the Appellant's employment. "Reasonable satisfaction" should
not be produced
by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect
inferences.
further difficulty for the Respondent is that there is a body of other evidence
that the decision-maker has failed to address
in any meaningful way in the
decision letter by merely relying upon her recollection of an admission made in
the meeting on 27 June
[292] Firstly,
there is the denial by the Appellant in the show cause response that he ever
informed ABW of his employment with MNHHS.
[293] Secondly,
there is the lack of any evidence of this occurring in any of the message
exchanges that were available to the delegated
decision-maker. One would expect
that if the Appellant had informed ABW of the nature of his employment and where
he was employed,
this would have come up at some stage in the messages, and in
particular on 11 January 2023 when the discussion occurred about ABW's
for a medical administration role.
[294] Thirdly,
in relation to that specific conversation on 11 January 2023 regarding ABW's
upcoming job interview, at 11:08 am the
Appellant sends a message to ABW that
states 'I work in medical administration you should come work for me'.
[295] There is
no reason why the Appellant would send a message in this form (in my view), if
he had already told the Appellant where
he worked and what his role is. To the
contrary, this message is more consistent with the Appellant's version that he
did not inform
ABW about his employment with MNHHS. The Appellant by the content
of that message appears to be maintaining an intention to not reveal
and where he works.
considering the significance of that message, it is also necessary to consider
the timing of the message. That message was
sent on 11 January 2023. By that
time ABW and the Appellant had been conversing for some time and their
relationship had clearly
gone well past the introductory stage and progressed to
them sharing intimate and explicit information.
[297] Further,
it was only three days later on 14 January 2023 that the Appellant expressed an
intention to end the relationship,
as follows:
[14/1/2023, 12:29:27 pm] Craig Margetts: Hi there. I might bid you adieu and
wish you all the best for your future. I don't think
this is a relationship that
is good for my self esteem and it's probably best that we part as friends. Kind
regards, Craig
[14/1/2023, 8:49:27 pm] +61 [redacted]: Hi. Thank you. I've written a
thousand messages in my head all unfinished which is why I haven't
reached out.
But I'm sorry for my sudden withdrawal.
[14/1/2023, S:49:54 pm) +61 [redacted]: And I would dearly like to part as
friends and meet again fate willing.
[14/1/2023, 8:49:55 pm] Craig Margetts: That's fine
[14/1/2023, 8:50:10 pm] +61[redacted]: Without strings just ... meeting
[14/1/2023, 8:50:32 pm] +61 [redacted]: But that's not a conversation I can
even begin to articulate. I'm sorry
[14/1/2023, 8:50:46 pm] Craig Margetts: Part of the problem - and you might
take this as a compliment if you feel generous - is that
I quite like you
[14/1/2023, 8:51:01 pm] Craig Margetts: Bye bye
[14/1/2023, 8:51:11 pm] +61 [redacted]: Bye-bye
[298] Thereafter,
there was sporadic messaging between the Appellant and ABW prior to the final
confirmation of the ending of the
relationship that occurred on 20 January
delegated decision-maker has not addressed the above evidence in the decision
[300] On the
basis of the analysis of the evidence undertaken above, I cannot be satisfied to
the requisite standard that the Appellant
did positively inform ABW that he
worked for MNHHS or what his role with MNHHS was.
[301] I also
cannot discount the possibility that in the course of the meeting the Appellant
may have confirmed that he had informed
ABW of his role in medical
administration (consistent with his evidence and the documentary evidence
discussed above), but this has
somehow been misinterpreted by Dr Rushbrook and
addition, the Appellant has provided an alternative, and plausible explanation
as to how KM and ABW became aware of his employment
with MNHHS.
[303] In the
show cause response from Meridian Lawyers, it is alleged that on or around 18
June 2023, the day after the Appellant
received the second threatening message
from KM, and the day before KM submitted the complaint to MNHHS, he received a
notification
that someone named K (the same name as KM) had
accessed his profile.
show cause response then contends that feeling threatened, the Appellant
effectively deleted his
profile so that this information is no
longer searchable.
[304] The show
cause response goes on to contend that ABW and KM had sufficient knowledge about
the Appellant by his inadvertent disclosures
of his name, to easily search for,
and identify, MNHHS as his
[305] On the
balance of probabilities, I find that it is more probable that the identity of
the Appellant's employer was revealed
in the manner alleged by the Appellant,
and not by the Appellant telling ABW where he worked and what his role was with
[306] This means
that the significant factor relied upon by the Respondent to connect the private
conduct with the Appellant's employment
has not been established. In light of
the analysis of the relevant provisions from the PSA and the
, and the discussion of the relevant authorities undertaken earlier
in these reasons, there was no proper basis to:
disciplinary process against the Appellant;
find that the
allegations were substantiated; or
find that a
disciplinary ground had been established.
decision of the delegated decision-maker must in those circumstances be set
The role of Dr Rushbrook as the delegated decision-maker
Discipline Directive
in the definition section includes a definition of
'procedural fairness' in the following terms:
Procedural fairness
is a concept used interchangeably with natural
justice and is a right recognised and defined by law that involves two key
elements–the
hearing rule (the parties shall be given adequate notice of
the case against them, and a right to respond) and the bias rule (
everyone is
entitled to a decision by a disinterested and unbiased adjudicator
(emphasis added)
[309] At the
hearing conducted on 16 April 2025, the Respondent's representative accepted
that Dr Rushbrook was required to bring
an independent and impartial mind in her
role as the delegated
decision-maker.
involvement of Dr Rushbrook in what appears to be either a quasi-investigative
meeting or a fact finding meeting on 27 June
2023 had the immediate potential to
compromise her ability to take on the role of the delegated decision-maker in
the subsequent
disciplinary process. Unfortunately, in my view that situation
came to pass and Dr Rushbrook did become compromised.
[311] Immediately
upon the Appellant in his show cause response denying that he at any time
informed ABW of his employment with
, and by implication
denying the alleged admission made in the meeting on 27 June 2023, both Dr
Rushbrook and Mr Bourke were placed
into the position of being witnesses.
[312] There was
a clear conflict in the evidence between the Appellant and the Respondent around
this key issue as to whether the
Appellant had ever informed ABW of his
employment. Further, the entire disciplinary process hinged on the veracity and
the credibility
of the Respondent's version of the meeting being accepted.
[313] Given the
concessions made by the Respondent at the hearing on 16 April 2025 that this was
the significant connection to the
employment relied upon by the
Respondent,
Dr Rushbrook and
Mr Bourke have become the key (and only) witnesses relied upon to ground the
disciplinary process. As a consequence,
in my view both Dr Rushbrook and Mr
Bourke were placed in a position of conflict as regards having a further
involvement in the disciplinary
[314] Once it
became apparent that the Appellant was contesting the allegation that he had
informed ABW of his employment with MNHHS,
the appropriate and prudent step
would have been for Dr Rushbrook to have been replaced as the delegated
decision-maker. Unfortunately,
this did not occur.
[315] In effect,
Dr Rushbrook became a judge in her own cause when making findings about this
issue in the decision letter. Dr Rushbrook
either had an actual conflict of
interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest such that a reasonable
observer would question
whether she was a disinterested and unbiased adjudicator
(within the words of the definition of 'procedural fairness' in the
Discipline Directive
excerpted above).
satisfied that this is a further basis to find that the disciplinary process
undertaken was flawed, and that the decision
to substantiate Allegations 1 and 2
was not fair and reasonable.
Deputy President Merrell confirmed that in assessing whether a decision was
'fair and reasonable' permitted a review of
both the factual merits and legal
reasonableness of both the decision itself and the process of making that
[318] Having
undertaken that assessment and for the reasons set out in paragraphs [222] to
[240] and [243] to [280] and [308] to [316]
of these reasons for decision, I am
satisfied that there were procedural flaws in the process of making the decision
that render
the decision not fair and reasonable and liable to be set
assessing the factual merits and the legal reasonableness of the decision, for
the reasons set out in paragraphs [85] to
[221], I am satisfied that it was not
fair and reasonable for the decision-maker to find:
grounds to commence a disciplinary process against the
That Allegations
1 and 2 had been substantiated in the circumstances; and
That grounds for
discipline had been established pursuant to
[320] On that
basis, the decision of 21 January 2025 is set aside and is substituted with a
decision that Allegations 1 and 2 are
not substantiated.
[321] I make the
following Orders:
Pursuant to
s 562C(1)(c)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
decision appealed against is set aside and substituted with the following
decision maker's determination to substantiate Allegations 1 and 2 was not fair
and reasonable.
Appellant was not liable for discipline pursuant to
Sector Act 2022
disciplinary finding was not fair and reasonable.
s 566(1)(b)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld), the stay of
the disciplinary findings decision appealed against made on 13 February 2025 be
At the relevant time Mr Bourke
appears to have held the role of General Manager, Workplace Relations for MNHHS.
Appellant's submissions filed
12 March 2025: Enclosure 1 – Show Cause Notice dated 23 May
Margetts v State
of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2025] QIRC 242:
The names of the members
of the "public" have been anonymised as a result of a suppression application
which was addressed and granted
in this decision.
Appellant's submissions filed
12 March 24: Enclosure 2 – Show Cause Response dated 5 September
Respondent's submissions
filed 20 March 2025: Attachment 1 – Disciplinary finding decision dated 20
January 2025.
Relations Act 2016
Goodall v State of
(Supreme Court of Queensland, Dalton J, 10 October 2018), 5 as to
the former, equivalent provisions in
Public Service Act 2008
Page v John
Thompson and Lesley Dwyer, As Chief Executive Officer, West Moreton Hospital and
Health Service
[2014] QSC 252
, [60]-[61] (Byrne
Section 32(4)(b)
Public Sector Act 2022
(Qld); see also
O'Hearn v State of Queensland
(Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC 283
Attachment 1:
Statement of Reasons, (n4).
Attachment 1: Statement of Reasons, (n4), p
Form 89 – Appeal
Notice filed 5 February 2025.
Enclosure 2 –
Response to Show Cause Notice dated 5 September 2024 at [3.12] –
The Appellant cites
as an example
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
[2009] HCA 41
'inappropriate or improper conduct in a private capacity that reflects seriously
and adversely on the public sector
Leigh v State of
Queensland (Department of Education)
[2025] QIRC
AB v State of
Queensland (Department of Education)
[2024] QIRC 49:
this decision involved
a decision to suspend the employee based on charges relating to firearms, drugs
and unlawful stalking which
grounded the reasonable belief the employee was
liable to discipline, specifically a finding of misconduct under
ss 91(1)(b)
employee must at all times behave in a way that upholds the APS Values and APS
Employment Principles and the integrity and good
reputation of the employee's
Agency and the APS.
Appellant cites as examples
Comcare v Banerji
[2019] HCA 23
(2019) 267 CLR 373
Starr v Dept of Human Services
[1998] IRCommA 1592.
Nield v State of
Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC 294.
Subsequent to the Appellant
filing his submissions on 12 March 2025, the Industrial Court overturned the
decision on 25 October 2025 in
State of Queensland (Queensland
Health) v Nield
[2025] ICQ 021. I have as a consequence given this part of
the Appellant’s submissions no
[1998] IRCommA
T 1-2, (16 April 2025)
lines 44-48.
[2021] QIRC
, at [239] per O'Connor
[2021] QIRC
[2021] QIRC
This being the alleged
admission by the Appellant during the meeting on 27 June 2023 that he had told
ABW of his role and position
with the Respondent in order to build 'trust' with
Gilbert v Metro
North Hospital Health Service & Ors
[2021] QIRC
Hutchinson v State
of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2021] QIRC
[2023] QCAT
Ibid, 7 at [25].
[2022] QIRC 16.
Ibid, at [25], citing
Pope v Lawler
[1996] FCA 1446.
[21]-[22] and [25].
Ibid, at [23] citing
Goodall v State of Queensland
(Unreported decision of the Supreme Court
of Queensland, Dalton J, 10 October 2018), 5 as to the former, equivalent
provisions in
Public Service Act
[2025] QIRC
Ibid, [9] and
Queensland (Queensland Health) v Hume (No. 3)
[2024] ICQ 3
, [78]-[79]
Schubert v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2024] QIRC 128
Malcolm v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2024] QIRC 97
[195]-[200].
v State of Queensland (Department of Agriculture and Fisheries)
[2022] QIRC
, [79]-[83], [85], which cited
Wirth v Mackay HHS & Anor
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v WZARH
(2015) 256 CLR 326, [35]-[36], [57], [61];
Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; ex parte Lam
(2003) 214 CLR
(n 4), (2.7).
ABW told the Appellant in
part of the message exchanges on 4 January 2023 that she was 30 years of
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[2021] QIRC
See by way of example
the decision of President Hall in
Australia Meat Holdings Pty Limited v
[2007] ICQ 44
(2006); 186 QGIG
Barker v Barker
(1976) 13 ALR 123 (TASSC)
, 132-133 (per Crawford J);
Melbourne City Link
Authority v Teford Pty Ltd
[2001] VSCA 54
(2001) 113 LGERA 102 (VSCA)
, [16] (per Batt JA,
Tadgell and Chernov JJA agreeing);
MyEnvironment Inc v VicForests
[2013] VSCA 356
, [197], (per Tate JA; Warren CJ and Garde AJA
Pty Ltd v Fairfield City Council
[2000] NSWCA 51
(2000) 106 LGERA 454
[22]-[23] (Stein JA, Heydon JA and Rolfe AJA agreeing).
See as an example,
v Department of Industry, Technology & Resources
[1987] VicRp 58
[1987] VR 681
(per Murray J; McGarvie and Marks JJ
Leigh v State
of Queensland (Department of Education)
[2025] QIRC
AB v State of
Queensland (Department of Education)
[2024] QIRC 49:
this decision involved
a decision to suspend the employee based on charges relating to firearms, drugs
and unlawful stalking which
grounded the reasonable belief the employee was
liable to discipline, specifically a finding of misconduct under
ss 91(1)(b)
Hutchison v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2021] QIRC
Rose v Telstra
Corporation Limited
[1998] IRCommA 1592.
Laws v London
Chronicle (Indicator Newspapers) Ltd
[1959] 2 All ER 285
; applied in
North v Television Corporation Ltd
[1976] CthArbRp 1465
(1976) 11 ALR
Rose v Telstra
Corporation Limited
[1998] IRCommA 1592
(1996) 140 ALR
[2021] FWCFB
[2022] FWCFB
Ibid, [142], per
Catanzariti VP; Asbury DP; Simpson C and P Ryan
[2023] FCAFC 96
Collier, Snaden and Goodman JJ.
See by way of example
Public Employment Office Department of Attorney General and Justice
(Corrective Services NSW) v Silling
[2012] NSWIRComm 118
, [29]-[30], [41]
(per Blackman J, Haylen J and Stanton C concurring) – correctional officer
charged and convicted of domestic
assault offences;
Starr v Dept of Human
[2016] FWC 1460
Starr v Dept of Human Services
, [59]-[60] (per Vice President Hatcher as his Honour then was) –
Centrelink officer dismissed for online public comments made
in a private
[2005] QIRC 163
(2005) 180 QGIG 934.
Johnson v Department of Justice and Attorney-General
[2005] QIRC 163
(2005); 180 QGIG 934
SC-1, (n 2),
Attachment 1: Allegations, p
T. 1-19 (16 April 2025)
ll 41-49; T.1-20, ll 1-6.
SC-1: Attachment 6 – text
SC-1: Attachment 6
– text messages.
Appellant's show cause response, [2.19] – excerpt from WhatsApp
Appellant's show
cause response, [2.21] – excerpt from WhatsApp
Rose v Telstra
Corporation Limited
[1998] IRCommA 1592
Show cause response (n
4), (4.1)-(4.2).
T 1-10, (16
April 2025), lines 27-41.
[2025] QIRC 146
[1983] 3 NSWLR 297.
T 1-3, (16 April
2025), lines 14-35.
Appellant cites
Fisher v Gaisford
(1997) 48 ALD 200
, a decision of the
Full Federal Court and also
Gaisford v Fisher & Ors
(1997) 45 ALD
See (n 5) Attachment 1
– Disciplinary finding decision dated 20 January
T 1-9 (16 April 2025)
(1997) 45 ALD
Gaisford v Fisher
(1997) 45 ALD 87
(1997) 48 ALD
Fisher & Ors v
(1997) 48 ALD 200
at 203, per Drummond
Appellant's
submissions filed 12 March 24: Enclosure 2 – SC-1 23 May 2024: Attachment
8: Redacted email complaint made by KM.
(2003) 195 ALR
Re Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex Parte Lam
(2003) 195 ALR 502,
Newton v Toll
Transport Pty Ltd
[2021] FWCFB 3457
, [152]-[157] (Ross J, Catanzariti VP,
Bissett C);
Keenan v Leighton Boral Amey Joint Venture
(2015) 250 IR 27
[2015] FWC 3156
, [110] (Vice President
(2015) 250 IR
[2015] FWC 3156.
Ibid, [110].
response (n 4), (2.8), (3.4),
(3.12-3.13).
T 1-19 (16 April
2025), lines 41-49; T 1-20, lines
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Show cause response
(n 4), (3.16).
T 1-13, (16 April
2025), lines 41-47.
Show cause response (n 4), (2.8), (3.4),
(3.12-3.13),
April 2025), lines 41-49; T 1-20, lines 1-6.
Colebourne v State of
Queensland (Queensland Police Service) (No 2)
[2022] QIRC 16
, [21]-[22] and
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (870 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter