URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCAT/2025/446.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Halter v Watton [2025] QCAT 446 (7 November 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Halter v Watton
[2025] QCAT 446
OWEN GEORGE HALTER
(applicant)
CHRISTIE STEVEN WATTON
(respondent)
DONNA SUZANNE WATTON
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
Other minor civil dispute matters
DELIVERED ON:
7 November 2025
HEARING DATE:
5 September 2025
DECISION OF:
Member Jensen
the respondent, at their cost, and within three months of this
(a) Prune trees numbers 2 and 4. There is to be a reduction in the crown so
that the canopy does not extend more than 2 m into the
applicant’s land to
a height of 4 m. Pruning work to ensure that the trees crown is maintained as
symmetrical/balanced;
(b) Prune the lower branch of tree 6 back to the boundary line between the
applicant’s and the respondent’s land;
(c) Remove tree number 7;
(d) Prune tree number 8. There is to be a reduction in the crown so that the
canopy does not extend more than 2 m into the applicant’s
land to a height
of 6 m. Pruning work to ensure that the trees crown is maintained as
symmetrical/balanced;
(e) Prune tree number 9. There is to be a reduction in the crown so that the
canopy does not extend more than 2 m into the applicant’s
land. Pruning
work to ensure that the trees crown is maintained as symmetrical/balanced;
(f) Maintain tree number 10 (bamboo) so that encroachment into the
applicant’s land does not occur;
(g) Install a root barrier by a qualified person between the shed and the
trees along the previous alignment for 25 linear meters
to a depth of 600 mm as
shown on the photograph at paragraph [9] of this decision.
pruning works are to be carried out:
(a) by an Australian Qualified Framework level 3 arborist with appropriate
insurance cover; and
(b) in accordance with Australian Standard 4373-2007 – Pruning of
amenity trees.
the applicant provide access to his land for the purposes of undertaking the
prescribed work, if required.
the respondent is to pay 50% of driveway repair patch near shed door if during
the repair a tree root is found to be causing
the damage. The tree root must be
a minimum of 40 mm in diameter.
AND IT IS NOTED that a
reference to a tree number in these orders corresponds to the tree number
described in the tree table contained
at paragraph 7 of this decision.
CATCHWORDS:
NEIGHBOURHOOD DISPUTE – TREES DISPUTES – DISPUTES BETWEEN
NEIGHBOURS – tree dispute – orders sought for the
removal of certain
trees and the pruning of overhanging branches along the boundary line between
neighbours – ancillary orders
sought for compensation to the
applicant’s driveway and for the installation of a root barrier
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
Self-represented
Respondent:
Self-represented
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant and the respondent are neighbours in dispute. The applicant neighbour
and respondent tree-keeper are the registered
proprietors of, and reside at, 58
and 60 Currawong Road, Gooburrum, Queensland, respectively.
[2] On 11 July
2024, the applicant filed an application in this Tribunal seeking orders under
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
”) identifying 12 trees located on the
respondent’s land along the common boundary.
applicant claims the branches of the respondent’s trees are more than 2.5
meters above the ground; and they overhang
to a point over his land that is 50cm
or more from the common boundary.
January 2025, the Tribunal directed that a qualified arborist be appointed as an
assessor to carry out an inspection of
the trees and provide a report to the
Tribunal on the issues raised in the application. Pursuant to the direction, a
tree assessor
inspected the trees on 28 February 2025 and provided a report on
or about 1 March 2025.
[5] The issues
(a) Is the applicant’s land affected by the
trees located on the respondent’s land?
(b) Are the requirements satisfied before an order
can be made?
(c) What orders does the Tribunal consider appropriate in relation to the trees?
(d) Is the neighbour entitled to compensation for damage to the driveway?
Is the respondent’s land affected by the trees located on
the respondent’s land
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and decide any matter relating to a tree in
which it is alleged that the land is
affected by a
[7] The tree
assessor’s report refers to 11 trees as being a large contributor to the
applicant’s concerns as per the
following tree table:
Tree species
Significance of vegetation
Diameter at Breast height (mm)
Tree height (m)
Canopy spread (m)
Tree condition
Corymbia ficifolia
Corymbia intermedia
Elaeocarpus obovatus
Moreton Bay Ash
Foambark Jagera pseudorhus
Moreton Bay Ash
Moreton Bay Ash
Leopard Tree
[8] The tree
assessor’s report states that the base of the vegetation is located wholly
on the respondent’s land. The
respondent does not challenge this
statement, and I am satisfied from the photographs, drawings of the tree
locations and the tree
assessor’s report that the trees are located on the
respondent’s land, and I find accordingly.
[9] A photograph
in the tree assessor’s report showing the trees on the common boundary,
the applicant neighbour’s land
(number 58) and the respondent
tree-keeper’s land (number 60) is reproduced below:
is widely defined in the Act. It is not disputed that the trees described above
are within the scope of the Act and I find accordingly.
of the Act, land is affected by a tree at a particular time if—
(a) any of the following applies:
(i) branches from the tree overhang the land;
(ii) the tree has caused, is causing, or is likely within the next 12 months to
(A) serious injury to a person on the land;
(B) serious damage to the land or any property on the land; or
(C) substantial, ongoing, and unreasonable interference with the
neighbour’s use and enjoyment of the land; and
(b) the land adjoins the land on which the tree is situated.
applicant claims that branches from the trees overhang the land. The applicant
claims that some of the branches extend to
approximately seven to eight meters
beyond the property boundary and that they are more than 2.5 meters above the
The respondent states that
all overhanging branches are approximately 2.5 meters above the ground and that
one of the tree’s
branches extend approximately six meters over the
boundary and that the remainder overhang less than six meters over the
I am satisfied from these
statements by the parties, from the tree assessor’s report and the
photograph shown above that the
trees overhang the land to the extent mentioned
in this paragraph.
[13] It is not
disputed that the applicant’s land adjoins the respondent’s land on
which the trees are situated, and I
find accordingly.
[14] I therefore
find that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and decide this matter under
of the Act.
application claims that the trees have caused serious damage to the
neighbour’s land or property on his land. The application
states that the
roots are causing damage to the neighbour’s bitumen sealed
However, I am not
satisfied on the material before me that this claim is established for the
following reasons:
(a) The tree assessor does not say that the tree roots are clearly the cause of
the damage. He refers to other possible contributing
causes being an unconnected
down pipe at the location and deterioration of bitumen over time. The tree
assessor is cautious with
his opinion as to the cause of the damage. He
It is possible that tree roots have established under this area. An unconnected
down pipe at this location could also have contributed
to the root ingress and
expansion as well as directly damaging the pavement”. He also states that
“the applicant pays
50% of driveway repair patch near shed door
(in bold in the report) during the repair a tree root is discovered to be
contributing to the damage ...
As previously stated, the drive damage could be in part a result of an
unconnected down pipe. The drive is as old as the house and
can be expected that
bitumen will deteriorate over time.
(b) The applicant’s plumber, Jason O’Shea, carried out an inspection
of the grey water soakage areas using a drain camera
on or about 5 May 2025 and
states in his invoice:
58 Currawong Dr: Undertook inspection of grey water soakage areas using camera
to find tree roots in slotted pipe work. These tree
roots are believed to be
from neighbouring block (60 Currawong Dr) due to absence of trees on client
(c) I have had regard to the plumber’s comments but do not place a lot of
weight on them. The plumber states that he believes
the tree roots in the
pipework are from the respondent’s land due to the absence of trees on the
applicant’s land. There
is an assumption built into this comment, namely
as there are no trees on the applicant’s land, the roots must be from
on the respondent’s land. I do not find such statement of belief
contained on an invoice as sufficiently persuasive to make
a finding in favour
of the applicant.
(d) The mere existence of tree roots of themselves alone does not establish that
they are the cause of the damage claimed by the
applicant. There is no
independent evidence of an engineer or other expert that goes to the next stage
to link the tree roots to
the damage.
(e) Furthermore, the primary consideration for the Tribunal is the safety of any
person and there is no evidence that the damage
to the driveway is a risk to
that safety or that the driveway is not functional.
(f) Also, I am not satisfied having regard to photographs provided by the
respondent in 2017 and 2024 that the damage is serious.
applicant also alleges that the trees have caused substantial, ongoing and
unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment
of his land, particulars of
(a) His garden area is practically rendered useless as it is almost covered by
the respondent’s trees;
(b) His roof top solar panels get very little if any sun after 2pm;
(c) The tree roots impact bitumen driveway and nearby soakage trenches in the
(d) Risk of tree/branch failure;
(e) Branch encroachment into the applicant’s land; and
(f) Excessive leaf, blossom and seed drop that is causing a maintenance burden,
specifically within the gutters of a shed and house.
[17] There is
evidence from the tree assessor that the shed gutter was full of leaves with
plants germinating in the gutter. There
is also evidence of extensive branch
encroachment on to the applicant’s land, and I accept the
applicant’s evidence that
his garden area is practically rendered useless
and that there is a risk of branch failure. I am satisfied that there is
substantial,
ongoing and unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of
applicant’s land.
Are requirements satisfied before an order can be made
am satisfied that the applicant has made a reasonable effort to reach agreement
with the respondent. The applicant states that
he has tried to resolve the
dispute with the respondent.
is evidence that parties attended mediation on or about 20 March 2024, that a
second mediation was proposed and that there
have been communications between
the applicant and the applicant’s solicitors on the one hand and the
respondent on the other,
in relation to the dispute.
[19] There is no
evidence of any relevant local law, local government scheme or local government
administrative process for dealing
satisfied from the evidence that the branches overhang the common boundary by at
least 50 cm,
that the applicant
cannot properly resolve the issue using the informal procedures in
Act and that he has given a copy of the application as required by the Act.
satisfied that the requirements of
of the Act are met.
What orders does the Tribunal consider appropriate in relation
to the trees
Orders the Tribunal may make
tree-keeper is responsible for the proper care and maintenance of the
tree-keeper’s tree
specific responsibilities set out in
of the Act. Relevantly, the
tree-keeper is responsible for ensuring the tree does not cause serious damage
to a person’s land
or any property on a person’s land or
substantial, ongoing and unreasonable interference with a person’s use and
of the person’s
[23] The orders
the Tribunal may make are set out in
of the Act. Under
Tribunal has wide powers to may make orders it considers appropriate in relation
to a tree affecting the neighbour’s land.
Tribunal may make orders to remedy, restrain or prevent “substantial,
ongoing and unreasonable interference with the
use and enjoyment of the
neighbour’s land”. If the alleged interference is an obstruction of
sunlight, the obstruction
must be a severe obstruction to a window or roof of a
dwelling on the neighbour’s
[25] Without
limiting the powers given to it by
of the Act, the Tribunal may pursuant
(a) require or allow the tree-keeper or neighbour to carry out work on the tree
on a particular occasion or ongoing
(b) authorise a person to enter the tree-keeper’s land to carry out an
order under the section, including entering land to
obtain a quotation for
carrying out an order;
(c) require the tree-keeper or neighbour to pay the costs associated with
carrying out an order under the section; and
(d) require the tree-keeper to pay compensation to a neighbour for damage to the
neighbour’s land or property on the neighbour’s
Matters the Tribunal is to consider
matters for the Tribunal’s consideration in deciding an application are
safety is primary
and removal or
destruction of a living tree is to be
There are also general
matters contained in
of the Act that the Tribunal must consider. They
(a) the location of the tree in relation to the boundary of the land on which
the tree is situated and any premises, fence or other
structure affected by the
location of the tree;
(b) whether the tree has any historical, cultural, social, or scientific
(c) any contribution the tree makes to the local ecosystem and to
biodiversity;
(d) any contribution the tree makes to the natural landscape and the scenic
value of the land or locality;
(e) any contribution the tree makes to public amenity;
(f) any contribution the tree makes to the amenity of the land on which it is
situated, including its contribution relating to privacy,
landscaping, garden
design or protection from sun, wind, noise, odour, or smoke;
(g) the type of tree, including whether the species of tree is a pest or weed
(however described) or falls under a similar category
under an act or a local
contains the matters the Tribunal may consider if unreasonable interference is
(a) Anything other than the tree that has contributed or is contributing to the
interference;
(b) Any steps taken by the tree-keeper or the neighbour to prevent or minimise
the interference;
(c) The size of the neighbour’s land;
(d) Whether the tree existed before the neighbour acquired the land;
(e) For interference that is an obstruction of sunlight or a view—any
contribution the tree makes to the protection or revegetation
of a waterway or
[28] In relation
to matters for consideration under
, the tree assessor’s
report states:
the respondent values the landscape amenity that the trees provide with the
trees also providing a means of vegetative screening
between neighbours. The
trees also contribute as a food source and habitat for native fauna.
Consideration
role of the independent tree assessor is to provide an assessment to help the
Tribunal determine the dispute. His qualifications
and experience are shown as
(a) Diploma horticulture/arboriculture;
(b) 23 years’ experience within Local Government undertaking roles as tree
assessor, arboriculture supervisor, manager capital
delivery and assets, senior
officer of parks operations and technical officer open space and environment.
(c) Tree assessor for the Tribunal since 2012.
[30] I place
substantial weight on the assessor’s report for the following reasons:
(a) He is qualified, experienced and independent;
(b) The respondent agrees with the report and the applicant gives it qualified
(c) During the hearing, the respondent accepted many, if not all, of the
assessor’s recommendations;
(d) The assessor treated the parties equally; inspections occurred on both
parties’ properties, and he held discussions with
both parties.
– During the hearing, the applicant argued for the tree branches to be
pruned back to the boundary line. The respondent said
minor action only was
required and that it should be left to the arborist who was engaged to carry out
future pruning works. The
tree assessor made no recommendation because, he said,
the tree does not substantially interfere with the applicant’s land.
view the future pruning should be left to the discretion of the arborist as it
is apparent from the photographic evidence that
the tree does not substantially
interfere with the applicant’s land.
– The applicant argues for the tree to be pruned back to the
boundary line. The respondent accepted the tree assessor’s
recommendation
of crown reduction so that canopy does not extend more than 2 m into the
applicant’s land to a height of 4 m.
Pruning work to ensure that the
tree’s crown is maintained as symmetrical/balanced. I accept the tree
assessor’s recommendation because it provides
a reasonable and fair outcome in that the tree is to be pruned, as sought by the
applicant, whilst preserving the landscape amenity and food source and habitat
for native fauna.
– The parties agree that no action is required.
– The applicant argues for the tree to be pruned back to the
boundary line. The respondent says they will abide by tree assessor’s
recommendation which is the same as for tree 2. There is evidence that this tree
has specific value to the
respondent.
As with tree 2, I
accept the tree assessor’s recommendation because it provides a reasonable
and fair outcome in that the tree
is to be pruned, as sought by the applicant,
whilst preserving the landscape amenity and food source and habitat for native
– The applicant makes no written submissions regarding this
The respondent says they
will comply with the tree assessor’s recommendation which is that no
action is required. In the circumstances,
I accept the tree assessor’s
recommendation.
– The applicant makes no written submissions regarding this
The respondent says that
they accept the tree assessor’s recommendation which is to prune the lower
branch that extends to
the applicant’s land. I interpret this as being
pruned back to the boundary line. I accept the tree assessor’s
recommendation
because it is a balanced approach.
– The parties agree that this tree is to be removed because it is
– The applicant submits that this tree be
The respondents agree
with the tree assessor’s recommendation of crown reduction so that the
canopy does not extend more than
2 m into the applicant’s land to a height
of 6 m. Pruning work to ensure that the tree’s crown is maintained and
symmetrical/balanced.
of the Act provides that a living tree should
not be removed unless the issue relating to the tree cannot otherwise be
satisfactorily
resolved. In the Tribunal’s view, the issue can be
satisfactorily resolved by implementing the tree assessor’s
recommendations
which I accept as the way to proceed.
– The applicant submits that the tree be pruned back to the boundary
line. The respondent agrees with the tree assessor’s
recommendation which
is for crown reduction so that the canopy does not extend more than 2 m into the
applicant’s land. Pruning
work to ensure that the tree’s crown is
maintained as symmetrical/balanced. I accept the tree assessor’s
recommendation
because it provides a reasonable and fair outcome in that the
tree is to be pruned, as sought by the applicant, whilst preserving
landscape amenity and food source and habitat for native fauna.
– The parties agree with the tree assessor’s recommendation
that the bamboo be maintained so that encroachment into the
applicant’s
land does not occur.
– The parties accept the recommendation of the tree assessor which
is that no action be taken.
Solar panels
applicant’s submission is that the solar panels on the roof of his
dwelling are shaded from 2pm by trees between 6
m to 12 m high and that this
constitutes a substantial, ongoing and unreasonable interference with the use
and enjoyment of his land.
This is qualified where sunlight is involved. The
requirement is that the sunlight obstruction be “severe”. It is
from the above photograph (number 58) that the solar panels are situated
on the roof at a reasonable distance from the boundary and
are quite exposed to
sunlight. The evidence provided by the applicant in my view does not demonstrate
that the trees constitute a
“severe” obstruction of sunlight. At
best there might be some reduced exposure to sunlight during winter months.
the evidence is that the relevant trees pre-existed the installation of
the panels.
Installation of root barrier
applicant submits that a root barrier should be installed at the
respondent’s cost for the entire length of the boundary
line between the
properties and to a dept of 1000mm. The respondent agrees with the tree
assessor’s recommendation that a barrier
be installed along the previous
alignment for 25 meters to a depth of 600mm in the position indicated in the
above photograph which
is between the shed and the trees (about tree 7 to tree
10). The respondent agrees to pay the installation cost.
applicant argues for the greater depth on the basis that they previously dug a
600 mm trench along the boundary in 2017 and
severed encountered roots.
parties agree to the installation of a root barrier, and this is the
recommendation of the tree assessor. The only issue
are its specifications. I am
not satisfied that the evidence is sufficient to require the respondent to
install the barrier to the
applicant’s requirements, particularly as the
respondent will be paying for it. I place more weight on and accept the
specifications
of the tree assessor who has more qualifications and experience
than the applicant.
Is the neighbour entitled to compensation for damage to the
the reasons stated above at [15], on the material before me the applicant has no
entitlement to compensation for damage to
the driveway. However, tree
assessor’s report states that the respondent’s have agreed to pay
for one half of the driveway
repair if found that the cause of the lifting, when
undertaking the repair, was because of tree root. This is also one of the
recommendations provided the root is a minimum 40 mm in
diameter. As the respondent has agreed to contribute to the rectification
if the damage is caused by a tree root from their property in my view it is fair
to make an order in the terms proposed by the
tree assessor.
the respondent, at their cost, and within three months of this order:
(a) Prune trees numbers 2 and 4. There is to be a
reduction in the crown so that the canopy does not extend more than 2 m into the
applicant’s land to a height of 4 m. Pruning work to ensure that the
tree’s crown is maintained as symmetrical/balanced;
(b) Prune the lower branch of tree 6 back to the boundary line between the
applicant’s and the respondent’s land;
(c) Remove tree number 7;
(d) Prune tree number 8. There is to be a reduction in the crown so that the
canopy does not extend more than 2 m into the applicant’s
land to a height
of 6 m. Pruning work to ensure that the tree’s crown is maintained as
symmetrical/balanced;
(e) Prune tree number 9. There is to be a reduction in the crown so that the
canopy does not extend more than 2 m into the applicant’s
land. Pruning
work to ensure that the tree’s crown is maintained as
symmetrical/balanced;
(f) Maintain tree number 10 (bamboo) so that encroachment into the
applicant’s land does not occur;
(g) Install a root barrier by a qualified person between the shed and the trees
along the previous alignment for 25 linear meters
to a depth of 600 mm as shown
on the photograph at paragraph [9] of this decision.
pruning works are to be carried out:
(a) by an Australian Qualified Framework level 3 arborist with appropriate
insurance cover; and
(b) in accordance with Australian Standard 4373-2007 – Pruning of amenity
the applicant provide access to his land for the purposes of undertaking the
prescribed work, if required.
the respondent is to pay 50% of driveway repair patch near shed door if during
the repair a tree root is found to be causing
the damage. The tree root must be
a minimum of 40 mm in diameter.
AND IT IS NOTED that a reference to
a tree number in these orders corresponds to the tree number described in the
tree table contained
at paragraph 7 of this decision.
The Act s 61.
Items 8 and 9 of the
application.
Page 19 of the
respondent’s submissions filed 18 September 2024.
Item 13 of the application.
Pages 3 and 4 of the tree
assessor’s report.
Item 5 of the application.
Item 6 of the application.
See paragraph [12].
The Act s 41.
Ibid s 52(2)(b), (c).
Ibid s 66(3).
Ibid s 66(5)(a).
66(5)(d)–(f).
Paragraph 6 of
applicant’s submissions filed 24 July 2025, subject to various alternative
actions mentioned in those submissions.
Paragraph 2.2 of tree
assessor’s report.
Submissions filed 24 July
Ibid paragraph 10.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (6.92 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter