URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRAA/2002/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:50:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McNee, Mark v Stewards of Queensland Harness Racing Board [2002] QRAA 15 (7 August 2002)
RACING APPEALS AUTHORITY
[2002] QRAA 15
: 7 August 2002
Mr Mark Patrick
APPEAL FROM
A decision by the Stewards of Queensland
Harness Racing Board to impose a penalty of six months
disqualification.
BREACH OF RULE:
APPEARANCES
: Mr Paul Willey with the approval of the
Authority appeared for the Appellant.
Mr N Torpey, Chairman of Stewards,
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.
McNee, Mark v
Stewards of Queensland Harness Racing Board
[2002] QRAA 15
REASONS FOR AUTHORITY’S DECISION
Mr Leo G Williams AO - Chairman
The Hon. Sir James Killen - Deputy
Mr Dennis Standfield - Member
This is an appeal of Mr
Mark McNee against the finding by the Stewards of a breach of Rule 190(1) of the
Rules of Harness Racing and
the penalty of six months disqualification imposed
by the Stewards.
Rule 190(1) provides:
“(1) A horse shall be
presented for a race free of prohibited substances”.
Sub rules (2)
(3) and (4) of Rule 190 further provides:
“(2) If a horse is
presented for a race otherwise than in accordance with sub rule (1), the trainer
of the horse is guilty of
an offence.
(3) If a person is left in charge
of a horse and the horse is presented for a race otherwise than in accordance
with sub rule (1),
the trainer of the horse and the person left in charge is
each guilty of an offence.
(4) An offence under sub rule (2) or sub rule
(3) is committed regardless of the circumstances in which the prohibited
came to be present in or on the horse.”
A swab was taken
from the horse Bronskie Bushman after that horse won the Seymour Group Preview
which was Race 7 run at Albion Park
on 28 May 2002. Mr McNee was the trainer of
Bronskie Bushman who is owned by Mr Stewart Hunter. Bronskie Bushman was
Mr Hunter’s property and Mr McNee described himself as Mr
Hunter’s private trainer. The swab was sent for analysis.
Stewards inquiry in relation to the matter was held on 15 July 2002 and both the
Certificate of Analysis No. 185145 from the Racing
Science Centre and the
Confirmation Certificate No. ARF02/1151 from the Australian Racing Forensic
Laboratory detected the presence
of Phenylbutazone and Oxyphenbutazone in the
blood sample taken from Bronskie Bushman. The certificates were tendered as
K and M respectively at the inquiry.
At the Stewards inquiry Mr
McNee vehemently denied any knowledge of the administration of the drug to the
horse even volunteering
to take a lie detector test. Mr McNee advised the
Stewards that there were some unusual events occurring around the stables and
inferred that there could have been another person who “wanted to square
up” with Mr Hunter. However, Mr McNee did not
elaborate further or name
any person.
When advised by the Stewards of the obligations of a
trainer to be responsible for the presentation of a horse free of drugs and
being asked to comment in relation to the charge Mr McNee
“I just think if I am guilty of anything it is not taking
the right measures to make sure my horses are secure.”
Mr McNee did
not enter a specific plea to the charge at the Stewards inquiry and the Stewards
found him guilty of the charge. Indeed
on the evidence presented to the
Stewards at the inquiry there was no option other than to make such a finding.
After Mr McNee disclosed
his personal circumstances the Stewards imposed a
disqualification of six months.
In the Notice of Appeal filed with the
Authority on 15 July 2002, Mr McNee appealed against the findings of the
Stewards and against
penalty. The Notice stated the grounds of appeal as
“I will lose my income & possibly family and home due
to the severity of the penalty. I have a young family to support.
was harsh when you consider others. Effecting my whole
The hearing of this Appeal was initially set down for 30
July 2002 but at the request of Mr McNee was adjourned and rescheduled for
August 2002.
On 5 August 2002 Mr McNee forwarded a facsimile to the
Registry which stated:
“To Whom it May Concern,
This letter
is in regards to my appeal which is to be heard on the 07/08/02 at 9.30 am.
These amendments are to support my original reasoning on my lodgement
Failure to comply with
legislation.
The Appellant was denied natural justice
in that I was denied procedural fairness.
Mr Paul Willey with
the approval of the Authority appeared for Mr McNee and presented a submission
to the Authority that the Certificate
of Analysis Number 185145 presented at the
Stewards inquiry and relied upon by the Stewards was invalid because it did not
with the requirements of Section 228A(7) of the Racing and Betting Act
1980 (“the Act”) in that it did not contain a
declaration that the
analyst followed the prescribed method in the analysis.
Section 228A(7)
of the Act provides:
“(7) Where any method of analysis, chemical or
physical, has been prescribed for the analysis of any samples taken pursuant
this section, any analyst, for the purpose of any prosecution for a breach of
the provisions of the rules of greyhound racing,
the rules of trotting, the
rules of racing or any provision of this Act shall, in the analyst’s
certificate of analysis declare
that the analyst has followed the prescribed
method in the analysis.”
The Certificate of Analysis Number 185145
(“the Certificate”) is as follows:
Mr Willey submitted there
is nothing in the wording of the Certificate which can be considered a
declaration that the analyst has
followed the prescribed method in the analysis
and as it fails to comply with the Section is invalid. Accordingly it should
have been relied on by the Stewards.
Mr Torpey submitted that the
Certificate was in accordance with NATA Accreditation Number 5296 and as there
is reference to Method
Chemical Analysis Manual Section 3C the Certificate was
There was nothing in Mr McNee’s Notice of Appeal or
facsimile of 5 August 2002 that gave any indication that there was to be
attack on the validity of the Certificate.
After hearing Mr
Willey’s submissions the Authority directed that Mr Torpey obtain from the
Racing Science Centre Method Chemical
Analysis Manual Section 3C for it to
consider. Mr Willey was advised that he would be forwarded the information
received and allowed
seven days to respond if he so desires.
August the Authority received Section 3C of the Method Chemical
Analysis Manual from Dr DE Auer Director of Racing Integrity Services
cover of a letter of 8 August 2002. In Dr Auer’s letter to the Authority
he made comments which expanded on the submissions
by Mr Torpey on the validity
of the Certificate stating that Section 228A(7) does not apply as there are no
analytical methods prescribed
by regulation under the Act.
On 16 August
2002 the Authority received a letter from Mr McNee submitting that the
submissions contained in the letter from Dr Auer
should not be considered as the
hearing was concluded on 7 August 2002. If the Authority was disposed to
consider Dr Auer’s
letter he requested seven days be allowed for formal
submissions in response.
Mr McNee was advised by the Authority that he
would be granted seven days for further submissions and on 23 August 2002
further submissions
were received by the Authority from Mr McNee.
main submission was that although there is no prescribed method of analysis
under any regulation to the Act, there is a prescribed
method of analysis within
the Act itself. Section 228A(2) provides:
“(2) Any officer
authorised by the chief executive may, at any time make or cause to be made any
test which the authorised officer
considers desirable, to determine whether a
drug has been administered to any registered horse or registered
greyhound.”
The basis of this submission of there being a connector
of Section 228A(2) with a prescribed method of analysis was stated by Mr McNee
in the following terms:
“It is clear from the wording of this
section that an authorised officer may analyse any sample taken pursuant to the
Accordingly, if an authorised officer does make an analysis on any sample
it is done pursuant to this section. It follows that the
section prescribes
that the analyst may select a desirable method of analysis to determine whether
any drug has been administered.
When section 228A(7) is read in
conjunction with section 228A(2) of the Act, it is clear that any test (method
of analysis) selected
by an analyst under subsection (2) is a prescribed method
for the purposes of subsection (7). This is on the basis that the wording
subsection (7) provides that it applies “where any methods are prescribed
for the analysis of any samples taken pursuant
to this section (section
228A)” and that the only subsection in that section dealing with analysis
si subsection (2). Accordingly,
as subsection (2) grants an authorised officer
the power to select an appropriate method of analysis or “test” to
whether any drug has been administered, it prescribes a method of
analysis for the purposes of subsection (7).”
In further support of
this submission Mr McNee referred to Section 257(2) of the Act which deals with
the making of regulations.
Mr McNee submitted that as paragraphs (ya), (yb) and
(yd) specifically referred to the taking, marking, and delivery of samples to
analysts and not the methods for analysis, this adds strength to his submission
that Section 228A(2) contains the prescribing of
the method of analysis.
A further submission by Mr McNee was that as the only certificate
required to be issued under the Act is in Section 228A(7) then when
certificate is issued the analysts have subjected themselves to the requirements
in that section and any certificate issued must
contain a declaration.
Further Mr McNee also reaffirmed his previous statement that the
statements tendered by Dr Auer in the letter of 8 August 2002 should
considered as the Appeal had been closed on 7 August 2002. Dealing with this
submission the Authority sees nothing in Dr
Auer’s letter as fresh
evidence. The reference Dr Auer has made to the
Act’s Interpretation
concerning “prescribed” and advising that there are no
prescribed regulations is not fresh evidence and is indeed understandable
view of the nature of the submissions by Mr Willey which were not previously
alluded to in the Notice of Appeal. Even if it was
fresh evidence the Authority
is not bound by the rules of precedents and our submission is Mr McNee has been
afforded every opportunity
to deal with it. To the extent necessary the
Authority reopens the hearing pursuant to Section 1150(1) of the Act to hear the
submissions on behalf of the Respondent and the Appellant.
clear the determination of this matter revolves around the statutory
interpretation of Section 228A of the Act. Section 228A
finds it origins from
the Racing and Betting Act Amendment Bill (No 2) 1985 which established the
Racing Codes Advisory Board. From
considering this Second Reading of the Hon.
RJ Hinz the then Minister for Local Government, Main Roads and Racing at the
introduction
of the Bill in Hansard it can be seen the Bill was considered an
important Bill with the purpose being “primarily to provide
controls over the administration of drugs to race horses and greyhounds and the
sampling and testing procedures applied with
respect to the detection of those
drugs”. The Second Reading speech of the Minister referred to the
certificate by analysts
“The Bill provides an analyst, in
giving a certificate of any analysis carried out by him, shall certify that it
was done in
the prescribed manner, and the results of the analysis of any sample
taken will be required to be forwarded, as soon as reasonably
possible after
completion thereof, to the control body having jurisdiction in the area from
which the sample was taken.”
Acts Interpretation Act
provides in
that in any Act the word “prescribed”
means prescribed by, or by statutory rule made or in force under, the Act in
the word is used. Prescribed therefore when used within the legislation
has a definite meaning.
In Section 228A(7) of the Act prescribed
relates to the “
method of analysis, chemical or physical
While Mr McNee’s submissions in relation to the connection with the
“method of analysis, chemical or physical”
“test” referred to in Section 228A(2) is inventive the Authority
cannot accept when interpreting Section 228A(7)
that this was intended when
referring to the method of analysis, chemical or physical. Nor does the
Authority consider the reference
by Mr McNee to Section 257(2) of assistance in
interpreting Section 228A(7).
It is the Authority’s view that as
there has not been any method of analysis, chemical or physical, specifically
then there cannot be in any certificate issued by an analyst the
requirement for a declaration.
The Authority also does not accept Mr
McNee’s further submission as the Certificate that has been issued refers
to the Act the
analysts have subjected themselves to the requirements of Section
228A(7) and must give a declaration as to the method of analysis.
228A(7) only requires the declaration to relate to any prescribed method in the
analysis and if there is no prescribed method
no declaration is required.
Accordingly, the Authority finds that the Certificate of Analysis No.
185145 is not invalid and the Stewards were right to consider
it in their
finding at the inquiry that Mr McNee was in breach of Rule 190(1).
relation to penalty the Authority has considered Mr McNee’s personal
circumstances and the disadvantage that will fall to
his wife and young
In all the circumstances the Authority considers that the proper
penalty is disqualification for a period of 4 months.
Deposit is to be forfeited.
Mr Leo G Williams
Chairman ............................................................
Hon. Sir James Killen
Chairman ............................................................
Standfield ............................................................
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (28.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter