URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2005/59.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DEM, Re [2005] QGAAT 59 (26 September 2005)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL,
Re DEM [2005] QGAAT59
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Declaration about Capacity
The Appointment of a Guardian
The Appointment of an Administrator
In the Matter of DEM
MATTER NUMBER:
2005/1986 2005/1984
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, Brisbane
DATE OF HEARING:
10 August 2005
DATE OF ORDER:
11 August 2005
DATE OF REASONS:
26 September 2005
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
J Cockerill Presiding Member
J Ford Member
M McCarthy Member
CATCHWORDS:
CAPACITY-ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY-CONFLICT
TRANSACTION-VALIDITY-SUSPENSION OF
ATTORNEY-GUARDIANS-ADMINISTRATORS-GIFTS-STATUTORY
HEALTH ATTORNEY-adult aged 91
diagnosed with Dementia since 2001-where adult’s capacity to execute
Enduring Power of Attorney
considered-level of dependence on son as attorney
considered-sale of property not in principal’s interest-presumption of
CASES QUOTED:
Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17
[1954] 91 CLR 423
Allcard v Skinner
(1887) 36 Ch.D. 171
(1999) QSC 182
Ranclaud v Caban
(1988) NSW Conv R 55-385
Guardianship and Administration Act
Schedule 1 and 4
Powers of Attorney Act
, Schedule 1
DECLARATION ABOUT CAPACITY
1. That DEM did not have capacity as at 5 August 2002 and 20 September
2002 for financial matters and does not now have capacity for
personal and
financial matters.
ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
2. The Tribunal declares that the Enduring Power of Attorney by DEM
dated 17 January 2002 appointing DR as attorney for financial,
personal and
health matters is declared invalid pursuant to
Attorney Act 1998
and s84(2) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
3. The Tribunal declares that the Enduring Power of Attorney by
DEM dated 15 July 1997 appointing DR and OS as attorneys for financial
is overtaken by the appointment of an administrator set out in paragraph 5 and
in accordance with
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
orders that the attorneys are no longer authorised to exercise any powers
thereunder.
GUARDIANSHIP
That the application for the appointment
of a guardian for DEM is
ADMINISTRATION
That The Public Trustee of Queensland is
appointed as administrator for DEM for all financial
6. That the administrator will provide a
financial management plan to the Tribunal within four (4) months.
The Tribunal directs the administrator to
provide accounts to the Tribunal when requested.
order remains current until further order of the Tribunal.
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
[1] Mrs DEM is aged 91 years and has been a resident at a Nursing Home
since 24 October 2000. She is a widow who has 4 children namely
[2] Mrs DEM was admitted to a nursing home via ambulance from
Hospital where she had been receiving respite care since 30 June 2000.
indicate that she had not been coping when living in her home.
DEM had made an Enduring Power of Attorney on 15 July 1997 appointing her son Mr
DR and her daughter Mrs OS as her joint attorneys
for financial matters. However
it is accepted by all parties that Mrs DEM had a long standing dependence on Mr
DR in relation to
her financial affairs dated from about 1983. Her level of
dependence progressively increased to one of total dependence in 1998 by
time she had relinquished all bill payment and other financial
[4] At least from the time of her admission to A nursing home,
Mr DR and/or Mrs OS, although not appointed as attorneys for personal
(the Enduring Power of Attorney predated the establishment in 1998 of the regime
for attorneys for personal matters), acted
as her substitute decision makers for
health matters in their capacity as statutory health attorneys.
January 2002 Mrs DEM made an Enduring Power of Attorney appointing her son Mr DR
as her attorney for personal and financial
matters. By virtue of
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
that document revoked the
earlier Enduring Power of Attorney made on 15 July 1997.
[6] Clause 3 of
the 2002 Enduring Power of Attorney expressly authorises the attorney to enter
into transactions where the attorney’s
interests and duty in relation to
the transaction could conflict with her interests in relation to the transaction
and without limiting
the aforegoing, the attorney is expressly authorised to
contract with himself and with his relatives and entities in which the attorney
has an interest or control. The clause further authorises the attorney to invest
in any form of investment he may think fit whether
authorised by law or not and
declares that any attorney engaged in a profession or business may engage
himself in relation to her
affairs and be entitled to make and receive payment
for all usual professional charges for work done in the same manner as if he
were not an attorney.
[7] Approximately two days before 5 August 2002,
Mr DR listed his mother’s unit for sale a real estate agent, for
[8] Mr DR’s response to questions at the hearing
indicated that immediately the property was listed a proprietor of the listing
agency agreed to buy the property at the listed price.
arrangements for the sale were made by Mr DR and he acted for his mother who
signed the Contract of Sale which was dated 5
August 2002 and witnessed by Mr
[10] The Sale was settled on 20 September 2002 and on instructions
from Mr DR, pursuant to a direction from Mrs DEM, the nett proceeds
of sale were
directed to: Body Corporate - $250, DJF - $227,299.56, DR -
$62,495.33.
[11] On the same day Mr DR signed an Acknowledgement of Debt
for $295,000. On the same document Mrs DEM put her signature below the
“I DEM hereby forgive you of this indebtedness”.
has given in evidence that the proceeds of sale were applied to the purchase by
him of a property on the North Coast.
[13] On the evidence, this unit
represented Mrs DEM’s only asset save for two amounts of $20,000 described
as loans paid to
Mrs OS and Mr DT some years previously. On Mr DR’s
evidence, Mrs DEM did not have any desire for these moneys to be repaid
Mrs OS had been making payments of $350 per month. By her will Mrs DEM forgave
these loans.
[14] Mrs OS disputes that the payment of $20,000 was a loan.
She maintains that when her mother moved to Brisbane in the 1980s she
gift to her of $20,000 as she did to Mr DT and Mr DR. Payments made by her were
done to assist her mother with Body Corporate
fees. MBF fees were paid by Mr DT
which he undertook for a couple of years until the unit was sold.
[15] The Adult Guardian received a referral on 8 December 2004 raising
concerns that Mrs DEM’s nursing home fees were substantially
and that the gift of the proceeds had reduced her Centrelink pension
entitlement. The Adult Guardian conducted an investigation
into the conduct of
the attorney and filed a report dated 30 April 2005 in conjunction with the
above applications.
[16] On 15 December 2004 the Nursing Home confirmed
that Mrs DEM’s fees were in arrears to the extent of $2,362 and were
accumulating
due to a shortfall between her pension income and nursing home
fees. On investigation by the Adult Guardian it was established that
the pension
had been suspended due to the attorney failing to respond to a request for
information in relation to Mrs DEM’s
assets. That conclusion was disputed
by Mr DR who stated that he did respond after a reminder from Centrelink. In the
event the pension
was reinstated although at a lesser figure.
[17] It was
established at the hearing that once Mrs DEM had ceased to reside in her home
for more than 2 years, her pension would
have been affected in any event. If it
had been retained, the rental or an assessment of the potential income would
have been taken
into calculation as part of the Assets/Income test as would the
real or attributed income from the proceeds of sale. The precise
either option on her pension was not determined.
[18] In respect of the
accumulation of arrears of nursing home fees, Mr DR’s evidence was that he
had allowed them to accumulate
because of his dissatisfaction about not being
consulted by A nursing home on nursing care plans and certain medical decisions
Mrs DEM, that were negotiated with Mrs OS. Ms JW on behalf of the
nursing home gave evidence that this was necessary only because
Mr DR was not
able to be contacted at the relevant time.
[19] On 18 May 2005 the Adult
Guardian lodged an Application for the Appointment of a Administrator and an
Application for a Declaration
of Capacity of Mrs DEM for financial and legal
matters at the time she signed a contract for the sale of her unit on 5 August
and the document to effect the gift of the proceeds of the sale on 30
September 2002
[20] The Tribunal of its own initiative pursuant to
section 12(3)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Application for the Appointment of a Guardian for Mrs DEM.
[21] Notices of Hearing were sent to Mrs DEM and all persons
notified to the Tribunal as having an interest in the applications on
[22] Mrs DEM due to her condition was not present at the
[23] Those appearing at the hearing and denoted either as
“A” (Active) or “I” (Interested) were:- the applicant
the Adult Guardian (Mr Mark Phillips and Ms Terri Campbell (A), Mr DR (A) and
his wife Mrs DS (I), Mr DT (A), Mr DP (A), Mrs OS (A)
and her husband Mr OJ (I),
Ms JW, Director of Care at the nursing home (A) and Ms PC, Registered Nurse at
the nursing home (I), the
Public Trustee (Mr Robert Yorke) (A) and Dr Michael
Hill (by phone) (I).
THE ISSUES AND THE LEGISLATION
[24] The applications before the Tribunal
call for a determination of the capacity of Mrs DEM at three material times
(a) the date of the application and at present time;
January 2002 - the date of the Enduring Power of Attorney appointing her son Mr
DR as attorney for personal and financial matters;
(c) 5 August 2002 - the
date of the Contract for the Sale of her unit and 20 September 2002 - the date
of the purported gift of the
[25] Capacity is defined in Schedule 4 of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
as follows:
“Capacity” for a
person for a matter, means the person is capable of –
(a) understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the
matter; and
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the
matter; and
(c) communicating the decision in some
[26] Mrs DEM’s capacity at the time of the application
and at the present is fundamental to the applications for guardianship
administration since
uardianship and Administration Act
12 Appointment
The tribunal may, by order, appoint a guardian for a
personal matter, or an administrator for a financial matter, for an adult if
tribunal is satisfied—
(a) the adult has impaired capacity for the matter; and
(b) there is a need for a decision in relation to the matter or the adult
is likely to do something in relation to the matter that
involves, or is likely
to involve, unreasonable risk to the adult’s health, welfare or property;
(c) without an appointment—
(i) the adult’s needs will not be adequately met; or
(ii) the adult’s interests will not be adequately protected.
The appointment may be on terms considered appropriate
by the tribunal.
The tribunal may make the order on its own initiative or
on the application of the adult, the adult guardian or an interested
[27] The effect of section 12 in the context of an existing
enduring power of attorney is that, the Tribunal when considering whether
to make an appointment , in addition to finding that an adult has impaired
capacity for a matter, the Tribunal in order to
satisfy the ‘need’
criterion, must also find that there is something in the circumstances of the
matter or the conduct
of the attorney to justify removal or limitation of the
attorney’s power through the appointment of a guardian and/or
administrator.
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
sets out the essential elements which an adult must have an understanding of
in order to have capacity to execute a valid enduring
power of attorney.
Specifically
provides as follows:-
(1) A principal may make an enduring power of attorney
only if the principal understands the nature and effect of the enduring power
(2)Understanding the nature and effect of the enduring
power of attorney
(the underlining is mine) understanding the
following matters-
(a) the principal may, in the power of attorney,
specify or limit the power to be given to an attorney and instruct an attorney
the exercise of the power;
(b) when the power
(c) once the power for a matter begins, the attorney has power
to make, and will have full control over, the matter subject to the
information about exercising the power included in the enduring power of
(d ) the principal may revoke the enduring power of attorney
at any time the principal is capable of making an enduring power of attorney
giving the same power;
(e) the power the principal has given continues
even if the principal becomes a person who has impaired capacity;
at any time the principal is not capable of revoking the enduring power of
attorney, the principal is unable to effectively oversee
the use of the
[29] Under the General Principles in Schedule 1 of
Powers of Attorney Act
an adult (the principal) is presumed to
have capacity for a matter.
[30] To enter into a contract a person must
have contractual capacity. That is the person must be able to understand the
the transaction when it is explained.
(Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17
Duties of an attorney
Attorney Act 1998
of Chapter 5 sets out the duties and
responsibilities of an attorney under an enduring power of
[32] The provisions which have relevance to the issues in this
matter are –
66. Act honestly and with reasonable
(1) An attorney must exercise power honestly and with
reasonable diligence to protect the principal’s interests
addition to any other liability the attorney may incur, the court may order the
attorney to compensate the principal for a
loss caused by the attorney’s
failure to comply with subsection (1)
73 Avoid conflict transaction
(1) An attorney for a
financial matter may enter into a conflict transaction only if the principal
authorises the transactions, conflict
transactions of that type or conflict
transactions generally.
The section goes on to define a
“conflict transaction”
87 Presumption of undue
The fact that a transaction is between a
principal and 1 or more of the following –
(a) an attorney
under an enduring power of attorney or advance health directive;
relation, business associate or close friend of the attorney;
rise to a presumption in the principal’s favour that the principal was
induced to enter into the transaction by the attorney’s
[33] In relation to section 73 it was contended by Mr DR
that he was not acting as his mother’s attorney and that the sale of
unit was made by her personally. It was noted that clause 3 of Enduring Power of
Attorney expressly authorises conflicts transactions
[34] Section 87 however applies to all transactions involving
an attorney and a principal and places a reverse onus on an attorney
establish that a transaction between them was not induced by undue influence -
in the case of a gift that it was the result of
the free exercise of the donors
Allcard v Skinner
(1887) 36 Ch.D. 171).
[35] Section 66 has
wide ranging implications for an attorney. While having the obvious intention of
protecting a principal against
an unscrupulous attorney, it also has the effect
of requiring an attorney to be pro active in his/her duties.
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL
[36] In addition to the written material contained on the Tribunal
file, all of the parties attending the hearing were given the opportunity
express their views. These views, where specifically relied upon by the
Tribunal, are discussed below.
[37] Nursing notes at the nursing home
indicate that on admission Mrs DEM had diagnosis of dementia and memory
problems. The notes
at this time also indicate that Mrs DEM presented as an
independent type of person. She had some comprehension loss although it was
considered difficult to establish whether this was due to dementia or behaviour.
By nature Mrs DEM appears to be a person who regarded
herself as superior to
those around her and could be difficult with staff.
[38] Although the
Application for Admission to the nursing home appears to have been signed by Mrs
DEM, the evidence is that it was
completed by Mr DR who also entered into a Deed
of Guarantee and Indemnity in relation to the fees.
[39] Ms JW, Director
of Care, gave evidence that Mrs DEM’s comprehension was such that she
would not have had the ability to
complete these documents.
Atkins, Physician who examined Mrs DEM in February 2001, while a patient at
Hospital, found her to be quite cantankerous.
He considered that her condition
was probably dementia rather than depression. A previous brain scan showed only
(sic) considerable
atrophy. There was no evidence of a urinary tract infection.
[41] Dr Michael Hill has been her regular medical attendant since late
2000. He says in the Health Practitioner’s Report of
5 January 2005, that
Mrs DEM was first diagnosed with dementia on 25 October 2000 resulting at that
time in a mild level of impairment.
A Mini Mental State Examination completed on
8 November 2000 showed a score of 29/30. He opined that Mrs DEM’s
cognitive impairment
rendered her completely unable to manage her affairs, but
later answering in the affirmative as to Mrs DEM’s capacity to execute
Enduring Power of Attorney,
[42] Nursing Notes over the next two years
are indicative of increasing confusion and the need for reminders and prompting,
as decreasing short term memory. On 12 December 2001 it was noted that
she was communicating well but the message sometimes had no
relevance due to
dementia. In January 2002 her behaviour was reported as being very difficult
with staff, refusing to take medication.
Later she became more pleasant but a
day or so later (the dates are not clear from the copy) an evaluation of care
indicated that
she needed full assistance with taking medication, and required
close monitoring. She was becoming increasingly more forgetful, notations
instancing her buzzing for a pan but having forgotten that she had just had one.
On 5 February 2002 her short term memory was said
to have decreased to the point
that she could not remember that she had already taken her
medication.
[43] By 19 July 2002 her worsening behaviour prompted a
notation that she may be in need of psychogeriatric evaluation. She was confused
on the time of day or evening and did indicate at one point that she did not
wish to stay at the nursing home any more and wanted
to return to her Unit. On 5
September her confusion was said to be severe and she was in need of assistance
with most ADL’s
although able to still feed herself. In this she also
needed prompting. Nursing notes after this time make similar comments.
[44] On 6 November, it is noted that she continued to require prompting
for all activities with some assistance needed and on 4 December
having trouble with communication due to confusion problems ext. (sic). She
needed close watching with food to ensure that
she remembered to finish her
[45] By letter of 13 January 2005 to the Adult Guardian, Dr Hill
says that in his opinion it is unlikely that (she) would have understood
full implications of the legal documents supplied to her during the time period
August to September 2002.
[46] At the hearing the requirements of the
law for capacity to enter into an Enduring Power of Attorney were explained to
[47] He was questioned by the Tribunal in relation to his
affirmative answer to the question in the report that Mrs DEM had capacity
execute an Enduring Power of Attorney. He said that in January 2002, she would
have been lucid enough to understand simple things
and was fairly well
orientated. He added that understanding legal documents is “different from
knowing who your doctor is”
and that such understanding would have been
beyond her capacity. In relation to questions about her knowledge of the nature
of her assets he said that he thought she would have understood the
nature of her assets. But in relation to understanding the consequences
sale of her assets, he said that her capacity for deeper more applied thought
was lacking. He gave as an example that while
she might express a desire to see
a skin specialist, she would fail to grasp the process of a person with her
level of immobility
getting to the surgery.
[48] Challenged by Mr DR that
it was not of concern to her because he had been taking her to Dr Terry Casey,
Dr Hill responded that
although she had been going to Dr Casey for years she
didn’t understand how difficult it would be for her to do
[49] Specifically questioned on her ability to grasp the nature and
effect of an Enduring Power of Attorney and terms such as a provision
authorising a conflict transaction Dr Hill’s response was, “Probably
[50] Asked by Mr DR if he stood by his statement in the
Health Professional Report that she had capacity for an Enduring Power of
Attorney, he said that she would know she was signing a legal document but would
not understand the deeper implications that it may
relation to the circumstances surrounding the making of the Enduring Power of
Attorney of 17 January 2002 Mr DR gave evidence
that it was prepared by Mr Kerry
Prior, of McCullough Robertson Solicitors who had been his mother’s
solicitor for many years.
Mr DR gave evidence that, his mother asked him to
instructions were taken in his absence for the Enduring Power of Attorney and
for a will. He assumed that clause 3 was a special
clause that was part of that
firm’s usual Enduring Power of Attorney format.
[52] No evidence
was given by Mr Prior as to how he satisfied himself about her capacity to make
the document. So far as is known
there was no medical examination on or about
the date of execution of the Enduring Power of Attorney or the contract for the
of determining her level of capacity.
[53] By way of background
to the making of the Enduring Power of Attorney, evidence was also given by Mr
DR that this was prompted
by his sister Mrs OS’s wish to be discharged
from her obligations under the previous Enduring Power of Attorney. This action
was brought about because of disputation between the attorneys as a result of
Mrs OS’s dissatisfaction with Mr DR’s performance
relating to the care of their mother.
[54] It is not clear if the
Enduring Power of Attorney document was forwarded directly to Mrs DEM at the
nursing home or via Mr DR.
Nevertheless, the evidence is that it was Mr DR who
arranged for its execution.
[55] This was done by his approaching MD, the
Receptionist at the nursing home who in turn arranged for Ms EL, Secretary and a
of the peace, to attend on Mrs DEM to witness the
[56] In the witness’s letter of 8 July 2005 filed in the
application, Ms EL advised that when approached by MD she knew that
have known Mrs DEM and come in contact with her regularly. Consequently, she
believed that there was no reason to suspect
that there was any problem with her
witnessing the document.
[57] When Ms EL entered the room both Mrs DEM
and a son (who on the basis of his evidence was Mr DR) were present. She
exchanged pleasantries
which indicated to her that Mrs DEM was well oriented and
mentally aware and understood what was going on. In her opinion Mrs DEM
to be in no doubt as to what she was doing.
[58] Ms EL has added that
she did not ask Mrs DEM about her financial circumstances nor any questions
placed in the document such as the conflict clause.
The witness never canvassed any of the criteria for assessment of Mrs
understanding of the nature and effect of the document. She did not
take any notes because she was in no doubt that Mrs DEM had the
capacity to sign
the document.
[59] Mr DR gave evidence that there was no discussion
was to put in Mr DR instead of both him and Mrs OS. She would, however, in his
opinion have understood what was meant by a conflict
transaction.
[60] Evidence was given by Mrs DEM’s son-in-law Mr OJ
and his wife Mrs OS that Mrs DEM would not have understood the ramifications
the conflict clause. Although not acting for Mrs DEM, Mr OJ is an experienced
[61] In relation to the sale of the unit Mr DR gave evidence
that it was he who arranged the sale but that he did so on his mother’s
instructions. He considered that this was the appropriate course of action in
view of the fact that his mother now regarded the nursing
that the unit was his. In this respect he referred to the letter on file signed
by his mother to this effect.
On questioning he informed the Tribunal that he
arrived at that figure after examining the market and seeking an appraisal from
source that he was not prepared to disclose. He went on to say that the
decision to sell was due to considerable expenditure being
required to place the
property in a tenantable condition and also referred to work being required to
re instate the bathroom including
to chipboard cupboards damaged by water after
he affected alterations to provide better access for his mother to
[62] With respect to sale of the unit to the agent and the speed
with which she accepted the offer Mr DR said that he was not concerned
because he knew the estate agent as a person with a good knowledge of the real
estate market and her interest was indicative
that the asking price represented
market value. No independent evidence of value was obtained.
material before the Tribunal and in evidence Mr DR stated that his
mother’s gift of the proceeds of sale during her
lifetime was consistent
with her desire as expressed in her will and by subsequent letter that he should
have the unit. He says that
Mrs DEM was concerned about a challenge to her will
by way of a TFM application by Mrs OS. He also brought to the notice of the
that in the 1960s and 1970s his mother had made gifts of property to
his two brothers.
[64] In response to the Adult Guardian and at the
hearing, Mr DR maintained that he had been paying his mother’s accounts
since 1998/1999 and had been paying off the arrears. He re-iterated
that he is the guarantor of the fees. He also referred to the
payment of a
number of his mother’s accounts that he had no legal obligation to pay
including chemist accounts.
[65] Mr DR maintained in evidence and in a
written response to the Adult Guardian that he has only used the Enduring Power
of Attorney
[66] As earlier noted
Attorney Act 1998
has wide ranging implications for an attorney and requires
an attorney to be vigilant in the performance of his/her duties . This
especially important in the case of an Enduring Power of Attorney the primary
purpose of which is to provide a mechanism for the
management of a
principal’s affairs when the person has lost capacity. It calls for an
attorney to be watchful in relation
to the occurrence of that event and to
commence exercising power when it becomes necessary in the principal’s
interest. The
provision applies regardless of when the power is expressed to
[67] The evidence would indicate that the occurrence of that
event, while of gradual onset, would have and indeed was apparent to
were close to her, well before the sale and gift of the
[68] The Adult Guardian’s Investigation Report disclosed
that there had been a failure on the part of Mr DR to pay his mother’s
nursing home fees so that by December there were arrears of $2,362. By the time
of the hearing these had grown to approximately $8,000.
[69] In response
to a question from the Tribunal, Mr DR gave as his reason for non-payment, the
fact that he was dissatisfied that
the nursing home had not consulted him in
relation to the development of care plans and health care
[70] He maintained that he had obtained legal advice that this
was the appropriate course. He was not prepared to disclose the source
legal advice.
[71] Ms JW’s response on behalf of the nursing home
was that Mrs OS’s consent had been obtained because Mr DR was not
be contacted. Despite the opportunity for discussions with the nursing home
request for payment nor
instituted steps for a systematic reduction.
[72] All members of the
family accepted Mr DR’s account of his significant role in relation to his
mother’s financial
affairs. It was also their universal view that Mrs DEM
relied on Mr DR and would always accept his view, despite contrary advice
given to her.
[73] Evidence was given of a previous financial dealing
where Mrs DEM had agreed to provide a guarantee to Mr DR in relation to his
business activities which failed. Enforcement action by the lender bank
necessitated other family members bringing an action in the
Federal Court to set
aside the guarantee. This action subsequently resulted her being released from
the obligation.
DISCUSSION OF EVIDENCE
[74] Although Mrs DEM has had a history of reliance on others to look
after her financial affairs, the evidence clearly establishes
that, she has not
been able to make decisions about personal or financial matters for a
considerable period.
[75] She now has no real understanding about
personal matters such as her health care or accommodation needs. Even at the
her admission to the nursing home she was not able to complete the
application for entry into the nursing home and health care decisions
to be made either by Mr DR or Mrs OS as attorneys. There also appears to be a
lack of understanding on her part that she
is unable to return to her home to
live, not only because it has been sold but because of her high support
[76] In relation to financial matters, the evidence is that Mrs DEM
has no understanding of her financial situation or the decisions
that need to be
made in this respect. She apparently still believes that she owns her home unit,
despite the sale which she is alleged
to have made in August 2002. The gift of
the proceeds of this sale (despite her alleged motives that have been provided
by DR), are
inconsistent with the actions of person having an understanding of
the consequences of their actions and otherwise having the competence
their own affairs.
[77] On the question of Mrs DEM’s capacity on 17
January 2002, the time she signed the Enduring Power of Attorney, Mr DR placed
reliance on Dr Hill’s affirmative response in the Health
Professional’s Report of 5 January 2005, to the question about
DEM’s capacity to execute an Enduring Power of Attorney.
was clear, however, that when the requirements of the law were fully explained
to Dr Hill at the hearing, he no longer held
[79] The witness
to the Enduring Power of Attorney while stating that she was satisfied as to Mrs
DEM’s capacity, she did not
carry out any tests to discharge her
responsibility under the Witness’s Certificate in the
[80] Had she done so, on the basis of other evidence provided
to the Tribunal, she would have been alerted to Mrs DEM’s cognitive
deficiencies.
[81] Mr DR disputes that his mother lacked capacity at
this time. The evidence however indicates otherwise.
[82] While Mrs DEM
signed the contract for the sale of her home unit, she was not involved in the
negotiations or in the determination
of the sale price. Indeed all the evidence
points to her not having the cognitive ability to do so.
[83] Mr DR says
that he was not acting as his mother’s attorney. If this be so, then on
his own version of events he was acting
as her agent. In light of the evidence
of her contractual capacity this relationship of principal and agent is also
[84] The evidence surrounding the gift shows that the
documentation including the letter of 26 August 2002 was prepared by Mr DR and
placed before his mother for signature. The evidence of her understanding about
other matters concerning her affairs does not support
a conclusion that she knew
and understood the terms of these documents.
[85] Mr DR appears to be
asking the Tribunal to accept that his guarantee and indemnity was the key
factor in his mother’s future
financial needs being catered
[86] Leaving aside the fact that the document is limited to the
nursing home fees, it would be unrealistic to believe that a person
understanding of her future needs would, in light of the past financial history
of and her experience with the guarantor,
be prepared to rely on such a
[87] Mr DR has steadfastly maintained that the Enduring Power
of Attorney was valid but said in evidence that in the sale and gift
transactions and in dealings with the nursing home he was not acting as his
mother’s attorney (having only used the Enduring
Power of Attorney twice).
His failure to act on what he believed to be a valid Enduring Power of Attorney
in light of his mother’s
incapacity (which should have been apparent to
him) would, on his version, have placed him in breach of
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
FINDINGS OF FACT
[88] Mrs DEM has been a resident at the nursing
[89] On admission she was suffering from short
term memory problems and early stage dementia.
[90] In 2001 Mrs DEM was
diagnosed with dementia.
[91] Since 1998 Mrs DEM had relinquished bill
paying and the management of her financial affairs to her Mr DR.
January 2001 she had lost the ability to understand complex aspects of her life
and the consequences of legal documents. She
had lost the capacity for deeper
more applied thought to decision making.
[93] In August and September,
2002, she signed a number of significant legal documents presented to her by her
son Mr DR (including
one that directly benefited him) without independent legal
or financial advice or in the case of the contract an independent
[94] At that time Mrs DEM had reached a point where she had a
high level of reliance on Mr DR. This was particularly so in financial
where it extended to the acceptance of Mr DR’s view on matters even if
this were contrary to all other advice.
[95] Mrs DEM’s level of
dependence on Mr DR was such that it raises real questions about her ability to
make decisions about
the sale and gift freely and
voluntarily.
[96] Having found that she lacked the ability to understand
the nature and effect of these decisions it is not necessary to make a
on this element of capacity.
Guardianship - Need and appropriateness
[97] Decisions on health care and other personal matters have been
made by family members since at least October 2000.
[98] Mrs DEM is well
settled in the nursing home and even though a large nursing home debt exists,
continuing care would not be refused
by the nursing home.
[99] All family
members are satisfied with the level of care being provided.
[100] Mr DR
indicated that save for Mr DT he would not be happy with other family members
giving consent to health care.
[101] Notwithstanding Mr DR’s view,
informal supports and substitute decision making by way of statutory health
attorney are
adequate, without an Enduring Power of Attorney or guardianship
appointment.
[102] There is no suggestion that any health care decisions
made by Mr DR have been other than in her best interest.
Administration - Need and appropriateness
DR’s refusal to pay nursing home fees since December 2004 and allowing
arrears to accumulate was not justified. By
this time his mother had lost
capacity and he believed that he was her attorney. It was inappropriate to link
this to the dispute
that he had with the nursing home.
[104] There had
also been a failure to pay Mrs DEM’s pharmacy accounts despite reminders
from the pharmacy. It became necessary
for her son-in-law Mr OJ to do so.
[105] An account from Dr Lewandowski, Plastic Surgeon, for surgery in
2004 was still outstanding in June 2005 despite reminders and
representations
through the nursing home.
[106] The evidence given in relation to the
gift transaction is inadequate to rebut the presumption of undue influence under
Powers of Attorney Act
or in equity, given the
fiduciary relationship that existed between Mr DR and his mother.
[107] These matters constitute maladministration of Mrs DEM’s
affairs by Mr DR.
[108] Action is required to resolve Mrs DEM’s
financial situation. Her pension is insufficient to cover nursing home and other
expenses and there is a potential claim in relation to the gift of the nett
proceeds of sale of the unit.
[109] An independent administrator such as
the Public Trustee with the ability to pursue these matters is required.
APPLICATION OF THE LAW
[110] The applications before the Tribunal call for a determination of
Mrs DEM’s capacity –
(a) for personal matters and financial
matters at the present time;
(b) to make an enduring power of attorney for
personal and financial matters on 17 January 2002;
(c) to enter into a
contract of sale for her unit and to make a gift of the proceeds on 5 August
2002 and 20 September 2002 respectively.
As to Mrs DEM’s
capacity at the present time.
[111] In relation to this question, the
Tribunal must be satisfied that Mrs DEM is unable to understand both the nature
and the effect
of decisions about personal matters and /or financial matters.
[112] The evidence must demonstrate that there is a lack of ability to
undertake the decision making process such as the ability to
weigh up options
that are available and other the elements as suggested by Kerridge et. al.
previously, as well as being able to
appreciate the consequences of selecting
one of these options or taking a particular course of action.
the decision making process must be able to be undertaken freely and
voluntarily. Or in other words the person must be able
to make up their own mind
on the matter, so that it is their decision not the decision of someone else who
has influence over them.
Having made a decision the person must be able to
communicate that decision in some way.
[114] The Tribunal is satisfied
on the evidence that Mrs DEM no longer has the capacity to make decisions about
her health care and
other personal matters (save for those on a fairly basic
level) decisions about personal or financial matters for a considerable
[115] In relation to financial matters, the Tribunal is satisfied that
Mrs DEM has no understanding of her financial situation or
the decisions that
need to be made in this respect.
[116] As a result the Tribunal is
satisfied that Mrs DEM currently lacks the capacity necessary to make decisions
financial matters.
As to Mrs DEM’s capacity at
the time she made the Enduring Power of Attorney
[117] Both the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration
(Schedule 1
echo the general law that an adult is presumed to
have capacity for a matter.
[118] Like any presumption it can be rebutted
by satisfactory evidence. As Mc Kenzie J said in Re
there must be evidence relatively contemporaneous with the
execution of the Power of Attorney to raise the issue of capacity in a
way. The onus lies on (those seeking to do so) to prove in a positive way that
the (principal) did not understand the nature
and effect of the enduring power
of attorney at the time it was executed”.
[119] On the medical
and other evidence from about the time of Mrs DEM’s admission to the
nursing home until 17 January 2002
and 20 September 2002, the Tribunal is
satisfied that the first aspect of this test has been met, so as to justify an
examination
of the capacity question.
[120] As indicated earlier in these
Reasons, pursuant to
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
person to validly make an enduring power of attorney that person must be able to
understand the nature and effect of the enduring
power of attorney. Subsection
(2) of that section then goes on to explain that this understanding
(the underlining is mine) some 6 elements.
leading case of
Ranclaud v Caban
(1988) NSW Conv R 55-385
(which involved
the making of power of attorney (with an enduring clause) by a woman of
advancing years who had expressed opinions
in determining what other things a person may need to understand to meet the
criteria. In that
case Young J said that “
when considering whether a
person is capable of giving that sort of power one would have to be sure not
only that she understood that
she was authorising someone to look after her
affairs but also what sort of things the attorney could do without reference to
[122] Mrs DEM was said to be a person who was not
concerned with the detailed financial aspects of her life. She had been a person
of means so she had no need to. She relied on others to look after things
– later in life solely Mr DR. That she liked to have
a cheque book appears
to have been more a matter of comfort since on the evidence she had not written
a cheque since somewhere around
[123] Reliance on others is not of
itself evidence of lack of capacity. What is relevant however is whether the
person understands
what has to be done and is able to give proper instructions
to act on their behalf.
[124] The evidence of Dr Hill, members of Mrs
DEM’s family and Ms JW point to a situation where by January 2002 and
before that, Mrs DEM’s cognitive ability had degenerated to the
extent that she was not able to understand the sort of decisions
that she was
authorising her attorney to make.
[125] The dual questions of Mrs
DEM’s capacity at the time she executed the enduring power of attorney and
in August and September
when she purported to enter into the Contract of Sale
and the Gift of the nett proceeds prompt an examination of what is involved
the “capacity to understand the nature of the transaction when it is
explained” (per
Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17
(1954) 91 CLR
Ethics and Law for Health Professions 1998
Kerridge, Michael Lowe and John McPhee explains the cognitive function involved
this understanding by reference to a range
of “capacities”. These
include the capacity (1) receive, comprehend, retain and recall relevant
information; (2) integrate
information received and relate it to one’s
situation; (3) evaluate benefits and risks in terms of personal values; (4)
an option and give cogent reasons for the choice; (5) communicate
one’s choice to others; and (6) persevere with the choice
decision is acted upon.
[127] While primarily directed to health issues,
the concept is nevertheless relevant (perhaps even more so) to financial matters
particularly those involving more complex issues.
[128] On the basis of
all the evidence relating to Mrs DEM’s ability to understand the decisions
that would need to made in
relation to her affairs at the time she entered into
the enduring power of attorney, the Tribunal is led to the inescapable
that she did not have the required level of capacity at this
[129] Pursuant to
section 113
Powers of Attorney Act
and section 84(2) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
the Tribunal therefore declares that the Enduring Power of Attorney is
[130] The Tribunal is also satisfied that Mrs DEM did not have
capacity to understand the nature and effect of the financial decisions
the sale of her unit or the gift of the proceeds.
[131] Having declared
that the Enduring Power of Attorney of 17 January 2002 is invalid the question
of the revival of the Enduring
Power of Attorney made by Mrs DEM on 1997
[132] This document appointed both Mr DR and Mrs OS as attorneys
for financial matters.
[133] It is considered by the Tribunal that Mr DR
by reason of his conduct in relation to the management of his mother’s
including the circumstances surrounding the purported gift and his past
history of financial dealings involving his mother, is neither
appropriate nor
competent to perform this role.
[134] It was Mrs OS’s desire to
retire as an attorney under this document that precipitated the drawing up of
the Enduring Power
of Attorney of 17 January 2002.
[135] By virtue of
section 22(2)
Guardianship and Administration Act
Tribunal gives power to an administrator, an attorney may exercise power only to
the extent authorised by the Tribunal.
[136] The Tribunal is satisfied
that there is a need for decisions to be made in relation to financial matters
affecting Mrs DEM.
[137] Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied that an
administrator should be appointed and given the complexity of the issues
surrounding
Mrs DEM’s affairs including the sale and alleged gift of the
proceeds, the Public Trustee is the most appropriate for this
[138] In accordance with
section 22(2)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
the Tribunal declares that the attorneys under the
1997 Power of Attorney are no longer authorised to exercise their
[139] In relation to personal matters, the Tribunal is satisfied
that although Mrs DEM lacks capacity to make personal decisions,
decisions that are likely to be required in the future relate to health
[140] These decisions can adequately be made by members of her
family as statutory health attorneys thus obviating the need to appoint
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (121 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter