URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIRC/2025/280.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:40:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kemp v State of Queensland (Department of Youth Justice and Victim Support) [2025] QIRC 280 (20 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Kemp v State of Queensland (Department of Youth Justice and Victim
[2025] QIRC 280
Kemp, Joanne
(Appellant)
State of Queensland (Department of Youth Justice and Victim
(Respondent)
PSA/2025/161
PROCEEDING:
Public Sector Appeal – Appeal against a conversion decision
DELIVERED ON:
20 October 2025
DATES OF WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS:
Appeal Notice (12 August 2025)
Respondent's submissions (26 August 2025)
Appellant's submissions (8 September 2025)
Respondent's further submissions (16 September 2025)
On the papers
The orders contained in paragraph
of these reasons for
CATCHWORDS:
PUBLIC SECTOR – EMPLOYEES AND SERVANTS OF THE CROWN GENERALLY
PUBLIC SECTOR APPEAL – where the Appellant appeals against
the decision to convert her temporary position to permanent –
where it is
accepted that the funding for the position was temporary and for a specific
purpose – where it is accepted that
the temporary nature of the role and
the non-recurrent funding are genuine operational requirements precluding
conversion to permanency
– where the decision appealed against is upheld
– where the Appeal is dismissed
LEGISLATION AND
OTHERINSTRUMENTS:
Industrial Relations Act 2016
s 562C(1)(a)
Public Sector Act 2022
Ehrlich v State of Queensland (Queensland Corrective Services
[2024] QIRC 209
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
[1] Ms Joanne
Kemp ('the Appellant') is employed by the State of Queensland
(Department of Youth Justice and Victim Support) ('the
Respondent'). Ms
Kemp has been acting at a higher classification level as a PO5 Senior
Practitioner from 27 March 2023. Her current
higher duties arrangement
concludes on 30 June 2026.
[2] Ms Kemp's
substantive permanent role is at the PO4 classification level. She has worked
for the Department (and the former Department
of Justice and Attorney General)
since 6 May 2015. Ms Kemp has been consistently employed in a PO5/AO7
equivalent capacity since
11 October 2021 in three different
[3] Ms Kemp has
made a request that she be appointed to the higher classification
On 25 July 2025, the
decision-maker informed Ms Kemp that she was not being converted to permanent
employment in the higher classification
because the position was not
substantively vacant and was temporarily funded until 30 June
[4] For the
following reasons, pursuant to
s 562C(1)(a)
Industrial Relations Act
(Qld), I confirm the decision appealed against.
Ms Kemp's reasons for appeal
[5] Ms Kemp says
that the decision was not fair and reasonable for the following
backfilling the role of the Senior Practitioner and was appointed to the role
through a merit based process. The Respondent
state in the decision letter that
the position is not substantively vacant. It is in contention whether the
position is, in fact,
substantively owned, as I have never been made aware of
the role being substantively owned, and I also possess a copy of employment
records which appears to confirm that the position is vacant.
Practitioner role is not a project position and does not have a fixed time frame
for completion of work tasks. The duties
are ongoing and vary depending on the
priorities set by the region. The role is considered essential to support
service delivery
within the region, as identified by the Regional Management
Although funding
for the original position was specific to supporting young people in
watchhouses, the purpose of the role has been
varied and extensive over the last
two years. Responsibilities continue to evolve and develop outside of the scope.
The source of
funding for the position, should not on its own, be a barrier to
conversion.
Respondent says that the decision not to convert Ms Kemp to the higher level
classification level was made with regard to
genuine operational requirements
a) The temporary nature of the funding for the Senior Practitioner position.
b) The declining need for the positions funded under the watchhouse response
allocations due to the reduced number of young people
in watchhouses following
the opening of the Wacol Youth Remand Centre.
fact that the position was never intended to be ongoing or permanently
Consideration
Ms Kemp is suitable for appointment to the role
[7] It is not
contentious that Ms Kemp is suitable for appointment to the higher
classification level/role of PO5 – Senior Practitioner.
Respondent says that it has explored alternate options to enable Ms Kemp's
appointment to a higher classification level, however,
has not located any
suitable positions. Ms Kemp submits that she appreciates this review of other
roles, but that s 120 of the
does not require the
Respondent to consider other roles.
Is the role substantively vacant?
[9] Ms Kemp
submits that the role is substantively vacant in that it is 'not substantively
owned' and the temporary engagement which
commenced in March 2023 was not due to
backfilling a substantive owner of the role. Ms Kemp contends that the role is
substantively
vacant and continues to be.
Respondent submits that the Senior Practitioner position was created using an
FTE from the Watchhouse response allocation
and that the position was never
intended to be ongoing or permanently funded. The Respondent says Ms Kemp's
claim that the position
is substantively vacant is not supported by the funding
arrangements or longer-term operational requirements of the
Department.
[11] In my view,
the role is 'vacant' or not 'owned' to the extent that Ms Kemp is not
back-filling the role with an expectation that
the 'owner' of the role may
return at some point. However, the Respondent does not resist Ms Kemp's
appointment to the higher classification
on the basis that there is a
substantive owner of the role.
[12] The basis
upon which the Respondent says that the role is not substantively vacant is that
the role is not 'substantive' or permanent.
The Respondent argues that the role
is temporary and that there is no permanently established role into which Ms
Kemp can be appointed.
[13] I accept
that if I were to set aside the decision not to appoint Ms Kemp to the higher
classification position, I would effectively
be making that higher
classification position a permanent, substantive position. Thus, setting aside
the decision and appointing
Ms Kemp as the substantive owner of a position
that is not funded to be a permanently established role, is a related
Is the funding for the role temporary?
Respondent submits that Ms Kemp's current acting position is managed under
non-recurrent FTE funding through 'watchhouse
allocations'
until 30 June 2026.
The Respondent says that the watchhouse funding was originally approved based on
a projected large number of
young people in watchhouses requiring
Respondent submits that 29 FTE positions are temporarily funded through the
watchhouse response allocation to address temporary
Respondent says that following the commencement of the Wacol Youth Remand
Centre, there are fewer young people accommodated
in watchhouses, and this has
reduced the need to continue these positions into the future. The Respondent
says that this is the basis
of the limited-life FTE funding.
[17] Ms Kemp
accepts that the funding for the role is temporary but argues that the source of
funding for the role should not, on
its own, be a barrier for
conversion.
[18] I accept
that the funding for the role is temporary and that this is one of the reasons
the Respondent says that operational
requirements prevent the appointment of Ms
Kemp to the higher classification position.
[19] Temporary
funding of a role, will not, without more, be a barrier to the appointment of an
employee to the higher classification.
In this case, it is not the sole reason
the Department has not converted Ms Kemp to permanent employment in the higher
classification
Is the role temporary due to a declining need for the role following
the opening of the Wacol Youth Remand centre?
her reasons for appeal, Ms Kemp says that the initial funding for the role was
specifically to support young people in watchhouses,
but that over time the role
has evolved and developed beyond that scope.
[21] Ms Kemp
submits that the role description for the Senior Practitioner does not
specifically relate to any watchhouse functions
and that it has not been used in
that capacity since she has been in the
Ms Kemp says that the
role was not specifically assigned in relation to a particular project or
purpose and the focus of the role
has continued to develop over the period it
has been in place.
reference to the role description, Ms Kemp says that the role is to provide
'specialist advice, guidance and oversight that
service response planning
including assessment, intervention, casework and case management are delivered
without the region to a
high standard and in accordance with legislation and
guidelines'.
[23] Ms Kemp
says that her key responsibilities to date have included 'supporting staff to
embed new government priorities and initiatives
and upskill understanding and
practice implications of legislative
changes...'.
Ms Kemp also says
that her role has been to '...support the ongoing implementation of a new client
management system, review operational
policy and procedures and support staff
learning and development
requirements'.
Respondent acknowledges that the Southeast region may have utilised the Senior
Practitioner role for broader purposes, including
to support initiatives, embed
government priorities and implement legislative changes. However, the Respondent
says that this does
not change the fact that the position was created to address
a temporary operational need, is not a permanently established role
cease when funding ends on 30 June 2026.
Kemp refers to the following correspondence in support of her
submissions:
A memo dated 13
June 2024 from Regional Direction of Southeast Region, Ms Joanne McKenzie,
submitting a memo to senior leaders requesting
an expansion of the Senior
Practitioner role due to operational need.
Correspondence
dated 19 June 2025 from the Office of the Regional Director Manager, Ms Erin
Mackie, outlining how embedded the Senior
Practitioner role is within the
southeast region.
An email dated
20 August 2024, from the Regional Director for the Southeast Region, Ms Joanne
McKenzie, confirming her extension in
the Senior Practitioner role and
consideration of how the position could be made permanent.
Respondent says that operational use of the Senior Practitioner position
reflects the temporary nature of the funding and
the Respondent's efforts to
maximise the value of the role during the funding period. The Respondent says
that discussions such as
those set out above at paragraph
do not constitute a commitment to
making the position permanent.
[27] Ms Kemp
notes that the Wacol Youth Remand centre opened in April 2025 but says that her
contract in the Senior Practitioner role
has been extended until 30 June 2026,
and that this demonstrates the ongoing need for the role, independent of the
number of young
people in watchhouses.
[28] I accept
that Ms Kemp may have received the communications she refers to at
above. However, I also accept the
Respondent's submission that those communications do not represent a commitment
that the position
be made permanent.
[29] While Ms
Kemp may not be undertaking a 'project' with a firm end date, it does seem that
the initial reason the funding for the
positions was provided was for a specific
purpose, namely supporting young people in watchhouses. Discussions Ms Kemp had
the role and whether it might be ongoing occurred prior to the opening
of the Wacol Youth Remand centre in April this year.
[30] I accept
the Respondent's submission that while funding for the role continues, it wishes
to maximise the value of the role until
the funding ends. Where the alternative
would be to end the role, not utilise the funds and lose the value that Ms Kemp
for the final period of the funding, I can understand why a decision
was made to continue Ms Kemp's temporary appointment to the
role until June
[31] There is no
doubt that Ms Kemp has been undertaking important work and that there is an
ongoing need for the type of work she
is undertaking. However, the question
before the decision-maker was not whether there is a continuing need for the
role. The question
was whether there are genuine operational requirements
precluding the conversion.
[32] The funding
for the role is set to end in June 2026, work has been allocated to Ms Kemp to
undertake until that time. I accept
that the temporary need for resources
directed at supporting young people in watchhouses has been impacted by the
opening of the
Wacol Youth Remand centre.
the new Wacol facility was being built or established, it follows that positions
which supported the system pending the
opening of the facility would be funded
beyond the date of establishment to factor in any potential delays in it
becoming operational.
[34] I accept
that the opening of the Wacol facility and the temporary nature of the funding
are genuine operational requirements
of the Department preventing Ms Kemp's
conversion to the higher duties role. Should new funding be provided for the
role beyond 2026
in circumstances where the Wacol facility has been open and
operational for some time and the Department identifies an ongoing need
role, that should certainly lead to consideration as to whether the role Ms Kemp
is undertaking is functionally permanent,
such that she should be appointed
permanently.
Was the decision fair and reasonable?
[35] Ms Kemp's
request for appointment at the higher classification level was not supported on
the basis that the position is temporary/not
substantively vacant and not
recurrently funded. While there are examples of Commission decisions setting
aside decisions based on
these reasons, there are also circumstances in which
those matters have been found to be genuine operational requirements preventing
conversion.
[36] In making
the decision, the delegate was required to consider if Ms Kemp is: suitable to
perform the role;
regard to the genuine operational requirements of the public sector
and the reasons for each
decision previously made, or taken to have been made in relation to the person
during their continuous period
of acting at, or secondment to, the higher
classification level.
suitable to perform the role and that question is not in issue.
[37] It appears
that a deemed decision was made to not convert Ms Kemp's employment in the
higher classification position to permanent
and she was provided information
regarding her right to make an additional request, Ms Kemp did so, resulting in
the decision being
appealed. The decision-maker was required to give
consideration to each decision previously made in relation to Ms Kemp during her
continuous period of acting in the higher classification position. While the
decision does not refer to any previous decision, Ms
Kemp's submission
requesting a review of her employment is referenced.
[38] Given that
the request was made following a recent deemed decision that both Ms Kemp and
the Respondent were aware of, I am
satisfied that the failure to directly refer
to the deemed decision was an administrative oversight. Ms Kemp does not raise
matter in her grounds for appeal, and there is no information before me to
suggest that there were previous decisions other than
the apparent deemed
decision made on 30 May 2025. The written decision received by Ms Kemp the
subject of this appeal should have
referred to that deemed decision. I am of the
view that consideration of the earlier deemed decision would not have impacted
decision not to convert Ms Kemp to the higher classification role. The
omission of that information in the letter does not render
the decision not fair
and reasonable.
[39] For the
reasons given above from paragraph
of these reasons, I accept that the
funding for the role is temporary and that the funding was for a specific
purpose. For the reasons
given from paragraphs
, I accept that the higher
classification position is temporary to the extent that it was created for a
specific purpose and funded
by money allocated for that specific purpose.
circumstances where the role was one of a set of positions created to support
young people in watchhouses pending the opening
of the Wacol Youth Remand
centre, which is now open, I find that the temporary nature of the role and
non-recurrent funding for the
role are genuine operational requirements
precluding permanent appointment of Ms Kemp to the higher classification
decision was fair and reasonable.
[42] Accordingly,
I make the following order:
s 562C(1)(a)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld), the decision
appealed against is
Respondent's submissions filed
in the Industrial Registry on 26 August 2025
Pursuant to
Public Sector Act 2022
(Qld) ('the
Appeal Notice filed
in the Industrial Registry on 12 August
Respondent’s
submissions (n 1) [13]; CBRC decision
Respondent's further
submissions filed in the Industrial Registry on 16 September
Ms Kemp's submissions
filed in the Industrial Registry on 8 September 2025
Ibid [19]; Attachment
State of Queensland (Queensland Corrective Services)
[2024] QIRC 209
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (224 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter