URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/146.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Holden Holdings Pty Ltd v Alliance Finance and Property Pty Ltd [2025] QDC 146 (21 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Holden Holdings Pty Ltd v Alliance Finance and Property Pty Ltd
[2025] QDC 146
HOLDEN HOLDINGS PTY LTD
(plaintiff)
ALLIANCE FINANCE AND PROPERTY PTY LTD
(defendant)
PROCEEDING:
Claim and statement of claim
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
21 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
22 September 2025 and 10 October 2025
Separate question answered “Yes”.
The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs of the separate
question on the standard basis, such costs to be agreed or
CATCHWORDS:
CONTRACTS – CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION OF CONTRACTS –
INTERPRETATION OF MISCELLANEOUS CONTRACTS AND OTHER MATTERS
– where the
plaintiff and defendant entered into a consultancy agreement to provide credit
services – where the plaintiff
claimed it is owed trailing commissions
under the agreement and after termination of the agreement – where the
proper construction
of the agreement concerning trailing commissions heard
separately from the trial – whether the plaintiff had accrued rights
– whether the obligation to pay trailing fees had already arisen at the
date of termination of the agreement, or whether the
obligation was instead
contingent on future events that had arisen at the date of termination.
INTERPRETATION – ADMISSIBILITY OF EXTRINSIC EVIDENCE IN RELATION TO
INSTRUMENTS – MATTERS PARTICULARLY RELATING TO CONTRACT
PRINCIPLES – where extrinsic material is relied on by the defendant to
support its contended construction
of the agreement – whether there is
sufficient uncertainty or ambiguity in the agreement to justify departing from
the fundamental
rule that the parties' intention must be determined from the
language they used, interpreted in light of the relevant factual context.
LEGISLATION:
National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 704
2620 Ipswich Road Pty Ltd v DN Holdings Qld Pty Ltd
[2022] QCA 49
(2022) 10 QR 439
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Delor Vue Apartments CTS 39788
[2022] HCA 38
(2022) 277 CLR 445
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of NSW
(1982) 149 CLR 337
Craine v Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Co Ltd
[1920] HCA 54
(1920) 28 CLR 305
DPN Solutions Pty Ltd v Tridant Pty Ltd
[2014] VSC 511
Ecosse Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Gee Dee Nominees Pty Ltd
261 CLR 544
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
(2014) 251 CLR 640
FPM Constructions Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Blue Mountains
[2005] NSWCA 340
Lucas Drilling Pty Limited v Armour Energy Limited
Macquarie International Health Clinic Pty Ltd v Sydney South West Area
Health Service
[2010] NSWCA 268
(2010) 383 ALR 577
McDonald v Dennys Lascelles Ltd
[1933] HCA 25
(1933) 48 CLR 457
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
256 CLR 104
Price v Spoor
(2021) 270 CLR 450
Realestate.com.au Pty Ltd v Hardingham
[2022] HCA 39
(2022) 277 CLR
Re Golden Key
[2009] EWCA Civ 636
Westralian Farmers Ltd v Commonwealth Agricultural Service Engineers Ltd
[1936] HCA 6
(1936) 54 CLR 361
, considered
APPEARANCES:
H Clift for the plaintiff (instructed by McBride Legal)
Defendant self-represented
[1] On or about
23 July 2014 the plaintiff and defendant entered into a consultancy agreement
), under which the plaintiff agreed to provide certain credit
“Services” (as defined) to the defendant in return for the
of “Fees” (as defined).
[2] Under the
Agreement, the plaintiff was appointed as an authorised credit representative of
the defendant to engage in, amongst
other things, the introduction of
[3] On 18 March
2024, the defendant terminated the Agreement. The effective date of the
termination was on or about 18 April 2024.
[4] As at 31
March 2024, there were several customers, introduced by the plaintiff, for whom
a trailing commission had already been
paid to the plaintiff. The plaintiff
contends that it continues to be owed trailing commissions from those customers
post-termination
of the Agreement. The defendant denies any obligation to
continue to pay trailing commissions to the plaintiff in relation to those
clients after the effective termination date of the Agreement.
plaintiff commenced proceedings by Claim and Statement of Claim for the
outstanding monies said to be owed to it pursuant
to the Agreement.
[6] On 17 July
2025, Barlow KC DCJ ordered that the proper construction of the Agreement
concerning trailing commissions (not including
liability in respect of
customers) be heard separately from the trial of the other issues in this
proceeding. This is the determination
of that separate question relating to the
proper construction of the Agreement.
[7] The separate
question is whether (
defendant is to pay to the plaintiff 50% of all up-front and trailing
commissions paid to the defendant in relation to customers
referred to or
introduced to the defendant, by the plaintiff, between 23 July 2014 and 18 April
Undisputed Facts
[8] There is
little disagreement between the parties as to the underlying facts.
defendant is the holder of an Australian Credit Licence.
[10] Pursuant to
the Agreement, the plaintiff, through a Nominated Individual, was engaged as an
independent contractor to provide
the Services for a Fee.
[11] The terms
of the Agreement relevant to the determination of the Separate Question are as
“Term” means the period from the date of the Agreement to the date
of termination of the Agreement in accordance
with clause 9 (clause 1.1).
[13] For the
Term of the Agreement the plaintiff was appointed as an authorised Credit
Representative of the defendant, pursuant to
National Consumer Credit
Protection Act 2009
) (clause 3.1). Pursuant to this
authorisation, the plaintiff was entitled to engage in Credit Activities as
specified in clause 3.3,
and for no other purposes (clause 3.2). For clause 3.2,
the Credit Activities that the plaintiff was authorised to engage in are
introduction of loans except for the provision of "credit services" as defined
in the NCCPA, which are to be made on a referral
basis only (clause 3.3).
[14] “Services”
means the Services as set out in Schedule 1 (clause 1.1), which are:
The provision of
Credit Services as specified in clause 3;
Collation of
required information as required from time to time in order to process
timely follow up of clients to advise loans progress;
Retention &
keeping of accurate diary notes to accompany the clients file(s).
is defined to mean the fee for the Services performed by the Consultant as
described in clause 4.2 (clause
[16] Payment of
the Fee is governed by clause 4 of the Agreement, which
In consideration of the Consultant performing the
Services, Alliance must pay to the Consultant the Fee for the period during
the Services are provided within 30 days after receipt of a valid tax
invoice issued by the Consultant in accordance with the GST
Law (subject to
schedule 1) (clause 4.1).
[17] The Fee
payable to the plaintiff by the defendant for performing the Services is set out
in Schedule 1 (clause 4.2). In Schedule
1, the "Fees" are defined
50% of all up-front and trailing commissions paid to NMB Pty Ltd
for the Services provided by the Consultant.
[18] It is not
in dispute that the reference to NMB Pty Ltd in the definition of
“Fees” was a drafting error and should
be read as a reference to the
[19] Termination
and the consequences of termination are set out in clause 9 of the Agreement as
Subject to clause 9.2, this Agreement commences on the date
of this Agreement and continues until either party gives to the other
months' written notice to the other. Alliance may, in its absolute discretion,
make payment of Fees in lieu of some or all of
any notice given (clause
[20] On or about
18 March 2024, the defendant gave the plaintiff notice that it had terminated
the Agreement pursuant to clause 9.1
of the Agreement.
plaintiff identifies that the fundamental point of difference between the
parties is crystallised by the allegation at paragraph
11(c) of the Amended
Statement of Claim, which relevantly provides:
[...] any Fees
payable to [Holden Holdings] pursuant to the Consultancy Agreement, including
Fees payable after the date of termination,
in relation to customers referred to
or introduced to Alliance by [Holding Holdings] prior to the date of
termination, survived termination
of the Consultancy Agreement.
defendant denies this allegation and contends:
(a) it is only liable to pay the Fee (including trailing commissions) for the
period during which the plaintiff provided the Services;
(b) the plaintiff ceased providing the Services on 18 March 2024 (when notice of
termination was given) or, at the very latest, on
18 April 2024, when
termination of the agreement was effected.
plaintiff contends the defendant is under an obligation to pay the plaintiff 50%
of all up-front and trailing commissions
paid to the defendant in relation to
customers referred to or introduced to the defendant by the plaintiff between
the date of entering
into the Agreement and the effective termination date of
the Agreement.
Relevant Legal Principles
Contract Construction
principles governing the interpretation and construction of contracts were
summarised by the High Court in
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright
Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 37; 256 CLR
rights and liabilities of parties under a provision of a contract are determined
objectively, by reference to its text,
context (the entire text of the contract
as well as any contract, document or statutory provision referred to in the text
contract) and purpose.
[47] In determining the meaning of the terms of a commercial contract, it is
necessary to ask what a reasonable businessperson would
have understood those
terms to mean. That enquiry will require consideration of the language used by
the parties in the contract,
the circumstances addressed by the contract and the
commercial purpose or objects to be secured by the contract.
Ordinarily, this process of construction is possible by reference to
the contract alone
, if an expression in a contract is unambiguous
or susceptible of only one meaning, evidence of surrounding circumstances
(events, circumstances and things external to the contract)
adduced to contradict its plain meaning
[49] However, sometimes, recourse to events, circumstances and things
external to the contract is necessary. It may be necessary in
identifying the
commercial purpose or objects of the contract where that task is facilitated by
an understanding “of the genesis
of the transaction, the background, the
context [and] the market in which the parties are operating”.
necessary in determining the proper construction where there is a constructional
. The question whether events, circumstances and things external to
the contract may be resorted to, in order to identify the existence
a constructional choice, does not arise in these appeals.
[50] Each of the events, circumstances and things external to the contract to
which recourse may be had is objective. What may be
referred to are events,
circumstances and things external to the contract which are known to the parties
or which assist in identifying
the purpose or object of the transaction, which
may include its history, background and context and the market in which the
were operating. What is inadmissible is evidence of the parties’
statements and actions reflecting their actual intentions
and expectations.
] Other principles are relevant in the construction of commercial
contracts. Unless a contrary intention is indicated in the contract,
a court is entitled to approach the task of giving a commercial contract an
interpretation on the assumption “that the parties
... intended to produce
a commercial result”. Put another way, a commercial contract should
be construed so as to avoid it
“making commercial nonsense or working
commercial inconvenience”.”
[emphasis added] (citations omitted)
[25] Where there
is uncertainty or ambiguity, the High Court in
Ecosse Property Holdings Pty
Ltd v Gee Dee Nominees Pty Ltd
[2017] HCA 12
(2017) 261 CLR 544
provided the following guidance as to the correct construction approach:
[98] Poor drafting may justify a court in being more ready to
depart from the natural and ordinary meaning of the terms of a contract,
doubt, the poorer the drafting, the less willing a court should be to be "driven
by semantic niceties to attribute to the
parties an improbable and
unbusinesslike intention". But
poor drafting provides "no reason to
depart from the fundamental rule of construction of contractual documents that
the intention
of the parties must be ascertained from the language they have
used interpreted in the light of the relevant factual situation in
contract was made
". Where there is ambiguity which permits of two
alternative and semantically not improbable interpretations, construction in
with what it may be supposed would be the approach of honest and
reasonable businesspersons may assist in choosing one such alternative
other. But where, as here, the language and surrounding circumstances of a
commercial contract present a choice between,
on the one hand, a plain, ordinary
and commercially not irrational meaning of a clause and, on the other, a meaning
which is significantly
removed from the natural and ordinary meaning of the
terms of the clause, which ill-accords with other provisions of the agreement,
and which in the end produces an outcome that is more commercially acceptable
from one of the parties' point of view only, the precept
runs out of
application. Unless the Anglo-Australian objective theory of contract is
now to be cast aside, the commercial approach
to construction is not a
licence to alter the meaning of a term that is "clear and fairly susceptible of
one meaning only" to achieve
a result that the court may think to be
reasonable.
The court is not authorised under the guise of construction
to make a new contract for the parties at odds with the contract to which
have agreed
. Where, as here, all things considered, the words of a
clause are fairly susceptible of only one meaning, they must be given that
[emphasis added] (citations omitted)
[26] A court is
entitled to approach the task of interpretation of a commercial contract on the
basis that the parties intended to
produce a commercial result unless a contrary
intention is indicated. The High Court in Electricity Generation Corporation v
[2014] HCA 7
(2014) 251 CLR 640
meaning of the terms of a commercial contract is to be determined by what a
reasonable businessperson would have understood
those terms to mean.”
[27] Extrinsic
material is usually inadmissible unless there is ambiguity (i.e. where there is
a constructional choice) and that evidence
is necessary to determine the proper
construction where there is a constructional choice.
separate question centres on what rights, if any, continue post-termination.
These rights are often referred to as accrued
rights in that they are rights
that have been earned prior to termination and are enforceable
post-contract.
[29] The leading
High Court decision on accrued rights following termination of a contract is
that of Dixon J in
McDonald v Dennys Lascelles Ltd
[1933] HCA 25
(1933) 48 CLR 457
When a party to a simple contract, upon a breach by the other
contracting party of a condition of the contract, elects to treat the
as no longer binding upon him, the contract is not rescinded as from the
Both parties are discharged from the further performance of the
contract, but rights are not divested or discharged which have already
unconditionally acquired
. Rights and obligations which arise from the
partial execution of the contract and causes of action which have accrued from
alike continue unaffected. When a contract is rescinded because of
matters which affect its formation, as in the case of fraud, the
parties are to
be rehabilitated and restored, so far as may be, to the position they occupied
before the contract was made. But
when a contract,
which is not void or
voidable at law, or liable to be set aside in equity, is dissolved at the
election of one party because the
other has not observed an essential condition
or has committed a breach going to its root, the contract is determined so far
is executory only and the party in default is liable for damages for its
[emphasis added].
decision was summarised by the Queensland Court of Appeal in Lucas Drilling Pty
Limited v Armour Energy Limited
[2013] QCA 111
(per Margaret
McMurdo P and White JA and Daubney J) as follows:
a contract is terminated, the parties are not divested of such rights as they
had already ‘unconditionally
(citations omitted)
[31] Accrued
rights are generally only unenforceable in specific situations, such as where
rights are waived, or released, or they
are rendered unenforceable by
These situations do not
arise here.
Submissions - Summary
plaintiff submits:
(a) the right to payment of the trailing commissions under the Agreement arises
when the services have been provided, and a reasonable
business like
construction supports this contention;
(b) it has provided the relevant services entitling it to the claimed
commissions;
(c) the right to claim these commissions survives the termination of the
agreement; and
(d) the defendant’s suggested construction of the agreement is
inconsistent with the Agreement terms and leads to an absurd
defendant initially submitted that the Agreement does not provide for any
entitlement to the payment of trailing commissions
following termination.
However, it became clear at the hearing that the defendant was not contending
that the plaintiff’s accrued
rights were unenforceable but rather that the
rights to trailing commissions had not in fact been unconditionally acquired
to termination.
defendant relied on the following contentions in support of its
submission:
(a) no clause expressly entitles the plaintiff to ongoing payments
post-termination;
(b) following termination, the plaintiff was no longer covered by the
defendant’s Australian Credit Licence and did not hold
any professional
indemnity insurance;
(c) following termination, the plaintiff no longer provided any
“Services” under the Consultancy Agreement; and
(d) the definition of “Services” in Schedule 1 of the Agreement
includes liaising with and following up clients and keeping
notes to accompany
addition, the defendant stated that the plaintiff:
(a) is a commercially experienced operator, having engaged in business activity
and consultancy across the financial services sector
for many years;
(b) had every opportunity to obtain independent legal advice before entering
into the Agreement; and
(c) did not have the terms imposed unilaterally or under duress or undue
influence, and no evidence has been led to suggest any ambiguity
misunderstanding as to its terms.
[36] I note
there has been no suggestion by the plaintiff that it acted under duress or,
indeed, any misunderstanding of the contract
Consideration
[37] As the
authorities provide, the rights of parties to a contract are to be determined
objectively and in accordance with the understanding
of a reasonable
businessperson. What is important about this is that intentions, desires or
misunderstandings are not relevant to
determination.
[38] I do not
find any ambiguity in the language used in the Agreement. Both parties expressly
contended there was nothing ambiguous
in the Agreement’s terms, albeit
then differing on its interpretation. A day prior to the resumed hearing the
defendant sought
to refer to the following extrinsic material as an aid in
support of its contended construction:
(a) A template (unsigned) agreement referred to as a “full member
agreement” between Connective Services group of companies
aggregation services company) and a “connective full member”; and
(b) Tables of figures called “illustration of trail variability”.
[39] As I have
found that there is no ambiguity and no construction choice to be made, the
extrinsic material is inadmissible for
objectively construing unambiguous terms
and cannot be used to contradict the Agreement's
Even if that material was
admissible, the connective agreement is a template and has no direct or apparent
indirect application to
the Agreement under consideration here. It is an
agreement entered into by different parties and concerns different arrangements.
The “illustration of trail variability” also does not assist in the
interpretation of the plain words of the Agreement.
commonplace for some contract clauses to survive termination. One obvious class
of clause would be confidentiality obligations.
Another example, and one that is
present here, is the restraint of trade obligations.
[41] Pursuant to
the Agreement, the plaintiff was entitled to 50% of upfront commissions and
trailing commissions paid to the defendant
resulting from the services provided
by the plaintiff.
[42] It is trite
to say that the obligation to pay for services rendered under a contract would
generally survive termination. This
was accepted by the defendant at the
[43] As referred
to earlier, following submissions and discussion, it became apparent that the
defendant’s argument was not
that the plaintiff should not be paid for
services already performed as at the date of termination, but rather that the
could not be paid trailing commissions with respect to ongoing client
loans into the future as it was not permitted, and had no obligation
continue to service those clients. This argument contends that the continued
right to trailing commissions is dependent on the
ability to provide services in
an ongoing way. The defendant submitted that the commissions continue to be
received, provided a borrower
is not in breach of its loan repayment
obligations. In circumstances where a borrower is not meeting its loan
repayments, the defendant
says it is incumbent upon it to manage the client, and
it is only when the client resumes performance of its repayment obligations
the trailing commission becomes payable. The defendant says that because the
plaintiff will no longer be able to manage those
clients, it should no longer be
entitled to the trailing commission moving forward.
[44] The central
issue in this case is whether the obligation to pay trailing fees (being ongoing
commissions paid for services they
have provided) had already arisen at the date
of termination, or whether this obligation was instead contingent on future
that had arisen at the date of termination.
[45] It does not
matter that the agreed Fee has not been paid. The point is that the fact of its
having accrued before the termination
date makes it payable whether it is paid
at termination or after.
[46] Trailing
commissions are commissions which are or become payable after settlement of the
loan, for the life of the loan, until
such time as the loan is repaid in full or
refinanced.
[47] Whether a
trailing commission is payable is determined at the end of each relevant period,
that is, it accrues periodically.
The question therefore becomes whether a
trailing commission not yet payable in relation to a client loan referred and
arranged by
the plaintiff can be said to be an accrued right of the plaintiff.
The contract does not expressly address this other than to provide
plaintiff is entitled to 50% of what the defendant receives for the work it has
performed. There is no temporal condition.
analogous case is that of
DPN Solutions Pty Ltd v Tridant Pty Ltd
, DPN solutions entered into a
consultancy agreement to provide IT consultancy services to Tridant. Relevant
terms of the consultancy
agreement included the right of either party to
terminate the giving of one month's written notice and a consultancy fee that
a daily base component and variable components in respect of software
sales and services sales. Following the termination of the
consultancy
agreement, DPN claimed that the proper interpretation of the agreement entitled
it to the variable component for all
software sales and service sales after
termination of the agreement which arose from the services provided to Tridant
by DPN prior
to termination. DPN claimed entitlement in perpetuity, 12 months or
for a reasonable time. The basis upon which DPN contended it
was entitled to the
unpaid variable component was largely because the sale had concluded before the
termination of the consultancy
agreement. DPN argued not only as a matter of
express contract terms but also that there was an implied term and/or industry
to support its contention. Other matters raised are not necessary to
consider here.
[49] One of the
issues for determination was whether DPN was entitled to be paid any amount
representing the variable component on
service sales made after termination. The
difference between that case and the present is that it was expressly provided
consultancy agreement that the variable component was to be paid in
arrears quarterly following the payment of the software sale.
That is, the
accrued rights to payment of the variable component termination remained due and
payable and that this provision was
not negated by the fact that the agreement
was stated to operate and remain in effect from commencement to termination. As
the question for the court was what amounts had accrued at termination.
Tridant contended that no entitlement arose until an invoice
was rendered to the
client for services sales or payment was made. The difference between the
matter and this matter is the contract expressly provided for the
timing of the variable component and how the variable component
was calculated.
DPN succeeded because of its express term case, but not on its other argument
that it was an implied term of the
agreement that would be paid variable
component in perpetuity. The court found that further sales to existing clients
will involve
further work and that work would then be performed by Tridant
employees not the consultant, and that Tridant would be liable for
commissions
to bring about those sales. In that case also, the court had the benefit of
evidence establishing industry practice.
No evidence was led in this matter
concerning industry practice. The plaintiff confirmed at the commencement of the
hearing that
it was not relying on any argument that it was an implied term that
it be entitled to commissions in perpetuity.
[50] Practically
here, if the relevant customer loan remains under the management of the
defendant, the defendant will continue to
receive the trail commission. If the
trail commission was transferred to another advisor/consultant or another firm,
neither the
plaintiff nor the defendant would be entitled to continue to receive
any further trail commission with respect to that loan.
[51] If the
customers are in default of their loan repayments or the loan agreements come to
an end, no trail commissions will be
payable from that moment on. The liability
to pay would not arise. That is, the liability to pay into the future is an
inchoate liability
until the necessary condition of a loan agreement has been
entitlement to receipt of a trailing commission is inchoate until loan
repayments are made.
The liability
to pay is only contingent on the customers’ performance.
[53] The primary
consideration here is when the right to trailing commissions arose and whether
it crystalised prior to the termination
of the Agreement. There is no argument
that the Agreement was invalidly terminated.
principles in
were applied by the High Court in
Farmers Ltd v Commonwealth Agricultural Service Engineers Ltd
[1936] HCA 6
(1936) 54 CLR 361
. In Westralian,
plaintiff was the agent of an American manufacturer of tractors and entered into
an agreement with the defendant allowing the
defendant to purchase those
tractors on payment of a fixed price to the manufacturer, and a percentage
commission to the plaintiff.
The commission was payable on the arrival of each
consignment in Australia; the tractors being sent directly by the manufacturer
to the defendant in response to orders from the defendant. The agreement
provided expressly that it would immediately terminate if
the agreement
between the plaintiff and the manufacturer was determined. That in fact occurred
on 3 February 1925. Prior to then,
the defendant had ordered and taken delivery,
in America, of several tractors, but they did not arrive in Australia until
termination of the agreement. The defendant denied that it was
liable to pay commission to the plaintiff under that agreement. Dixon
JJ in a joint judgment, said at pp 379-80:
“When a contract
comes to an end by reason of the occurrence of an event upon which the parties
have by an express provision
made it terminate,
the question whether an
inchoate liability arising thereunder does or does not become enforceable must
in the end be governed by the
intention of the parties. It is a rule of law that
when a simple contract is discharged by the election of one party to treat
as no longer bound after the other has committed a breach of the
contract, rights and obligations which have already arisen from
the partial
execution of the contract shall remain unaffected
McDonald v.
Dennys Lascelles Ltd.
if all the facts have occurred which
entitle one party to such a right as a debt, a distinct chose in action which
for many purposes
is conceived as possessing proprietary characteristics, the
fact that the right to payment is future or is contingent upon some event,
involving further performance of the contract, does not prevent it maturing into
an immediately enforceable obligation.
In the present case the thirty-two tractors had been delivered before
the termination of the contract. On behalf of the respondent
which under the agreement occupies the position of a vendor, the price payable
to the vendor's supplier had been paid by
the appellant company and the property
had under the agreement passed to it. In point of law the percentage formed part
of the price
payable to the respondent company as vendor. Its payment, however,
was by the terms of the contract deferred until the arrival of
the goods at
This contingency depended upon external events constituting no
part of the performance of the contract. The right to payment, no doubt,
the time of the termination of the agreement contingent but it was a
debt otherwise completely vested in the respondent company
as creditor.
The termination of the agreement did not prevent it becoming absolute
on the occurrence of the contingency.
For these reasons we are of opinion that the determination of the agreement
affords no answer to the respondent company's claim.”
[emphasis added]
, the right to payment under the Agreement accrues in two
different stages. The right to payment of the trail commission is conditional
the performance of a third party and not the plaintiff or defendant. This is
what has been described as a conditional accrued
right. It is not the act of
following up a client or keeping a file note which triggers the obligation to
pay a trailing commission,
but the loan repayment itself. Once the repayment
occurs, the accrued right is no longer
conditional.
Constructions Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Blue Mountains
[2005] NSWCA
where the NSW Court of Appeal said this of
[192] [...] Westralian Farmers Ltd v
Commonwealth Agricultural Service Engineers Ltd
[1936] HCA 6
(1936) 54 CLR 361
qualify this principle, although it provides some further context for its
application. It
makes clear a distinction between a right to payment in the
future which is contingent upon an event which does not involve further
performance of a contract and one which does. It is only in the former case that
an accrued right can be said to have arisen
. That distinction returns one to
the terms of the contract in order to determine whether a future contingency
depends upon the further
performance of the contract. To the extent that the
contingency in the present case requires the continued exercise of power by the
superintendent, pursuant to clause 23, it requires the further performance of
the contract by the principal whose obligation it is
to see that there is a
superintendent and that the superintendent discharges its functions in the
prescribed manner. Where the relevant
period has not expired, it is not possible
to identify an “unconditional” right to a payment vested in the
contractor,
as at the date of termination in the sense identified in
Dennys Lascelles
. That right will
only crystallize where the principal continues to ensure that the superintendent
exercises its power. Not only
does that power not outlive termination, but if it
did, it would require continued performance by the principal.
[emphasis added]
[56] Although
the Agreement lacks particularity, there are no clauses inconsistent with the
notion of accrued rights (conditional
or otherwise) continuing to be enforceable
post-termination.
[57] Clause 4.1
of the Agreement makes it clear that the payment is tied to the performance of
Services. This does not mean no payment
needs to be made after termination.
Payment obligations with respect to the performance of the plaintiff during the
term remain payable.
It follows from the authorisation in clause 3.2 and the
definition of “Services” in the Schedule, that the Services provided
by the plaintiff under the Agreement were services related to the introduction
of loan customers. The wording used in the definition
of “Services”
(“process loans” and “loans progress”) refers to all
work done before a client
executes a loan agreement. Once a loan agreement is
complete, there is nothing which provides, as the defendant contends, that there
are any further services for the plaintiff to provide. The trailing commission
is an ongoing consideration for the successful loan
introduction. Even if there
are some additional administrative tasks, such as contacting a customer if they
are in default of their
repayments throughout the duration of the loan, these
steps are not tied to the right to the trailing commission.
[58] Clause 9
which sets out the consequences of termination makes no reference to the ceasing
of the obligation to pay trailing figures
upon termination. The Agreement was
not void or of no effect upon
termination.
[59] In my view,
an objective businessperson would find it unreasonable that, upon termination,
particularly in circumstances where
there has been no alleged breach, the
plaintiff was no longer entitled to ongoing commissions in relation to loan
contracts that
they had helped to facilitate. As the counsel for the plaintiff
identified at the hearing, to find otherwise would, at least in the
this arrangement, lead to an absurd result whereby a party could effectively
sign up hundreds of clients only to be deprived
of the ongoing commission
expected, by virtue of a unilateral termination of the contract terminating the
agreement. Once the loan
agreement was in place, the entitlement to the trail
commissions, or share of that commission, arose. The trail commissions are
potentially
of a significant value, depending on the amounts received, given the
longevity with which most loan agreements remain in place. In
circumstances
where the contract lacks some detail or precision, consideration favours an
interpretation that produces a more reasonable
commercial result.
defendant argued that the plaintiff had not done all that was required arguing
that there was an ongoing obligation to service
clients while the loan facility
was in place. There is no such obligation imposed on the plaintiff in terms of
the services it had
to provide, and it was clear from the terms of the contract
that the right to both commissions arose on settlement, that is on settlement
a particular transaction. The plaintiff has conditional accrued rights.
[61] To find the
Agreement should be construed as the defendant indicated would be commercially
unconscionable because the practical
effect is that the defendant would retain
moneys earned by the plaintiff. Under no circumstances would this be considered
a commercial
[62] If it was
the intention of the parties that the plaintiff’s rights were to be
extinguished on termination, then it should
have been expressly provided for in
the Agreement.
[63] Pursuant to
the Agreement, the defendant is to pay to the plaintiff 50% of all trailing
commissions paid to the defendant in
relation to customers referred to or
introduced to the defendant by the plaintiff between 23 July 2014 and 18 April
starting point is that costs usually follow the event and are ordered to be paid
on a standard basis.
[65] There is no
reason to depart from the usual order as to
As per declaration sought in
paragraph 3 of the Amended
Cited and followed in
2620 Ipswich Road Pty Ltd v DN Holdings Qld Pty Ltd
[2022] QCA 49
; subsequently approved by the High Court in Victoria v
Tatts Group Ltd
[2016] HCA 5
(2016) 90 ALJR 392
per French CJ and Kiefel,
Bell, Keane and Gordon JJ at
; see also Price v
[2021] HCA 20
(2021) 270 CLR 450
Re Golden Key
[2009] EWCA Civ 636
[2021] HCA 20
(2021) 270 CLR 450
; Craine v Colonial Mutual Fire
Insurance Co Ltd
[1920] HCA 54
(1920) 28 CLR 305
Australia Insurance Ltd v Delor Vue Apartments CTS 39788
[2022] HCA 38
(2022) 277 CLR 445.
(FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 52
; (2004) 219 CLR 165
(Gleeson CJ,
Gummow, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon JJ); Realestate.com.au Pty Ltd v
[2022] HCA 39
(2022) 277 CLR 115
CJ and Gageler J).
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of NSW
(1982) 149 CLR 337.
McDonald v Dennys Lascelles Ltd
[1933] HCA 25
(1933) 48 CLR
Westralian Farmers Ltd v
Commonwealth Agricultural Service Engineers Ltd
[1936] HCA 6
(1936) 54 CLR 361
McDonald v Dennys
Lascelles Ltd
[1933] HCA 25
, at 476-477; see also,
Macquarie International Health Clinic Pty Ltd v Sydney South West Area Health
[2010] NSWCA 268
(2010) 383 ALR 577
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 702.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (266 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter