URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2025/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Beckdev Coolangatta Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold Coast [2025] QPEC 15 (11 June 2025)
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT COURT
Beckdev Coolangatta Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2025] QPEC 15
BECKDEV COOLANGATTA PTY LTD
(ACN 649 112
(appellant)
COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GOLD COAST
(respondent)
899 of 2024
Planning and Environment
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning and Environment Court, Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
11 June 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
25, 26 & 27 March 2025
Williamson KC DCJ
The appeal is dismissed on the limited basis the
appellant’s change application does not seek a minor change to a
development
approval as defined in Schedule 2 of the
Planning Act
CATCHWORDS:
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT – APPEAL – where the appellant
obtained a development a permit for an 18 storey mixed used development
Centre zone – where the height of the approved built form exceeds a
building height overlay map in the respondent’s
planning scheme –
where the appellant made a change application to make a minor change to the
development approval to increase
the building height by 3 storeys –
whether the change would result in substantially different development.
LEGISLATION:
Planning Act 2016
, Schedule 2.
Planning & Environment Court Act 2016
, ss 43 and 45.
Cleanaway Solid Waste Pty Ltd v Ipswich City Council & Ors
[2020] QPEC 47
[2021] QPELR 809
427 Beckett Rd Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council
[2024] QPEC
Mr M Batty KC with Mr W Macintosh for the appellant
Mr B Job KC with Ms
M Rodgers for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers for the appellant
Corrs Chambers Westgarth for the
Introduction
[1] This is an appeal against a decision to refuse a change
application. The application seeks approval to make a minor change to
development approval for land in the Centre zone.
[2] The development
approval the subject of the change application attaches to a 2,355 m2 site
on McLean Street in the Coolangatta
central business district. The approval was
granted after an impact assessment, and authorises a material change of use for
use development in a high rise building form of 18 storeys. The approved
form incorporates an existing local heritage place known
as the Jazzland Dance
[3] A review of the approved plans reveals the development has a podium
and tower form. The overall height is 58.75 metres. This exceeds
an overlay map
in Council’s planning scheme, which provides for a building height on the
land of 39 metres. The exceedance
was assessed by Council against a building
height uplift provision in s 3.4.4.1(5) of the planning scheme.
change application, which was made to Council immediately after the submitter
appeal period came to an end for the development
approval, seeks to, inter alia,
increase the height of the built form to 67.75 metres and 21 storeys.
[5] Council resists the appeal on three alternative grounds. First, it
contends the change to the development approval is not a minor
change as defined
Planning Act 2016
(PA). Second, it contends there are sound reasons
warranting refusal of the change application on its merits. Third, it contends
the change application ought not be approved in the exercise of the
discretion.
[6] The appeal is a hearing anew:
, Planning &
Environment Court Act 2016 (PECA).
[7] It is for the appellant to establish
the appeal should be upheld: s 45(1), PECA.
development approval
[8] The development approval the subject of the appeal was
granted on 24 October 2023 (the development approval). It is a conditional
approval attaching to land formally described as Lot 4 on RP115560 and Lot 10 on
RP811040 (the site). The assessable development
authorised is a new use, namely
a material change of use for Multiple dwelling (132 units), Theatre, Community
use, Shop, Food and
Drink Outlet and Bar.
[9] Condition 2 of the development
approval requires the new use to be undertaken and carried out generally in
accordance with a bundle
of approved plans. Colour A3 copies of the approved
plans were before the Court in exhibit 5. A review of the approved plans reveals
the built form is a modern and attractive mixed use tower complex. A total of
132 units are proposed. The total gross floor area
of the structure is
[10] As I have already observed, the development approval was
granted after an impact assessment. A feature of this process is public
notification, which occurred between 7 April 2022 and 4 May 2022. The form of
development publicly notified is different to that
which was approved. The
public were given an opportunity to make submissions about the development
application in its original form,
which sought approval for a tower 75.5 metres
and 23 storeys high. This form of the development attracted significant public
478 submissions were received, of which 458 were properly made. A
review of the submissions reveals that matters of amenity, bulk
density, building height, building appearance, and design excellence were key
areas of interest for those members of the
public who did not support
[11] The form of development was changed twice after public
notification but prior to the decision to approve. First, it was changed
February 2023 in response to an information request. The building was reduced to
68.35 metres and 21 storeys in height. After
receiving advice from Council that
a building of this height was not supported for approval, the development
application was changed
again in August 2023. The change reduced the height of
the building to 58.75 metres and 18 storeys. This is the form of development
approved by way of Council decision notice.
[12] No appeal was commenced by
the appellant, or submitters, against the development approval.
proposed to the development approval
[13] The appellant’s change application seeks to vary the
approval in the way identified in exhibit 34. In rudimentary terms,
appellant seeks to alter the development approval in two ways. First, to
substitute a new set of development plans for the approved
plans. Second, to
make consequential changes to the conditions to give effect to the new set of
development plans.
[14] The plans (architectural and landscape intent plans)
for which the change application seeks approval are contained in exhibit
(Document 2.1, pp.72-116). Those plans can be read with, and are complimented
by, a bundle of photomontages, which were marked
exhibits 7, 8 and 9. The visual
aids enable a comparative exercise to be undertaken to expose the changes
proposed to the built form
approved by the development approval.
joint report of the town planning witnesses (Ex.1) contains a helpful summary of
the changes as between the approved and
new development plans. It was agreed
between the parties that this table correctly identifies the changes to consider
for this appeal.
The table is annexed to these reasons and marked A.
summary terms, the changes proposed to the approved plans can be identified as
(a) an increase in building height from 58.75 metres to
67.75 metres and 18 storeys to 21 storeys;
(b) an increase in the number of
units from 132 to 156; and
(c) an increase in gross floor area from 14,923m2
to 17,792m2.
disputed issues
[17] Council contends the change application should be refused
for any one of three reasons (Ex.4, para 17), namely that the proposed
to the development approval:
(a) do not constitute a ‘minor change’ as
defined in the PA (Issue 1);
(b) should not be made having regard to an
assessment against the relevant statutory framework pursuant to s 81(4) and (5)
PA (Issue 2); and
(c) should not be made in the exercise of the
Court’s discretion, or alternatively pursuant to s 81(2)(g) of the PA
[18] The appellant has not discharged the onus in relation to
Issue 1. This is fatal to the change application; the appeal will be
on this limited basis.
[19] Given the outcome of Issue 1, it is unnecessary
to determine Issues 2 and 3.
1: Whether the change to the development approval results in a substantially
different development?
[20] I was persuaded this question should be resolved in the
affirmative for the following reasons.
[21] A ‘minor change’ to a
development approval is defined in Schedule 2 of the PA. It was uncontroversial
that the only
part of the definition in issue is subsection (b)(i), which
“minor change means a change that –
development approval –
(i) would not result in substantially different
development;”
[22] The substantially different development test calls
for a comparative exercise. That exercise in this case requires the development
approval, including the approved plans, to be compared with exhibit 34 and the
plans referred to therein. The changes identified
by this comparative exercise
were agreed between the parties. They are discussed at [13] to
[23] Whether the change to the development approval satisfies
subsection (b)(i) of the definition of minor change is to be considered
and fairly, turning on matters of fact, degree and impression. The point of
focus is the ‘result’ of the change
proposed as distinct from the
significance of the change. Qualitative and quantitative considerations are
relevant to the result
of the change, as is Schedule 1 of the Development
Assessment Rules: Cleanaway Solid Waste Pty Ltd v Ipswich City Council & Ors
[2020] QPEC 47
[2021] QPELR 809
and 427 Beckett Rd Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council
[2024] QPEC
[24] To determine whether the change to the development approval results
in substantially different development, I had the benefit
of a comprehensive
bundle of architectural plans (Ex.5) and photomontages (Ex.7, 8 and 9). They
depict the development in its approved
and changed form. I was particularly
assisted by the photomontages. They depict the approved and changed development
in context.
Their accuracy and reliability was not contested. I am satisfied the
photomontages accurately depict the development in its approved
and changed
[25] The photomontages confirm that the additional building height of 3
storeys and 9 metres will be appreciable from multiple viewing
points. It is
appreciable (Ex.7 cf Ex.8 & 9): (1) because it marks an obvious increase in
the overall height of the built form
when compared to the approved development;
and (2) because the additional height brings with it additional building bulk,
evident at the upper most part of the building. That the increase in
building height and bulk is visually appreciable from multiple
viewing points is
consistent with an opinion expressed by the appellant’s visual amenity and
architecture expert, Mr Curtis.
He said the changes to the development approval
would result in ‘legibly greater building height’.
[26] That the
additional building height and bulk is appreciable does not, in and of itself,
mean the change to the development approval
necessarily results in substantially
different development. The change needs to be carefully and closely scrutinised
in context.
Relevant context here is to be found in the planning scheme. A
review of the planning controls reveals that building height and bulk
uppermost part of the approved development is likely to be sensitive to change.
The sensitivity is the product of a forward
planning strategy in relation to
building height.
[27] As I have already observed, the approved development
has an overall height of 58.75 metres and 18 storeys. This exceeds the level
stated for the site on a Building height overlay map in the planning scheme. The
applicable overlay map earmarks part of the Coolangatta
centre, including the
site, as having a building height of 39 metres. Where development exceeds the
height denoted on the building
height overlay map, this is a matter of import
for the planning scheme.
[28] The site is included in the Centre zone.
Development in this zone is assessed against, inter alia, the Centre zone code.
purpose of the zone code is achieved through a number of overall outcomes,
including (2)(d)(ii), which is directed to the height
of built form. This
provision states that ‘Built form...has a building height that does not
exceed that indicated on the Building
height overlay map’. The approved
development exceeds the applicable building height overlay map by about 29
metres. Self-evidently,
it does not comply with overall outcome 2(d)(ii) of the
Centre zone code. This non-compliance required the assessment manager at
instance to give attention to the Strategic framework in the planning
[29] The Strategic framework sets the policy direction for the
planning scheme: s 3.1(1). To describe the policy direction, the Strategic
framework is structured to include layers that build upon each other. One of the
layers deals with ‘elements’. They refine
and further describe
strategic outcomes: s 3.1(3)(d). Section 3.4.4 of the Strategic framework
deals with the Mixed use centre and
specialist centre design and operation
element. Section 3.4.4.1 sets out a number of specific outcomes relevant to this
[30] Section 3.4.4.1(4) identifies the strategic importance of
building height as shown on overlay maps and links this expression
of planning
intent to the desired future appearance of an area. The provision
“The Building height overlay map shows the desired building
height pattern and appearance for mixed use centres and specialist
centres. This
map also shows areas where building heights change abruptly to achieve a
deliberate and distinct contrast in built
form within and between low, medium or
high-rise areas.”
[31] The Building height overlay maps, while
important, do not prescribe absolute limits. The planning scheme conveys an
expectation
that approval may be supported for development that exceeds the
building height overlay map in a centre. The expectation is to be
s 3.4.4.1(5) of the Strategic framework (the uplift provision). The uplift
provision states:
“Increases in building height occur in mixed use
centres and specialist centres where all the following outcomes are
(a) a reinforced local identity and sense of place;
well managed interface with, relationship to and impact on nearby development,
including the reasonable amenity expectations
of nearby residents;
varied, ordered and interesting skyline;
(d) an excellent standard of
appearance of the built form and street edge;
(e) housing choice and
affordability;
(f) protection for important elements of local character or
scenic amenity, including views from popular public outlooks to the city’s
significant natural features;
(g) deliberate and distinct built form contrast
in locations where building heights change abruptly on the Building height
(h) the safe, secure and efficient functioning of the Gold
Coast Airport or other aeronautical facilities.”
[32] The uplift provision, considered as a whole, requires
building height above that stated on any overlay to be considered having
to a range of matters. These matters are not limited to the visibility of any
additional building height above the overlay
or the presence or absence of
impact. They require attention to be given to, inter alia, local character
considerations, the standard
of appearance and the management of interfaces.
[33] The above planning provisions are extracted from version 8 of the
planning scheme, which was the document in force when the original
development
application was treated as being properly made. Version 10 of the planning
scheme was also referred to during the appeal.
There is, for present purposes,
no need to dwell upon the differences between the two versions of the planning
scheme; the differences
are immaterial. The fundamental point to be made remains
the same irrespective of which version of the planning scheme is considered.
point is this: given the extent to which the approved development exceeds the
building height overlay, built form height has
always been a sensitive parameter
for the development approval. That it is a sensitive parameter is confirmed by
the submissions
received during the public notification period. Many adverse
submissions took issue with the extent to which the development exceeded
building height overlay, and its potential for adverse impacts.
[34] Against
this background, the result of the change to building height and associated bulk
at the upper most part of the built
form can be examined. Two perspectives can
be adopted. First, the change can be considered in the light of existing
circumstances.
Second, the change can be considered looking forwards, taking
into account extant development approvals that have not yet been acted
With the first of these in mind, I was satisfied the minor change proposed did
not result in substantially different development.
The difficulty in this case
arises when a forward looking perspective is adopted. When looking forward, the
relationship to, and
interface with, an approved but not yet constructed tower
on the adjoining land to the south at 39 McLean Street is
problematic.
[35] The adjoining land to the south has the benefit of a
development approval for a Multiple dwelling in tower form. The photomontages
reveal the approved tower is shorter than the approved development, but
comparable in height and bulk: Ex.7, pp.5 and 7. The building-to-building
relationship between them was described by Mr Buckley as
‘sympathetic’. I accept his evidence. It is made good by the
photomontages. The comparability, in terms of building height and bulk, of the
two approved building forms mean neither visually
dominates the other.
[36] The changed form of development materially alters the
building-to-building relationship with the approved building form to the
The photomontages depict a new relationship, one that is characterised by built
form dominance rather than similarity and
sympathy: Ex.9, pp.5 and 7. The
changed form of development visually dominates the built form to the south due
to its additional
height and bulk. This is a new impact. The impact was aptly
described by Mr Olsson. He was called by Council to deal with visual
amenity and
architectural considerations and described the relationship between the two
built forms in colourful terms. He said the
changed development puts the
adjoining development in the shade in two ways. First, by reason of its visual
dominance. Second, by
reason of the physical impacts of shadowing the changed
form creates. I accept Mr Olsson’s evidence. It is consistent with
of the photomontages. It is also supported by the evidence of Mr
[37] Mr Curtis, the appellant’s visual amenity and architecture
expert, accepted the changed form of development would give
rise to shadow
impacts upon the upper levels of, and upon the hypothetical occupant, of the
adjoining development at 39 McLean Street.
He said the impacts would be
‘probably not minor’ and ‘certainly...noticeable’. This
evidence, in my view,
establishes that the changed development would do one of
two things; either exacerbate a known impact (overshadowing on the upper
of the approved development at 39 McClean Street) or introduce a new impact.
Irrespective of which option is selected, both
are indicators of a change that
results in substantially different development.
[38] The evidence
establishes that the likely impacts of overshadowing on the upper levels of the
adjoining development to the south
will not be trivial; the impacts will be
noticeable. That this is so is confirmed by the layout of the approved built
form for the
adjoining site.
[39] The approved plans for the development to
the south show, at the top level, an apartment with extensive glass along its
façade, which coincides with the interface with the changed form
of development. There is also a lounge area with barbeque
facilities and the
like for occupants of the building on the western end of the building. This area
connects to a communal area,
including a gym, pool and areas for sitting on the
level below. These areas align with the middle of the proposed development and
will likely experience noticeable shadowing impacts. These impacts are the
direct result of the additional building height and bulk
sought by the
appellant’s change application.
[40] Against this background, Council
persuaded me that the change to the development approval would result in
substantially different
development. This is so, in summary terms, given three
matters taken in combination, namely that: (1) the change to the approved
building height and bulk is material and would be visually appreciable from
multiple viewing points in the locality; (2) the material
increase proposed to
building height is sought in circumstances where the planning scheme context
suggests this is a parameter sensitive
to change, engaging the application of
the uplift provision; and (3) the change to the approved building height, if
allowed, would
give rise to the introduction, or exacerbation, of an adverse
impact (overshadowing) that is more than trivial – it will be
noticeable.
[41] The appellant led a substantial body of evidence about the
extent of impact that could be expected from the changed form of development.
This evidence was said to establish that the impacts would not be unacceptable.
This can be accepted in part; I do not accept this
is correct in terms of the
likely shadowing impact. There was an evidentiary gap in the appellant’s
case. The gap related
to shadow impacts on the adjoining site to the south. An
attempt was made to patch this gap during the hearing but the highest the
evidence reached was that of Mr Curtis’ opinion, which was referred to in
paragraph [37]. His evidence did little to persuade
me that the change proposed
to the development approval would not result in substantially different
development.
[42] This conclusion is, in my view, fatal to the
appellant’s change application. It cannot be assessed and decided on the
it seeks a minor change to a development approval. In the event the
appellant wishes to persist with the changed form of development,
it needs to
proceed via a different process, such as an ‘other change’, with a
different assessment regime.
[43] Chapter 3, Part 5, Division 2, Subdivision
2 of the PA provides a mechanism to change a development approval after the
of appeal periods. The mechanism is defined in the PA by reference
to s 78(1) as a ‘change application’. Such an application
made to the responsible entity identified in s 78A.
[44] There are two
‘minor change’ definition in Schedule
2 of the PA. A change
application that satisfies the definition seeks a ‘minor change’ to
a development approval. A change
application of this kind is assessed and
decided under ss 81 and 81A of the PA. A change application that does not
satisfy the definition
is one that seeks an ‘other change’. It is
to be administered, assessed and decided differently to a minor change to
development approval; section 82 of the PA applies.
appellant’s change application was assessed and decided on the basis that
it sought a minor change to the development
approval. It was administered,
assessed, and decided under, inter alia, ss 81 and 81A of the PA. This had
three consequences: (1)
the change application was not publicly notified; (2)
the public did not have a right to make submissions about the change to the
development approval; and (3) those members of the community who have made, or
would have made, a properly made submission did not
accrue a right of appeal
[46] The change
application before the Court is one that, properly characterised, seeks an
‘other change’ to a development
approval. If it is the
appellant’s intention to persist with such an application, it has to be
assessed and decided on its
merits in accordance with, inter alia, s 82 of
the PA. This process will, unlike what has happened here, involve the giving of
notification and the accrual of appeal rights for those members of the
public who have made, or make, a properly made submission.
That the change
application must, but has not, been administered in this way brings this appeal
to an abrupt end.
2: Whether the change application should be approved or refused?
[47] A cursory review of the evidence reveals the parties
devoted considerable time and money to the resolution of the merits of the
change application. This did not end with the preparation of the material led at
trial. Public and private resources were also incurred
for the hearing and use
of Court time. From the Court’s perspective, at least 80% of the hearing
was devoted to an examination
of the merits of the change application.
[48] In circumstances such as this, there is a certain attraction to the
idea that the merits of the application should, despite the
findings above, be
formally resolved by the Court. The rationale for doing so is laudable; it is
intended to minimise, as far as
practicable, a waste of public and private
resources. Such a course should not, however, be adopted in this case. This is
two reasons, taken in combination. Both assume the appellant continues to
seek approval for the proposed changes either in the form
of: (1) a fresh change
application for an ‘other change’; or (2) a fresh impact assessable
development application. The
reasons are as follows.
[49] First, it is
undesirable for the Court to express views about the merits of the changed form
of development because, in practical
terms, those views have the potential to
predetermine the exercise of a future discretion in relation to an application
yet to be made to, and assessed by, Council. I accept, as a general
proposition, there is force to the argument that this, in and
of itself, may not
necessarily be decisive in every case; whether it is decisive will turn on the
facts and circumstances, including
whether all of the parties with an interest
in the future application are before the Court. This is not the case here. Not
all interested
parties are before the Court nor had an opportunity to be heard.
This is clear having regard to the second reason that follows.
[50] Second,
it cannot be said that all persons with an interest in the change application
participated in the appeal. Members of
the public had no right of appeal in
relation to Council’s decision. The only entities with an interest in the
change application
before the Court were the appellant and Council. Given this,
and given any new application will allow for public involvement in the
making process, it is undesirable for the Court to express views, one way or
another, about the merits of the change application.
To do so in the absence of
public submissions directed to the specific form of development for which
approval is now sought would
be, at least, premature and, at worst, have the
potential to predetermine the exercise of future discretion for an application
does not yet exist.
[51] I raised these matters with senior counsel for
consideration. After doing so, Mr Job KC and Mr Batty KC both conceded the Court
should not consider the merits of the change application in the event the minor
change question was resolved adversely to the appellant.
[52] I make no
findings in relation to Issue 2.
3: Whether the change application should be approved in the exercise of the
discretion?
[53] It is unnecessary to deal with Issue 3 in light of the
Disposition of the appeal
[54] The findings in relation to the first issue mean the
change application before the Court cannot be approved. It does not seek
change to a development approval as defined in Schedule 2 of the
[55] Given the merits of the change application were not the subject of
consideration or findings, the appeal will be dismissed on
the limited basis
that the change application does not seek a minor change to a development
approval as defined in Schedule 2 of
[56] I order
accordingly.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.11 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter