URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2003/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hot Wok Noodle Bar [2003] QLAT 21 (11 June 2003)
APPEAL NUMBER:
21 OF 2002/03
(APPLICANT)
Vijendra Nath
RESPONDENT:
The Chief Executive, Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading,
including Liquor Licensing
Hot Wok Noodle Bar (Octopussy)
3 MacGregor Street, Wilston, Brisbane
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST:
Refusal of transfer of Liquor Licence
Mrs G Spender (Chairperson)
Mrs J Harrington
DATE OF HEARING:
DATE OF DECISION:
11 June 2003
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. On 20 February 2001, Vijendra Nath (“the appellant”) lodged an
application pursuant to
section 113(1)
Liquor Act 1992
Act”) for transfer to himself of the existing on-premises (meals) licence
in respect of premises known as the “Hot
Wok Noodle Bar” situated at
Shop 1, 3 MacGregor Street, Wilston, Brisbane. When the appellant took over the
operation of this
restaurant in March 2001 he changed its name to
“Octopussy” and he has operated the restaurant since that date as a
restaurant. At the time when he lodged his application for transfer of the
licence, the appellant was also operating the “Tastes
restaurant at Southbank, South Brisbane, as a lessee and sub-licensee of
Southbank Corporation, who is the holder
of the special facility licence which
attaches to Southbank parklands. The appellant has operated the “Tastes
restaurant since August 1994 and continues to operate that
restaurant.
2. On 18 April 2001 the Executive Director of the Liquor Licensing Division
(“the Division”) obtained a criminal history
in relation to the
appellant from Queensland Police pursuant to sub-sections 107(5) and (6) of the
Act, which disclosed no police
history. Searches of court records undertaken by
the Division in April/May 2001 revealed that four Magistrates Court money
had been entered against the appellant in favour of creditors in 1998
and 1999, and that a large number of other Magistrates Court
money claims had
either been discontinued or had not proceeded to judgments as at the date of the
3. Between May 2001 and October 2002, officers of the Division corresponded with
the appellant with a view to obtaining information
indebtedness. In May 2001 the appellant attended meetings with officers of the
Division and provided documentation
concerning unpaid debts. At these meetings
and at other meetings over the next 18 months, the appellant argued that his
high level of indebtedness has arisen as a result of the devastating
effect the redevelopment of Southbank parklands over the period
1994 to 1999 had
had on his “Tastes of India” business. This explanation was not
acceptable to the Division who continued
to press him to justify his financial
difficulties. Following further requests for information from the Division, the
on 8 August 2002 provided a comprehensive submission with respect to
his financial position, and on 29 October 2002 at a meeting
with officers of the
Division he provided still further information, including a statutory
declaration giving detailed information
relevant to his financial
4. On 5 December 2002, the delegate of the Chief Executive, the Executive
Director of the Division, determined to refuse the application
for a transfer of
licence, and in his reasons for decision, the Executive Director states as
Having regard to the
provisions of
Section 107
Liquor Act 1992
relating to the Restrictions on
Grant of Licence or Permit,
s.107(1)(c)
requires an applicant to demonstrate a
“responsible attitude to the management and discharge of the
applicant’s financial
obligations” in order to qualify as a fit and
proper person to hold the
In view of the course
of events outlined on file, the substantial number of outstanding claims in the
Brisbane Magistrates Court and
the overall conduct of the applicant in the
management of the “Tastes of India”, the delegate of the Chief
was not satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person within
the meaning of the Act.
5. By Notice of Appeal lodged on 23 December 2002 the appellant instituted the
present appeal against the decision of the Executive
Relevant Statutory Provisions
6. The statutory provisions relevant to this appeal are
sections 113(1)
which provide as follows:
Application for transfer of licence
On application made by—
(a) the licensee and the proposed transferee; or
(b) the owner, lessee or mortgagee of the licensed premises if—
(i) the licensee has been lawfully evicted from, or has abandoned, the
licensed premises; or
(ii) the lease, sublease, tenancy or right to occupy the licensed premises
of the licensee has been lawfully terminated; or
the licensee has ceased to
conduct business in the licensed premises and has not agreed to the
application;
the chief executive may transfer a licence (together with any extended hours
permit held in association with the licence) to a person
who could be granted
the licence.
115 Chief executive’s responsibility on application for transfer
or franchising of a licence
On application made for the chief executive’s
approval that—
(a) a licence or permit be transferred; or
(b) licensed premises, or any part, be let or sublet; or
(c) the right to sell liquor be let or sublet; or
(d) a franchise, or management rights of a similar nature, be granted for
licensed premises, or a part of licensed premises;
sections 107
to 109 apply as if the proposed transferee, lessee,
franchisee or proposed holder of management rights were an
applicant for a licence, and the chief executive must not approve the
application
unless the requirements of the sections are
107 Restrictions on grant of licence or
The chief executive may grant an application for a
licence or permit only if the chief executive is satisfied that the applicant
not a disqualified person and is a fit and proper person to hold the licence or
permit applied for having regard to—
(a) whether the applicant demonstrates knowledge and understanding of the
obligations of a licensee or permittee of the relevant
kind under this Act;
(b) whether the applicant is a person of good repute who does not have a
history of behaviour that would render the applicant unsuitable
to hold the
licence or permit applied for; and
(c) whether the applicant demonstrates a responsible attitude to the
management and discharge of the applicant’s financial
obligations.
153 Letting or subletting of licensed
A licensee must not, without the chief executive’s
(a) let or sublet all of the licensed premises; or
(b) enter into a franchise or management agreement for all of the
licensed premises.
Maximum penalty—40 penalty
A licensee must not—
(a) let or sublet part of the licensed premises; or
(b) enter into a franchise or management agreement for part of the
licensed premises.
Maximum penalty—40 penalty units.
Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to the holder of a
special facility licence who, with the chief executive’s
(a) lets or sublets part of the licensed premises; or
(b) lets or sublets the right to sell liquor; or
(c) enters into a franchise or management agreement for part of the
licensed premises.
Fit and Proper Person
7. Mr Reinhold, the Senior Licensing Officer who appeared on behalf of the Chief
Executive at the hearing, submitted that in determining
whether the appellant is
a fit and proper person to hold the licence applied for, it should be accepted
that the appellant was a
fit and proper person as at the time when the Division
approved him as a sub-licensee for “Tastes of India” restaurant
pursuant to
section 153(3)
in August 1994. In order to determine whether the
appellant is now a fit and proper person, regard should be had only to his
as a licensee and to his attitude to his financial responsibilities
since August 1994. We think that this is the proper approach
determination of the issue.
8. Departmental records tendered in evidence before us indicate that the
appellant has held a number of liquor licences over the
period since August
1994. In addition to “Tastes of India”, from July 1994 until July
1997 he held the on-premises (meals)
licence with respect to
“Gypsy’s Downtown” restaurant at the Wintergarden centre in
the Brisbane CBD. From February
1997 to March 1999 he held an on-premises
(meals) licence in respect of “Flavours of India” restaurant,
Ormiston. The
only breaches of the Act which are recorded occurred while the
appellant held the licence for “Gyspy’s Downtown”.
a temporary suspension of licence on 9 December 1994 pursuant to
section 209
the Act for failure to pay a licence fee in respect of those premises, and there
was a conviction and fine of $1,200 on 17 April
1996 for breach of the
after-hours trading provisions of
sections 146(a)
9. There is no basis on the material before us in our view for a finding that
the appellant has failed to meet the criteria in
section 107(1)(a)
involves “a demonstrated knowledge and understanding of the obligations of
a licensee”. One contravention of the
Act in 10 years relating to the
actual operation of a licensed restaurant is not a bad record. There has been
no contravention of
the Act for the past eight and a half years during which
period the appellant has been operating two, and at times three, licensed
restaurants.
10. Again, with respect to the criteria in
section 107(1)(b)
, we find that there
is no evidence before us to suggest that the appellant is not a person of good
repute. He has no police record
and has provided extensive character references
from a range of professional and business people, including his trade suppliers,
attesting to his personal integrity.
11. The criteria which the Division argues he has failed to meet is in respect
section 107(1)(c)
requirement that he should demonstrate a responsible
attitude to the management and discharge of his financial obligations. It is
clear that the appellant suffered substantial financial difficulties in the
period 1994 to 1999 when he was operating “Tastes
of India” and one,
and at times two, other restaurants. We accept the evidence of the five or more
witnesses whose statements
speak of the problems associated with the
re-development of Southbank, and whose evidence corroborates the
appellant’s evidence
in this regard.
12. In a letter to the Division dated 30 July 2002, Mr C Cooper, principal of
the firm of solicitors CJ Cooper & Associates,
said that he had known and
acted for the appellant for some seven or eight years and was quite willing to
provide a reference and
explanation of the appellant’s circumstances. Mr
Cooper states as follows:
“It is common knowledge that all restaurants within the Southbank
precinct have experienced major trading difficulties since
Southbank opened and
particularly during the ongoing reconstruction and development of Southbank
which has been undertaken for the
last several years.
During this time trading was severely disrupted both for Vijay’s Tastes
of India restaurant and all other restaurants at Southbank.
Many of these other
restaurants were substantially in arrears of rent and many have failed.
Mr Nath however has continued to trade and to the best of my knowledge is
probably one of the only restaurants at Southbank that has
resolved all arrears
rent matters and is meeting all of his commitments. Certainly there were
disputes between Vijay and Southbank
management relating to a whole range of
issues including the lack of promotion for Southbank and the detrimental effect
the re-development
was having on all restaurants in the area. Most restaurants
at Southbank were in dispute with Southbank management and many proceedings
instituted both for and against the Restaurants and Southbank.
Despite these trading difficulties imposed upon Vijay he continued to trade
in good faith and ultimately reached settlements with
Southbank management which
resulted in Vijay, to my knowledge, being the only restaurateur to be completely
up to date with all rental
and other payments.
I understand that since resolving the dispute with Southbank management, and
the finalisation of much of the re-development the Tastes
of India Restaurant
has continued to trade well and I understand Vijay continues to meet all
commitments in relation to his Tastes
of India Restaurant”.
13. The Industrial Advocate/Deputy Chief Executive of the Restaurant and
Caterers’ Association of Queensland Incorporated,
Mr K Law, said in a
letter to the Division dated 29 October 2002 that he wished to support the
endeavours of his organisation’s
member in relation to his application.
Mr Law states as follows:
“Over the past few years there has been a turnover of small business
owners in the Southbank area. Each of these operators
has experienced excessive
pressure from Southbank Corporation in relation to their lease, lease payments
and renewal of the leases
in this parkland area...
One business, a member of this association, had to reduce its staffing
establishment from 75 to 40 employees. Another business has
had to increase its
prices 3 times to sustain the rent required by the Southbank Corporation. At
times it is believed that there
are simply to (sic) many food outlets operating
in this area and the pie is not large enough to be shared around.
The association through the President and the Chief Executive Officer have
been involved in discussions/negotiations to have reasonable
rents apply (10% of
gross turnover for restaurant and 15% for retail take-aways) to our members in
the Southbank area. In some cases
through the Associations intervention there
has been substantial rental reductions”.
14. Mr J Gregg, principal of the firm of solicitors Gregg Lawyers, says in his
statement dated 31 March 2003 that he has known the
appellant in a personal and
professional capacity for the last six years. Mr Gregg says that the appellant
has experienced numerous
problems which can be summarised as
“(a) Vijendra is of Fijian Indian descent and has family still in Fiji,
and a result of three military coups that have occurred
over the last 10 years,
he has had to support numerous family members. This has caused him severe
emotional and financial strain.
(b) As a result of the redevelopment of South Bank his restaurant was
affected for several years, and which I understand is only recently
(c) During the redevelopment of South Bank, several restaurants closed down,
but Vijendra stayed the distance.
Mr Gregg continues:
“As a result of the above, Vijendra has experienced severe emotional
and financial stress, but at all times with his creditors
he has attempted to
pay his just debts, but this has often led to repayment arrangements being
entered into.
My professional advice approximately two to three years ago, was that he
should close his restaurant and apply for bankruptcy. Despite
this he has
continued to fight on.”
15. Mr P Davis, a financial consultant, in a statement dated 9 April 2003,
points out that if the appellant had opted for bankruptcy
as advised three years
ago, he would now have no difficulties with the transfer of this licence. His
current trade creditors are
up to date, and if he had gone bankrupt the previous
debts which are now being paid out through arrangement would not have been paid
and creditors would have lost out completely. He says that the majority of the
claims in the Magistrates Court generated against
the appellant occurred at a
time when 22 businesses closed at Southbank. Many of those businesses were
restaurants owing millions
of dollars to creditors and the creditors of those
restaurants, unlike the appellant’s creditors, had lost out completely.
16. In his statement dated 2 April 2003, Mr W Ballantine-Jones, a licensed
commercial agent with Ballantine Mercantile Agency Group
Pty Ltd, confirms the
appellant’s evidence that he has agreed to work with the appellant to
assist in controlling the appellant’s
future personal and business
financial affairs. Mr Ballantine-Jones states as follows:
“Vijandra Nath has been known to me in my professional capacity as a
Licensed Commercial Agent over the past 8 years.
During this period I have acted for a number of Creditors and have engaged my
Lawyers to undertake legal action in an attempt to recover
outstanding debts
from Vijandra Nath and his business located at South Bank know as “The
Taste of India”.
A number of these matters went as far as bankruptcy proceedings.
It was apparent that Vijandra Nath restaurant located at South Bank was
suffering as a result of major redevelopment of the area in
1990’s and I had a number of meetings with Vijandra Nath in an effort to
settle my client’s claims.
Mr Vijandra Nath upon taking some financial advice was able to settle all my
clients’ claims and could have taken the easy way
out and gone
I have recently spoken with Vijandra Nath in relation to accepting an
appointment to act as his financial consultant and to endeavour
to consolidate
approx $40,000.00 of outstanding debt so he can continue to run his new
restaurant the “Octopussy” located
at Wilston. He believes the cash
flow generated from the Wilston restaurant will be more than enough to meet his
current and past
obligations.
I have agreed to accept this appointment should he be successful in his
appeal and to work in conjunction with Vijandra Nath’s
Tax Accountant to
control his future personal and business financial affairs.”
17. We do not accept the Division’s argument that the sheer number of the
Magistrates Court money claims initiated by his creditors
during the period of
the redevelopment of Southbank establishes that the appellant is financially
irresponsible. We find that his
financial difficulties were caused in the main
by circumstances which were beyond his control viz the business climate in which
“Tastes of India” restaurant operated during the redevelopment
of Southbank. The litigation in which he and other Southbank
lessees became
involved against the Southbank Corporation was costly and impaired his capacity
to repay creditors. On the basis
of the material before us, we find that his
financial difficulties since 1994 have not arisen as a result of financial
mis-management
or irresponsibility.
18. We accept the appellant’s evidence contained in his statutory
declaration of 29 October 2002 that he has repaid in full
or reached settlement
with a large number of his creditors, and that the remainder of the claims are
of small magnitude and many
have been written off as evidenced by the remaining
creditors taking no further action to prosecute their Magistrates Court claims.
We find that only four judgments have been entered against the appellant, and we
find that each of those judgments has been satisfied
by the appellant.
19. Since the redevelopment of Southbank was completed in 1999, the appellant
has operated two restaurant businesses without financial
difficulty. The
evidence put before us by way of statements from his current trade suppliers
establishes to our satisfaction that
the appellant is presently meeting his
financial commitments. We find that he has taken a number of steps to ensure he
current and future financial obligations and has engaged professional
assistance to this end.
20. We appreciate the frustration experienced by officers of the Division in
attempting to assess the appellant’s financial
situation, as a result of
the appellant’s tardiness in responding to the Division’s requests
for information. However
we find that the material which the appellant
provided to the Division by 29 October 2002 constituted a satisfactory response
the Division’s enquires. We find no basis for the Division’s
view that the appellant has been evasive in dealing with
the Division’s
enquiries. We consider that the fact that the appellant was operating two
successful restaurants, working 14
to16 hours per day, seven days a week,
throughout the period when the Division was seeking information about his
complex financial
situation, may well account for his difficulty in satisfying
their enquiries in a timely fashion.
21. On the basis of the material which the appellant had provided to the
Division by 29 October 2002 and on the basis of the further
material which the
appellant has placed before the Tribunal, we are satisfied that the appellant is
a fit and proper person to hold
the licence which he seeks to have transferred
to him. We find that his ability to continue to successfully operate a high
Southbank restaurant which seats 200 patrons in a difficult trading
environment is satisfactory proof of his financial and business
competence.
22. The evidence before us indicates that his second restaurant,
“Octopussy”, is operating successfully. The appellant
this restaurant trades seven days a week for lunch and dinner, has received good
reviews, and enjoys healthy repeat business.
The “Octopussy”
restaurant has a comprehensive menu of international cuisine and is not
restricted to Indian food in
the way that the “Tastes of India” is,
as a result of a speciality clause in his agreement with the Southbank
Corporation.
We do not think that the appellant is at any greater risk of
experiencing future financial difficulties in running two restaurants
other restaurateur. It is common knowledge that restaurants operate in a
fiercely competitive market. Operating a restaurant
is an inherently risky
venture and lack of success in operating a restaurant in Brisbane does not in
our view necessarily reflect
any lack of financial acumen or any lack of
financial responsibility. We consider that, should the appellant face financial
difficulties
in the future, he has the capacity, with professional assistance,
to discharge his financial obligations in a responsible
23. In all the circumstances, we find that the appellant satisfies the criteria
section 107
for transfer to him of the subject
ORDERS OF THE TRIBUNAL
24. The Tribunal grants approval for the transfer to Vijendra Nath of
on-premises (meals) licence number 43119648 in respect of
premises presently
known as “Hot Wok Noodle Bar”, and also approves associated
applications for registration of an interest
in licensed premises and change of
..............................
G. SPENDER – CHAIRPERSON
For the Liquor Appeals
G Spender D Stitt J
Chairperson Member Member
Date: 12 June
DE:E:\Case Management Files\02-03\LAT\21 of 2002-03\21 of 02-03
DEC 3-6-03.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (119 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter