URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R & S Edomonds v Qbsa [2003] QBT 22 (28 April 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 022
Edmonds v QBSA
[2003] QBT Q129-02
EDOMONDS Ross & Sandra
QUEENSLAND BUILDING SERVICES AUTHORITY
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
28 April 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
18 February 2003
DECISION OF:
CATCHWORDS:
Insurance: period in which claim is to be made. When facts and
circumstances giving rise to a claim first become known.
REPRESENTATION:
SOLICITORS:
APPLICANTS:
Connolly Suthers Lawyers
RESPONDENT:
In-house lawyer
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
This is an application by Ross Edmonds and
Sandra Edmonds (‘the applicants”) pursuant to s.104(1)(h) of the
Building Tribunal Act 2000. The applicant seeks a review of a
decision of the Queensland Building Services Authority (“the
authority”) dated the 5
June 2002 whereby the authority,
amongst other things, which are now not in dispute, rejected a claim by the
applicants pursuant
to the insurance provisions of the Act with respect to a
number of agreed major defects which have arisen with respect to certain
building work carried out by Steven Forrest a builder (“the
The parties provided the Tribunal with a
document entitled “Agreed Set of Facts”.
Further, there was no major dispute as to
any other facts.
The applicants are the owners of a
property at Lot 1 Harvey Range Bohle Plains near Townsville (“the
property”).
By a contract in writing dated the
July 1994 the applicants contracted with the builder to
construct on the property a dwelling house for a price of
$165,000.00.
The works were commenced in or about
September 1994 and completed on the 31
The applicants moved into possession of
the house on the 31
March 1995.
It is agreed, that the building contract
and the works carried out were “residential construction work”
within the meaning
of Clause 1.1 of the Insurance Policy applicable to the
construction, taken out pursuant to the Act.
The builder has ceased to be a licensed
builder and, indeed, has not been licensed since the 19
According to the provisions of the Act
there was in force with respect to the building contract, a policy of insurance
between the
applicants and the respondent, with respect to the building work
performed by the builder. The relevant policy was agreed to be
effective from the 1
January 2001, the
applicants lodged with the Authority a dispute notification form with respect to
a number of alleged defective
items. It is not necessary for me to set out those
defects in this decision.
The Authority upon receipt of the dispute
notification form categorized the defects as “major defects” or
Initially there was some dispute between
the applicants and the Authority with respect to that categorization but for the
of this application there is no longer any such
It is agreed by the parties that all of
the “major defects” are category 1 defects in accordance with the
respondent’s
policy in respect of s.72 of the Act (“Power to Require
Rectification of Building Work”).
November 2001 the
Authority forwarded a letter to the building inviting him to contact the
applicants with a view to attending to
the defective building work. The builder
did not contact the applicants nor did he make any response to that
The letter of the 26
November 2001 is not regarded by any of the parties, and is not, a notice to
rectify pursuant to s.72 of the Act.
On or about the 1
2002 the respondent gave a direction to rectify and or complete pursuant to s.72
of the Act with respect to a number of
the defects all of which are agreed to be
category 1 defects. The builder failed to comply with the direction. By that
time he was
no longer licensed under the Act.
It would seem that the Authority has
taken the dispute notification which was given on or about the 24
January 2001 as being the document in writing which constitutes the making of a
claim under the insurance policy.
Whilst not forming part of the
“agreed set of facts” the following facts would also seem to be
established and relevant.
Following the receipt of the dispute
notification form Mr Milton Stennett a Building Inspector of the Authority
inspected the works
March 2001.
By a letter of the 2
February 2001 the Authority requested further information from the applicants.
No response to that letter was received and the Authority
forwarded a further
letter of the 20
February 2001 wherein it once again requested the
information from the applicants.
The Authority, believing that no response
to that correspondence had been received, decided to close the file on the
March 2001.
By a letter of the 16
2001 the Authority advised the applicants that the file had been so
In fact it became apparent, at a later
date, that the applicants had responded to the letter of the 20
February 2001. Such response had been received by facsimile on the
March 2001, but overlooked by the Authority. Accordingly, the
file was reopened.
February 2002 the
Authority advised the applicants in writing that a direction to rectify had been
given to the builder on or about
By a letter of the 13
2002 the Authority advised the applicants that the file had been referred to the
insurance division for assessment as a claim
and requested further documentation
from the applicants.
Once again on the 10
2002 the Authority, in writing, requested a response to its letter of the
March 2002, which at that time had not been
forthcoming.
April 2002 the
applicants provided the Authority with the requested information and
documentation sought in the letter of the 13
June 2002 the
Authority advised the applicants of its decision with respect to its insurance
claim. It is that decision which is
the subject of this review
proceeding.
The decision of the Authority was, at
least in respect of the major defects, that as the defects became evident to the
between 1995 and 1999, and as the dispute notification form was not
lodged until the 24
January 2001, that the application was out of
time in accordance with the provision of s.7.1 of the Insurance Policy
Conditions and
as such the application was rejected. The decision did not
purport to deal with any consideration as to whether or not the Authority
considered the exercise of any discretion to allow an extension of time for the
making of the claim.
In a statement from the applicants, the
applicants concede that the defect with respect to a gable which had not been
plastered and
painted properly was apparent to them from the moment they took
possession of the house.
During the course of the hearing, it was
conceded by Mrs Edmonds, that the applicants were aware of the facts and
circumstances relating
to the defects themselves (that is the relevant major
ones) by 1998.
Accordingly, the dispute notification
form was not lodged until approximately three years (24
2001) after the applicants became aware of those
The Insurance Policy
It was conceded by the parties that the
relevant policy was that policy effective as from the 1
The policy specifically deals with both
non-completed work (s.2) and defective construction
It is s.3 “defective
construction” which is relevant in this application. S.3 relevantly
provides as follows:
Compensation for Defective
Construction
Subject to the terms and conditions of this
Policy, the Authority agrees to compensate the Owner for loss suffered by the
Owners resulting
from the Contractor failing to rectify defects in the
Residential Construction Work after practical completion.
Failure to Rectify
The Owners is only entitled to compensation for
defective construction under this Section in the following
circumstances;
Where the Contractor has failed to
comply with a direction of the Authority to rectify the defective
construction;
Where the Contractor has failed to
comply with a determination of the Queensland Building Tribunal to rectify the
defective construction;
Where the Contractor has otherwise
failed to rectify the defective construction because of any of the
following:-
the suspension or cancellation of the
Contractor’s licence;
the death or legal incapacity of the
Contractor; or
the insolvency, bankruptcy or
liquidation of the Contractor.
Compensation
Subject to Section 5 and 6 of this Policy,
where the Owner is entitled to compensation under this Section, the amount of
that compensation
the reasonable cost of rectifying the
defective construction as determined by the Authority;
should the Authority think fit, the cost
of reasonable alternative accommodation and additional removal costs necessary
incurred and
paid by the Owner as a result of the Contractor’s failure to
rectify the defective construction.
PROVIDED THAT in the
opinion of the Authority, the defective construction consists of or includes a
departure from any approved plans
and/or specifications in relation to the
Residential Construction Work, the compensation payable in respect of that
departure may
be limited to the decrease in the total value of the Residential
Construction Work (if any) caused by that variation.
As can be seen from s.3.1 the Policy does
not in its terms purport to indemnify or provide any compensation to an owner
simply with
respect to defective building work.
It is only where a contractor has failed
to rectify defects in the residential construction work after practical
completion that the
owner is entitled to compensation.
S.3.2 then goes on to deal more
specifically with “the failure to rectify
For the purposes of this proceeding, it
was accepted that the relevant provision is s.3.2 (a). The provision of s.3.2
to further restrict the words “failing to rectify
defects” in s.3.1.
A contractor would not be taken as
“failing to rectify defects” for the purposes of s.3.1 unless one of
the circumstances
set out in s.3.2 is satisfied.
S.3.2 does not by its terms purport to be
inclusive but is in fact exclusive. In other words, it is only where the
circumstances
set out in s.3.2 exist that an owner is entitled to compensation
for defective construction.
It was not argued, that any of the
provisions of s.3.2(c) are relevant in this proceeding.
It would seem, that if the Authority in
any particular case declined to issue a direction to rectify (presumably
pursuant to s.72
of the Act) then there would be no circumstances, subject to a
successful review of that decision by the Tribunal and assuming that
circumstances set out in s.3.2(c) do not arise, under which an owner would be
entitled to compensation under the insurance policy.
Circumstances can be envisaged where,
even though it is clearly established that building work is defective, the
Authority might
in the exercise of its discretion under s.72 of the Act decline
to issue a direction.
Such circumstances might arise where, for
instance, the time period has been such as to bring into play the provisions of
the Authority’s
published and gazette policy conditions relating to s.72
of the Act “Notices to Rectify” whereby the Authority has stated
that it will consider the passage of time between the completion of the building
work to the lodgment of the notification in conjunction
with the degree or scale
of the defects, when determining if it will give a direction to
With respect to category 1 defects (which
are those defects relevant in this proceeding) the relevant time limit is within
years and three months after the completion of the work or within three
months of the defects becoming apparent.
The policy uses the expression “the
defect becoming apparent” which of course is different to the wording used
of the Insurance Policy which states as follows:
Procedure for
Prior to making any claim under this
Policy, the Owner shall notify the Contractor of the facts and circumstances
giving rise to the
claim and shall allow the Contractor 14 days in which to
recommence the work or commence rectification of the defects as the case
All claims under this Policy (other than
claims for minor defects) must be made within 3 months of the Owners becoming
aware of the
occurrence of the facts and circumstances giving rise to the claim,
or within such further time as the Authority may allow. Claims
defects must be made within 1 month of the Owner becoming aware of those facts
and circumstances.
All claims shall be in writing and shall
be in such form and contain such information as the Authority may
No issue has been taken by the Authority
with respect to the provisions of s.7.1(a).
In fact, upon the Authority receiving the
dispute notification form, the Authority notified the builder and drew to his
the dispute but the builder took no steps to remedy any of the
The critical provision of s.7 is
s.7.1(b). It is this provision upon which the Authority relies to reject the
application.
The Authority takes the position that the
provision requiring that claims under the insurance policy must be made within
three months
of the owner becoming aware of the occurrence of the facts and
circumstances giving rise to the claim, means that the claim must
be made within
three months of the owners becoming aware of the defects.
For their part, the applicants argue that
the words “the facts and circumstances giving rise to the claim” are
not restricted
to knowledge of the defects themselves but knowledge of all the
facts and circumstance which are necessary to exist to enable the
applicants to
be entitled to make a claim under the insurance policy.
The applicants argue, that as the
applicants are not entitled to any compensation under the policy by reason of
the provisions of
s.3 until such time as (in this particular case) the
contractor has failed to comply with the direction of the Authority to rectify
the defective construction, then the applicants did not become aware of the
occurrence of the facts and circumstances giving rise
to the claim until such
time as the builder failed to comply with the direction to rectify given to him
by the Authority on the 1
February 2002.
Insofar as the dispute notification form
is taken to be the effective claim under the policy and the Authority seems to
be approaching
the matter on that basis, and as it was given on the
January 2001 (in fact prior to the failure of the builder to
comply with the direction to rectify) it is argued that the claim must
to have been given in time.
The resolution of this matter turns upon
the construction of the words “...the occurrence of the facts and
circumstances giving
rise to the claim” as used in s.7 and in particular
The Tribunal was referred to a number of
authorities and in particular a Decision of Member Burke in
Queensland Building Services Authority
In that case, Member Burke was required
to consider the same provisions of the Insurance Policy to which I have referred
A factual difference in that case was
that the Authority had not at any stage given a direction to rectify to the
building involved,
but the builder’s licence had been suspended and thus
it seems to have been assumed that the provisions of s.3.2(c)(i) were
applicable.
It was clear in that case, as it is in
the present one, that the owners became aware of the actual defects well before
the claim under
the Insurance Policy was made and insofar as becoming aware of
such defects was the relevant date for the purposes of s.7.1(b) of
the Insurance
Policy, the claim would have been made well out of time.
Member Burke held that the expression
“the occurrence of the facts and circumstances giving rise to the
claim” meant more
than simply being aware of the defective construction
but required knowledge of one of those circumstances set out in s.3.2 of the
Insurance Policy.
Member Burke at page 12 of her Decision
“Cl.72.(a) of the insurance policy conditions
supports the notion that a claim may be made prior to a direction to rectify a
defect being given by the Authority. For this reason, I do not think that
cl.3.2 particularises the only circumstances in which
a claim may be made.
Rather, it identifies the instances which give rise to an entitlement to
compensation. In this context, a
claim may be made reliant upon the
contractor’s failure to rectify a defect however entitlement to
compensation will arise
only when there has been non-compliance with a direction
of the Authority or failure to rectify the defective work for any other
specified in cl.3.2(b) and (c).”
Taking s.3 and s.7.1(b) alone, the
strength of the approach taken to the construction of the Insurance Policy by
Member Burke is clear
and obvious. However, the matter is made somewhat more
complicated by the words of s.7.1(a).
Clearly, the steps required to be taken
by s.7.1(a) would seem to contemplate such steps being taken prior to any of the
circumstances
prescribed in s.3.2 having occurred.
S.7.1(a) uses the same expression
“...the facts and circumstances giving rise to the claim...” as is
used in s.7.1(b).
Clearly, if the words as
used in s.7.1(b) include one of those circumstances referred to in s.3.2, then
the same words as used in
s.7.1(a) cannot be taken to include one of the those
circumstances set out in s.3.2.
The notice required to be given by
s.7.1(a) must, it would seem, of necessity be given prior to any of the
circumstances in s.3.1
having occurred. It seems to me, that the expression
“...the facts and circumstances giving rise to the claim...” as
in s.7.1(a) must refer to the existence of the defective building
The question is, whether or not those
same words as used in s.7.1(b) are to be given the same meaning as those in
s.7.1(a) or to be
construed differently.
Further, s.7.2 also clearly contemplates,
that a claim may be made prior to any direction to rectify having been given by
the Authority.
The sub-section goes on to provide that the claim is not to be
admitted or paid until the contractor has failed to comply with such
S.7.2(b), however, somewhat paradoxically
goes on to provide that the Authority may admit and indeed pay the claim in
circumstances
where it would be “unfair to the owner” to refuse to
admit or pay the claim until the contractor has failed to comply
The provisions of s.7.2(b) seem to give
the Authority a rather odd discretion when one considers the provisions of
s.3.2(a) and (b)
which effectively provide that an owner is only entitled to
compensation under the policy unless a contractor has failed to comply
a direction.
I suppose there may be circumstances
where it is readily apparent to the Authority that even though none of the
circumstances in s.3.2(c)
exist, a contractor is highly unlikely to comply with
the direction.
I assume the Authority is given the
discretion to form a view as to the likelihood of a contractor complying with
such a direction.
However, s.7.2 clearly contemplates the
making of a claim prior to the occurrence of any of the circumstances referred
to in s.3.2.
S.7.1(c) provides that claims shall be in
writing and be in such form and contain such information as the Authority may
cannot identify in the Regulations or elsewhere any prescribed form
for the making of a claim.
Taking s.7 of the insurance policy as a
whole, it seems to me that the purpose of the provision is to ensure that the
Authority is
given notice of the facts and circumstances giving rise to the
claim to enable the Authority to take action including the giving
direction, to both protect the owner and also to protect the insurance
Whilst the construction given to the
words in s.7.1(b) by Member Burke is certainly attractive, I think taking the
policy as a whole
the words used in s.7.1(b) are to be taken to refer to the
defective work itself and not additionally to those matters set out in
In those circumstances, the claim
(assuming that it was constituted by the notice of dispute) was clearly out of
time and well out
Should an Extension of Time
S.7.1(b) of the insurance policy gives to
the Authority a discretion to grant an extension of time within which to make a
In the present case, the Authority does not seem to have considered the
exercise of any discretion and the applicants have sought
from the Tribunal an
exercise of that discretion in their favour.
I have been referred to a number of
authorities dealing with the exercise of the discretion provided for in
There are a number of matters to which
the Authority, and now the Tribunal, should have regard. Without being
exhaustive they are:
The period of time between the owners
becoming aware of the facts and circumstances constituting the defective
building work and the
making of the claim;
The reason for the delay in making the
The extent of the defective building
Any prejudice which has been occasioned
to the Authority by reason of the delay in making the
With respect to the above considerations,
for the reasons I have set out above, it is clear that the delay between the
becoming aware of the defects and the claim was considerable indeed.
In her evidence, the female applicant
said that she was confused about the time in which claims could be made, having
seen at some
stage, a certificate relating to the insurance policy which showed
that the policy was current for a period of about six
However, the female applicant had
apparently not read the insurance policy but does not dispute having received
In the circumstances, I am not convinced
that that alone is any explanation for the delay.
Other than for that explanation there
really is no other explanation offered by the applicants for the delay in making
The Authority argues, that it has been
prejudiced by reason of the delay with respect to the fact that building costs
have gone up
in the period and that it is now exposed to a higher pay out having
regard to such increase. I am unconvinced that there is any
merit in that
Whilst there was some evidence as
to an increase in building costs there was no suggestion that the increase has
been out of the ordinary
or other than one would expect with the affluxion of
time. Whilst the cost of rectifying the defective building work may indeed
increased, the fact that the fund has not been required to pay out any money to
rectify the work over a period of years would
be to the fund’s benefit in
that it would have had the use of the money and the ability, one would assume,
to earn interest
on it during that time.
However, the Authority also argues that
it was placed in a difficult position with the builder by reason of the delay.
By the time that the Authority actually
issued the direction to rectify, the builder was no longer a licensed person
under the Act
and the Authority argues that it lost a substantial amount of
coercive power which it might otherwise have had had it given the direction
earlier whilst the builder was still the holder of a licence and anxious, one
would assume, to maintain the licence without interference
and imposition of any
penalties or restrictions that the Act might have imposed upon him had he filed
to comply with the direction
to rectify.
Whilst the question of prejudice is not a
glaring one in favour of the Authority, having regard to the length of the
delay, the inadequate
explanation for the delay and the possibility of prejudice
as submitted by the Authority with respect to its ability to exercise
coercive powers to have the builder rectify the defective building work I am
satisfied that this is a case in which the discretion
should not be exercised in
favour of the applicants and in the circumstances I decline to do
Accordingly, the order of the Tribunal is
that the applicants’ application be dismissed. Further, the decision of
the Authority
is confirmed.
I grant each party liberty to apply with
respect to the question of
.....................................
A.J. MOON – MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Queensland Building Tribunal
Application No:
Applicants:
ROSS & SANDRA EDMONDS
C/- Connolly Suthers Lawyers
TOWNSVILLE Q 4817
Respondent:
QUEENSLAND BUILDING SERVICES AUTHORITY
11 Edmondstone
SOUTH BRISBANE Q 4101
Section 93 –
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
Upon hearing Mr Humphries on behalf of the Applicants and Mr
Budden on behalf of the Respondent, the Queensland Building Tribunal
following orders:
That the order of the Tribunal is that
the applicants’ application be dismissed.
That the decision of the Queensland
Building Services Authority of 5 June 2002 is confirmed.
That each party is granted liberty to
apply to the Registrar for a further time and date for hearing with respect to
the question
..................................
A MOON - MEMBER
QUEENSLAND BUILDING TRIBUNAL
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (150 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter