URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QChCM/2009/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department of Child Safety v SJ & MB [2009] QChCM 1 (16 June 2009)
MAGISTRATES COURTS OF QUEENSLAND
Department of Child Safety v SJ & MB
[2009] QChCM 1
DEPARTMENT OF CHILD SAFETY
(applicant)
(first respondent)
(second respondent)
CCM4969/08(1)
Childrens Court of Queensland (Magistrate)
PROCEEDING:
Application for Child Protection Order
ORIGINATING COURT:
Childrens Court of Queensland (Magistrate) at Ipswich
DELIVERED ON:
26 June 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
23 June 2009, 24 June 2009, 25 June 2009
MAGISTRATE:
McLaughlin M
A long term guardianship order be made in relation to all four
CATCHWORDS:
CHILD WELFARE – GUARDIANSHIP – long term guardianship order
– whether child in need of protection – whether
a parent is willing
and able to protect child
Child Protection Act 1999
Munro for applicant
Balzamo for first respondent
Second respondent appeared on own behalf
SOLICITORS:
[1] This is an application pursuant to the
Child Protection Act 1999
, hereafter
called "the Act", for an order that the Chief-Executive of the Department of
Child Safety be granted long term guardianship
of four children, TA, TJ, TB and
TM, born respectively on 10 June 2001, 26 March 2003, 13 February 2006 and 4
April 2008.
[2] The background of the matter is that between 2001
and 2006, there were a total of six "notifications" to the Department of Child
Safety, hereafter called "the Department", in respect of the three eldest
children. Three of those notifications were "substantiated",
to use the jargon
adopted by the Department, the last of which was on 19 April 2006.
result of that incident, an application for a child protection order was made on
20 April 2006. The three children have been
in the custody of the Department
ever since, either on an interim basis or as a result of a final
[4] Originally a final order was made on 10 July 2006 granting custody
to the Chief Executive for 12 months. A further application
was then made in
2007 and on 6 March 2008 a second order was made granting custody to the Chief
Executive for nine months.
[5] The fourth child, TM was then born in April.
The Department immediately applied for a two year custody order in respect of
In December 2008 a third application was made seeking custody for a further
two years for the three older children. Subsequently
the department amended all
of those applications to seek long term guardianship of all children until they
reach 18 years.
[6] In essence, there is no suggestion the mother would
intentionally neglect or harm the children. But rather due to her intellectual
impairment she would do her incompetent best to care for them thereby exposing
them to risk. The Department says she has failed to
demonstrate the necessary
skills to properly care for the children.
[7] With the father there are
concerns as to his mental health status and his alleged history of domestic
violence, both emotional
and physical. While the parents have apparently been
separated for more than a year the Department believe that significant contact
continues between the parents and the fore even if the mother had the sole care
of the children the father would, in reality, also
have significant contact with
them. The Department says the mother lacks the necessary insight to
appropriately control contact between
the children and the father. Further, they
say the mother is, in effect, dependant on and subservient to the father and
a real chance they would resume their relationship. It may even be the
case that they substantially continue to live together but
pretend otherwise
only to placate the Department.
[8] As far as the evidence goes, there was
evidence from three “case workers”, Ms Davies, Mr Rasmussen and Ms
as well. These three were singled out to give evidence. A “case
worker” again being some jargon that is used by the Department to denote
the person who is actually in control of the application
at the time and the
overseer, I suppose one could say; and they in turn answer to a person known as
a team leader, to use some more
NOTIFICATIONS
[9] Ms Davies in
her affidavit set out details of the six notifications that I mentioned. They
can be shortly summarised as follows:
[10] June 2001 there was a
notification about the home being unhygienic and a child being undernourished
and concerns about the parents
using marijuana and the father having Asperger's
disorder. This was an “unsubstantiated notification”. I will come
[11] August 2002 another notification regarding the child TA
being brought in with the mother to a clinic in an ambulance. Diagnosed
viral infection and there were concerns again as to the home being dirty; the
child sleeping on a soiled mattress; concerns
and having conspiracy theories; and the child presenting in a dirty and unclean
state. And again
this is said to be “unsubstantiated”.
third, May 2003, another notification that there was domestic violence going on
in the home; that police had been to the
residence; that the father was alleged
to have pushed the mother who was then pregnant, down a flight of stairs; and
that the father
had barricaded himself into a house with the boy TA and was
threatening to kill himself and the child and the police had to come
remove him from the house and he was then detained. This was said to be
investigated and substantiated however the child
was deemed not to be in need of
protection.
[13] September 2003, the fourth notification, following the birth
of another child, TJ. Again there were concerns about frequency
and severity of
domestic violence. This was “unsubstantiated”.
[14] Fifth, in
June 2005, a notification that the father was being aggressive towards staff of
the Department and police. He even
installed security cameras at his house and
got a police scanner. And general notifications about the house being terribly
animal faeces throughout the house, lack of blankets, that sort of
thing, and that basically the house was a health hazard. That
was said to be
substantiated. At that stage the Department, it seems, became for the first time
involved with the family, with the
consent of the family and without any
application to the Court at that stage.
[15] Ten months later was the sixth
and final notification, on 19 April 2006, the day before the first order was
granted that I mentioned
earlier. That again was a notification about the father
with his surveillance equipment and scanners and not wanting police or staff
into his house; that the house was untidy and infested with cockroaches; that
the children were neglected. And it was said that that
was substantiated.
[16] It was then that the Department stepped up their intervention and took
custody of the three older children, TB of course at that
stage being an infant
of only a few weeks of age.
[17] When Ms Davies was questioned as to what was
required to consider a notification to be substantiated, I have to say her
were less than impressive. Perhaps partly due to the fact that the Act
provides that the Rules of Evidence do not apply in these
proceedings, the
Department has developed a jargon of their own apparently without reference to
any identifiable definitions for
such terms. Whether a notification is
substantiated seems to be a decision at the whim of the person dealing with the
matter. The
source of information is routinely not disclosed due to the obvious
need to protect informers and this right to anonymity is enshrined
in the Act.
While this protection has clear advantages to the informer, at the same time it
also undermines the reliability of the
information.
[18] Unfortunately the
attitude of the Department seems to be that if the Department considers a
notification to be substantiated
then the Court should accept the information as
reliable without further question. Ms Davies provided no information whatsoever
to what checks or investigations were in fact undertaken to substantiate any
notifications. A photo of an allegedly filthy kitchen
would have been helpful.
Failing that, perhaps a statement from the departmental employee as to their
actual observations.
[19] As far as the Court knows, the notification might,
for instance, be based on no more than a phone call to the Department from
neighbour who bears a dislike to the parents for some unknown reason. Even more
disturbing is the practice of outlining unsubstantiated
notifications in the
material in support of an application. If it is unsubstantiated, one must wonder
what possible probative value
it can have. Nevertheless the Department persists
in providing details of unsubstantiated notifications to the Court.
second worker, Mr Rasmussen, was asked what he thought the difference between
unsubstantiated and substantiated was, he ducked
the question by basically
saying that was not part of his job and he did not know what the criteria was.
But obviously he nevertheless
placed importance on a notification if it was said
to be substantiated even though he himself conceded he did not know what that
[21] Ms Sabatino, the worst of the three in my view, the most
unreliable, vague and unimpressive witness, was asked what she thought
difference between substantiated and unsubstantiated meant and, extraordinarily
she said substantiated means "obviously evidence
to prove there has been harm
done to the children." And that unsubstantiated means, "There's no evidence."
[22] You could hardly get a more ridiculous set of definitions. She was not
asked, "What about if there is some evidence, so that
there is not no evidence
at all, but there is not enough evidence to prove something? And to what
standard is it proved?" She was
not asked about these things and probably just
as well, because her answers, no doubt, would have been nonsense.
more interestingly, what about a notification where not only is there no
evidence to substantiate it but there is evidence
to suggest that it is not
[24] For instance, what about a notification that her house was
filthy, the Department coming along and finding it spick and span.
I do not know
may have come along and found exactly
that. I am not told. I am left in the
dark. I am simply told it is unsubstantiated. It could have been a malicious,
vexatious piece
of information passed on to the Department. Why the Department
would routinely add those matters into an application is nothing short
disturbing.
[25] As I said before, it comes back to this business of no rules
of evidence applying under the Act. The Department, in my view,
cavalier attitude that whatever they like to tell the Court they can, even if
they cannot tell you what it was based on.
[26] To further demonstrate the
paucity of evidence about these matters, the three witnesses I have just
discussed were all at various
times asked about the source of their information.
Their voluminous affidavits and their oral evidence routinely made reference to
“Departmental records” and “office records” and other
such jargon. When they were asked about that, I think
it was Mr Rasmussen
primarily who told us all about it, it was said that the records are basically
an electronic record, one cannot
bring them along to Court because they are
electronic and it is hard to get remote access to them. Why they could not be
off in anticipation on an application to take four children away from
their parents for the rest of the children’s lives is
beyond me. But the
Department again says: The rules of evidence do not apply - just trust us. What
is on our file and what we tell
you is said on our file is reliable.
might have though they would have brought along the various statements and the
notes from people who had first hand information,
rather than continually
relying on referring to Departmental notes. As Mr Balzamo, for the mother,
pointed out with Mr Rasmussen
and the others, their affidavits say the sources
of information, which are not of their own personal knowledge, are deposed to in
their affidavit. What rubbish. All they say is it comes from a file. They might
as well say it comes from Queensland. That is not
deposing of the source of the
information. We need the name of the person. We need the dates that they saw
these things. It has
really no probative value at all.
[28] In my view, if
the case depended on the evidence of the three people that I have just spoken
in dismissing the application. I would have to
be satisfied on the balance of probabilities under the Act that the children,
on that information, are in need of protection and I would not be
satisfied anywhere near on the balance of probabilities. I am not
simply swallow blanket statements by the Department that say to me - trust us,
what we say is true but we are not going
to tell you why we think you should
EXPERT OPINIONS
[29] From the parent’s point of view,
unfortunately that is not the end of the matter. From the parent's point of
my opinion, they bent over backwards to co-operate with the Department
by submitting themselves to all sorts of intrusive examinations.
The father to a
psychiatric evaluation. The mother to an evaluation by a neuro-psychologist and
both of them to repeated examinations
by social workers preparing social
assessment reports. Those are very intrusive examinations. They did them
voluntarily in the genuine
effort to try and demonstrate their ability to take
the children back and, unfortunately, in my view, what it has at the end of the
day done is embolden the otherwise appallingly thin application case.
[30] In hindsight, from their point of view, they would have been better off
telling the Department to go jump in the lake and not
submit to any
examinations, because if the Department had come along with only their own
material they would have been in trouble.
[31] The reports that I do need to
refer to are firstly the psychiatric report of the father, which was done by a
Dr Prior in 2007.
[32] I should just diverge at this point and mention that
a matter was brought to my attention during submissions that I had not even
noticed previously; again just to demonstrate some of the cavalier approach of
the Department. On 7 April 2008, when the application
for TM was filed, the
application included a claim that "MB has not engaged in a full psychiatric
assessment to date". The report
addressed to the Department from Dr Prior, which
contains a full psychiatric examination of the father, is dated 12 October 2007.
It is a blatant untruth. The application also says "There is a domestic violence
and criminal history". There is no criminal history
for any domestic violence,
which I will detail to some extent later on. There are other inaccuracies in it
as well, perhaps not as
glaring as those two but it again just goes to show the
high handedness of the Department in their attitude to these matters.
PSYCHIATRIC ASSESSMENT OF THE FATHER
[33] Dr Prior, in his examination,
said this in his conclusions at paragraph 16.1:
1. "MB shows evidence of the following conditions, as defined by the Diagnostic
Statistic Manual for Mental Disorders Fourth Edition,
(1) Clinical disorders.
Delusional disorder, provisional diagnosis. Asperger's disorder, provisional
diagnosis. (2) Personality
disorders. Personality disorder mixed type.
Paranoid/schizotypal traits, provisional diagnosis".
[34] He went on in 16.2 to say:
1. "MB shows evidence of psychological disturbance of a long-standing nature. He
was an unco-operative historian. He refused to allow
history to be sought from
other medical sources. Consequently, this assessment is hampered by the lack of
independent collateral
information. However, it does appear that he had a
history of contact with family services in his own childhood, attendance at a
public school - a special school I should say, conflict with law, admissions to
public hospital psychiatric units and current conflict
with Child Protection
agencies. He described a childhood and adolescence characterised by marked
upheaval, breakdown of the family
unit, rejection by his mother, possible
neglect by his mother, childhood physical abuse, below average educational
attainment, an
inability to sustain paid employment and a long history of
reliance upon Social Security.
2. The diagnosis is uncertain and, consequently, I've nominated a delusional
disorder, Asperger's disorder and personality disorder
as provisional diagnosis.
The evidence for Asperger's disorder relates to qualitated impairment in his
social interaction with odd
eye-to-eye gaze, abnormality social interaction, a
lack of social reciprocity but less of the criteria B symptoms of restricted,
repetitive and stereotype patterns of behavioural interests and activities".
[35] He goes on – I am skipping some of his report:
1. "The evidence for mixed personality disorder, schizotypal paranoid relates
to a pervasive pattern of social and interpersonal
deficits with discomfort and
reduced capacity for close relationships other than with his partner. He
displays odd thinking and speech
patterns with vague tangential and formalised
patterns of communication. He shows evidence of marked paranoid ideation, an
inappropriate
effect and eccentric behaviour such as that relating to
surveillance equipment in his house and taping over his windows. He appears
socially quite isolated and despite his assertions he has close friends, appears
to be lacking in confidence other than his partner.
The presence of ideas of
reference for magical thinking is absent".
[36] Further on he says:
1. "There's clear evidence of a delusional disorder although MB was very guarded
in the history that he would reveal and consequently
some of his more paranoid
ideas may be psychotically based. At this point there appears to be overvalued
ideas about his current
circumstances and conflict with the Child Safety
Department. There's evidence of long-standing paranoid ideation, threatening
going armed in public, illicit drug use in the past. Those tend to
support a diagnosis of a psychotic disorder. The prognosis of
these diagnosis is
that they are life long disorders".
[37] I should have said before I started reading from that, that counsel for the
mother, who has also admirably assisted the father
who is unrepresented, has
been at pains to point out to me that I need to exercise caution in adopting
what any of these independent
experts have decided because of the fact that some
of the information which they are decided upon, is the very information which
have already criticised. That is, the affidavit and other material from the
Department which is not backed up by what would normally
be regarded as reliable
[38] I accept his general criticism of that, and I think that is a
point well made. However, I think that it is fair to say that even
the father in
his own submissions does not try to shy away from the fact that he knows he is a
person with some problems, and finds
it difficult to interact as most people do.
I think he was very fair about that, saying how difficult his life is because of
shortcomings, and I do not mean that as any criticism of the
[39] As he said to me, it is very difficult in his life, because of
the problems that he has, to get on with his life. I am sure that
is absolutely
correct. I think I can, on the balance of probabilities, be relatively
comfortable with the provisional diagnosis –
that is, I should accept the
general thrust of what Dr Prior said.
PSCHOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF THE
[40] The mother was assessed by a neuro-psychologist, a Ms Anderson.
Ms Anderson, among other things, performed a number of intelligence
and came to the conclusion that the mother has an IQ of 64, which puts her in
the lowest one percentile of the population.
[41] She said in the summary of
her report, prepared in December 2008 "On this occasion SJ was referred to
neuro-psychological assessment
concerning difficulties encountered by the
Department of Child Safety in relation to her parenting capacity. Concerns have
been raised
reported a lifelong history of significant intellectual impairment
extremely disrupted educational experience. In addition she's never formally
worked and is in receipt of a disability support
[42] She's been in
a relationship with her child's current father since the age of 19, and although
they have recently separated she
claimed that this had occurred solely because
she thought this is what was required in order to re-obtain custody of the
That is, she didn't feel or see any real need to separate from her
[43] The results obtained on this occasion are essentially
consistent with what have been expected, given her lifelong history. On
occasion compared to adults her overall level of intellect scored in the
extremely low range; first percentile IQ 64. She performed
surprisingly well on
memory tests, generally demonstrating average ability to learn and retain new
information.
[44] Difficulties were encountered, though, when required to
mentally manipulate information; that is, think about information and
her mind, than when required to plan or organise more complex data. She
performed in the extremely low range on measures
of abstract reasoning, but
demonstrated basic planning skills on a more practical and concrete task.
Information processing speed
was in the border line to extremely low range.
Academic achievement was also in the extremely low range."
[45] She goes on
to say, "It is my view these results are fairly consistent. That is her
presentation and her history are suggestive
of an individual with significant
intellectual disability. Her ability to rapidly understand information presented
to her is very
poor. Her information processing speed is slow. Her concentration
is very limited. Her ability to think of things in an abstract
extremely poor. It is very likely that the lack of responsiveness seen by
officers may well reflect basic inability to
rapidly process information and
react to it.
[46] In addition she demonstrated a very significant inability
to think about problems in an abstract manner. This was demonstrated
variety of tasks where she could not demonstrate a significant and understanding
of social rules and ideas, and this simply
reflects her intellectual disability.
As a result her ability to perceive the abstract implications of situations is
extremely poor,
and this appears to be leading to some significant
misunderstandings.
[47] Her current perception of the situation is extremely
concrete. That is, she has broken up with her partner for the only reason
she thought that that was what the Department wanted her to do in order to have
her children returned to her. She was aware
of the accusations against him but
denied them, and really couldn't perceive in any abstract fashion the idea of
protecting the children.
This reflects her level of intellectual disability and
would appear unlikely to change in the future.
[48] It is very unlikely that
the SJ will be able to function in a very independent fashion without ongoing
supervision. Whilst she's
very resistant to this her decision making is limited
in the bottom one per cent of the population, as is her ability to conceptualise
employment problems."
[49] She went on to say that in relation to her
potential to parent, "I would suggest developing with her very strict and
routines that are to be undertaken in particular timeframes. For
example, 6am get up; 6.10 give child breakfast; 6.10 bath child,
so that she can
follow a simple routine in order to achieve what needs to done. She has
demonstrated extremely poor ability to develop
any novel situations to problems
as they arise. That is why I think she cannot be simply given a lot of options
expecting she will
be able to work out which one to use.
[50] It is my view
she will require quite structured and specific direction and training. A
positive relationship also needs to be
fostered with some kind of external
agency to whom she should go when difficulties arise as she is unlikely to be
able to spontaneously
resolve problems."
[51] A little later on she said,
"Based on the available information SJ has presented with a lifelong
intellectual disability." And
later, "She has demonstrated on testing very poor
ability to conceptualise problems in an abstract fashion and to anticipate
consequences.
She retains very little insight about her situation and the
factors that led to it, and this may well be an ongoing difficulty despite
separation from her partner.
[52] She requires concrete skills base training
and quite a specific routine to be developed for her in order to assist her in
the day to day needs of the children." And later, "She has limited
insight and judgment and therefore will require ongoing monitoring
children are returned to her."
[53] That was explored to some extent in
cross-examination with the witness and I suppose all that really can be said is
was no exact list of what needed to be done by way of supervision or
assistance with her, but the psychologist did not back away
from the fact that
it would need to be significant assistance.
CRIMINAL HISTORY OF THE
[54] Before going on, I mentioned earlier that the Department had
concerns about the domestic violence and criminal history of the
father. I have
already commented about the “notifications” of domestic violence,
and my reluctance to place any weight
on any of those. Referring to the criminal
history, it shows that the father was convicted in 1998 and 2000 of some
relatively minor
drug offences, it looks like, because they resulted in fines
with no convictions in the Magistrates Court.
[55] In 2001 he was convicted
of a trespass offence where he was fined a very small amount. In 2004 he was
fined an even smaller amount
for contravening a direction of a police officer,
which is a minor charge, and also in 2004 he was convicted with no punishment
breaching bail. In 2006 he was convicted of assaulting police and
obstructing police which occurred on the 20th of April 2006, no
doubt when the
authorities came to take the children away; and he was placed on an intensive
corrections order.
[56] In other words the only criminal history that he has
for any violence whatsoever is the day that his children were removed from
He has no history for any domestic violence. All we are told about in Ms Davies'
affidavit is that "A domestic violence index
indicates there were three
incidents of domestic violence between 2003 and 2004" and she then goes on to
give some details about
alleged domestic violence.
[57] The difficulty, once
again, just as with substantiated and un-substantiated notifications is that the
domestic violence index
is not in evidence. Not only is it not in evidence, we
were not even told what it is. We were not told who created it, what it actually
says, whether it is first, second, third hand information or anything else. It
is useless, just like the notifications. So, there
is really next to no evidence
of those matters as far as I am concerned.
SOCIAL ASSESSMENT REPORTS
– MS RATHBORNE
[58] There are social assessment reports prepared by two
[59] Firstly a Ms Rathborne, who actually prepared two reports. The
earlier one I think is of no real assistance. The one that is
being looked at by
everybody with some degree of interest is the second one which was done in
September 2008. To do that she interviewed
both parents and one of the carers,
the carer for TM. In fact, this report was really only prepared in relation to
TM, so she interviewed
TM's carer and she also interviewed Ms Sabatino, the
departmental worker who I have mentioned earlier and who I was wholly
unimpressed
with. So, there was a limited number of people she spoke to in a
relatively brief report comprising about 11 pages.
[60] She eventually said
that she would support reunification - I should have said she is a social worker
of considerable experience.
She said that the goal should be reunification
between TM and the parents but that it was clear in her report that she thought
the mother would need assistance and she in evidence at the hearing said
that she thought that the mother needed "very strong networks"
to get on in the
absence of the father and look after the children. She was talking about just
TM, although she did say that her
comments would apply similarly to all of the
children. Also, she commented that the more children there are, the bigger the
become, which is self-evident I suppose. It is easier to look after one
child than it is four.
[61] When talking about the very strong networks she
said, "There are really three different sorts of networks that you can have:
can have social, which are basically friends; family or relatives; or supportive
networks which are community/ professional networks."
She commented that her
investigation showed the mother had little in the way of either social or family
networks apart from the father,
who had been distanced from her at the request
of the department. Therefore she would have to rely on supportive networks
by the community, which I will come back to later.
[62] The reality
is that whilst the children have been in care now for three and a-half years it
does not seem too many community
networks or supportive networks have been
forthcoming at the instigation of the Department or anybody else. So, whilst she
did recommend
that the goal of the case plan was reunification it was prefaced
on the understanding that there would need to be networks to assist
SJ given her
own personal shortcomings.
SOCIAL ASSESSMENT REPORT – MR
[63] The further report was by a Mr Thompson, and I have made no
secret of the fact throughout the hearing that I found Mr Thompson
impressive witness, and really invited counsel to talk to me about him more than
anybody else, and I have not changed my mind
[64] Mr Thompson
interviewed a large number of people for his report which was prepared in
February this year. He interviewed the
mother, the father, and the carers of all
the children. There are three different carers. The two older boys are with one
then there is another carer for TB and another one for TM. He
interviewed all of them. He also interviewed Ms Sabatino once again,
to have got a look at both social workers, and he interviewed a Ms McGregor
who was a step-mother to the father from his
teenage years for some time.
[65] In addition, he had regard to a large amount of material provided to
him by the department which included the affidavits from
three people I have
mentioned: Davies, Rasmussen and Sabatino; the report of Dr Prior; the report
from Ms Rathborne; the report
from Ms Anderson and other information of less
significance.
[66] His report is an extremely detailed report. It comprised
more than 40 pages of reasons and, again, whilst Mr Balzamo for the
urged upon me that I need to be careful about the influence that the affidavit
material which I've criticised was relied
upon to some extent as was the oral
information he received from Ms Sabatino, I still think I could take some
comfort in some of
the matters that he arrived at. I think it is necessary that
I read a fairly large extract from his report to show that whilst he
did rely on
some of the material that he was given by the Department and told by Ms
Sabatino, that he also relied on other material
and primarily his own
observations during his extensive interviews that I have mentioned.
perhaps should also mention before I do that, that in his report he quoted what
the step-mother of the father, Ms McGregor,
had told him. And, whilst she
is not a professional it is clear from what he says that Ms McGregor bears a
great affection for the
father and would do the best she could for him. I do not
think anybody is suggesting anything different. I also think that, while
not been explored in any great fashion, that we can reasonably assume that she
knows him well, she has known him since he
was a boy, as I said.
paragraph 7.3.7 of the report Mr Thompson quotes his discussions with Ms
McGregor when she was discussing the father. And,
Mr Thompson says, she
stated, "I believe MB would be a caring parent but I don't think he would be a
responsible parent in his state
of mind." She stated, "SJ might be able" - SJ,
being the mother - "SJ might be able to cope as a parent if there were high
of support in managing general household tasks and help towards care for
the children". And then again quoting Ms McGregor, "They
work as a team but MB
definitely has to have his issues dealt with. MB is scared of medication, he's
afraid of being doped to the
level that he doesn't have control of his own
[69] She agreed that the mother and the father felt they had been
ordered by the Department not to be in a relationship together if
there was to
be any hope of the mother getting the children back into her care, and that both
the mother and the father had visited
her together very upset and "beside
themselves over these demands." He went on to say Ms McGregor stated that "I
fear for both their
mental health if they do break up because the only thing
that's kept the SJ together mentally and MB to a certain extent is to have
other. They're not perfect but every time I've visited the home in the last
couple of years it's been clean. That was their
first hurdle because when they
got depressed their cleanliness went down. They've said to me, 'Child Protection
said all I have to
do is clean up the house. The house is clean, why don't they
give back the children' so I don't think Child Protection has dealt
very well."
[70] Mr Thompson in his own conclusions at paragraph 10 in his
report says this - and I should say he starts off discussing the fact
are apparently separated, just to put it in context, that is that the mother and
father have separated at the urgings of
the Department. He says,
evident to me that MB and SJ are still very much in a relationship. They may not
be living together and they may have indicated
they're not in a relationship,
but I'm of the opinion these are merely practical necessities effected on their
part to engineer the
possible return of the children.
Neither parent was
able to adequately relate the circumstances which brought about the end of the
relationship beyond the naïve
interpretation that this is what was required
of them and nor was there any indication that either of them had taken
substantial
steps to begin a new life independent of the other. What I did
observe were two individuals who, despite a series of personal disputes
chaotic relationship patterns, had demonstrated a clear pattern of devotion and
trust of each other since 2000.
SJ was more adamant the relationship was
over, but MB spoke of the relationship as though it was still a viable option
and even discussed
the possibility of what might occur if SJ was to get the kids
back, if he complied with the Department's previous requests involving
for his condition and if he was then able to move back in with SJ and the
He sees SJ as having been manipulated by the Department into
determining the only way she's going to have a chance to regain custody
children was by ending her relationship with himself, but I don't believe they
would have even contemplated ending the relationship
unless SJ had been
presented by the Department MB and SJ's allegation" - the other way around,
sorry - "with this rather questionable
option of having to decide between MB and
her children but then still to be presented with an application for an order for
the long-term
guardianship of those children.
It is noted that Ms Jennifer
McGregor also stated that both SJ and MB had visited her specifically to discuss
the Department's alleged
ultimatum that either MB leave the relationship or SJ
has no chance to be reunified with the four children.
Whilst I understand the
Department concerns regarding MB's mental health, the previous instability and
the potential harm of the children
delivering such an ultimatum to a mother with
a severe level of intellectual disability who clearly doesn't understand the
nature of the issues involved in effecting the return of her children,
to chose between her children and what she still considers
to be a supportive
relationship would seem to be a rather brutal and ill-conceived strategy to
socially engineer the end of the relationship.
If MB and SJ decided to
terminate their relationship because they recognised some systemic instability
or incompatibility or danger
to either party or to their children because they
developed such a genuine belief then the Department might have been able to work
legitimately with such a situation. Instead, it is the Department who has
apparently created the situation leading to the fraudulent
break-up and now
they're seeking to capitalise on that situation by using it to demonstrate
MB’s and mother’s implied
dishonesty.
But even with the best of
intentions towards the children's future stability and frustration over MB's
past behaviours it appears
to me to have been a poor decision to attempt to
manipulate this highly disabled and disorganised couple's relationship to the
they felt they had no other option but to fake its end only to be
presented with an amended application seeking long-term guardianship,
irrespective of whether the relationship ended or not.
If professional social
work and human services provisions supposedly highlights the importance of
equity and the importance of process
then I'd suggest this situation offers an
excellent example in which the utilitarian theory of the end justifies the means
employed in a rather brutal fashion and an argument could possibly be
made to frame this as unethical behaviour."
[71] I pause to stop reading from
the report for the moment to say that I could not agree more with what Mr
Thompson has said. I hope
that his comments and my endorsement of his comments
are brought to the attention at the highest levels of the Department of Child
Safety. I would urge counsel for the Department to ensure that a transcript of
this decision is sent to the people who control these
matters to make sure that
this sort of thing is known about and addressed adequately.
[72] Continuing
on with the report Mr Thompson said, "The recent neuropsychological assessment
of SJ indicate that she operates under
a significant intellectual disability. I
am of the opinion that with her current level of limited support and insight
into her condition
she would realistically need to have access to the equivalent
of a trained, long-term support person to assist her to provide appropriate
for her four young children.
[73] This report notes that while it is possible
for SJ to be taught to progress through a series of routine tasks provided these
were sequenced with prompt short intervals that realistically she has little
capacity to carry out those tasks unless she was continually
reminded. She would
also have difficulty in anticipating or adapting her behaviour to any
significant change in that routine, something
that occurs regularly in rearing
four small, unpredictable and energetic children, two with recognised
behavioural difficulties.
[74] In support of this observation I would note
the comments of the carer of TB who stated that SJ would change the nappy at
when reminded to do so, but would stop when no prompts were provided.
It's also noted by the CSO in her interview" - the CSO I should
say being Ms
Sabatino - "that SJ on supervised contacts with TM had to be regularly prompted
to pick up her infant daughter from
the pram and cuddle her, otherwise the
mother was generally content to interact with the baby while she was restraining
[75] I would also note that it was the report writer who had to
alert both parents to the disappearance of TB from the interview room
had not noticed her walk out of the room and into the public area of the office.
I discussed the neuropsychological assessment
with both SJ and MB and they both
stated they disagreed with the results and stated SJ was merely a bit slow with
her reading and
writing and maths, there was nothing about her intellectual
capacity that adversely affected her parenting ability.
[76] Further, SJ
stated she could not really say what it was about her parenting ability which
had led to the original removal of
the children, apart from the fact that the
house needed to be clean and the Department had some issues with MB's mental
[77] Since the removal of the children SJ has essentially developed
no significant level of insight or accepted responsibility to
behaviour or parenting skills beyond attending those courses imposed by the
Department in keeping the house clean. She
sees herself as a mother who is ready
and able to take on the care and protection of all of the four children despite
the fact she
is now apparently a single mother with no private transport, no
significant social or family network and operating under a serious
intellectual
disability."
[78] He goes on in his report to reach the opinion that the
long-term guardianship is appropriate and desirable and that there is
intrusive order that would be appropriate.
[79] In evidence at the hearing he
made comments during his evidence-in-chief that as far as support goes, and the
likelihood of support
changing the situation, that he observed that the older
children had been in care for about three years by the time he saw the parties
for the preparation of the report and that nothing had really
[80] He also made the comment that there had been a period of nine
months he had noted where the parents had decided to cease contact
because they
were not happy with the arrangements, and that he thought that only went on to
reinforce the fact that what had been
the situation in 2006 was little different
now and he could see little prognosis for it changing given that all that time
by and nothing really had changed.
[81] He was pressed about whether
- in cross-examination - if appropriate support was given she would be able to
care for children
and he said "Provided she had enormous levels of support and
demonstrated insight" and later said that she could "perhaps" care for
or even maybe two, but that three or four children would simply be too much to
ask of her.
[82] In other words, as I understood Mr Thompson's evidence, even
with great support for the four children it was simply beyond her
capabilities, and even one or two children would need enormous support. The
problem of course is that the enormous support
apparently is not
[83] There has been no evidence led today by any party over the
last four days of this hearing as to what support might be made available.
not aware of any and, as we discussed during submissions, neither can I order
any support if I did, for instance, allow the
children to be returned to the
[84] As I said before, I accept that Mr Balzamo has a legitimate
grievance that all of those reports from Prior, Anderson, Rathborne
and Thompson
to some extent - and particularly Rathborne and Thompson - rely on questionable
information from the department in addition
to their own observations and that
therefore caution must be exercised in accepting what they say.
might have been some room at this stage of the proceedings, if that was all
there was, for that argument to triumph. That
is, that I could not be satisfied
on balance that the children would be at risk if they were returned to the
mother or the mother
and the father together. But that is not all – there
EVIDENCE OF CARERS
[86] In particular there's evidence from the
current carers which I think is compelling as to the ability of the parents,
their best efforts, to care of the children properly.
bright point, if I can put it that way, as far as the department's handling of
this matter goes - one of the few bright points-
is that the two boys and TB
have been with their same carers ever since they were taken into care in April
2006, which is unusual
in my experience and refreshing to see that they have not
been shunted around from carer to carer which is so often the case.
other words the carers who have got the three eldest children are very familiar
with them and have had them since they were
first taken into care right up to
now, and still have them, and they all have said - and so has the carer for TM
who has had her
since she was born last year - that they want to see the
children stay with them on a permanent basis if the appropriate orders are
So if I can draw comfort from any aspect of the case, there is a glimmer of it
MS SHELLARD – CARER FOR TM
[89] The carer for TM is Ms
Shellard. I suppose this looks not at what the situation was three and a half
years ago; this looks at
what the situation is now, that is what has changed in
the last three and a half years to show that
[90] SJ may now have reached a
point where she is able to adequately care for the children.
affidavit sworn only a month ago Ms Shellard says in part - and I should say
that TM goes to contact with SJ on a weekly
basis, an hour and a half visit, and
then comes back to Ms Shellard. Ms Shellard says, "TM will often come home from
no nappy change and her bottle often hasn't been consumed. TM often
comes home from contact with a dirty face and her clothes that
she is wearing
are filthy. There have been numerous occasions when TM has been transported to
up. At times TM would be unsettled after
visiting her parents."
[92] That is a very brief affidavit; it does not say a
lot. It does not raise a lot of concerns; they are fairly minor matters, I
suppose. It is part of the picture. There was no suggestion in any
cross-examination of Ms Shellard that what she said is not correct.
McLELLAN – CARER FOR TA AND TJ
[93] The other carers' information is
much more concerning. A Karen McLellan has been the carer of the two older boys
and her affidavit
raises real concerns about their level of care at
[94] She says, "When the boys first came into my care I observed the
following: TA and TJ were extremely dirty when they first came
into my care.
They appeared not to have been bathed for some time. Their hair was dirty, they
had dirty hands, feet et cetera. Their
clothes were dirty and very worn. The
fabric was quite thin. To the best of my recollection neither of the boys came
with shoes.
However, a pair of shoes was passed on to TJ from his parents which
were approximately three sizes too small." And I am picking out
pieces of her
statement here, I am not reading the whole lot of it. "Neither of the boys could
use a knife, fork or spoon, hence
they could not feed themselves. They ate with
their hands or waited for someone to feed them."
[95] "TA was approximately
four and a half years old and was still wearing night-time nappies and couldn't
clean himself after toileting.
TJ was approximately two and a half years old and
was not toilet-trained at all, had no desire to be trained or inclination as to
what to do in regards to toileting. Neither of the boys could speak. The only
words they could say was 'Mum', 'Dad' and 'yum-yum'.
They had no concept of
routine, that is they didn't know what mealtimes, bath time and bedtimes meant
or when they were meant to
happen. They had no concept of boundaries and
wouldn't listen or adhere to directions. Their gross and fine motor skills were
non-existent. That is, they couldn't kick a ball, hop, catch. TJ was
constantly falling over for no apparent reason. TA has said"
- and I should
interrupt here to say that in evidence she explained that this was only recently
that he has said this - "TA has said
on a few occasions that Mum and Dad had
remembered to buy food for breakfast and lunch but forgot to buy food for
dinner. Hence they
had nothing for dinner that night."
[96] She goes on to
say, "Since they've been in my care the changes that stand out on a daily basis
are as follows" - and again I
am selectively picking out the ones that I think
are most interesting - "Anthony can now use a spoon and fork and is learning to
use a knife. TJ still struggles a bit with a fork but is quite competent using a
spoon. TA can now bathe himself by himself. TA talks
constantly. TJ also talks
constantly but is still hard to understand at times. TA no longer wears a nappy
and toileting is great.
TJ is now toilet-trained although does wear pull-ups at
night. Both the boys are very active. They're motor skills are improving.
of the boys can ride two-wheeler bikes, catch a ball, hit a ball et
[97] "Both the boys exhibit challenging behaviours at times. It's
noticed from the past that when there is no contact" - that is with
the parents,
if I can interrupt there again - "behaviours improved
dramatically."
[98] This witness also gave evidence at the hearing. She is an
experienced mother. She has two natural children of her own, aged nine
and therefore some reliance can be put on, in my view, her comments about the
abilities of the children at their age being
of concern. She has been there,
done that with her own children.
MR HULAN – CARER FOR TB
is then the carer for TB - Leslie Hulan and his wife care for her, but Mr Hulan
was the only one who gave evidence and
the only one who has provided an
affidavit. He said in his affidavit - and again I am reading selectively - "TB
arrived into our
day care" - this is 2005 of course - "wearing a dirty, stained
T-shirt that smelt badly and a baby wrap that appeared to have not
been washed
for some time and also smelt. TB herself was dirty. She had dirt embedded in the
creases of her skin which took some
time to remove with quite a few baths. TB
had severe nappy rash which extended down the back of her knees and took
approximately
one and a half weeks to get under control. TB was initially having
supervised contact by the Department of Child Safety with her
parents. The
visits did end up going unsupervised. Upon TB's return for these unsupervised
visits, 90 per cent of the time she appeared
not to have been changed. Her nappy
was not only wet but was at times soiled. Her clothes, face, hands et cetera
were once again
90 per cent of the time dirty when she was returned to our care
after these visits.
[100] My wife and I noted the dates when TB arrived home
either wet or soiled. Some of these dates included" - and he then goes on
detail more than 20 specific dates between January and September 2007, and goes
on to say, "This occurred despite the fact that
Sandy and I provided changes of
clean clothes and nappies for TB when she went on access visits. When TB first
came to our care she
came with no clothes. After a short time the parents sent a
bag of clothes for her which I returned to the Department of Child Safety.
clothes were mostly size 2. They were dirty, stained, holey and some of them
stank. They were also all boys' clothes.
[101] After contact with her parents
TB shows extreme bouts of aggression which can last for up to four days. She is
extremely clingy
towards both Sandy and myself. There's been days when she's
refused to go to day care and was asked to go and sit in time out. She
to have a fear of going in the car for days after contact saying, "No Mummy
Daddy". Her sleep patterns are disrupted majorly
to the point where Sandy would
at times have to lay down with her for the most part of the night. It's noted
that after contact TB
says "No Mummy no Daddy, you my Mummy" to Sandy. It is
only after Sandy agrees with TB that she is Mummy will TB begin to settle
[102] TB does not ask to see her parents at all. TB has been a witness
to bouts of aggression from her father in our presence. During
this time she
will turn her head and hide her face not making eye contact with anybody and not
speak until such time as her parents
have left the room (an incident at the
Ipswich Hospital)."
[103] All three of those carers were cross-examined and
it was not suggested in any way to them that what they were saying was untrue.
have no reason therefore to doubt what they say is substantially
OVERVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE OF CARERS
[104] What it demonstrates
therefore is that if I disregard completely the evidence of the departmental
workers, and if I have some
reservations about the effect of that disregard of
evidence upon the reports of Thompson, Rathborne et al, I am then still left
this independent and compelling evidence that the children in 2006 were in
a sorry state, to say the least, when they were taken
into care. And the whole
picture is that it has not got any better.
[105] Mr Balzamo urged upon me
that during contact visits and so on it is an artificial environment and parents
cannot be expected
to perform to the normal level because of the obvious
stresses that that artificial environment imparts. And I accept to some extent
that that is true. We must not forget though what was said about the
unsupervised visits with TB. There can’t be much stress
is dropped around to SJ's house and repeatedly comes back having simply not been
cared for properly.
[106] They are fairly minor matters of their lack of
care. Not changing nappies. And no child is going to have great health problems
if their nappies are not changed perhaps as regularly as they ought to be, one
would think. But it is really a small window into
the larger picture.
[107] As I said during submissions it seems to me that surely any parent
with any insight of any degree would know that their performance
monitored during these periods and would strive to make sure that everything
looked shipshape when the baby was returned
visits in the mother's home where she is relaxed in her own home environment and
really in the
same environment to which it is proposed by the parents that the
baby would now go to. If even during those visits the mother still
does not have
enough insight, without somebody standing there reminding her what she has to do
with the baby, how could I possibly
think that if the children were returned to
her, all four of them, let alone one, that she would be able to look after
CONCLUSIONS
[108] There is plenty of evidence now that the house is
being cleaned for the last couple of years, as the stepmother said. But that
a house with just the mother living there. That is not a house with four young
children in it. That is a wholly different matter.
It would be nice if I could
somehow order that various levels of support were given to the mother and I
might say, from what I have
heard, I would not have too many problems about the
father going back and living with the mother. I think even though his mental
health problems might pose some risk, there is no suggestion he ever physically
hurt any of the children and I think everybody accepts
that he provides a great
deal of support to the mother, and no doubt some guidance to her. But even with
him back there they would
still need support. That is obvious when one looks at
what the situation was in 2006.
[109] The reality is there has not been any
support offered or forthcoming. Whether the Department is simply holding off on
make sure they get their order or whether the Department cannot provide
it for financial or other reasons, I don't know, that is
a mystery, but at the
end of the day there is nothing I can do about that. The support simply is not
available for one reason or
another and I cannot order any support. As we have
looked at in
of the Act, I can make a variety of orders, but once I
make a final order, what support is offered is up to the Department. The reality
is the Department has offered little support in the last three and a half years.
They are not likely to suddenly change now.
[110] I therefore reluctantly
come to the conclusion that whilst I accept that the mother and the father love
these children dearly
and have done enormous things over the last three years
from their point of view to show how much they love the children and to get
back, the reality is that they need support and the support is not available.
And I think without the support four children
being returned to this household
would be an impossible situation and it would very quickly degenerate back to
just as bad as it
was in 2006, which is quite unsatisfactory for any
[111] It is quite apparent therefore that in my view no less an
intrusive order than long term guardianship can be made. Because to
order for a less term, which is what Mr Balzamo has urged upon me, would only be
putting us back in the same position we
have been in for the last three and a
half years.
[112] How many times do we have to put the parents and the
children through the agony of an order that lasts for a limited time with
glimmer of hope at the end they will get the children back when, in reality,
nothing changes between the order in 2006 and the
orders in 2008 and now the
orders in 2009. It is really just being more cruel again, much like the
Department was in my view.
[113] And so with great sadness, given that the
parents love their children so much, I am persuaded that on balance the children
in need of protection. There is no other appropriate order on less intrusive
terms that I can make other than long term guardianship
in relation to all four
of the children.
[114] I should have mentioned, it was not addressed in the
submissions, that I have to be satisfied under the Act that there is no
person willing and able to be granted long term guardianship before I can grant
guardianship to the Chief Executive. The various
carers have put their hands up
and said they would do it.
[115] Prima facie therefore, the orders could be
made with them. The difficulty with that though is that the father, and in a lot
of ways I sympathise with him, as Mr Thompson said, has much rage built up in
him. Contact would have to continue and I really think
that given those
difficulties that it is unrealistic for me to think that if the carers were
given long term guardianship, real contact
would continue.
[116] What I want
to make sure is that whilst the children will not go back to the custody of the
parents, that both of them will
continue to see their children on a regular
basis. And I fear that if I gave guardianship to any of the carers that would
evaporate as the relationship deteriorated. Whereas the Department of
course has much more material and methods at their disposal
to properly
supervise the contact. So I am satisfied that, again it is appropriate that the
guardianship be made in favour of the
Chief Executive rather than the carers.
[117] In closing and I address this to the mother, Mr Thompson mentioned in
his report that he feels very sorry about the fact that
it seems to him and to
me that the Department have for years given you the impression that all you
needed to do was to keep a clean
house and get the father out of the house and
then there was a real chance to get your children back. And Mr Thompson has gone
some length in his report to say that somebody needs to sit down with you and
explain to you the real picture. And I'd like to try
and do that now briefly if
I may. And I don't mean this as any criticism of you.
[118] The fact is that
the information I've got before me indicates that you have been born with
problems and you will have those
problems for the rest of your life. That
doesn't mean you don't love your children. It doesn't mean you don’t do
to look after your children. But what it does mean is you just don't
have the skill to do it properly. It's like me being asked to
be a race car
driver. I'd love to have a go but I couldn't do it properly. I'd crash the car,
even though I'd like to try, because
I'm not a race car driver.
people are cut out to be mums and dads and some aren't. And it's very sad that
you're a person who although you love your
children, you don't have the skills
to be able to do it. And I don't mean to criticise - I'm not trying to put you
down saying that,
I'm trying to say it to you so that you understand that it's
not just a matter, and I'm very sorry that you've been tricked into
that if you had a clean house and made the father leave home that everything
would be right and the boys and the girls would
come back to you. Because that's
never been the case. The Department has always known, I think, and we've all
known, looking at the
material, that you've got longstanding problems that could
only really be helped by a great deal of assistance being given to you
assistance has not been given to you. If I could give the assistance to you,
madam, I would, and I would give your children
back. I can't give you that
assistance, I can't order anybody to give you that assistance. As I said before,
it's with a great deal
of sadness that I have today in this case to tell you
that the children are now ordered to go into long term guardianship. I don't
think I can say any more than that to you to express my condolences about what
I've had to do today. It's been a very difficult case
for me and I'm sure it's
been a lot more difficult for you and the father.
[120] And I thank you both
for your patience and your good grace in sitting here throughout the four days,
putting up with what's
been, when all said and done, an exposing of a pretty
disgraceful series of events over the last three and a half years by a
Department.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (176 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter