URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/60.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Q67 and Council of the City of Gold Coast [2025] QICmr 60 (15 September 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
Q67 and Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2025] QICmr 60
September 2025)
Application Number:
Respondent:
Council of the City of Gold Coast
Decision Date:
15 September 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION -
REFUSAL OF ACCESS - DOCUMENTS NONEXISTENT OR UNLOCATABLE - request for documents
to a development - scope narrowed on external review - whether agency
has taken all reasonable steps to locate internal agency communications
whether access to further documents may be refused - nonexistent documents -
sections 47(3)(e) and 52(1)(a) of the
Right to Information Act
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied
to Council of the
City of Gold Coast (
) under the
Right to Information Act 2009
access to internal and external Council communications between January 2018 and
May 2020 relating to the development of a childcare
centre at Metricon
to release 1,791 full and
15 part pages, and refuse access to 6 full and 15 part
applicant applied
to the Office of
the Information Commissioner (
) for external review of Council’s
decision, submitting that Council should have located more documents,
particularly internal
Council communications. Following negotiations on external
review the applicant agreed to limit the scope of the additional information
was seeking to:
‘All internal communications’
involving three
specified Council officers, and the Council City Architect
the review Council located and released additional documents falling within the
Agreed Scope to the applicant.
However, the applicant did not accept disclosure of this additional information
in resolution of the review and provided further
submissions to OIC outlining
the reasons why he considers further documents should have been
The applicant’s
submissions also detail his broader concerns about Council and the particular
development, including reference
to information access requests made to other
agencies in connection with his wider
For the purpose of
reaching my decision in this external review, I have only had regard to the
applicant’s submissions to the
extent they are relevant to the issue for
determination (as set out in paragraph
making this decision, I have also taken into account the evidence, submissions,
legislation and other material as set out in these
reasons (including
footnotes). I have had regard to the
Human Rights Act 2019
), particularly the right to seek and receive information and in doing
so, have acted in accordance with section 58(1) of the HR
the reasons set out below, I vary Council’s decision and find that Council
has taken all reasonable steps to locate documents
falling within the terms of
the Agreed Scope, and access may be refused to further documents because they
nonexistent.
Issue for determination
issue for determination is whether access may be refused to additional documents
falling within the Agreed Scope, on the basis
they do not
In determining that
issue, it is necessary to examine Council’s searches to assess whether it
has taken all reasonable steps
to locate information falling within the Agreed
Scope. During the review process, the applicant contested OIC’s
interpretation
of the Agreed Scope; effectively seeking to broaden the terms of
his request. As the terms of an application set the parameters
agency’s searches, I have made additional findings on the scope of the
application before setting out my findings on
Scope of application
Relevant law
RTI Act requires that an access application must ‘give sufficient
information concerning the document to enable a responsible
officer of the
agency or Minister to identify the
There are sound practical reasons for requiring the
documents sought in an access application to be clearly and unambiguously
identified,
including that the terms of the access application set the
parameters for an agency’s response and the direction of an agency’s
It is also well
settled that the scope of an access application may not be unilaterally widened
on external review.
Information Commissioner has held that although the principles outlined in those
cases are ‘in the context of the repealed
FOI Act’ they
‘remain relevant and are consistent with the object and pro-disclosure
bias of the RTI Act’.
Applicant’s submissions
applicant acknowledged that, during the review process,
‘agreement was
reached for narrowing the scope of the information request to; all internal
communications involving’
the named individuals and City
However, in his final
submissions to OIC, responding to OIC’s preliminary view letter, he
‘the wording of the search be refined’
drafts and comments on all versions of draft documents’ in connection with
the ‘Delegated Report’
transcripts of a
meeting held on 5 September 2019 between Council and a commercial entity
information to
‘show basis’
for comments made at the 5 September 2019
‘information/content
for any meetings or communications whereby ministerial approval or prospective
ministerial approval, and
State Government will, were to have bearing on
GCC’s approval of the development’
notes and information on discussions’
after the 5 September 2019
the applicant
It would be reasonable to expect that post the 05/09/2019 ‘Response to
Information Request’ meeting with
[third party]
there would have
been, and should have been, considerable discussion and deliberation between the
Council officers attending the
meeting. While not in attendance at the meeting,
it is reasonable to assume
[named person]
would also have been involved
in discussions.
It is considered the scope of my original RTI application includes all
transcripts and or recordings of the meeting on 05/09/2019
between Gold Coast
Council officers ...
[and relevant third parties]
It is also considered that the scope of my original application would have
included all drafts and comments on all versions of draft
documents, showing the
progress of drafts to final document and comments shown in the Delegated Report
for approval of a child care
centre development (MCU/2019/238).
It is appreciated that the extent of the searches is enormous and cumbersome.
It also has to be appreciated that outcomes of the searches
potentially lead to
profound public interest consequences.
Moving ahead, in consideration of information processing times, perhaps
‘Response to Information Request’ document by
[third party]
and were listed on the agenda for the meeting on 05/09/2019
1) Amended Proposal Plans & CPTED Letter
2) Architectural considerations
3) Stadiums QLD &
[third party]
correspondence
4) Economic Needs Assessment
applicant also submitted:
Evidence has been provided to substantiate the case that information relevant
to the public interest exists and that the information
has significant public
interest consequences justifying the release of that information.
Information searches should include Council’s correspondence (if any)
with the Departments of Sport, and Planning and Infrastructure.
This was listed
in the scope of the original RTI application to GCC.
While the information requested may represent a substantial impact on an
agency’s resources, it is considered the processing
of the request is not
unreasonable. Public interest issues involving alleged apprehended bias and
malfeasant public administration
should be prioritised.
the applicant’s own admission, the
‘extent of the searches
[which he requested]
anticipated scale of searches necessarily led, by agreement, to the scope of the
access application being narrowed on external
review to the Agreed Scope,
limited to internal communications involving specific Council officers and the
City Architect.
applicant has received access to over 2,300 documents from Council in response
to this application. The applicant
acknowledges
that he has
received information of interest to him including emails which provided
background/context to Council's decision to approve
the development. Disclosure
of this information appears to have given rise, in the applicant’s mind,
to further lines of inquiry
pertaining to the development application approval
process, and in particular, the 5 September 2019 meeting and further documents
associated with that meeting. It is not uncommon for applicants to identify
further lines of inquiry after receiving documents from
an agency. However, such
further lines of inquiry must still be tested against the scope of the
application, and the reasonableness
of any further searches (discussed below).
In many cases, a fresh access application, framed in clear and unambiguous
terms, to the
agency to allow the application and search process to be
recommenced, within revised and defined search parameters, will be required.
noted at paragraph
, it is well
settled that an applicant cannot unilaterally broaden the scope of an
application on external review. For the purpose
of this review, I consider the
Agreed Scope as confirmed by OIC to the applicant on 20 August 2024, represents
the scope of this
external review. I do not accept the applicant’s
submission on further
of the scope, nor to the extension of
seeking in connection
with the 5 September 2019 meeting. Therefore, in assessing
the reasonableness of Council’s searches below, I have done so within
parameters set by the Agreed Scope.
Existence of further documents
Relevant law
the RTI Act, an individual has a general right to be given access to documents
held by a Queensland government
While the legislation is
to be administered with a pro-disclosure
the right of access is
subject to certain limitations, including grounds for refusing
Relevantly, access to a
document may be refused if there are reasonable grounds to be satisfied it does
be satisfied that a document does not exist, the Information Commissioner has
previously identified a number of key factors to
consider, including the
agency’s structure, recordkeeping practices and procedures and the nature
and age of requested documents.
By considering relevant key factors, a decision-maker may conclude that a
particular document was not created because, for example
the agency’s
processes do not require creation of that specific document. In such instances,
it is not necessary for the agency
to search for the document, but sufficient
that the circumstances to account for the nonexistence are adequately
all reasonable steps must be taken to locate the
documents. What constitutes
reasonable steps will vary from case to case, depending on which of the key
factors are most relevant
in the circumstances. The Information
Commissioner’s external review functions include investigating and
reviewing whether
agencies have taken reasonable steps to identify and locate
documents applied for by
applicants.
external review, the agency or Minister who made the decision under review has
the onus of establishing that the decision was justified
or that the Information
Commissioner should give a decision adverse to the
However, where the
issue of missing documents is raised, the applicant bears a practical onus of
demonstrating that the agency has
not discharged its obligation to locate all
relevant documents.
and mere assertion will not satisfy this
Applicant’s submissions
applicant’s submissions set out at paragraphs
of these reasons outline his concerns
‘internal communications’
, the submissions which
go beyond the parameters of the Agreed Scope, similarly fall outside the scope
of the issue for determination
and I have therefore, not considered them in
making my decision.
Council’s searches and submissions
provided submissions outlining the searches and enquiries conducted by its
As set out in these
reasons, Council located and released over 2300 pages to the applicant in
response to this application, including
plans, reports, meeting minutes, and a
significant volume of internal Council emails.
provided further information
relevant business unit, as set out below:
Upon receiving the original RTI application, Council’s RTI team
undertook detailed searches for documents relating to Development
Application
MCU/2019/238. These searches were conducted in
Objective Navigator
centralised electronic document and records management system (EDRMS), using the
reference number
MCU/2019/238
as identified by the applicant. A search
action form was completed and signed by an RTI officer on
6 October 2023
... documenting the process and results of the search.
As part of Council’s internal business process, following this initial
unit (Planning and
Assessment) via email, confirming that records relating to the relevant
development application had been extracted
and requesting confirmation that no
additional documents existed outside the records located in Objective Navigator
... it was verbally
confirmed at the time that no further documents were held
beyond what had been retrieved and recorded.
Pathway system
is used to log all development
applications against the relevant property. Each application, including
MCU/2019/238, is then linked
to a corresponding file in Objective Navigator.
This file is named according to the development application reference number and
contains all relevant documentation for the matter, including internal and
external correspondence, assessments, reports, and related
The Planning and Assessment business unit is well-versed in these procedures
and consistently stores all records associated with development
applications in
the designated Objective file. Given this centralised and systematic
recordkeeping approach, it is Council’s
position that a search of the
relevant MCU file within Objective Navigator encompasses all documentation held
in response to the
narrowed scope of the application.
reviewed the located information, and Council’s submissions on its
by Council were
appropriately informed by the details provided by the applicant in the access
application, the Agreed Scope on external
review and Council’s
record-keeping practices (such as the use of Objective Navigator - as the
primary storage facility for
documents related to a development application -
and the Pathway system).
am further satisfied that the direct inquiries with the Planning and Assessment
business unit constituted a further reasonable step
taken by Council to search
for relevant documents. The extensive number of emails that were located and
released to the applicant
during the review process, in my view, demonstrate
that further relevant documents were identified through those inquiries.
accept Council’s submission that the relevant business unit
‘consistently stores all records’
in the designated Objective
file and that due to this recordkeeping practice, there are no reasonable
grounds to believe further
the Agreed Scope, exist
outside of that system.
applicant firmly believes further internal communications were undertaken by
Council officers in relation the development. Given
the scale of and community
interest in the development, that very well may be the case; however, for the
purpose of this review,
there must be reasonable grounds to believe further
documents exist
the Agreed Scope so as to warrant further searches
on this application
. As noted above, following his careful examination of
the released documents from Council (over 2300 pages), the applicant identified
additional documents which he considers relevant to his interests, e.g.
documents in connection with the 5 September 2019 meeting.
In addition to
seeking further information, the applicant also conceded the extent of searches
he seeks is
and the information request would have
‘substantial impact
’ on Council’s resources. To my
mind, the applicant’s submissions (and attempts to reframe the scope on
demonstrate that the extent of information of interest to the applicant
remains exceptionally broad, reinforcing the view that further
documents are
beyond the parameters of the Agreed Scope.
acknowledge that the applicant has significant concerns around Council’s
handling of the development approval process, and
the conduct of officers
involved, and that he is seeking to pursue access to information to substantiate
those concerns. It is also
apparent that the applicant is seeking to look behind
decisions that were made by Council to gain further insight into why certain
actions were/were not taken in relation to the development. He is also
specifically seeking to interrogate any Council deliberations
following the 5
September 2019 meeting. While I recognise that these are genuinely held concerns
of the applicant, and that he considers
there to be public interest value in his
pursuit of information from Council, I do not consider his submissions establish
grounds to believe that further documents falling within the Agreed
Scope exist, nor am I satisfied that it would be reasonable for
conduct any further searches
on this application
. I am satisfied, based
on the evidence available to me that the applicant’s ongoing concerns
require searches that would not, to my mind, be
reasonable steps for Council to take in response to the Agreed Scope.
the terms of the original application, the parameters of the Agreed Scope, the
nature and extent of searches that have been
undertaken by Council, the
extensive number of documents located to date and Council’s relevant
recordkeeping systems, practices
and business unit operations, I am satisfied
that further documents responding to the Agreed Scope do not exist. Accordingly,
to further documents may be refused on that basis.
the reasons set out above, I
the decision under review
and find that Council may refuse access to any further documents falling within
the terms of the Agreed
Scope under sections 47(3)(e) and 52(1)(a) of the RTI
Act on the basis they are nonexistent.
have made this decision as a delegate of the Information Commissioner, under
section 145 of the RTI Act.
Assistant Information Commissioner
September 2025
On 5 September
On 1 July 2025 key parts
Information Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2023
came into force, effecting significant changes to the RTI Act. In
accordance with the transitional provisions in Chapter 7
Part 9 of the RTI Act,
particularly section 206K of the RTI Act, references in this decision are to the
RTI Act as in force prior
applicant requested communications between Council and six Council officers,
four individuals employed by private companies,
two government agencies and one
Decision dated 8
December 2023. This is the
reviewable decision
for the purpose of the
external review.
Relying on the
grounds of legal professional privilege, contrary to public interest, and
irrelevant information. The applicant did
not contest the information to which
access was refused in those pages and therefore, those issues did not form part
of the review.
On 29 February
2024. This application was received outside the statutory timeframe but, due to
the particular circumstances, the
applicant was allowed a longer period to apply
under section 88(1)(d) of the RTI
Confirmed by email to the
applicant on 20 August 2024.
total of 559 additional pages of documents were released to the applicant on
external review. Consultation was also conducted with
several third parties and
no objections to disclosure were
On 17 April 2025 and
16 May 2025.
For example, 13
of the 63 pages in the applicant’s submission of 16 May 2025 directly
related to External Review 317862 with
the remaining pages related to a separate
external review with OIC, as well as information relating to access applications
Office of Liquor and Gaming and Department of Tourism and Sport. The
submission also attached further supplementary documents comprising
OIC’s approach
to the HR Act set out in this paragraph has been considered and endorsed by the
Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal in
Lawrence v Queensland Police
[2022] QCATA 134
Under sections
47(3)(e) and 52(1)(a) of the RTI Act
Under sections 47(3)(e) and
52(1)(a) of the RTI Act.
Section 24(2)(b) of the RTI
Australian Quality Egg Farms Ltd
[1994] QICmr 9
(1994) 1 QAR 491
cited with approval
Rolfe and Banana Shire Council
(Unreported, Queensland Information
Commissioner, 9 October 2009) at [104],
O80PCE and Department of Education
and Training
(Unreported, Queensland Information Commissioner, 15 February
2010) at [33]
, Ciric and Queensland Police Service
[2018] QICmr 30
June 2018) at [20] and
S59 and Griffith University
[2025] QICmr 29
June 2025) at [18].
Robbins and Brisbane North Regional Health Authority
[1994] QICmr 19
(1994) 2 QAR 30
Arnold and Redland City Council
(Unreported, Queensland
Information Commissioner, 17 October 2013) at [17] to [21];
Simpson MP and Department of Transport and Main
(Unreported, Queensland Information Commissioner, 29 July 2011) at
[11] to [22]; and
and Redland City Council
(Unreported,
Queensland Information Commissioner, 21 August 2012) at
Lindeberg and
Department of Treaty, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Partnerships,
Communities and the Arts
[2023] QICmr 34
(30 June 2023) at
Page 12 of submission
dated 16 May 2025.
Pages 12-13 of
submission dated 16 May 2025
Page 21 of submission dated 16 May
Page 13 of submission
dated 16 May 2025.
phone call with OIC on 28 February
Section 23 of the RTI
Section 44 of the RTI
Section 47 of the RTI
Act. Those grounds are however, to be interpreted narrowly: see section 47(2)(a)
of the RTI Act.
52(1)(a) of the RTI Act.
These factors are identified in
Pryor and Logan City Council
(Unreported,
Queensland Information Commissioner, 8 July 2010) at [19], which adopted the
Information Commissioner’s comments
PDE and the University of
(Unreported, Queensland Information Commissioner, 9 February
2009) at [37]-[38]. These factors were more recently considered in
Department of Justice and Attorney-General
[2024] QICmr 33
(7 August 2024)
at [15] and
T12 and Queensland Police Service
[2024] QICmr 8
(20 February
2024) at [12].
130(2) of the RTI Act. The Information Commissioner also has power under
section 102 of the RTI Act to require additional
an external review. The Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal confirmed
Webb v Information Commissioner
[2021] QCATA 116
that the RTI
does not contemplate that
[the Information Commissioner]
will in some way check an agency’s records for relevant
’ and that, ultimately, the Information Commissioner is
dependent on the agency’s officers to do the actual searching
for relevant
Section 87(1) of
the RTI Act.
Mewburn and Department of Local Government,
Community Recovery and Resilience
[2014] QICmr 43
(31 October 2014) at [13].
Parnell and Queensland
Police Service
[2017] QICmr 8
(7 March 2017) at [23];
Rockhampton Regional Council
[2017] QICmr 49
(6 October 2017) at
Council email dated 10
July 2025 attaching completed search form.
Section 110(1)(b) of
the RTI Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (414 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter