URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2021/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:47:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re FCZ [2021] QMHC 2 (28 May 2021)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of FCZ
[2021] QMHC 2
PROCEEDING:
MHC No. 48 of 2020
DELIVERED ON:
4 June 2021
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
28 May 2021
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr S J Harden and
Dr J G Reddan
DETERMINATION:
1. The defendant was not of unsound mind when the offences were
allegedly committed.
2. The reference is adjourned to a date to be fixed.
C L Morgan for the defendant
S Robb for the Chief Psychiatrist
Finch for the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the defendant
Office of the Chief
Psychiatrist
Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
[1] This is a
reference under the
Mental Health Act 2016
) in relation
to FCZ. The reference concerns seven charges, three committed in 2015 and four
in 2016. The 2015 charges include charges
5 and 6 on the reference, being one
charge of grievous bodily harm and one charge of armed robbery in company with
personal violence,
both allegedly committed on 3 August 2015. Charge 7 on
the reference is assault or obstruct staff member allegedly committed on
October 2015. For the 2016 charges, charge 1 on the reference is serious
assault of a Corrective Services officer allegedly committed
on 8 August
2016. There are three charges allegedly committed on 4 December 2016: charges 2
to 4 on the reference, being charges
of rape, assault with intent to commit rape
and deprivation of liberty.
[2] The charges
allegedly committed on 3 August 2015 concern the defendant being in company with
three others at the City Botanic
Gardens. The complainant was approached by the
defendant who asked for spare change. Upon being told that the complainant had
change to offer, the defendant allegedly commenced punching the complainant
repeatedly with a closed fist causing the complainant
to stumble back and fall
to the ground. The defendant continued the assault while his associate
attempted to rip the complainant’s
backpack from his hand as he lay on the
ground bleeding. The associate took possession of the complainant’s
backpack and smartphone.
[3] The most
serious charges on the reference are those allegedly committed on 4 December
2016. The defendant is alleged to have
approached the complainant at Wickham
Park, Spring Hill. The defendant requested money from the complainant but was
declined. The
defendant then followed the complainant, saying words to the
effect, “I can’t wait to fuck you. I want you to suck my
dick.” The complainant continued walking through the park towards Wickham
Terrace to her hotel and the defendant persisted
in following her. When the
complainant reached her hotel, a receptionist was on duty and there were two
operating CCTV cameras inside
the receptionist’s office. It is alleged
that the defendant grabbed hold of the complainant from behind, wrestled her to
ground and punched the complainant to the rear of her head. The complainant
resisted and the receptionist called triple zero. Seeing
this phone call, the
defendant knocked the phone out of the receptionist’s hand. The defendant
is alleged to have continued
to attack the complainant, who was then on the
floor of the reception office. The defendant was on top of the complainant and
at the complainant’s breast and groin area, with the defendant
putting his hand down the front of the complainant’s pants
area, and with
his hand coming into contact with the complainant’s vaginal area. The
allegation of rape is one of digital
penetration. When police sirens were
heard, the defendant ceased his attack and exited the reception office. When
intercepted by
police he refused to be interviewed.
[4] The only
issue on the reference is whether the defendant is fit for trial.
[5] The Court
has previously considered the defendant’s fitness for trial. On 14
November 2018, the Court determined that the
defendant was fit for trial. On
that occasion, the Court had before it a report of a clinical neuropsychologist,
Dr Mariani, who
noted that, while the defendant’s raw scores across
all tests administered would place him in the extremely low to borderline
of intellectual capacity, he did not exert full effort on testing and there were
several occasions where there was evidence
of deliberate attempts to deceive the
examiner. The Court had considered whether it was appropriate to adjourn the
reference for
the purpose of further neuropsychological testing but, as the
defendant had previously failed to cooperate in that process and was
unlikely to
cooperate in any future testing, the Court proceeded to make a finding that the
defendant was fit for trial in relation
to each of the offences. The Court did,
however, have before it some earlier testing which assessed the
defendant’s IQ as
Court’s reasons of 14 November 2018 included that both Assisting
Clinicians had advised the Court that it should accept
the opinions expressed by
Drs Arthur and Aboud that there was sufficient evidence to find that the
defendant was fit for trial.
The Court noted:
“While he has a
mild intellectual impairment, both Assisting Psychiatrists advise that he is, in
fact, fit for trial.”
[7] The charges
against the defendant are yet to be finalised and he remains on remand at
Wolston Correctional Centre. Findings in
relation to fitness may be revisited
at any time during the life of the criminal proceedings.
[8] There is now
further material before the Court regarding the issue of fitness,
(a) a report by a neuropsychologist, Ms Debbie Anderson,
dated 20 September 2019;
(b) an addendum report and further addendum report of Dr Kovacevic dated
12 January 2021 and 4 March 2021;
(c) a CEO report of Dr Arthur dated 12 February 2021; and
(d) an update report of Dr Tie dated 20 May 2021.
[9] There is a
divergence of opinion between Ms Anderson and Dr Kovacevic on one hand, and
Dr Arthur and Dr Tie on the other. Ms
Anderson and Dr Kovacevic opined
that the defendant is permanently unfit for trial primarily because he suffers
from mild to moderate
intellectual disability. His full-scale IQ as measured by
Ms Anderson is 55. Dr Arthur opined that, with certain accommodations,
defendant remains fit for trial. This is also the opinion of Dr Tie.
Ms Anderson and Drs Kovacevic, Arthur and Tie all gave
oral evidence.
There is also evidence from the defendant’s legal representatives of their
ongoing difficulties in obtaining
instructions from, and explaining the legal
process to, the defendant.
Ms Anderson’s report
6 August 2019 at Arthur Gorrie Correctional Centre, Ms Anderson evaluated
the defendant during two separate sessions of no
more than two hours each, with
a two-hour break in between each session. Ms Anderson noted that the defendant
appeared to be reasonably
cooperative. She noted that the defendant’s
literacy was very poor, but that he seemed to exert satisfactory effort on the
formal tasks. The time constraints, however, meant that the examination of some
issues was, according to Ms Anderson, “less
than optimal”. She
noted that effort was focused on obtaining valid and interpretable cognitive
test performances.
defendant told Ms Anderson that he did not like reading but that he could read,
whereas he was not good at maths and was
unable to count. He thought he was
satisfactory at writing.
[12] As to the
validity of the testing, Ms Anderson noticed that, for two of the most
well‑known measures, being the Test of
Memory Malingering and the Rey
15‑item test, the defendant performed above the generally used cut-off
point. However, there
were some tasks where the results were less clear. For
example, on the dot counting test, compared to the learning disability group,
his results were in the “suspect effort range” primarily because he
made several errors in counting the dots. However,
with the caveat that the
defendant’s response set was indiscriminate at times, Ms Anderson opined
that it appeared that the
defendant’s performance was satisfactory on the
most reliable test of performance validity.
[13] In terms of
intellectual assessment, she noted that the defendant’s overall
performance on the verbal comprehension index
scored in the extremely low range.
The defendant also scored in the extremely low range for attention and
concentration skills which
were evaluated using the working memory index.
defendant also scored in the extremely low range in terms of his overall level
of ability to register new information, as
indicated by the immediate memory
index. The defendant’s overall performance on the general intelligence
test scored in the
extremely low range, namely 55. This suggests individual
functioning at the very low end (likely exceeded by 99.9% of the population)
measures of intellect, memory and academic achievement.
[15] In her
, Ms Anderson addressed each of the
She identified that, in terms of understanding the nature of the charges the
defendant is facing, he indicated that he
was charged with a serious assault.
However, on questioning, he angrily denied that he had anything to do with the
rape charge.
Ms Anderson opined that the defendant understands the difference
between pleading guilty and not guilty. As to the defendant’s
follow the course of proceedings, Ms Anderson opined that, based on the
cognitive test results, the defendant is unlikely
to be able to appreciate the
majority of the discussion in court. He is likely to struggle to understand the
concepts and his poor
memory would mean limited ability to update his knowledge
if new facts were presented. As to understanding the substantial effect
evidence, the defendant appeared to have limited appreciation of what evidence
would be examined. According to Ms Anderson, the
defendant’s demonstrated
intellectual levels suggest he would most likely find it very difficult to see
information from another
point of view or to appreciate the complex details that
would ordinarily be contained in the evidence presented at a trial. She
identified the possibility that the defendant engages in a simplistic method of
avoiding the situation. She could not, however,
provide any suggestions that
would reliably overcome the defendant’s widespread and significant
cognitive limitations.
Ms Anderson’s oral evidence
[16] In oral
evidence, Ms Anderson confirmed that the defendant did not wish to speak to her
on 4 December 2016.
[17] She noted
that the defendant was able to give some version of events in relation to all
offences to other reporting doctors,
including Drs Arthur and Tie. Ms Anderson
identified multiple factors that cause the defendant to present differently on
That the defendant has an alternative diagnosis of antisocial
personality disorder is one factor that may explain why he engages
differently
with various reporting doctors and his legal representatives. There is also
some history of the defendant having seizures
for which he is medicated. The
defendant is also on medication for anxiety which may, from time to time, change
his presentation.
Combined with these factors is the defendant’s
long-term intellectual disability which may impact on how he presents on various
occasions. Ms Anderson stated that,
prima facie
, if there had been an
improvement in how the defendant presented, that would perhaps suggest an
improved ability to recall events
but would not mean that his capacity to be
educated had improved.
defendant performed in the extremely low range in the delayed memory test, where
the maximum delay was up to 30 minutes but
more usually in the range of 20 to 30
minutes. Ms Anderson opined that the defendant would be unable to follow
proceedings and remember
the information, nor be able to add new information to
that information for the purposes of giving instructions. She added that,
because of the defendant’s literacy difficulties, he would not be assisted
by matters being reduced to writing, nor in having
matters repeated to
Dr Kovacevic’s reports
[19] In his
report of 12 January 2021, having considered Ms Anderson’s report,
Dr Kovacevic considered that the test results
were interpretable and
examined by Dr Kovacevic on 12 December 2020 for approximately one hour and
15 minutes, the defendant gave a version of
events that was in “direct
opposition” to the version reported by the rape complainant.
Dr Kovacevic noted that the
defendant’s attitude noticeably changed
while discussing this version, and he became irritable and guarded. The
effectively withdrew from the interview process to the point where
Dr Kovacevic’s further enquiries became futile. Dr Kovacevic
therefore found it difficult to conduct an evaluation of the defendant’s
fitness for trial. The defendant could tell the difference
between pleading
guilty and not guilty. He vaguely understood that a lawyer would be
representing him in court, but he could not
discuss the roles and
responsibilities of any other court officials. The defendant began a pattern of
responding to questions from
Dr Kovacevic with the words, “I
don’t know”.
[21] According
to Dr Kovacevic, the critical finding is Ms Anderson’s
neuropsychological assessment showing that the defendant
has a full-scale IQ of
55. This indicates, according to Dr Kovacevic, on the balance of
probabilities, that the defendant suffers
from a mild to moderate intellectual
disability that would likely interfere with his ability to assist in his own
defence and instruct
counsel. Dr Kovacevic was of the opinion that the
defendant does not have sufficient capacity to understand the effect of evidence
against him or give instructions as the trial progresses. He would not be able
to make an informed decision whether to give evidence
[22] In his
later report, Dr Kovacevic, having considered Dr Arthur’s report of
12 February 2021, adhered to his opinion that
the defendant is unfit for
trial. Dr Kovacevic identified the following
“Clearly, the findings from the psychometric testing
cannot be immediately translated into the opinion that [the defendant]
to stand trial without considering the specific
criteria. Again,
this is where [the defendant’s] performance has been consistently
inconsistent. Based on the findings from
my own examination, I previously
concluded on a balance of probability that [the defendant] was not fit to stand
trial and I remain
of the same view.”
Dr Kovacevic’s oral evidence
[23] In oral
evidence, Dr Kovacevic confirmed that the defendant does not have a mental
illness. The evidence from the defendant’s
legal representatives
concerning their difficulties in obtaining instructions is, according to
Dr Kovacevic, consistent with his
assessment of the defendant. He doubted
that any modification at trial will overcome the defendant’s difficulties
from his intellectual disability.
[24] According
to Dr Kovacevic, the results of the clinical testing performed by Ms
Anderson, particularly in the areas of verbal
comprehension and memory, served
to confirm his opinion that the defendant is unfit for trial. He considered
that the defendant’s
significant deficits mean that he does not have the
capacity to follow proceedings in the sense of listening to the evidence,
it and adding new information to old information.
[25] Dr Kovacevic
accepted that there were significant differences between the defendant’s
presentation to him and to Dr Arthur.
Dr Kovacevic opined that there could
be multiple reasons for these differences, such as deliberate avoidance. This
was Dr Kovacevic’s
initial impression when he examined the defendant
in 2016 but, over time, he has become of the view that the presentational
differences
are a result of the defendant’s long-term intellectual
disability. Another explanation is the defendant’s cognitive
which arises from his intellectual disability. Dr Kovacevic cautioned that
one should not assess the defendant’s capacity
based on his best
performance. He was concerned that, while the taking of short breaks in the
course of a trial may be helpful,
equally it may not be helpful in terms of
increasing the cognitive load on the defendant.
Dr Arthur’s
[26] Dr Arthur
assessed the defendant for approximately 90 minutes at Wolston Correctional
Centre on 12 February 2021. Unlike with
Ms Anderson and Dr Kovacevic,
the defendant spoke candidly with Dr Arthur about his offences, including the
alleged rape. As recorded
at paragraph 58 of Dr Arthur’s report, the
defendant was able to give an account of the charges that allegedly occurred on
4 December 2016. His explanation for the offences was that he was severely
intoxicated, somewhat sexually preoccupied and frustrated
that he did not have a
[27] While Dr
Arthur accepted that the defendant’s clinical presentation was consistent
with a degree of cognitive impairment,
he was of the opinion that the defendant
is fit for trial. Dr Arthur stated:
“At interview, it was
apparent that [the defendant] has a degree of intellectual disability, which I
would estimate to be mild
to moderate in severity. Whilst I believe that this
would have an impact on his ability to follow court proceedings, I was otherwise
satisfied that he fulfilled the
criteria. It is not clear why
[the defendant] has now decided to be more cooperative with the assessment
process. It is likely that
he has matured over the last three to four years and
had time in jail to reflect on his behaviour. He appears motivated to be
paragraphs 70 to 80 of his report, Dr Arthur addressed each of the
criteria. He noted that the defendant was able to give a version of events
that was generally consistent with what he had previously
told Dr Arthur. He
understood the difference between a plea of guilty and not guilty. Dr Arthur
was satisfied that the defendant
could be educated about the exercise of the
right of challenge. The defendant understood that the court was a place where
decide whether you are guilty or not” and he demonstrated an
understanding of his legal team’s role.
[29] Dr Arthur
noted that the defendant had difficulty concentrating on conversations for long
periods of time and often did not understand
complex words. He acknowledged
that the defendant became fatigued during the assessment and found it
increasingly difficult to maintain
defendant was aware of video footage of the alleged sexual assaults and some
CCTV footage of him around the QUT building
on the day of the grievous bodily
harm charge. The defendant informed Dr Arthur that he trusted his legal team
and would be totally
honest with them. He was unsure, however, as to how he
would cope if called to give evidence in court.
expressing his opinion as to the defendant’s fitness, however, Dr Arthur
noted that his main concern was about the defendant’s
ability to follow
court proceedings:
“He clearly suffers from cognitive fatigue,
has difficulty concentrating for extended periods of time and would most likely
struggle with comprehension and retention of new information. However, I
believe that, were he given special consideration, these
difficulties could be
compensated for. This would include the option of taking breaks should he
become cognitively fatigued, carefully
going through the facts of the case and
the strength of evidence against him prior to the court date, and providing him
with sufficient
education and opportunities to ensure he has an adequate
understanding of the nature of the proceedings and is able to consistently
decide on what defence he would rely upon. If possible, it would be best for
him to provide his version of events to the court in
written form.”
Dr Arthur’s oral evidence
[32] Dr Arthur
confirmed that the defendant does not have a mental illness. He does, however,
suffer from seizures that may also
affect his cognitive abilities.
Dr Arthur was able to obtain details of the offending with some prompting
and by seeking to trigger
the defendant’s memory. If the defendant was
given the opportunity of being educated about court processes and legal concepts
by repetition, Dr Arthur was of the view that the defendant has some capacity to
learn. He considered that the defendant has the
capacity to remember details of
the offending.
accommodations, Dr Arthur accepted that, at trial, the defendant would
experience considerable difficulties but that, with
breaks and repetition of
information, he would be assisted in following the course of proceedings. Dr
Arthur’s main concern
was the defendant’s capacity to follow
proceedings which encompasses listening to, retaining and adding new information
the information he receives. Dr Arthur accepted that, based on the
neuropsychological assessment, the defendant’s capacity
proceedings is of real concern. Dr Arthur also readily accepted that the
defendant will have difficulty assimilating new
information into information he
already has.
future management, Dr Arthur noted that there is a risk of future violence given
the defendant’s previous alleged
offending. A psychiatric facility would
be an inappropriate place for the defendant’s detention. He noted the
defendant’s
history of antisocial behaviour and his history of assaulting
police and correctional staff.
Dr Tie’s report
[35] Dr Tie
evaluated the defendant on 14 May 2021. The defendant tolerated a psychiatric
assessment of approximately 50 minutes,
after which he demonstrated cognitive
[36] Dr Tie was
more inclined to the clinical opinion that the defendant is fit for trial with
specific reference to the
criteria. The defendant understood the
nature of each charge and could articulate his version of the events. Dr Tie
noted that the
defendant was aware that there were witnesses to the alleged
offences and that he understood that his past statement could be brought
during legal proceedings.
[37] There is,
however, a significant caveat to Dr Tie’s opinion as to
“I note that [the defendant] has difficulty
sustaining concentration for extended intervals of time. [The defendant] does
with abstract concepts and more complex communication, with associated
deficits in comprehension and retention of new information.
However, I formed the impression that the identified deficits could be
accommodated through – the option of taking breaks should
cognitively fatigued; – regular orientation and continued education
regarding the nature and potential impact of
evidence during the course of legal
proceedings.”
Dr Tie’s oral evidence
[38] Dr Tie has
reviewed the defendant six times. The most recent interview was conducted on 14
May 2021 for the purposes of assessing
the defendant’s fitness for trial
and producing a report for this Court. This assessment took approximately 50
minutes. Dr
Tie confirmed that, at the time of his assessment, the
defendant was taking a medication, Sertraline, which was being used as an
anti-anxiety medication to modulate impulsivity and aggressive acting out. Dr
Tie accepted that the defendant was exhibiting signs
of cognitive fatigue by the
end of the 50-minute assessment. Dr Tie did not conduct any formal cognitive
testing of the defendant
during the assessment.
defendant’s legal representatives’ evidence
defendant has filed three affidavits in this reference. They are affidavits of
his legal representatives in relation to
the criminal charges, one of whom is Mr
Edwin Whitton, a barrister currently employed as in-house counsel at Legal Aid
Queensland.
[40] In February
2019, following this Court’s decision of 14 November 2018 that the
defendant was fit for trial, Mr Whitton
was briefed by a solicitor, Ms Lauren
Heaney, to represent the defendant.
February 2019, Mr Whitton and Ms Heaney conferred with the defendant at the
Arthur Gorrie Correctional Centre where they
attempted to obtain instructions
for committal proceedings. Mr Whitton and Ms Heaney attempted to distil the
relevant advice into
the most basic form so that the defendant could understand
it and provide instructions.
[42] Mr Whitton
soon formed the view that they were unable to take instructions from the
defendant. The defendant was effectively
mute for much of the first part of the
conference. Neither Mr Whitton nor Ms Heaney were able to obtain an adequate
version of the
alleged events from the defendant. Mr Whitton recalled that
there were long periods where the defendant simply remained silent in
to questions, mostly staring at the floor or the wall. Mr Whitton did not
believe that the defendant was being deliberately
obstructive or simply refusing
to engage with them, although he acknowledged this was a possibility.
20 May 2021, Mr Whitton again conferred with the defendant, this time at
Wolston Correctional Centre with Mr Tim Clements,
another solicitor who has
provided an affidavit. At this conference, Mr Whitton formed the view that the
defendant’s ability
to engage and discuss his legal proceedings had
improved significantly. Despite this improvement, Mr Whitton remained sceptical
when concepts were distilled to the simplest form
possible. While he could be
educated about, for example, the role and function of a jury when explained in
simple terms, the defendant
could not recall such explanation even five or ten
minutes later.
[44] Mr Whitton
was also concerned that the defendant, in responding to Mr Whitton’s
questions, would sometimes give affirmative
answers, suggesting gratuitous
concurrence. Mr Whitton was concerned about a legal representative’s
ability to ethically act
on any instructions given by the defendant, especially
in the context of a jury trial.
[45] Ms Heaney,
who has had carriage of the defendant’s criminal charges since August
2016, has also given an affidavit. During
her several conferences with the
defendant, she has never been able to obtain a version of events from him in
relation to the alleged
offences or specific instructions in relation to his
legal matters. At a conference on 10 January 2019, Ms Heaney presented to
defendant basic notes of the evidence, including pictures, maps and a
diagram depicting the committal process. She had completed
basic instructions
in plain English and with minimal legal language. However, she was not
satisfied that the defendant could understand
the committal process, even with
these additional aids. She recalled that Mr Whitton attempted to further reduce
the language and
concepts into three paragraphs but she remained unsatisfied
that the defendant could understand this document and he did not sign
Mr Whitton and Ms Heaney also gave oral evidence and confirmed the difficulties
that they have encountered in obtaining
instructions from the defendant and
explaining legal processes to him.
Assisting Clinicians
Reddan’s advice to the Court was to accept the opinions expressed by
Dr Kovacevic and Ms Anderson. Dr Reddan advised
that it is very unlikely
that any accommodations would sufficiently overcome the defendant’s
significant impairments in verbal
comprehension and in auditory and verbal
memory. The concern is that the defendant will be unable to follow or remember
the evidence
given at trial.
[47] Dr Reddan
noted that the defendant’s verbal comprehension index is only 56 and that
his auditory memory and verbal memory
are “very, very low”. This
would impact on the defendant’s ability to follow the evidence and Dr
Reddan advised
the Court to accept Dr Kovacevic’s evidence that this
deficit could not be accommodated nor overcome.
future management, Dr Reddan noted that a forensic order (disability), inpatient
category, is necessary. If the defendant
cannot be accommodated by the Forensic
Disability Service, Dr Reddan advised that he should be accommodated for risk
assessment at
a secure unit at The Park. Dr Reddan noted that, in view of the
nature of the offences and the defendant’s relative youth,
drive for offending was still likely to be somewhat high”. However, as
there has not been any history of violence
for the last four-and-a-half years,
Dr Reddan suggested that a medium secure unit, rather than a high secure unit,
could be considered.
[49] Dr Harden
generally agreed with Dr Reddan’s advice. He also advised the Court that,
on balance, it should accept Ms Anderson’s
report. He noted that Dr
Arthur’s points are well made and that, while the defendant may fulfil
most of the
criteria, a major concern remains about the
defendant’s ability to follow the proceedings and effectively participate
in a trial.
He noted that the defendant’s IQ is 55 and his memory is
extremely poor.
[50] Dr Harden
noted that the defendant’s ability to understand, retain and think about
information is all globally affected.
Dr Harden described the defendant as
having a very severe impairment.
[51] Dr Harden
did not consider it unusual that the defendant could recall some aspects of the
offending. He characterised as speculative
the suggestion that the
defendant’s deficits could be accommodated by having matters being
constantly repeated to the defendant.
future management, Dr Harden also agreed that the defendant requires a secure
facility and that a forensic order (disability),
inpatient category, should be
made. The defendant should remain at a secure facility until appropriate risk
assessments have been
Consideration
Smith J stated that
the test of fitness for trial should be applied in a “reasonable and
commonsense fashion”. The defendant
must be able to follow the course of
the proceedings so as to understand what is going on in court in a general
sense, though he
need not, of course, understand the purpose of the various
court formalities. He needs to understand the substantial effect of any
evidence given against him, and he needs to be able to make his defence or
answer the charge.
v Director of Public
Prosecutions
the Court of
Appeal discussed the relevant authorities. An important aspect of the
test is the ability of the accused to follow the course of
proceedings. There is also the requirement in relation to fitness to instruct
counsel, which necessitates that the accused personally understand the evidence
so as to answer the charge. As observed by Connolly
to instruct counsel involves understanding the evidence which is led so as to be
able to inform counsel whether it
is true or not and whether there are other
facts which qualify or explain the evidence adduced.”
de Jersey CJ observed that,
even where a person has an intellectual disability, the question of fitness for
trial must be determined
in accordance with the
criteria. The
Chief Justice noted that, in that case, the defendant was illiterate and
innumerate and spoke with a marked impediment.
approaching this issue, one does not overlook the circumstance that the
appellant is represented by counsel. A person in
the position of the appellant
need not, therefore, in order to be tried fairly, appreciate the nuances of
court procedure or the
intricacies of the substantive law.”
[56] The Chief
Justice referred to the decision of the High Court in
Ngatayi v The
where Gibbs, Mason and
Wilson JJ observed as
test looks to the capacity of the accused to understand the proceedings, but
complete understanding may require intelligence
of quite a high order,
particularly in cases where intricate legal questions arise.”
Honours continued, however,
notorious that many crimes are committed by persons of low intelligence, but it
has never been thought that a person
can escape trial simply by showing that he
is of low intelligence.”
at [14], it was observed:
“Questions of unsoundness of
mind aside, the public interest warrants the trial of persons accused of
criminal offences whether
their level of intellectual capacity be normal or
otherwise.”
[59] There is,
in my view, a marked difference between how the defendant interviewed with
Ms Anderson and Dr Kovacevic and how he
interviewed with Drs Arthur
and Tie. The defendant was able to give Drs Arthur and Tie a version of events
in relation to the offending.
It would also appear that Dr Arthur was able
to educate the defendant about various aspects of the trial process and the
of the charges, although, on the evidence, it is unlikely that the
defendant would be able to retain the information.
[60] The real
issue is whether the defendant has the capacity to instruct counsel and follow
the proceedings, which involves understanding
the evidence which is led so as to
be able to inform counsel whether it is true and who and whether there are other
facts which qualify
or explain the evidence adduced. The question of such a
capacity arises in the context of the defendant being tested with an IQ
which is in the extremely low range. Dr Arthur’s primary concern about
the defendant’s fitness for trial was
his ability to follow court
proceedings. Dr Arthur noted that the defendant suffers from cognitive fatigue
and has difficulty concentrating
for extended periods of time and would most
likely struggle with comprehension and retention of new information. This is
the primary
concern also expressed by Dr Kovacevic and Ms Anderson, as well
as both Assisting Clinicians. Given the defendant’s significant
deficits, I am of the view that he will be unable to follow the course of
proceedings and will be unable to instruct counsel.
I accept the advice of both
Drs Reddan and Harden and prefer the opinions of Dr Kovacevic and Ms
Anderson as to fitness. I note
the same concerns as to the defendant’s
capacity to following proceedings are expressed by Drs Arthur and Tie, but they
suggested this could be overcome with accommodations. I do not accept
this. It is inconsistent with the experience of the defendant’s
representatives and is contrary to the evidence of Ms Anderson and
Dr Kovacevic that accommodations, such as regular breaks
and repetition of
information, would overcome the defendant’s significant cognitive
Disposition
defendant was not of unsound mind when the offences were allegedly
[62] Apart from
that finding, the Court will not, at this stage, make any further
determinations. This is because, if the Court was
to make a finding that the
defendant is permanently unfit for trial under
and (3) of the Act, the
proceedings against the defendant for the alleged offences would be discontinued
pursuant to
The defendant is presently on remand at Wolston
Correctional Centre.
[63] Where a
finding is made that the defendant is permanently unfit for trial,
requires the Court to make the order required under division 2 (‘Forensic
orders’) or division 3 (‘Treatment support
orders’) of
of chapter 5 of the Act.
[64] Based on
the Assisting Clinicians’ advice and the evidence, the appropriate order
in the present case is a forensic order
(disability), inpatient category. Prior
to making that order, the Court will seek a certificate from the Director of
Forensic Disability
under s 148(2) of the Act. That certificate must state
whether or not the Forensic Disability Service has the required capacity
the meaning of s 147. The term “required capacity” is defined in s
147(8) to mean “(a) the physical capacity
to accommodate the person; and
(b) the capacity to provide care for the person under the order”. For the
purposes of determining
whether the Forensic Disability Service has the required
capacity, the Director of Forensic Disability will be provided with a copy
these reasons, together with the Court’s request for a certificate.
[65] Until the
certificate is received, the Court cannot decide that the Forensic Disability
Service is responsible for the
Therefore, apart
from the finding as to unsoundness, the only other order of the Court is that
the reference is adjourned to a date
R v Presser
[1958] VicRp 9
[1958] VicRp 9
[1958] VR 45
[2015] QCA 196
[2016] 2 Qd R 248.
[1986] 2 Qd R 415
[2002] QCA 464.
[2002] QCA 464
, [5] (citations
[1980] HCA 18
(1980) 147 CLR 1.
[1980] HCA 18
(1980) 147 CLR 1
[1980] HCA 18
(1980) 147 CLR 1
Mental Health Act 2016
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (260 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter