URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Marrow Enterprises Pty Ltd v Lu, Mccaul, Alliance Shop & Office Fitters Pty Ltd t/a Alliance Interiors & Del Arco [2003] QBT 28 (30 June 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 028
Marrow Enterprises Pty Ltd v LU, MCCAUL, Alliance Shop & Office
Fitters Pty Ltd T/as Alliance Interiors & Del Arco
MARROW ENTERPRISES PTY LTD
McCAUL Margaret
ALLIANCE SHOP & OFFICE FITTERS PTY LTD
T/AS ALLIANCE INTERIORS
DEL ARCO A X
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
30 June 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
3 June 2003
DECISION OF:
Mr P Lohrisch
CATCHWORDS:
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
, sections 28, 93 &
REPRESENTATION:
SOLICITORS:
FIRST RESPONDENT:
Rouyanian & Company
SECOND RESPONDENT:
THIRD RESPONDENT:
James Byrne & Rudz
FOURTH RESPONDENT:
Self-represented
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Introduction
This is an application by the Applicant in
these proceedings for orders that:
a determination pursuant to section
42(1) of the
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
Act”) that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction in accordance with
section 28 of the Act to hear and determine
matters pertaining to the
procurement and installation of household furnishings;
pursuant to section 42(1) of the Act, a
determination that the First Respondent’s claim for damages pleaded in the
First Respondent’s
defence and further amended counter claim (dated 29
January 2003), in respect of alleged rectification works required to be
to items of furniture procured and installed by the Applicant and/or
Second Respondent, currently quantified at fourteen thousand
one hundred and
five dollars ($14,105.00) (the “furniture claim”), is a vexatious
proceeding within the meaning of section
50 of the Act;
the furniture claim be struck out
and/or summarily dismissed;
the First Respondent’s
counter-claim to contain only claims which can be determined by the Tribunal in
accordance with section
28 of the Act;
The First Respondent pay the Applicant
and Second Respondent’s reasonable costs:
of this application;
of and incidental to the defence of the
furniture claim.
In particular, the Applicant says that the
Respondent’s counter-claim at paragraph 8 deals with a claim for loss and
to certain furniture supplied by the Applicant as part of the
Applicant’s obligations under the Design and the Fitout Agreement
agreement) further to which the Applicant’s claim and the
Respondent’s counter-claims are based.
Relevantly, those obligations include
responsibility for –
effecting the interior design concept
including walls, floor and ceiling finishes; lighting and power plan;
furnishings, accessories
and window treatments and other items as per the
inventory and the client’s instructions.
supervising –
Demolition/removal of existing
Carpentry/building
Painting/custom
wall finishes
Tiling/timber
floors/carpet installation
Installation
of furniture and accessory items as per the client’s brief and approved
inventory (the supervisory obligations).
issuing of purchase orders as per the
inventory and/or client’s instruction.
By its counterclaim the First Respondent
repayment of all monies paid by the First
Respondent for the carrying out of the works. This is on the basis that the
Applicant was
not licensed to carry out building works.
damages on account of unconscionable
conduct/undue influence in relation to the execution and administration of the
agreement. These
damages include unreasonable charges for the works, costs of
rectifying the works and costs of rectification of furniture. The
are defined for the purposes of the defence and
counter-claim as the supervisory obligations.
damages on account of the services not
being rendered with due care and skill and not being reasonably fit for the
purposes for which
they were supplied. These damages included rectification of
the works and the furniture.
damages on account of misleading or
deceptive conduct in terms of the
Fair Trading Act
. These damages
include unreasonable charges for work, costs of rectification of work, but do
not include rectification of furniture.
at paragraph 8, damages on account of the
furniture supplied being of unmerchantable quality. The damages in this
instance are limited
to rectification of the furniture.
The basis for the Applicant seeking to
strike out the Respondent’s counter-claim in so far as it relates to the
cost of rectification
of furniture is that this Tribunal does not have
In particular, the Applicant submits that
section 28 of the Act does no more than underline the general concept that the
is a creature of statute and that the source of the Tribunal’s
power must be found in the express or implied words of the enabling
National Parks and Wildlife Service v Stables Perisher Pty Ltd
Section 28 is in the following terms
The tribunal may hear and decide all
applications made to it and all matters required or permitted to be heard and
decided by it
under this Act, the
Queensland Building Services Authority Act
Domestic Building Contracts Act 2000
The Applicant further submits
the relevant jurisdictional power is
section 93(1) which is as follows:
Tribunal may
decide building dispute
A person involved in a
building dispute may apply to the tribunal to have the tribunal decide the
as noted in section 93 means relevantly a domestic building
dispute with a “domestic building dispute” again relevantly
“a claim or dispute
arising between a building owner and a building contractor relating to the
performance of domestic building
work or a contract for the performance of
domestic building work”
“Domestic building
has the meaning given to it in section 8 of the
Building Contracts Act
2000, apart from “excluded building work”
which is not applicable in this instance.
There is nothing in the definition of
“domestic building work”
Domestic Building
Contracts Act
to suggest that such work includes the supply of free
standing, as opposed to affixed, furniture.
By enacting section 93 the legislature
altered the scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction from that which existed
prior to 1 July
2000 in the form of the equivalent section 95 in the old
legislation. Section 95 was in the following terms–
“(1) The tribunal may, on application by a
party to a domestic building dispute, make such orders and directions as may be
just to resolve the dispute and any other matters at issue between the
In other words, the Tribunal no longer has
“... any other matters at issue between the
. Its jurisdiction is specifically limited to a
“building dispute”
The Respondent does not essentially
challenge the above reasoning. Instead the Respondent submits the question of
to be determined in accordance with section 28 and more
particularly the reference in that section to the word
I should note that section 29(1) also
uses the word
but in the context of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Section 29(1) is as follows –
A proceeding for a matter for which the
tribunal has jurisdiction is started by a person (the
applicant”) filing an application in the approved form in
the tribunal and paying the fee prescribed under a regulation.
Nonetheless the Respondent submits that,
by use of the word “matter” in section 28, the ambit of the
of a domestic building dispute. This is because, in the Respondent’s
submission, the claim for costs of rectification of furniture and that part of
the counter-claim which is a domestic building dispute
so depend on common
transactions and facts that they arise out of the same sub-stratum of facts. As
such the word “matter”
embraces the controversy between the parties,
excepting only claims that are distinct and unrelated:
Moorgate Tobacco Co
Ltd v Phillip Morris Ltd
[1980] HCA 32
(1980) 145 CLR 457
(1983) 152 CLR 570.
For this proposition the Respondent also enlists
the support of
Stack v Coast Securities (No. 9) Pty Ltd
(1983) 154 CLR
National Parks and
Wildlife Service v Stables Perisher Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 573.
In my view section 28 deals with a
general statement of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, with section 93(1),
dealing with a more
specific area within that jurisdiction. As such the more
specific statements take precedence. Indeed the reference to
in the old Act was in the context of the equivalent
specific jurisdictional provision in that Act, namely section
Further, as was conceded by the
Respondent, section 93 constitutes the permission envisaged by section 28 in the
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
2000. As such that
“permission”
specifically qualifies the word
as it appears in section 28. Accordingly the word
“matters”, as it appears in section 28, confers no additional or
determining the relevant limit to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
In that regard, in my view, the decisions
National Parks
can have no application as their
reference is, on the one hand, to the relief available in the exercise of a
body’s jurisdiction,
and, on the other hand, to the question of fact or
law for decision, in circumstances where otherwise the body concerned had
to hear each of the claims, not merely the preponderance of those
Accordingly the claim for rectification
of free standing furniture (but not fixtures) cannot be categorised as a
“domestic building dispute”
and the Tribunal does not have
In this regard I agree with the
Applicant’s further submission that the reference to
purpose contracts”
Domestic Building Contracts Act
reinforces the notion that the legislature intended that the Tribunal’s
In the circumstances I consider the
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine the Respondent’s
counterclaim
insofar as it relates to damages for rectification of free standing
furniture supplied by the Applicant under the agreement. The
accordingly contains matters over which the Tribunal does and does not have
The Respondent submits that, if the
Tribunal considers that it does not have jurisdiction over the claim in respect
of rectification
of furniture, it should then consider exercising its discretion
under section 117(3) of the Act to return that issue to the Magistrates
Further in submissions the Respondent
appeared to take that view that, although submitting that the issues relied upon
a common substratum
of facts such that the matter of the costs of rectification
of furniture was not a separate and distinct issue, the application as
should not be removed to a court in terms of my discretion in section
Section 117(3), in my view, deals
specifically with the situation here in point. That subsection is in the
following terms –
“Transfer of proceedings
between tribunal and the courts
If the tribunal
is of the opinion that it does not have jurisdiction to hear all matters in a
proceeding before the tribunal, the
tribunal may order that all or part of the
proceeding be removed to a court.”
Subsections (4) and (5) of section 117
further state –
The tribunal may
make an order under subsection (3) even though the proceeding has previously
been removed from a court to the tribunal
under subsection (1).
However, if the tribunal makes an order under subsection (3), a court must
not make an order under subsection (1) relating to the
proceeding.
Section 117 contemplates, in my view, the
Tribunal exercising a discretion as to whether or not certain parts of a
proceeding can
and/or should be separated and transferred to a court for hearing
with presumably the remaining part being heard by the
It is not contemplated that, as the
Applicant submits, there must be some application by the party to activate the
discretion under section 117(3). All that is necessary is for
the Tribunal to conclude that it is without jurisdiction to hear all
before it. On the other hand the subsection seems prescriptive namely that
matters must be removed in whole or in part.
In other words the Tribunal must
deal with the
or application one way or the other
such that the claim, or that part of the claim in respect of which the Tribunal
does not have
The question then is what is the better
course to adopt in these circumstances. It is the Respondent’s
counter-claim. The
Respondent submits, as I have said, that the claim in
respect of the furniture is not discrete in that it requires, as do other
of the claim, proof of the contract, the negotiations and instructions
given, the basis for the allegation of undue influence/unconscionable
and detailing of the various defects (including the
furniture).
Whilst I consider the Respondent’s
submission might, to an extent, be overstating the conjoint or overlapping
nature of the
counterclaims, there is nonetheless a need to
further and needless litigation”
(per Gleeson CJ in
“put an end to the controversy between the
(per Gibbs CJ in
Stack v Coast Securities (No. 9) Pty
In that regard the overriding factor in
exercising the discretion in 117(3) in my view is that actions arising out of
the same contract
and circumstances should not be split and that justice is
better served if all issues can be dealt with in the one action and in
forum, rather than be fragmented for reasons associated with the jurisdictional
inadequacies of one of the forums, namely
this Tribunal. Further, to my mind,
there would be unnecessary duplication and added costs in separating the matters
the Respondent’s counter-claims. That would disadvantage the
Respondent (and to an extent both parties) in not being able
to have all claims
resolved as conveniently and cost effectively as
All things considered, in my view,
separating the matters subject to this proceeding for separate hearings in
different forums would
be at odds with the intent in section 42(1) of the
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
2000, a matter with which this Tribunal
is charged.
In the circumstances I consider that I
should exercise my discretion in section 117(3) to remove the whole of this
application to
a court. In light of the magnitude of the Respondent’s
counter-claim the appropriate court is the District Court. I order
accordingly.
On the matter of costs I consider that
having been successful in this application, the Applicant should have its costs
as and against
the First Respondent based on the District Court scale for
matters exceeding $50,000. I give leave to the Applicant to re-list the
of costs for further hearing in the event there is no
In the event there is disagreement as to
the costs payable pursuant to order (2) of these orders, or indeed generally as
of parties to this application, I give leave to the parties to re-list
this matter for determination in that
.......................................
P LOHRISCH – MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 028
Application No:
Marrow Enterprises Pty Ltd
C/- Deacons Lawyers
Level 17, 175
Eagle Street
BRISBANE QLD 4000
First Respondent:
C/- Rouyanian & Company Lawyers
BRISBANE QLD 4001
Second Respondent:
Margaret McCaul
C/- Deacons
GPO Box 407
Third Respondent:
Alliance Shop & Office Fitters Pty Ltd
T/as Alliance
C/- James Byrne & Rudz
GPO Box 900
BRISBANE QLD
Fourth Respondent:
A X Del Arco
A X Del Arco
50 Mandalay Street
POCKET Q 4069
- Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
Upon hearing Mr Sullivan of Counsel on behalf of the applicant and the
second Respondent, Mr Redmond of Counsel on behalf of the first
respondent, Mr
Rudz on behalf of the third respondent and Mr Del Arco the fourth respondent,
the Queensland Building Tribunal makes
the following orders:
This application be removed in its
entirety to the District Court.
The First Respondent pay the
Applicant’s costs of and incidental to this application on an indemnity
basis in accordance with
the District Court Scale of
In the event there is disagreement as to
the costs payable pursuant to order (2) of these orders, or generally as to
costs of parties
to this application, I give leave to the parties to re-list
this matter for determination in that
......................................................
MR P LOHRISCH - MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Date: 30 June 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (136 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter