URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
State of Queensland (Queensland Health) v Nield [2025] ICQ 21 (14 October 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF
State of Queensland (Queensland Health) v Nield
[2025] ICQ 021
STATE OF QUEENSLAND (QUEENSLAND
(appellant)
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
14 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
Davis J, President
orders made by the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission are set
Nield’s appeal to the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission is
4.00 pm on 14 October 2025 the parties file and serve written submissions on
4.00 pm on 21 October 2025 either party may file and serve a notice of intention
to make oral submissions on costs.
the absence of any notice being filed by 4.00 pm on 28 October 2025, the
question of costs will be decided on the written submissions
without further
oral hearing.
CATCHWORDS:
PUBLIC SERVICE – EMPLOYEES AND SERVANTS OF THE CROWN GENERALLY
– where the respondent was employed by the appellant –
respondent was employed as a clinical nurse – where the respondent had a
grievance with her unit manager –
where the respondent gathered evidence
in support of her grievance – where the respondent accessed computer
sensitive material to her private email address –
where the appellant found that conduct to be “misconduct” –
where the respondent appealed to the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission
– where the Commission allowed the appeal –
where the appellant
appealed to the Industrial Court of Queensland – whether the conduct was
Public Service Act 2008
Public Sector Act 2022
Industrial Relations Act 2016
A Solicitor
v Council of the Law Society New South Wales
(2004) 216 CLR 253
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation
[1948] 1 KB 233, cited
Australian Workers’ Union of Employees,
Queensland v Gold Coast Hospital and Health Services
[2020] QIRC 067
Ball v State of Queensland (Queensland Corrective Services)
[2021] QIRC 116
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
In Re Davis
(1947) 75 CLR 409
[1947] HCA 53
v Gold Coast Hospital and Health Services
[2021] ICQ 010,
Mathieu v Higgins
, considered
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsand Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
[1986] HCA 40
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs v Eshetu
(1999) 197 CLR 611
[1999] HCA 21
Nield v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
Pillai v Messiter
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
Plaintiff M70/2011 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2011) 244 CLR 144
[2011] HCA 32
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1998] HCA 28
(2019) 269 CLR 507
[2019] HCA 35
(1995) 183 CLR 501
[1995] HCA 1
Sean Investments Pty
Ltd v MacKellar
(1981) 38 ALR 363
[1981] FCA 174
(1979) 142 CLR 531
[1979] HCA 9
Ziems v Prothonotary
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
(1957) 97 CLR 279
[1957] HCA 46
E Shorten for the appellant
L S Reidy for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
MinterEllison for the appellant
Queensland Nurses and Midwives Union
directly instructing Mr Reidy for the respondent
[1] The State
appeals against a decision made by the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission which set aside a finding against
the respondent Shirley Nield that
she was guilty of misconduct in the course of her
employment.
[2] Ms Nield is
a clinical nurse employed in the neuroscience rehabilitation unit at the Gold
Coast University Hospital which is under
the auspices of the Gold Coast Hospital
and Health Service (the Service).
[3] Ms Nield is
an active member of the Queensland Nurses and Midwives Union. She has served as
a union representative since 2020
and a delegate since 2022.
Nield’s nurse unit manager was Susan Jones. The Assistant Director of
Nursing at the hospital was Sue Samuels. The
relevant Union representative who
aided Ms Nield was Ms Maddi Heathfield.
[5] Prior to
March 2020, Ms Nield held concerns over the conduct of Ms Jones.
period from early March 2020 to mid-October 2021, and with the assistance of Ms
Heathfield, Ms Nield collected evidence
against Ms Jones which would ultimately
form the basis of a complaint which she made to Ms Samuels in October 2021.
course of collecting the evidence to substantiate her compliant against Ms
Jones, Ms Nield accessed databases under the
control of the Service. She then
emailed some documents to her own private email address, and sometimes third
parties, although
that was very limited.
[8] In October
2021, Ms Nield lodged her complaint against Ms Jones with Ms Samuels. By her
letter to Ms Nield dated 17 January 2022,
Ms Samuels dismissed Ms Nield’s
complaint and also observed that some of the material which had been provided to
support the
complaint contained “health information”. Health
information is information over which confidentiality obligations arise.
October 2022, a show cause notice was issued to Ms Nield by Mr Grant Brown,
Executor Director People and Operations for
the Service. The notice
particularised 11 allegations against Ms Nield.
allegation 1, it was asserted that Ms Nield accessed a file note of a meeting on
5 March 2020 concerning a particular patient
at the hospital.
[11] Allegations
2 to 11 are all similar in that they allege that Ms Nield emailed documents to
herself at her private email address,
and in some cases to third parties. An
example is allegation 2, which reads:
On 5 March 2020 you failed to take reasonable steps to protect information
collected and/or stored by Gold Coast Hospital and Health
Service when you
emailed yourself a file note completed by Susan Jones without approval or
delegated authority.”
[12] The show
cause notice refers to “the Act”, which is a reference to the
Public Service Act 2008
which has since been repealed and replaced by
Public Sector Act 2022
Brown’s letter went on to explain why the alleged conduct may give grounds
for discipline:
Possible grounds for discipline
Having considered the information currently available to me in respect of
Allegations one to eleven
, I consider that you
be liable to
disciplinary findings on the following basis:
a) Pursuant to
section 187(1)(b)
of the Act, in that you may be guilty of
misconduct, that is inappropriate or improper conduct in an official capacity
section 187(4)(a)
of the PSA.
Further, or in the alternative,
b) Pursuant to
section 187(1)(g)
of the Act, in that you may have contravened,
without reasonable excuse, a relevant standard of conduct in a way that is
sufficiently
serious to warrant disciplinary action, with the relevant standard
applying to you under an approved code of conduct under the
Public Sector Ethics
, being the Code of Conduct for the Queensland Public Service (
), specifically:
Clause 3.1 of the code which provides as follows:
3.1 Commit to our roles in public service
Our role is to undertake our duties, and to give effect to the policies of
the elected government, regardless of its political complexion.
Comply with the
laws of State, Australian and local governments
Comply with all
relevant awards, certified agreements, subsidiary agreements, directives,
whole-of-government policies and standards,
Adhere to the
policies, organisational values and organisational documents of our employing
Clause 4.1 of the code which provides as follows:
4.1 Ensure diligence in public administration
We have an obligation to seek to achieve high standards of public
administration and perform our duties to the best of our abilities.
Exercise our
lawful powers and authority with care and for the purpose for which these were
granted, and
Comply with all
reasonable and lawful instructions, whether or not we personally agree with a
given policy direction.
Clause 4.4 of the code which provides as follows:
4.4. Ensure appropriate use and disclosure of official information.
Information privacy legislation protects against the misuse of personal
information and we have an obligation to ensure the lawful
collection and
handling of personal information.
In addition, we will:
Treat official
information with care and use it only for the purpose for which it was collected
or authorised
Store official
information securely, and limit access to those persons requiring it for
legitimate purposes.”
[14] The show
cause notice called for a response from Ms Nield within 14 days. Ms Nield
responded by her letter to Mr Brown dated
5 December 2022.
response outlined some of the history regarding Ms Nield’s complaint about
Ms Jones and explained that the information
had been gathered for the purpose of
making the complaint. Ms Nield acknowledged that the information ought not to
have been sent
to her private email address, but she outlined the security
measures which she used to ensure that her computer was not accessed
making submissions about the security measures she implemented with her
computer, Ms Nield stated:
“I do however accept that these
measure do not wholly mitigate the risk that health information could be
compromised and the
fact they are in place does not excuse me from the
consequences of my actions.”
[17] In relation
to allegation 1, Ms Nield said this:
Allegation 1
I deny that I failed to take reasonable steps to protect information stored
by the Gold Coast Hospital and Health Service (GCHHS).
The file note was a copy
given to me by NUM Sue Jones. After our discussion pertaining to the incident,
she photocopied the file
note and gave me a copy. I did not access it from a
source without permission.
I will in the future liaise with Human Resources before accessing documents I
wish to use in a complaint so that approvals/authority
[18] Ms Nield
made responses to each of the allegations 2 to 11. Those responses were all
very similar.
response to allegation 2 is an example:
(1) I acknowledge that I should have not sent health information to my
private email address especially those with personal names
& URN. I am
remorseful and this will not happen again.
(2) I partially admit I failed to take reasonable steps to protect
information stored by the GCHHS. I refer to the security measures
(3) Regarding the issue of delegated authority, I will in the future liaise
with Human Resources before accessing documents I wish
to use in a complaint so
that necessary approvals/authority can be obtained.”
[20] In answer
to some allegations, Ms Nield observed that the emails were only sent to
employees of the Service.
relation to others, she observed that the only person other than Service
employees who received the email was a Union
In other responses, she
pointed out that the information transmitted was unlikely to lead to the
identification of the patient.
December 2022, Mr Nigel Hoy, then acting Executive Director People and
Operations of the Service, responded to Ms Nield.
[22] Mr Hoy
found that allegation 1 was not established but found that each of allegations 2
to 11 were.
referring to the allegations and Ms Nield’s response, Mr Hoy
“With regards to your explanation in relation to
preparing your complaint I note the emails you refer to contain sensitive
information, including in some instances details about patients’
names and URN details (which is subject to statutory protections).
recognise you have a protected workplace right to make a complaint, your
protections do not extend to accessing confidential
patient information. Access
to and use of confidential records and documents must comply with the authorised
purposes detailed in
the National Privacy Principles and
Hospital and Health
Boards Act 2011
. For your information, forwarding emails to your Hotmail
account has allowed confidential, sensitive and/or personal information
stored on an external server without the protections afforded by Queensland
Health’s secure network. Further, I note
the greater the number of emails
you send to your Hotmail account which contains confidential information, the
higher the likelihood
confidential patient information will be accessed by an
authorised third party via your Hotmail account. Queensland Health does
or control Microsoft’s email server.
I am not persuaded you have taken all reasonable steps to protect the
information you have forwarded. I have reached this conclusion
for two reasons.
Firstly, you do not have authorisation to access confidential clinical, patient
and staff information to prepare
a complaint alleging inappropriate conduct
towards you. It is my understanding access to confidential and sensitive
information
stored by GCHHS to prepare a complaint would require you to submit a
Right to Information application. This is because making a
complaint to your
employer is not a reason for which GCHHS would collect or store patients’
personal information. Secondly,
having regard to the level of confidentiality
and sensitivity of the information you deal with and taking into consideration
seniority and tenure with GCHHS it is concerning to me at no stage prior to
forwarding emails to your Hotmail account did you consider
the potential privacy
and security risks associated with sending statutory protected and highly
sensitive patient identifying information
to an unsecure, external email server.
Therefore, I do not consider your assertion you were stressed or subjected or
subjected to
workload issues to be a sufficient or reasonable excuse for failing
to take reasonable steps to protect sensitive and confidential
information.”
[24] Mr Hoy
“On the basis of my finding in relation to
allegations 2 – 11, I have determined that pursuant to
section 187(1)(b)
of the Act, you may be guilty of misconduct, that is inappropriate or improper
conduct in an official capacity within the meaning
section 187(4)(a)
Hoy’s letter went on to explain the disciplinary action that was open to
him on the findings and called on Ms Nield
Proposed disciplinary action
Given the serious nature of the substantiated allegations, I am giving
serious consideration to the disciplinary action of:
a reduction
of classification level
from Clinical Nurse, Level 6, pay point 4 (NRG6.04)
to Registered Nurse Level 5, pay point 7 (NRG5.07).
In accordance
with the principles of natural justice, no final determination of the
disciplinary action to be taken has been made,
or will be made, until you have
the opportunity to respond.”
[26] Ms Nield
appealed Mr Hoy’s determination to the
Commission.
That course was open
[27] That appeal
was successful, with the Commission
s 562C(1)(c)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
, the decision
appealed against is set aside and substituted with the following decision:
decision maker’s determination to substantiate Allegations 2 – 11
was fair and reasonable.
2. Ms Nield’s actions do not amount
to ‘misconduct’.
3. The disciplinary finding was not fair and reasonable.
‘Management
action’ is the appropriate course to address GCHHS’s concerns about
Ms Nield’s use of her personal
[28] It is not
necessary to analyse the entirety of the judgment. The relevant reasons become
apparent during the analysis of the
grounds of the appeal which the State now
State’s appeal to this Court seeks the following Orders:
“1. The appeal be allowed.
2 to 4 of the Commission given in [2023] QIRC
are set aside.
Court determines that Ms Nield’s actions do amount to
‘misconduct’.
Court determines that the disciplinary finding was fair and
reasonable.”
On the following grounds:
“1. The Commission erred in finding that Ms Nield did not engage in
‘misconduct’ by taking into account the following
considerations:
(a) That the State, in different circumstances, might itself disclose
confidential patient information ([2023] QIRC 294 at [84]);
(b) Ms Nield’s subsequent apology ([2023] QIRC 294 at [91]; and
(c) The proposed disciplinary action ([2023] QIRC 294 at [93]-[94]).
Commissioner erred by drawing the inference that the training of “most
relevance” was done in 2013, and that more
recent training was less
relevant, when the inference was unsupportable by the facts ([2023] QIRC 294 at
[92]-[93]).
Commissioner erred in finding that Ms Nield did not engage in
‘misconduct’ by applying the wrong test and:
(a) Requiring that Ms Nield’s conduct reflect seriously and adversely on
the public sector, when the words of the applicable
part of the definition of
‘misconduct’ did not require it ([2023] QIRC 294 at [80]-[83]);
(b) Requiring that Ms Nield either “... ‘deliberately depart’
from accepted standards, engage in ‘serious
negligence to the point of
indifference’, or ‘abuse the privilege and confidence enjoyed by a
public sector employee’”,
elevating those examples to the status of
a test ([2023] QIRC 294 at [89]-[90]);
(c) Requiring that the State assert and demonstrate that Ms Nield had actual
knowledge of the obligations she breached before it
could be found that she
engaged in ‘misconduct’, when that was not required ([2023] QIRC 294
Commission erred by unreasonably finding that Ms Nield did not engage in
‘misconduct’ and that the State’s ‘disciplinary
finding’ was not ‘fair and reasonable’ ([2023] QIRC 294 at
Commission acted in excess of its jurisdiction by purporting to substitute the
decision that “’[m]anagement action’
is the appropriate
course” ([2023] QIRC 294 at [96]-[106]).”
[30] Both the
Public Service Act 2008
and its successor, the
Public Sector Act
, provide regimes for the discipline of employees of the State. The
Public Sector Act
came into force on 1 March 2023, that is, after Mr
Hoy’s decision but before the appeal to the Commission was heard and
Section 313
Public Sector Act
is a transitional provision apt to the present
circumstances:
Existing disciplinary finding
(1) This section applies if—
(a) before the commencement, a chief executive made a disciplinary finding
against a public service employee under the repealed
(b) immediately before the commencement, any disciplinary action in relation to
the disciplinary finding had not been completed.
(2) From the commencement, the disciplinary finding is taken to be a
disciplinary finding under this Act.”
[32] The parties
have assumed that the
Public Sector Act
applies to the Commission’s
assessment of the correctness or otherwise of the decision of Mr Hoy.
Therefore, the Commission
considered the grounds of discipline prescribed by
Public Sector Act
Public Service
. The effect of that is to judge Ms Nield’s conduct by provisions
not in force at the time of her conduct. I am not convinced
that is the
intention of s 313.
considered the relevant provisions in both Acts, nothing turns on the point so I
shall accept the parties’ assumption.
Industrial Relations Act 2016
, any appeal to the Court from the
Commission is limited to an error of law or excess or want of jurisdiction,
except by leave,
which was not
[34] Central to
grounds 1, 3 and 4 is the scope and meaning of the term “misconduct”
as it appears in
s 187(4)(a)
Public Service Act
Ground 3 most
directly raises that question so it is convenient to deal with ground 3
Ground 3: The Commissioner erred in finding that Ms Nield
did not engage in “misconduct” by applying the wrong test
[35] Ms Nield
accepted in her response to the show cause notice that the information which she
sent to her private email address should
not have been sent. That concession
was both correct, and no doubt, honestly made.
[36] The first
complaint made by the State is that the Commission applied the wrong test by
ruling that Ms Nield’s conduct was
only “misconduct” if the
conduct reflected “seriously and adversely on the public
Public Sector Act
provides as
Grounds for discipline
A public sector employee’s chief executive may discipline the
employee if the chief executive is reasonably satisfied the employee
(a) engaged in repeated unsatisfactory performance to serious under performance
of the employee’s duties, including, for example,
by performing duties
carelessly, incompetently or inefficiently; or
been guilty of misconduct;
(c) been absent from duty without approved leave and without reasonable excuse;
(d) contravened, without reasonable excuse, a direction given to the employee
as a public service employee by a responsible person;
(e) used, without reasonable excuse, a substance to an extent that has adversely
affected the competent performance of the employee’s
(f) contravened, without reasonable excuse, a requirement of the chief
executive under
in relation to the employee’s appointment,
secondment by, in response to the requirement—
(i) failing to disclose a serious disciplinary action; or
(ii) giving false or misleading information; or
(g) contravened, without reasonable excuse, a provision of—
(i) this Act, other than
(ii) another Act that applies to the employee in relation to the
employee’s employment; or
(h) contravened, without reasonable excuse, a relevant standard of conduct in a
way that is sufficiently serious to warrant disciplinary
(2) A disciplinary ground arises when the act or omission constituting the
ground is done or made.
(3) Also, a chief executive may discipline, on the same grounds mentioned in
subsection (1), a public sector employee under
or a person under
section 95.
(4) To remove any doubt, it is declared that a disciplinary ground does not
arise in relation to a public sector employee only because
the employee’s
work performance or personal conduct fails to satisfy the work performance and
personal conduct principles or
the public sector principles.
(5) In this section—
inappropriate or improper conduct in an official capacity; or
inappropriate or improper conduct in a private capacity that reflects
seriously and adversely on the public sector entity in which
the employee is
Example of misconduct—
victimising another public sector employee in the course of the other
employee’s employment in the public sector
relevant standard of conduct
(a) for a public sector employee, means—
(i) a standard of conduct applying to the employee
under an approved code of conduct under the
Public Sector Ethics Act 1994
(ii) a standard of conduct, if any, applying to the
employee under an approved standard of practice
Public Sector Ethics Act 1994
(b) for a public sector employee who is an ambulance
officer under the
Ambulance Service Act 1991
section 13(1)
—includes a code of practice under
of that Act; and
(c) for a public sector employee who is a fire service officer
Fire Services Act 1990
—includes a code of
practice under
of that Act.
responsible person
, for a direction, means a person with
authority to give the direction, whether the authority derives
from this Act or another law.” (emphasis added)
[38] Section
91(5) defines “misconduct” and draws a distinction, commonly made,
between conduct committed in the course
of a calling and conduct committed
outside the calling.
[39] An example
of such a distinction being drawn is
Ziems v Prothonotary
Supreme Court of New South
There, a barrister
was convicted of manslaughter arising from a motor vehicle accident. The
question was whether that personal
conduct ought lead to his exclusion from the
legal profession.
[40] Fullagar J,
“Personal misconduct, as distinct from professional
misconduct, may no doubt be a ground for disbarring, because it may show
the person guilty of it is not a fit and proper person to practise as a
barrister... But the whole approach of a court to a
case of personal misconduct
must surely be very different from its approach to a case of professional
misconduct. Generally speaking,
the latter must have a much more direct bearing
on the question of a man's fitness to practise than the
[41] Misconduct
in a person’s personal life only becomes “professional
misconduct” where the misconduct reflects
on the person’s fitness to
be a member of the profession.
similar vein,
Public Sector Act
draws a distinction
between conduct in, and conduct outside the scope of employment and makes
private conduct “misconduct”
only where the conduct “reflects
seriously or adversely on the public service”. Unlike the common law, the
not linked to unfitness, but there is a requirement that the conduct
have a particular impact upon the public sector. That is the
element which the
legislature has determined converts personal misconduct of a public sector
employee into occupational misconduct.
[43] However, as
recorded by the Commission,
was submitted on Ms Nield’s behalf, in reliance upon the explanatory note
Public Service Bill 2008
that conduct committed in either
an official capacity or a private capacity is only “misconduct” if
the conduct “reflects
seriously and adversely on the public
[44] In the
Explanatory Memorandum to what became
Public Service
, “misconduct” is said to be defined as “inappropriate
or improper conduct in an official capacity or in a private
capacity reflecting
seriously and adversely on the public sector”.
[45] As already
is the predecessor to
Public Sector Act
The Explanatory Memorandum to the
Public Sector Bill
makes no comment
directly on the notation of misconduct. It refers back to
Public Service Act
and explores differences between that section what
Public Sector Act
comments made as to “misconduct” in the Explanatory Memorandum to
Public Service Bill
remain relevant. If the task was to construe the
Explanatory Memorandum to s 187 it may be open to apply the words
“reflecting
seriously and adversely on the public service” to both
conduct committed “in an official capacity” and conduct
“in a private capacity”.
[47] However,
the task is not to construe the Explanatory Memorandum but to ascertain the
meaning of the words actually used by the
legislature in the statutory provision
by considering those words against relevant context and
[48] While the
Explanatory Memorandum is part of the context against which the
Public Sector
ought to be construed, the definition of “misconduct” in
is very clear. The legislature has adopted a definition encompassing two
paragraphs: paragraph (a) which defines misconduct in
an official capacity, and
paragraph (b) which defines misconduct in a private capacity. It is only the
conduct identified in paragraph
(b), namely conduct committed in a private
capacity which must “[reflect] seriously and adversely on the public
sector entity
in which the employee is employed” in order to constitute
“misconduct”.
Union’s submission on the construction of
(relevant to
was recorded in the judgment:
“[80] The QNMU
submitted that Ms Nield has not engaged in ‘misconduct’ within the
meaning of the PS Act. In doing
so, the union referenced the Explanatory Note at
Public Service Act 2008
that expands on the definitions of
misconduct that relevantly explains it to be ‘inappropriate or improper
conduct in an official
capacity or in a private capacity reflecting seriously
and adversely on the public sector.’ The union submitted that GCHHS
‘has not alleged or substantiated any finding that (Ms Nield’s)
actions or conduct may reflect ‘seriously and adversely’
public service’.”
submitted by Mr Reidy, counsel for Ms Nield, there is no express acceptance or
rejection of the Union’s submission in
the judgment under appeal.
referring to the Union’s submission, the Commission referred to the
State’s submission on that point:
“[81] The Respondent
countered the QNMU’s argument, submitting that:
... misuse of information through inappropriate dissemination to uncontrolled
external email providers creates a significant risk
to GCHHS as it is not
authorised and uncontrolled without the safeguards of information security
employed by Queensland Health. Risk
relates to further potential uncontrolled
dissemination as well as data breaches within third-party provider systems.
Further, National
storage and dissemination of personal information.
The Respondent considers
reputational risks to the organisation, legal risks, and impacts on involved
persons the medical information
relates to, warrant the view the actions would
‘seriously and adversely’ impact the public service.
(emphasis added)
[52] There is no
express rejection or acceptance of the State’s submission.
Commission’s judgment then goes on in paragraphs [82] and [83] to
consider matters not related to the question of
construction raised by the
Union’s submission recorded in paragraph [80] of the
“[82] While the decision maker stated that Ms Nield
does ‘not have authorisation to access confidential clinical, patient,
staff information to prepare a complaint of inappropriate conduct towards
you’, the QNMU submitted:
... this misrepresents the objectively verifiable facts of the matter which
Appellant did have legitimate access to records
she accessed in the
course of her duties as a CN for the Respondent, and
redacted identifying details from confidential information she sent, and
relation to allegations 1, 2 and 6, the Respondent
provided the
Applicant a copy of the file note for her own records, and
relation to all other allegations the Appellant took steps to redact, remove or
obscure any confidential information.
[83] The Respondent later
clarified it meant that Ms Nield ‘has the authorisation when directly
relating to the performance
of her duties and that the access to the records on
the occasions listed in the allegations were not for an approved or authorised
purpose’ and acknowledged the actions taken by her to redact the material
reduced the risk of patient identification.”
[54] Thereafter,
the Commission observed:
“[84] Also relevant is the
QNMU’s assertion that ‘the level of detail was similar to or less
than that which the
employer transmits to third parties, including the QNMU, on
a regular basis as show in Attachment 1.’ It does appear to me
different standard has been applied to Ms Nield in this matter.”
[55] It was
submitted by Mr Shorten of counsel for the State that the statement “Also
relevant is the QNMU’s assertion
...” Paragraph [84] shows an
acceptance of the earlier submission that conduct committed in an official
capacity is only “misconduct”
if it “[reflects] seriously and
adversely on the [service]”. For reasons which follow, that submission
should be rejected
as it is inconsistent with how the judgment then progresses.
making the observation at paragraph [84] of the judgment, the Commissioner then
considered the meaning of the term “misconduct”
as defined by
, relying on two statements of principle from
Ball v State of
Queensland (Queensland Corrective
Australian Workers’ Union of Employees, Queensland v Gold Coast
Hospital and Health
statements of principle appear in the decision under appeal
, O'Connor VP went on to cite with
approval Merrell DP's considerations of 'misconduct' in
Coleman v State of
Queensland (Department of Education)
in these terms (emphasis added): In my
view, the definition of ‘misconduct’ contained in
s 187(4)(a)
contemplates a
deliberate departure
from accepted standards,
negligence to the point of indifference
, or an abuse of the privilege and
confidence enjoyed by a public service employee.
[88] Merrell DP adopted the same approach in
The Australian Workers' Union
of Employees, Queensland v Gold Coast Hospital and Health Service
he also held that (emphasis added):
In my view, inappropriate or improper conduct in an official capacity
involves something more than mere negligence, error of judgement
or innocent
mistake and includes a
deliberate departure
from accepted standards,
serious negligence to the point of indifference
, or an abuse of the
privilege and confidence enjoyed by an employee to whom s 187 of the PS Act
[58] From those
statements the Commissioner reasoned that Ms Nield did not “deliberately
depart” from accepted standards
etcetera and, therefore, was not guilty of
misconduct. However, neither the
Public Sector Act
authorities referred to by the Commissioner establish the proposition that
knowledge of wrongdoing is a necessary element
of misconduct under the Act.
[59] In the
Australian Workers’ Union
case, Deputy President Merrell was faced
with an unfair dismissal claim arising from a finding of misconduct constituted
of inappropriate force to a patient. The Deputy President was called
upon to resolve the proper construction of the term “misconduct”.
In undertaking that task, the Deputy President referred to two authorities:
Pillai v Messiter
a decision of
Kirby P (as his Honour then was), and
, the NSW Court of Appeal was concerned with the phrase
“misconduct in a professional respect”. After an examination
historical development of the notion of professional misconduct, Kirby P
“These remarks, read in their context, do not
justify a conclusion that mere negligence or incompetence amounts to
“misconduct”.
To so hold would be to reverse many years of
authority upon the phrase here under consideration and its predecessor which was
to be equivalent in effect. All that Hutley JA was stating was that
indifference to basic rules and inattention to rudimentary obligations
professional practice would not provide a safe haven for a professional personal
charged with misconduct. Moral turpitude is
not now required: see
New South Wales Medical Board
[1976] 2 NSWLR 281
at 291. But it is still
necessary, in every case, to prove misconduct that goes beyond mere
carelessness.”
[61] Pillai
was followed in
. There, Daubney J construed a provision of the
Queensland Ambulance Service Disciplinary Policy
issued pursuant to the
Ambulance Service Act 1991
[62] The policy
defined “unacceptable workplace behaviour” as:
“behaviour of an officer that adversely affects the
effectiveness of the QAS and/or reflects adversely on the position held
officer. Examples of unacceptable workplace behaviour include:
of QAS policy of procedure;
of QAS Code of Conduct;
misconduct;
misconduct;
to obey a lawful and reasonable direction;
carelessness,
incompetence or inefficiency; and/or
the QAS to claims arising out of the foregoing.”
[63] It can be
seen that “misconduct” is one of the categories of
“unacceptable workplace behaviour” specified
in the policy. The
term “misconduct” was defined in the policy as “Disgraceful or
improper conduct in an official
[64] It was
submitted to Daubney J that his Honour should attribute to the word
“improper” a meaning consistently with
that determined by Brennan,
Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ in
a case involving
breach of fiduciary obligations by company directors, where their Honours
“Impropriety consists in a breach of the standards
of conduct that would be expected of a person in the position of the alleged
offender by reasonable persons with knowledge of the duties, powers and
authority of the position and the circumstances.”
[65] Daubney J
rejected that argument. His Honour held that the term “misconduct”
had to be viewed in its context as
one of various categories of defined
“inappropriate workplace behaviour”.
[66] His Honour
observed that another species of defined “unacceptable workplace
behaviour” was “carelessness, incompetence
or inefficiency”.
His Honour then held:
“[25] Despite the respondent’s
submissions, I am not persuaded that the term ‘misconduct’ in the
policy should
be given such a broad construction. This is so for two
(a) It is not appropriate to rigidly separate the definition into its component
parts; the words ‘disgraceful’ and ‘improper’
included in the definition as alternative, but nonetheless should not be
regarded as wholly independent. Rather, each term should
be read as giving
colour to the other.
(b) The definition must be read in context. ‘Misconduct’ is, in s 9
of the policy, listed as one form of ‘unacceptable
behaviour’. It is, in this provision, expressly separated from other
forms of sub-optimal workplace behaviour such
as ‘careless, incompetence,
or inefficiency’.
[26] These two considerations compel the conclusion that
‘misconduct’, as used in the policy, contemplates something more
than mere incompetence, or a failure to attain the established standards of
conduct. As the policy stands, ‘misconduct’,
to adapt the words of
Kirby P (as his Honour then was), requires a deliberate departure from accepted
standards, serious negligence
to the point of indifference, or an abuse of the
privilege and confidence enjoyed by ambulance officers.”
[67] In the
Australian Workers’ Union
case, Deputy President Merrell analysed
and observed that the meaning of
“misconduct” and, relevantly, “improper”, (that being
the term used to define
“misconduct”) was coloured by the other
grounds of discipline which involved “careless, incompetent or inefficient
conduct”. The Deputy President then reasoned:
Because a public service employee’s careless, incompetent or
inefficient conduct is a separate disciplinary
ground under s 187
of the PS Act, then the meaning of ‘misconduct’, as
analysed by Daubney
, is of assistance in
construing s 187(4) of the PS Act.
[36] In my view, inappropriate or improper conduct in an official
capacity involves something more than mere negligence,
judgement or innocent mistake and includes a deliberate departure from
accepted standards, serious negligence to
the point of indifference, or an abuse
of the privilege and confidence enjoyed by an employee to whom s 187 of the PS
Act applies.”
[68] The Deputy
President’s approach to the construction of s 187(1)(b) was, in my view,
completely conventional and solid.
He has sought to put meaning to the words
used by Parliament by considering the text in context with surrounding
provisions.
[69] Importantly,
the Deputy President has not purported to recast the provision in different
language. After distinguishing “misconduct
in an official capacity”
from lesser conduct such as an “error of judgement or innocent
mistake” he identified
conduct which would be caught by the definition of
“misconduct”, being conduct which is “inappropriate” or
“improper”.
very correctly in my respectful view, did not purport to give an exhaustive list
of conduct that would be caught by the definition.
To do so would be just
reframing the provision in different words.
[70] Rather, the
Deputy President identified conduct which would be
definition namely “a deliberate departure from accepted standards, serious
negligence to the point of indifference
or an abuse of the privilege and
confidence enjoyed by an employee to whom section 187 ...
[71] In the
present appeal, after considering the authorities, the Commissioner then
“[89] With the above criterion firmly in mind, I do
not believe that Ms Nield's actions amounted to ‘misconduct’.
[90] That is because Ms Nield did not ‘deliberately depart’ from
accepted standards, engage in 'serious negligence to
the point of
indifference’, or ‘abuse the privilege and confidence enjoyed by a
public sector employee’.
[91] In arriving at this decision, I consider the following QNMU submissions
to be particularly helpful:
In the letter and attachments inviting the Appellant to show cause, the
Respondent asserted a clear position asserting the Appellant
required approval
or delegated authority to email records. This
information was not within the prior knowledge of the Appellant.
The Appellant determined to acknowledge the Respondent's direction, and
apologise for her action, in the context of the newly available
information.
The Respondent provided a list of information they intended to rely on in
making a decision, including material unlikely to be within
the knowledge of a
clinical nurse,
Coast Hospital and Health Service Privacy Plan, and
6 to 7 of the Explanatory Notes,
Health and Hospitals Network Bill 2011
Health Fact Sheet: How to email secure information, and
Service Commission Private Email Use Policy.
The Respondent failed
to assert or demonstrate the Appellant held prior knowledge of these documents
or their content. She did not.
... the Appellant had a reasonable excuse at all times for her actions, in
that she was,
performance concerns (the grievance), and / or
h. exercising
herself as a union delegate, and / or
concerns in her workplace including, but not limited to,
safety, and
ii staff safety, and
iii consultation, and
iv staff communication and updates.
[92] Of further assistance was the Respondent's submissions in response to
the Appellant’s position that there was ‘a
lack of training or
direction relevant to transmitting information or redacting records’. The
Respondent advised that the Appellant's
Online Learning records showed the
following relevant training had been completed by Ms Nield:
(i) Information Privacy Training, completed on 26 November 2013
(ii) ieMR - Nursing, completed on 25 January 2019
(iii) ieMR - General, completed on 17 February 2020
(iv) Ethics, Integrity and Accountability, completed on 10 September 2021
[93] The training of most relevance to the conduct subject of the
allegations against Ms Nield appears to be ‘Information Privacy
Training’, which I note was completed almost ten years ago. Given GCHHS
has proposed disciplinary action as severe as both
a reprimand and a reduction
in classification level, the Respondent would be better placed to level such
criticism of an employee
in circumstances where it could demonstrate that such
directly relevant training had been currently and comprehensively conducted.
[94] For all those reasons above, I find that Ms Nield had not engaged in
‘misconduct’ within the meaning of s 91 of
the PS Act. The
disciplinary finding
fair and reasonable.”
[72] It can be
seen that the Commissioner does not base her decision upon any consideration of
the conduct “[reflecting] seriously
and adversely on the public
sector”. Accordingly, ground 3(a) fails.
[73] However, in
my respectful view, there are two flaws in the Commissioner’s logic.
[74] The first
is that the Commissioner has applied the Deputy President’s statements in
Australian Workers’ Union
case as if the list of examples used
is an exhaustive list of requirements for misconduct to be established. It is
one thing to
say that “inappropriate or improper conduct ... includes a
departure from accepted standards ...” but it is quite another
to say that
a mistaken departure cannot constitute “inappropriate or improper”
[75] Secondly
the Deputy President goes on to include in his list of examples “abuse of
the privilege and confidence enjoyed
by an employee ...”. That is
important for at least two reasons. Firstly, that example recognises that
subjective knowledge
of wrongdoing is not a necessary element of inappropriate
or improper conduct. Secondly, a breach of privilege and confidence is
precisely what the State alleges against Ms Nield.
[76] Having
formed the view that deliberateness is a necessary element of
“inappropriate or improper” conduct, the Commissioner
that Ms Nield did not deliberately depart from the accepted
and referred to the
Union’s submissions
the alleged shortcomings in the training offered to Ms
concentration on Ms Nield’s knowledge lead to that factor being
determinative without consideration of the seriousness
of the admitted breaches
of confidence.
[78] In my view,
the conclusion reached by the Commissioner, that the finding by the decision
maker that Ms Nield is guilty of misconduct
is not fair and reasonable, is
affected by error of law.
The other grounds
[79] Ground 4
unreasonableness.
As ground 3
has been established and specific legal error found, ground 4 need not be
considered.
unnecessary to consider ground 5 in any detail.
[81] Ground 5
attacks order 4 made by the Commission ordering “management action”
as the appropriate response to Ms Nield’s
conduct. The State submits the
Commission had no jurisdiction to make such an order.
[82] There is no
suggestion that order 4 could be made if the Services’ decision that
Ms Nield is guilty of misconduct
For reasons which
follow the Services’ finding of misconduct should stand so it is
unnecessary to determine ground 5 of the
[83] Ground 1
alleges that the Commissioner took into account irrelevant considerations which
favoured Ms Nield.
[84] It is a
function of decision making for the decision maker to consider and determine
what factors are relevant to the making
of the decision, and it is for the
decision maker to determine the weight attributed to each of those
considerations.
The decision
maker is subject, though, to the terms of the statute giving the power which
ought, on its proper construction, have
compelled a consideration of some
factors and prohibited the consideration of
[85] By ground
1(a), the State submits that the Commissioner’s consideration of the
circumstances where the State discloses
information is not a relevant
consideration. The relevant passage of the judgment appears at paragraph [54]
of these reasons.
submission should be rejected.
[86] “Misconduct”
is defined as conduct which is inappropriate or improper. That must be looked
at in the context of
the workplace where Ms Nield is working. The way in which
the employer deals with confidential information may be one factor which
relevant to appropriateness and properness of an employee’s dealing with
confidential information. The extent to which
these considerations bear on the
decision is a matter for the decision maker.
[87] The State
complains in ground 1(b) that the Commissioner took into account Ms
Nield’s apology when determining whether
her conduct was misconduct and
her apology is an irrelevant consideration.
[88] The apology
is contained in the Union’s submissions which are recorded in paragraph
[91] of the judgment. Paragraphs [88],
[89], [90], [92] and
all concern Ms
Nield’s knowledge of her wrongdoing at the time of her conduct.
paragraph [91] of the judgment,
the Commissioner acknowledges the assistance which she gained from the
Union’s submissions. The Union’s submissions
largely dealt with Ms
Nield’s knowledge, or lack of knowledge, of her wrongdoing. The apology
is referred to in the context
of Ms Nield gaining the relevant knowledge of her
wrongdoing, then she apologised. That fact is relied upon by the Union as
that, before the information was recorded, Ms Nield was not aware of
the wrongness of her actions. Ground 1(b) fails.
[90] The State
complains by ground 1(c) that the Commissioner wrongly took into account the
severity of the proposed penalty in determining
whether the conduct was
“misconduct”. That submission should also be rejected.
criticism is based in paragraph [93] of the
The Commissioner has
by this point in the judgment concluded that Ms Nield’s knowledge is
relevant to the determination of
whether her conduct is
“inappropriate” or “improper”. At paragraph [93], the
Commissioner observes that,
given how seriously the Service is regarding the
alleged misconduct, better training should have be given. In proper context
is not objectionable.
[92] Ground 2 is
also grounded in paragraph [93] of the judgment. There, the Commissioner is
said to have drawn an inference that
was not open to her, namely that the most
relevant training was that described as “information privacy training,
on 26 November 2013”. The complaint is that there is no basis
upon which to draw that inference.
[93] The Service
chose not to put before the Commission details of the later training, namely
that completed by Ms Nield in 2019,
2020 and 2021. The Commissioner, at
paragraph [93], says “the training of most relevance to the conduct
subject of the allegations
against Ms Nield
appears to be
information
the headings of the training modules
in circumstances where she was given
nothing else. In my view, the finding is not objectionable and ground 2
Is the conduct “misconduct”?
[94] I have
found that Ground 3 is established and that an error of law has affected the
finding of the Commissioner that Ms Nield
did not commit misconduct.
Commissioner did not take evidence from witnesses on the determination of the
appeal which was dealt with “on the papers”
without oral hearing.
There is, therefore, no advantage enjoyed by the Commission over me were I to
consider the issue of misconduct
based on the materials before the
Commission.
suggested that I should not determine the matter if error was found.
[96] There is no
dispute that the acts which the Service alleged constituted
“misconduct” were done by Ms Nield. As observed,
Ms Nield in her
response to the show cause notice admitted that she had emailed the material as
For the reasons I have
already explained the question is whether that admitted conduct amounts to
“misconduct” which,
given the statutory definition of
“misconduct”, raises consideration of whether the conduct
(a) committed “in an official capacity”; and
(b) was “inappropriate”; or
(c) “improper”.
[97] The conduct
was committed in an official capacity. Ms Nield had access to the databases in
her capacity as a clinical nurse employed
by the Service and she accessed the
material in that capacity. For for the reasons earlier
it is not an element
of misconduct in an official capacity for the conduct to “[reflect]
seriously and adversely on the public
s 3.5(d) of the
Code of Conduct for Nurses
, published by the Nursing
and Midwifery Board of Australia, nurses are “to protect privacy and
confidentiality, nurses must...access
records only when professionally involved
in the care of the person authorised to do so”.
[99] Clause 4.4
Code of Conduct for the Queensland Public Service
, issued under
Public Service Ethics Act 1994
provided, at relevant
“The public has a right to know the information that is
created and used by the government on their behalf. This right is balanced
necessary protections for certain information, including personal information.
Information privacy legislation protects against the misuse of personal
information and we have an obligation to ensure the lawful
collection and
handling of personal information.
In addition, we will :
official information with care and use it only for the purpose for which it was
collected or authorised
official information securely, and limit access to those persons requiring it
for legitimate purposes, and
use confidential or privileged information to further personal interests.
We will continue to respect the confidentiality of official
information when we leave public service employment.”
previously observed, I accept and endorse the approach taken, and the
conclusions reached by Deputy President Merrell in
Australian Workers’
Union of Employees Queensland v Gold Coast Hospital and Health
was held that on a proper construction of
Public Service
more than a mere
breach of some duty or obligation must be found before misconduct is
established.
[101] However,
the nature of the obligation and the nature of the breach may bespeak misconduct
without more. For example, if a public
sector employee who was entrusted with
the personal property of a patient at a hospital converted some of that property
own, misconduct without more would surely be established.
[102] That is a
more extreme example than the current of course. There could be no doubt that
stealing is both morally wrong and
[103] Here, Ms
Nield was employed as a nurse working in a hospital where information of a
personal and sensitive nature is collected
from patients in order to give them
the care they need. In that respect, the patients are vulnerable and the
information is, as
I have observed, sensitive.
[104] Ms Nield
had a personal grievance with Ms Jones. Her complaint about Ms Jones was
that she was acting unreasonably towards
Ms Nield. The material accessed was
then used for Ms Nield’s personal purposes in formulating the complaint
against Ms Jones.
[105] While some
of the material does not identify patients, some does.
[106] I take
into account the limited dissemination of the material. I accept the security
measures which Ms Nield had in place to
protect her computer being accessed by
third parties. I accept that Ms Nield believed that the conduct was acceptable
given her Union’s involvement, and her position within the
Union, she considered she was advancing interests beyond just her
[107] However,
the sending of the material to a private computer to which the Service had no
access and over which the Service had
no control was a serious breach of
confidentiality.
Nield’s admitted conduct was both inappropriate and improper in an
official capacity and constituted misconduct.
question before the Commission was whether the finding of misconduct was
reasonable”.
found, contrary to the Commission, that it was.
decision maker should note that I have not disturbed the findings by the
Commissioner that:
(a) the nature of the conduct could be subject of management action; and
(b) Ms Nield did not knowingly breach any requirement of confidentiality in the
sense of doing something she knew she ought not do.
[111] I assume
those findings will be taken into account when the decision maker revisits the
penalty proposed.
[112] The appeal
must be allowed and Ms Nield’s appeal to the Commission dismissed. I will
make directions in relation to costs.
[113] The orders
orders made by the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission are set
Nield’s appeal to the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission is
4.00 pm on 14 October 2025 the parties file and serve written submissions on
4.00 pm on 21 October 2025 either party may file and serve a notice of intention
to make oral submissions on costs.
the absence of any notice being filed by 4.00 pm on 28 October 2025, the
question of costs will be decided on the written submissions
without further
Nield v State of Queensland (Queensland
[2023] QIRC 294.
Allegation 3.
Allegation 8, allegation 9,
allegation 11.
Allegation 3, allegation 4,
allegation 8, allegation 9, and allegation 11.
Queensland Industrial
Relations Commission file PSA/2023/29.
Public Service Act 2008
Nield v State of Queensland
(Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC 294.
A reference to the
Commission’s decision;
Nield v State of Queensland (Queensland
[2023] QIRC 294.
Industrial Relations Act 2016
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279.
[1947] HCA 53
(1947) 75 CLR 409.
At 290. See also Kitto J at
298 and Taylor J at 302-303; followed in
Solicitor v Council of the Law Society New South
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253.
Nield v State of
Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC 294
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507
[2021] QIRC 116.
[2020] QIRC 067.
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197.
[2008] QSC 209.
[1995] HCA 1
(1995) 183 CLR 501
At 514-515.
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355.
Public Sector Act
Workers’ Union of Employees, Queensland v Gold Coast Hospital and Health
[2020] QIRC 067
was affirmed on appeal in
Lam v Gold Coast
Hospital and Health Services
[2021] ICQ 10.
On appeal, the Deputy
President’s construction of
was not in contest.
Paragraph [89].
Paragraph [90].
Paragraph [92]-[93].
Associated Provincial
Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation
[1948] 1KB 233; and
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Eshetu
[1999] HCA 21
(1999) 197 CLR 611.
Nield v State of
Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC 294
Sean Investments Pty Ltd
v MacKellar
[1981] FCA 191
(1981) 38 ALR 363
at 375; and
Plaintiff M70/2011 v Minister
for Immigration and Citizenship
[2011] HCA 32
(2011) 244 CLR 144
dissenting on other issues.
Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs v Peko-Wallsand Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
The passage is paragraph
Nield v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC
These paragraphs of
Nield v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC 294
paragraphs [57] and [71] of these reasons.
Which appears in paragraph
[71] of these reasons.
Which appears in paragraph
[71] of these reasons.
Warren v Combes
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
at 551; followed in
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Nield v State of
Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC 294
Paragraphs [36] –
[48] of these reasons.
[2020] QIRC 67.
Industrial Relations Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (381 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter