URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2018/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
In the matter of HYX [2018] QMHC 13 (20 November 2018)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of HYX
[2018] QMHC 13
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
20 November 2018
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
31 October 2018
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr S J Harden and
Dr A S B Davison
DETERMINATIONS:
1. The Court cannot determine
the questions of unsoundness of mind at the time of the alleged offences because
of s 268 of the
Mental Health Act 2000
2. The defendant is fit for trial.
3. All charges before this Court should continue
according to law.
A E Loode for the defendant
S Robb for the Chief Psychiatrist
Lehane for the Director of Public Prosecutions
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the defendant
The Office of the Chief
Psychiatrist
The Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
[1] This is a
reference in relation to HYX [redacted]. He is before this Court on 39 charges.
All but one of the charges relate to
indecent treatment, rape or sexual assault
of children said to have been committed between 1965 and 1989. [Redacted]. I
determined the reference on 31 October 2018, reserving my reasons,
which I now outline.
Material before the Court
reference was filed on 22 May 2015 and was accompanied by a report of Dr Reddan
dated 4 October 2014. Dr Reddan is now an
assisting psychiatrist to this Court.
She did not give evidence in the matter and it was accepted that the matter
would proceed on
the basis that I would not have regard to the contents of her
reference was also accompanied by a short letter from Dr Penny King, who was,
and is, the defendant’s treating doctor.
She is a psychiatrist and
psychogeriatrician. Dr King’s letter is dated 22 May 2014 and
“Further to our discussion I would like to confirm that
[HYX] is a patient of mine and has recently been assessed at our memory
He suffers from a memory disorder of Alzheimer’s type, with a moderate
degree of impairment confirmed on imaging studies
and memory testing. I believe
that he lacks the capacity to instruct counsel in that his complex decision
making and complex cognitive
capacities are significantly impaired. I have
attached this assessment at his consent.”
[4] Attached to
the letter is a memory clinic assessment summary [redacted], which does not seem
to be complete and does not seem
to be dated. It gives the results of an
assessment on 21 November 2013 and seems to be addressed to a general
practitioner. As
the copy which the Court has is incomplete, I cannot determine
who provided the assessment. It contains almost no useful information
disregard it in making my decision on this reference.
[5] Lastly in
the list of material to which I do not have regard in deciding this reference, I
refer to a report from Dr Graham Senior,
dated 21 April 2015. Dr Senior has
become an assisting clinician to the Mental Health Court. He was not called or
cross-examined.
Again I think in the circumstances I should not have regard to
his report in deciding this reference.
[6] The material
before the Court to which I do have regard on the reference can be summarised as
● reports of the psychologist, Dr Haydn Till, dated
18 August 2015, 29 May 2016, 22 October 2017, 10 January 2018 and 27
2018, together with his oral evidence;
● the report of Dr Pamela van de Hoef, psychiatrist, dated 13 December
2015, together with her oral evidence;
● the report of Professor Gerard Byrne, dated 19 September 2017, a
letter from him dated 27 September 2018, together with his
oral evidence,
● the letter from Dr Penny King dated 22 May 2014 as described above,
together with a report from her dated 30 July 2018, and
her oral evidence.
Scope of Controversy
[7] There was no
support from any witness for a finding of unsoundness in relation to any of the
charges before the Court. To everybody
who examined him the defendant denied
the offending. It was the submission of defence counsel that there was a
dispute of fact in
relation to the offending and I think that is right, so the
first finding which I made on 31 October 2018 was that by reason of s
Mental Health Act 2000
I was precluded from making any finding
[8] The second
determination which I made on 31 October 2018 was that the defendant was fit for
trial. There was a dispute on the
evidence before me as to that, and my finding
involved preferring the evidence of Professor Byrne and Dr van de Hoef to that
King and Dr Till. That preference was my own, but it was supported
by the advice of my assisting psychiatrists. The remainder of
these reasons are
to explain my decision on fitness.
[9] I should
make it clear that if Dr King and Dr Till were correct in their assessments of
the defendant’s cognitive abilities,
there is no doubt he would be unfit
The question was
whether their assessments of his cognitive abilities were correct. Professor
Byrne and Dr van de Hoef thought
that the assessments of the defendant by Drs
King and Till were based on unreliable presentations by him. Dr van de Hoef
that the defendant had a mild cognitive impairment, but thought him fit
for trial, even with that.
Till agreed that with a mild dementia the defendant would be fit for
So did Professor
Psychological
Testing by Dr Till
[10] Dr Till was
an independent doctor performing Court-ordered examinations. He first saw the
defendant on 21, 28 and 30 July 2015.
The defendant was able to give Dr Till
quite a detailed family and life history – see pp 5-6 of the report.
[Redacted].
He reported that he receives a total and permanent impairment
pension [redacted]. It appears that this is in relation to a diagnosis
post‑traumatic stress disorder. That diagnosis was made by someone who
did not report to this Court.
defendant described his current functioning as poor; that he just wanted to sit
and read, that he was easily frustrated and
that people and noise irritated him.
He said he had difficulty concentrating on what he was doing, completing things
he started,
and learning and remembering things. He said he struggled to make
decisions and left it all to his (second) wife.
defendant told Dr Till that he could not recall how many charges he faced and
could not recall what the exact titles of the
alleged offences were. He said
that he was well aware of how the legal system worked because he had worked in
it and because “they
explained it to me”. However, he was
apparently unable to explain it to Dr Till. He said that he would rely upon
“information
from the civil
in his defence, and
said that his sister would say that the charges were untrue. Dr Till records
that, “Irrespective of the
questions asked, HYX stated that he could not
recall detail from that time.”
defendant’s wife told Dr Till that she noticed intellectual and functional
changes in the defendant from 2011 which
have worsened. She said he had
experienced a decline in his memory and functioning so that he was now very
forgetful. He will disengage
from conversation; he will ask the same question
several times, and he had difficulty understanding situations and explanations.
She said that he was very dependent upon her; unable to independently shop or
take the grandchildren out, or conduct basic activities,
such as washing up.
She reported that he simply sat in front of the TV most of the time. She said
he required prompting to attend
to his personal cares and that he had poor
defendant’s wife also told Dr Till that he was agitated, aggressive,
depressed and dysphoric, anxious, apathetic, indifferent,
irritable and
experienced lability of emotions and unusual motor behaviours.
[14] Dr Till
administered quite a battery of testing to the defendant. The tests were
appropriate and there was no criticism of Dr
Till’s testing from
Some of the tests
Dr Till administered were purely designed to test whether or not the
subject was making proper effort. Other
tests which he administered had
measures of effort built into them.
There was no criticism that Dr Till had not administered appropriate testing to
see if the defendant was making an effort. As well,
I thought Dr Till gave
thorough evidence in which he explained very well how he had thought about the
defendant’s effort and
the scores which had been obtained on testing for
effort. It was obvious that he was well‑informed as to these matters, and
had given them considerable thought.
[15] There is no
doubt that on all the measures of effort the defendant’s results were
That is, the testing did
not show that he was making normal effort. Unfortunately, results of the type
which the testing showed
are displayed by people who have dementia, as well as
people who are not making proper
These difficulties were
discussed by Dr Till at page 13 of his report. I will not set out the
entirety of that page of his report
but will set out the first three paragraphs
to give an indication of the dilemma:
“The Test of Memory
Malingering is a stand-alone measure of effort. [HYX’s] performance on
this task rated within the
range characterised as chance responding for both the
first and second trials. His performance also fell well below that typically
observed in the dementia subgroup of the test validation sample. The lower
bound of chance responding was calculated. [HYX’s]
performance was above
that calculated lower bound characteristic of blatant suboptimal effort. This
measure has been criticised
in relation to its variable reliability to
accurately differentiate sub-optimal effort from the effects of dementia.
The Word Choice Effort task is another stand-alone measure of effort. [HYX]
performed at an unusually low level compared to the comparison
sample on this
task. While his performance rated as unusual it was above the theoretical guess
level considered to represent blatant
suboptimal effort. The comparison sample
for this measure consisted of non-dementia clinical populations. Therefore,
even though
this is a common measure of effort, the validity of comparing
[HYX’s] performance to the comparison sample is difficult to
[HYX] performed at an unusually low level on one of two embedded measures of
effort. That measure was the verbal learning recognition
task and his
performance was ≤5% of the comparison sample. As that task is a based in
functional memory, it is likely susceptible
to dementia and therefore may not
have adequate sensitivity to sub-optimal effort. As with the Word Choice Effort
task, the comparison
sample did not contain individuals with confirmed or
suspected dementia. Therefore, the reliability of the measure for
differentiating
between the dementia and effort (specificity) is
[16] Dr Till
accepted in his oral evidence that in reporting he accepted that the defendant
did have dementia and analysed the test
results on that
This further complicated
the matter and I think that can be seen, for example, in the last lines of each
of the three paragraphs
in the extract from his report at [15] above. That is,
while the tests indicated suboptimal effort, Dr Till thought that was accounted
for by the fact that the defendant had
This Court must
decide whether or not the defendant does have dementia and, if so, whether or
not it is having anything other than
a mild effect on him. I thought that Dr
Harden, one of my assisting psychiatrists, put this well in his advice to
“I think the other thing that has come out is that the
state of science in regard to testing when combining the issues of dementia,
perhaps moderate – let’s say moderate dementia and possible
feigning, slash malingering, slash exaggeration of symptoms.
The state of
science and testing, as Dr Tills has really, I think, acknowledged, is that the
testing is not very helpful in that
combination of circumstances because you can
look at the data from this direction and say, ‘It shows moderate to severe
Or you look at it from this direction and say, ‘It shows
feigning’ with roughly the same dataset. And I have an interest
cognitive testing, although I’m not an old age psychiatrist.”
fairness, it must be said that there were aspects of Dr Till’s testing
which he thought did show that the defendant
was making an effort but was
impeded by dementia. One was his performance on the digit span effort
Another one was his
performance on recognition memory tasks for verbal information. In that test
the defendant did recognise more
of the information which had been presented
earlier in the test for learning. Dr Till’s view was that if the
defendant had
been trying to present poorly, he was likely to have performed
just as poorly on that previously learned information as he did for
the rest of
Also in performing
this test, the defendant confabulated, which Dr Till said was a “common
enough feature in moderate Alzheimer’s
Till’s conclusion was that, “[HYX] displayed considerable cognitive
impairment branching across the cognitive
domains of intellectual processing
speed, non-verbal intellectual function, memory, language, and executive
functioning”.
Indeed, his
evidence was that the defendant had severe Alzheimer’s
assessing fitness for trial, other than simply reporting the results of his
testing, Dr Till thought it was of concern that
the defendant could not explain
how he would mount his defence against the charges either from a strategic or
factual basis. Also
he thought it was of concern that he had an “apparent
inability to recall facts to a level consistent with the detail available
in November 2014”.
[20] By the time
of this second report Dr Till had received Dr van de Hoef’s report
(below). Dr van de Hoef thought that depression
might be affecting the
defendant’s ability to perform cognitively. Dr Till was open to this
idea, and the idea that further
testing might show that the defendant’s
depression had been alleviated with a consequent improvement in his cognitive
He thought the only way to explore that was to test in the future.
Till’s third report, 22 October 2017, was a specific response to Professor
Byrne’s report and I will deal with
it in the context of considering
Professor Byrne’s evidence below.
January 2018 Dr Till wrote another major report which reported the results of
examining the defendant for a second time
on 12 December 2017. He reported that
the defendant had difficulty answering some of the questions he was asked. That
his interview
manner was at times vague, and that he appeared prone to losing
his train of thought. He provided less detail about his early history
history than he had at the first interview. He appeared to have considerable
difficulty recalling the details of his current
marriage. When asked
specifically about the charges he faced, the defendant responded in a disjointed
manner and was hard to follow.
He complained about the slow progress of his
Court case and his bail conditions. He still denied doing the acts complained
He still attributed a financial motive to the complainants which he had
done, so far as the material reveals, ever since the complaints
[23] Dr Till
reported that [the defendant’s wife] reported that her husband required
support 24 hours a day and that his ability
to perform the basic activities of
daily living had declined. He needed prompting to shower, but he could dress
independently.
He had difficulty recognising different food products by their
cartons. He was unable to reliably take his medications.
[24] Dr Till
re-administered testing. Once again the defendant’s scores on measures of
effort were not normal. Dr Till reported,
“As discussed in my previous
reports, individual measures of effort and standard cut-off scores for effort
measures applied
[to] dementia sufferers likely result in misclassifying of
impairment as low effort.”
As discussed above, while this may be true as a general proposition, it is not
the subject of testing is
feigning or exaggerating dementia. Dr Till discusses the same difficulties
which I have canvassed above
at pages 8 and 9 of this report. It is clear from
this discussion that Dr Till accepted the defendant’s presentation as
and accepted what the defendant’s wife told him as true, and
interpreted the test scores with that assumption in mind. This
was confirmed in
his oral evidence, see above.
[25] Some of the
test results were outstandingly poor, for instance, tests of intellectual
processing speed put the defendant below
the first percentile of the population
– see paragraph 7.5.2 of Dr Till’s report. Further, other tasks put
second percentile of the population for attention/concentration and
working memory – see paragraph 7.5.4 of Dr Till’s
[26] Overall, Dr
Till thought that the defendant had performed worse on testing on the second
occasion than he had on the first occasion
of testing. Dr Till thought that the
defendant’s presentation was consistent with “advancing dysfunction
in Alzheimer’s
that the degree of impairment on testing was consistent with the degree of
functional impairment in the activities of
daily life described by the
defendant’s wife – paragraph 8.2 of the report. As to the effort
issue he said:
“I concluded from my examination of his effort
that [HYX’s] performance could not be conclusively declared sub-optimal
due to inherent difficulties in the measures applied to assess his effort. That
is, due to their reliance on memory effort measures
are inherently confounded in
individuals with an identified dementia condition. That confound raised the
risk of misclassifying
[HYX] as lacking effort when he more likely had an
neurodegenerative disorder.
Extend effort assessment
In the current assessment, [HYX] performed within normal limits on subtle
indicators of effort that are considered much less susceptible
to the impact of
dysfunctional memory. When considered in the context of consistent performance
across time on other performance
validity indicators, worse presentation at
interview, decline in daily functioning reported by his wife, and subtle memory
performance
consistent with that observed in Alzheimer’s disease clinical
groups; [HYX’s] performance on the new effort indicators
supports the
conclusion that his deficits are real and do not represent sub-optimal effort
tin order to avoid consequence.”
Till’s opinion that the defendant was unfit for trial remained unchanged.
Dr van de Hoef
[28] Dr van de
Hoef saw the defendant in the company of his wife on 25 November 2015.
Dr van de Hoef notes that the defendant was
arrested on the charges which
are before the Court on 22 December 2012. Dr van de Hoef deals with the nature
of the charges at pp
2‑5 of her report and notes that, “The
very detailed descriptions of the alleged offences repeatedly indicate the use
of force ... on his part, as well as threats to keep the alleged events quiet,
which in my opinion indicates an intimidatory, even
sadistic, element to the
allegations.” She notes that two of the complainants describe other forms
of threats made to them.
[Redacted]. Two of the complainants were of the view
that the defendant was drunk at the time of the offending. The
defendant’s
daughter described him as someone who committed violence when
drunk on a regular basis.
[29] At pages 8
and 9 of her report, Dr van de Hoef summarises evidence from witnesses other
than the complainants, some of whom supported
the complainant’s evidence,
but others of whom did not.
[30] To Dr van
de Hoef the defendant disputed the facts in relation to “each and every
charge”. He cited a number of
reasons why some of the charges could not
have been true, having regard to a car he owned at the time of one allegation,
regard to where he lived or worked in relation to other charges said
to have taken place in a particular country town. He made detailed
refutations
of some of the corroborative evidence.
defendant and his wife described years of symptoms of PTSD and depression, which
Dr van de Hoef details at p 11 of her
[32] So far as
the charges were concerned, the defendant was able to give the history that it
all started as a civil suit in which
the complainants asked for money,
[redacted]. He attributed motive to the complainants – wanting money, and
gave instances
of his daughters in particular requesting money from him at other
times during their lives. Dr van de Hoef comments that the explanation
the complainants being motivated by money made no sense to her as it was
apparent to her that the defendant and his wife were
impecunious” – p 13 of her report.
defendant’s wife] said that she noticed that her husband was forgetting
things [redacted] in 2012. She also thought
that he was depressed and anxious.
He took an overdose in 2013.
defendant’s wife told Dr van de Hoef that she could not leave her husband
alone because he was a suicide risk and that
he would mix his tablets up or
leave the stove on. She said that he was able to shower, shave, dress and
toilet himself and to eat
unaided. She said her husband repeated himself a
great deal and was unable to remember instructions she gave him. She put
out for him to dress in. He no longer remembered how to rig up the
caravan and had lost interest in [redacted] (previous hobbies).
He had stopped
attending to handyman tasks at home. He rarely went out.
defendant told Dr van de Hoef that “it’s just all gone”. He
said he loved reading because it takes everything
out of his head and that he
watched a fair bit of TV. He said he could use the remote control, but rarely
used the phone or the
computer since 2012. He said he mowed the lawn. He did
not use their banking key-card any more. He did not use public transport.
[36] Dr van de
Hoef detailed a past psychiatric history being treated by a Gold Coast
psychiatrist from about 1997 for PTSD and depression.
She noted an admission
for the first time at the Currumbin Clinic in November 2013, after having taken
an overdose of prescription
medications [redacted]. She notes that it was the
Currumbin Clinic who referred the defendant, first to the memory clinic at that
hospital, and then to Dr Penny King (who has treated the defendant ever since).
She noted that to Dr King in 2013 it was reported
that the defendant had a
history of decline since 2011 in “memory (of dates and times), and
procedural tasks”.
notes another admission at that clinic for 22 days from 20 January 2014,
where the diagnoses on discharge were PTSD, depression,
(early) dementia (about
which he was “upset”) and alcohol abuse.
defendant was able to give Dr van de Hoef a history of alcohol abuse and smoking
throughout his life in some detail, including
the ages at which his consumption
changed, and what alcohol he drank at different times. He could give a history
of his childhood,
his schooling, his early work years, his first marriage and
the children he had with his first wife. He could give a history as
ending of that marriage and the commencement of a relationship with his second
wife. He could give a history of their relationship
through the 1990s and his
work roles through the 1990s. Notwithstanding all of that, Dr van de Hoef
records, “The striking
feature of the interview was how many times [HYX]
said ‘I can’t remember’ or ‘if only I could
and deferred to his wife to fill in
[38] As to that
latter observation Dr van de Hoef said:
“I don’t have
any recollection of [HYX] being uncooperative, but I noted that in my report
because I thought it was unusual.
When I’ve interviewed people with
dementia – and I’ve interviewed many – not as many as
Professor Byrne,
but many – they sometimes comment on the fact they
can’t remember, but – but I thought this was also an unusual
exaggerated – maybe not exaggerated, but a very – very striking
feature of that interview. When I went back to
test further his understanding
of the charges and to assess him for fitness for trial then, it was clear that
he didn’t have
the extent of memory lapse for the period involved that
might have been reflected in most of the interview. And I did that deliberately
because I believe that one of the arms for assessing fitness for trial is
whether a person can participate in their trial and mount
a defence. And so the
– the questions that I asked that have been alluded to earlier in this
hearing and the answers he gave
impossible or untrue came from his memory, not hers. And I thought that that
was interesting
for two reasons clinically. Firstly, it informed my assessment
for fitness for trial. Secondly, it sort of put the lie to his general
presentation that he would rely on his wife for many, many gaps in his
knowledge.”
Till’s effort testing Dr van de Hoef said:
found [HYX] unfit for trial based on deficits in his intellectual speed
processing (borderline range on testing), and
opined such unfitness would be
permanent in nature. Several tests to detect ‘suboptimal effort’
and malingering were
administered; the results to me seem inconclusive to me
i.e. there is some
[40] One of the
tests which Dr Till had administered was the ACE-R. Dr van de Hoef administered
this test and she said this about
the results:
“This reporter
(November 2015) also administered the ACE-R; [HYX] scored 54 (a very large
decline in his scores in 2 years);
moreover, it did not, in my view match his
functioning at home over the same time period. In other words, it was a
catastrophic
drop in test scores, whilst his functioning, though impaired, had
not declined similarly.”
[41] Dr van de
Hoef spoke about this topic in her oral evidence. She
“... [HYX’s] history of performance on that test,
I found to be very hard to explain on the basis of a dementing illness
unconfounded by any other factors because when Dr King performed the test in
November 2013 he scored 83 out of 100. Now, depending
on which paper you read,
the cut-off score to diagnose a dementia is anything between about 82 and 88. I
go with 88. So, at worst,
that score in late 2013 would have been a mild or
perhaps even very mild dementia or an indication of that. Dr Till first
[HYX] about four months before I did, and I thought his test results
– very comprehensive testing. I don’t have any
issue with that, but
I thought the scores actually were in keeping with what Dr King had found, you
know, 18 months, 20 months earlier.
I performed the ACE-R again in November
2015, four months after he saw Dr Till, and [HYX] scored 54. That is a
catastrophic drop,
and it did not seem to me to match up either with his and his
wife’s description of his functioning at home. It did not match
previous testing, and I guess more importantly, it doesn’t even match up
with testing in my view that’s happened
since, because he’s had the
ACE-R performed again in June this year and scored 58, higher score than when I
did it three years
ago. So if the hypothesis is that he had a mild dementia in
late 2013 and late 2015 when I saw him and it’s progressed, and
that’s why I assume we’ve been all looking at scans and other
things, then why did he score higher in June this year
than he did three years
ago, very nearly? It doesn’t make sense to me. I think there have to be
other confounding variables,
other factors. Now, Professor Byrne’s
alluded to some, or some possibles. In my report, I also made the point that
has been previously diagnosed with depressive illness and
post-traumatic stress disorder, and I thought the diagnostic dilemma in
not did he or didn’t he suffer from any of these, but the emphasis that I
would’ve given to contributions from
each of those disorders
would’ve been vastly different from those given by Dr King or Dr Till
subsequently. And that flows
on to fitness. So I diagnosed him with mild
dementia in late 2015. I thought he was fit for trial. Before then, Dr King
his dementia was worse than that and that he was unfit, really unfit
very early. That’s a bit [big] difference of
[42] Dr van de
Hoef was taken back to this inconsistency in examination by counsel for the
defendant. She was asked whether other
factors such as depression might have
accounted for the score of 54. She said:
could’ve affected it. But that’s a drop of almost 30 points.
Yes?--- And that’s very hard for me to lay at the feet of, say, the
– what I thought was his more severe disorder when
That’s the depression. In other words, I thought the major depressive
disorder with which he’d been diagnosed
was more significant than the
PTSD. Honestly, if he were really functioning at that level largely because of
depression, he should’ve
been hospitalised on the spot, and I probably
would’ve made moves to do that.
And that test in and of itself, you indicate that was one that had a
catastrophic drop. The other testing that you administered to
him on that day
didn’t necessarily have a correlating drop or difference that caused
concern?--- Well, no. That was –
that was – I focused on the ACE-R,
but in – but the clinical impression and the history of his functioning at
thought also did not marry up at all well with such a low score on the
[43] Dr van de
Hoef thought there were inconsistencies between what the defendant and his wife
reported his disabilities to be, and
his results on
“There is – there are inconsistencies, in my
view, between what both [HYX and his wife] say he does, and the level of
he has apparently required since the time of diagnosis by Dr King in late 2013.
I mean, I agree with Professor Byrne. By
the time someone’s got a
mini-mental state score – and that’s one of the simplest tests
that’s been administered
to this man – of 15 out of 30, I
don’t understand why he hasn’t got maximal supports in the
community, or rather
in a nursing home now, or at least for the last year or
two. That to me is a bit [big]
inconsistency.”
[44] I thought
Dr van de Hoef’s analysis of the conflicts in the evidence before me was
useful. She said:
“I accept Dr Till’s expertise. I do.
I do. It’s our interpretation of why his performance was so low and so
that differs, I think. It seems to me that I differ with Dr King in
that when you match our opinions, it would seem my opinion would
be that perhaps
the diagnosis was applied too early and the severity overstated, for various
reasons. But all the clinicians who’ve
seen this man have seen him for
different purposes, and I believe [HYX] would be aware of that. Dr King is his
treating doctor and
therefore must and does and should advocate for him and try
and make him as well as she possibly can. I have no doubt she has done
that. Dr Till’s main purpose was to perform extremely comprehensive,
careful and – cognitive testing over time,
and he has done that, but he
has said that he did not really address the 38 charges over 35 years to any
great extent.
Yes?--- That task fell, as I see it, to Professor Byrne and me. So we had
different focuses coming into this, and it’s quite
possible that [HYX] has
responded differently to all of us simply because of that,
[45] I also
thought Dr van de Hoef’s opinion about the defendant’s preservation
of memory was very interesting. The charges
are dated and span a period of 50
years. Her first observation about that was that people suffering from dementia
tend to forget
more recent things first, rather than older memories – t
1-51. Her second observation was that the events alleged against
the defendant
were very significant, so they would not “be easy to forget for an
ordinary individual” – t 1-51.
She then dealt, I thought very
sensibly, with the idea that if the allegations are false, the defendant could
not possibly remember
them – t 1-51. So far as that latter proposition
was concerned, Dr van de Hoef had already given this evidence to the
Prosecutor:
“In terms of the importance so far as assessments
of fitness for trial in relation to trying to ascertain whether the accused
able to give an account of the alleged events, are you able to assist us in
terms of the significance of that matter to a question
of fitness? I note you
spent some time trying to ascertain information from him?--- Well, I did. But
there’s a problem, because
[HYX] has consistently, over a long period of
time now – because let’s not forget, before this became a criminal
and a Mental Health Court matter, as I understand it, it had reared its
head as a potential civil case, and he was aware of the allegations
for months,
as I understand it, before he was charged. He’s always denied them.
He’s consistently said they never happened,
it’s a pack of lies, and
so to ask him to recall events he said never occurred is a bit of a problem. So
that’s another
reason why I asked him to think of anything he could around
many of the material times that could disprove it.
Yes?--- And that’s when he came up with that list of, I thought, quite
impressive potential issues for mounting a
[46] Dr van de
Hoef concluded that it was likely the defendant had cognitive deficits caused by
a dementing illness which deficits
were across a number of cognitive domains.
She doubted that the illness began as early as his wife described, given the
that in 2012 [redacted]. If there was a dementing process then, Dr van
de Hoef comments that it must have been “very early
Dr van de Hoef thought that the defendant’s functioning had
declined since then, and especially since 2013, having regard
to his declining
test scores and his psychosocial functioning. In that context she mentions the
number of psychiatric admissions
he had commencing in 2013. She also mentions
that, “the timing of this worsened mental state and functional decline
with the large number of serious criminal charges laid against him,
and the fact that [redacted] the ignominy, fear, and disgrace
attached to those
charges and their potential consequences [redacted] would be greater than for
the average person.”
[47] Dr van de
Hoef thought that the dementia which the defendant suffered from was
She thought that the
dementia probably had multi-factorial causation, including cerebrovascular
disease, long-term alcohol abuse
and chronic untreated sleep
Dr van de Hoef did not
think that the defendant’s decline in functioning and symptoms were all
clearly attributable to a dementia.
She thought his chronic PTSD and his
significant depressive illness were contributors to the clinical picture painted
his wife. She comments that the latter two conditions were
theoretically reversible or amenable to treatment, although she conceded
the stress of Court proceedings might render recovery less likely. Dr van de
Hoef concludes:
“In my view, the issue of ‘suboptimal
performance’/ malingering/ exaggerating deficits to obtain poor test
remains a live one, i.e. is not fully clarified. I simply think it
cannot be ruled out, especially given the very poor performance
on the test with
me, 4 months after Dr Till’s assessments. I also think it is possible
[HYX] [redacted] might know dementia
could help avoid conviction and
fitness for trial, Dr van de Hoef said in her report:
said he knew he had ‘more than 12’ charges (of which he could name
indecent dealing), and that the complainants
were his 2 daughters [and his
nieces]. He said he knew these were serious matters, and that he could go to
jail if convicted. He
was aware of the allegations now being a criminal matter,
and that a custodial sentence could be imposed if he were convicted. He
hoped he ‘could remember enough to defend (him) self.’ He knew the
difference between guilty and not guilty,
and intended to plead not guilty (to
all charges). He understood the functions of the agents of the court. He
could, in my view,
withstand the rigours of a trial without detriment to his
mental health.
I have considered whether his dementia, depressive illness or PTSD impacted
any of these abilities sufficiently to render him unfit;
I am sure they would be
affected by all 3 conditions (probably via impaired concentration and attention,
and perhaps by reduced processing
speed) but not so much as to render him
incapable of understanding proceedings and participating in them (especially
given [redacted]
and his long term memory seems relatively well preserved.) If
his depression were to resolve, I think his abilities might actually
In my opinion, therefore, notwithstanding his dementia and depression, [HYX]
is currently fit for
Professor Byrne
[49] Professor
Byrne specialises in geriatric psychiatry, and for 25 years has run the
Alzheimer’s Disease Research Clinic at
the Royal Brisbane and
Women’s Hospital. He said that he had seen “hundreds and hundreds
of patients each year where
the question of Alzheimer’s disease arises,
and where detailed assessments are done, psychometric assessments, clinical
assessments,
neuroimaging
assessments.”
Non-co-operation
[50] Professor
Byrne saw the defendant for two “long interviews”, one on 11 May
2017 and one on 15 June 2017. He had
short interviews with the
defendant’s wife on those dates. He wrote a report dated 19 September
[51] Professor
Byrne’s view was that the defendant did not co-operate with the
examination except to a “quite limited”
extent. That was the reason
for his asking for two extended examinations – p 9 of Professor’s
Byrne’s report.
[52] As to his
conclusion that the defendant was unco-operative in his interview with him,
Professor Byrne said the following:
“... So it was unchanging.
So one often might start an awkward interview, you know, with a little bit of
harrying and then once
things get going, you know, repartee develops and guards
are dropped and, you know, accurate testing can be performed. And at the
the person who’s being assessed feels a bit better about it even though
they may be in difficult circumstances. So that
wasn’t the case. So in
this circumstance, what happened on each of the occasions was that [HYX] was
uncooperative the whole
Yes?--- There was no mellowing. There was no – my attempts to engage
in sort of fairly inconsequential, normal conversation
in order to break the ice
– unsuccessful.
Yes?--- So that struck me as very
Professor Byrne’s assessment that the defendant was not co-operating with
his testing, Dr Till thought that might
be accounted for by dementia or perhaps
the defendant’s emotional state or a lack of willingness to be
Professor Byrne did
not agree that the defendant’s presentation on interview with him could be
accounted for by anything other
than an unwillingness to
co-operate.
In this regard see
the extract from his evidence at [56] below.
[54] Professor
Byrne thought that the defendant was unwilling to discuss the offences with him.
The defendant referred to his poor
memory in refusing to discuss the offences.
However, Professor Byrne says, “In this regard, it is worth noting that
the offences
were alleged to have been committed over a period of 24 years and
that the first of the alleged offences may have been committed
ago. However, HYX was able to speak about his experiences [redacted], which
occurred around the same time as the
[55] Professor
Byrne expanded on this in his oral evidence:
“Well, I always
endeavour to address the charges with the accused to assess their understanding
of it. [HYX] said he could
not recall these, and then – then I read them
out to him seriatim, and he still couldn’t recall them. He – I read
out who the named individuals were who were making the claims. He said no, they
were different people, and anyway, it was all a
lie, and it was all to collect
money from him. So he had an alternative theory, but he was unwilling to engage
on the specifics
of the individual charges.
... So when he reviewed [refused] to be engaged on that after, you know,
multiple attempts to do so, I proceeded to other matters.
Yes. And you make the point in your first report that he did have apparent
reasonable recall of his life [redacted] around that same
period?--- Well,
that’s right. I mean, he was able to refer to a whole range of
[redacted]. So he was able to provide a reasonable
amount of detail of that,
and more importantly, he was able to tell me about his grandson, [redacted]. He
was able to tell me those
details. That’s not something from the distant
past. That was a contemporaneous fact.
Yes?--- And very few people I’ve spoken to would be able to say
[redacted]. I mean, it’s a fairly sort of specific fact
which suggests
that he was able to generate new memories, at least on things that were
important to him.”
[56] Professor
Byrne’s conclusions were:
“I still felt the presentation
by [HYX] was exaggerated, and that he had excessive slowness which
couldn’t really be explained
properly by any depression, post-traumatic
stress disorder, history of alcohol abuse, or mild cognitive impairment, or
perhaps very
early dementia. I thought it was all too much.
probably conducted between eight and 10,000 interviews of people with dementia
or where the question of do they have dementia
has arisen, mostly not in
forensic settings, but sometimes in civil forensic and sometimes in criminal
forensic settings, and I’ve
never encountered someone who presented in
this way, in such an exaggerated fashion and such an uncooperative fashion for
. The fact that I formed the view that [HYX] was not being
cooperative and was exhibiting low or poor effort doesn’t mean that
may not have been some mild cognitive impairment. It simply means that the
presentation is a sham - - -
Yes?--- - - - and undermined the value of the evidence that I might have
otherwise been able to assign some value to, so – so
that was my problem,
that I left thinking, well, I can’t be sure of any aspect of his evidence
because of the way he performed
when I assessed him,
which was quite unlike
any of the other thousands of people I’ve assessed under similar and
circumstances.
underlining).
[57] I will
record that Professor Byrne was very definite in his views. He was not
dogmatic, indeed under cross-examination he certainly
made concessions, but I
was left with the impression that there was no doubt about these matters in his
[58] Professor
Byrne administered a test for memory malingering to the defendant. In his
report he said this about it:
“Valid cognitive testing is
reliant upon an appropriate degree of effort being exerted by the testee.
Effort was assessed on
Trial 1 of the Test for Memory Malingering (TOMM). [HYX]
was shown 50 line drawings of common objects and asked to remember these.
was then shown drawings of pairs of objects, where one of the objects had been
shown before. He was asked to point to the object
that had been shown before.
He was not required to name the objects. Although this task appears difficult
to the testee, it is
actually very easy, even for people with mild to moderate
dementia. [HYX] obtained a score of 26, indicating grossly reduced effort.
Grossly reduced effort is likely to invalidate the findings from other cognitive
tests that require the testee’s
cooperation.”
[59] Further,
Professor Byrne administered the mini mental state examination and
“On the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), a
screening test for cognitive impairment in older people, [HYX] scored 15/30.
Scores of 18/30 and below are usually found in people with at least moderate
dementia, many of whom are residing in residential
aged care facilities and many
of whom require assistance with basic activities of daily living, such as
washing, dressing, feeding
toileting.”
[60] Professor
Byrne administered other tests and considered that the defendant’s
performance was “grossly impaired”
to the point that the scores he
produced were “generally found in people with at least moderate
[61] Professor
Byrne had the defendant complete two trail-making tests. In the first he had to
join 25 numbered circles, i.e., 1-2-3
... and so on, as quickly and accurately
as possible. He took five minutes and 30 seconds to complete the task, whereas
person in his age range would complete it in 37 seconds if their IQ was
percentile, or 53 seconds if it were at the
percentile. The second trail-making test had to be discontinued
after four minutes and 20 seconds because the defendant behaved
as though he
could not continue. At that point he had joined only three of the points. That
second test is slightly more difficult.
A normal person of the
defendant’s age at the 50
percentile of intelligence, would
complete it in 86 seconds, and at the 10
percentile of
intelligence, would complete it in 137
There were other
similarly poor results on other
Professor Byrne
concluded as follows:
“[HYX] had a predicted premorbid IQ in
the normal range. He exhibited grossly reduced effort on the Test of Memory
Malingering
(TOMM), thus calling into question the validity of subsequent
cognitive testing. If the findings from extended clinical cognitive
were to be taken at face value, they would be indicative of moderate to severe
dementia. However, the reduced effort he
exhibited on the TOMM, the generally
uncooperative nature of his performance at interview, the inconsistencies in his
memory performance,
and the collateral history obtained from his wife about his
current everyday function at home all suggested to me that his actual
cognitive function is likely to be considerably better than that seen on formal
It is possible that [HYX’s] posttraumatic stress disorder, depression,
and history of excessive alcohol intake have combined
to produce mild cognitive
impairment. However, his current level of markedly reduced effort suggests to
me that he is exaggerating
any genuine cognitive impairment in the hope of being
found unfit for
[62] Further
Professor Byrne said:
“In my opinion, the degree of apparent
cognitive impairment exhibited at interview is not consistent with [HYX’s]
level of function, nor with his ability to recall recent and remote
matters of interest to him. His clinical presentation appears
to me to be a
poor facsimile of dementia and seems likely to be due to markedly reduced effort
or to deliberate exaggeration of deficits.
While it is difficult to exclude the presence of mild cognitive impairment
(mild neurocognitive disorder), which might be related
to current depression or
post-traumatic stress disorder, or possibly to untreated sleep apnoea or past
excessive alcohol intake,
the extent of exaggerated cognitive impairment appears
to be considerable.
I should point out that the prior probability of [HYX] have dementia with an
onset at the age of 60 years is low, even if his mother
had dementia in her
Although a diagnosis of dementia was made by [HYX’s] treating
psychiatrist shortly after the current charges were laid, I do
not think there
is sufficient evidence to confidently conclude that [HYX] is suffering from
[63] I turn to
the analysis made by Dr Till of Professor Byrne’s cognitive testing. The
difficulty so well described by Dr
Harden at [16] above re-emerges. Dr Till
acknowledges that the defendant’s performance could be categorised as
of sub-optimal effort on Professor Byrne’s TOMM test but
qualifies this by saying, “However, [HYX] has a diagnosis of
Dementia from
two practitioners. ... When [HYX’s] various scores are compared to the
clinical dementia sample in the test
manual, his performance is within the range
that could be expected for the
condition.”
refers to some literature which discusses the difficulties in using this test to
differentiate sub-optimal effort from
[64] Dr Till
said he was not aware of any literature specifically supporting Professor
Byrne’s opinion that a score of 18/30
on a mini mental state examination
was consistent with moderate dementia such that someone scoring at that level
would be in residential
aged care facility, requiring assistance with basic
activities of daily living.
further comments that mini mental state examination scores are not, in his
opinion, a particularly robust estimate of functional
ability or the need for
[65] Professor
Byrne gave evidence after hearing Dr Till expand on his views in oral evidence
“I mean, I listened carefully to what Dr Till said,
and I agree with his – the technical argument that he made, but he
scoring – [HYX] was scoring at chance levels.
Yes?--- I’ve administered this test for a number of people with
dementia and none of them have scored at chance levels.
Do you accept that this could be problematic for people with dementia?--- I
– I accept that if you have moderate or severe dementia,
psychometric tests start to deteriorate in their reliability and validity, and
you have – you have floor effects
where you can’t get below the
certain score and – and you start to wonder whether the person has the
basic brain functions
necessary to even understand what’s being asked of
them, so certainly that will affect anything, including the Test of Memory
Malingering.
Yes?--- But the overall circumstances of [HYX’s] presentation and what
his wife said to me really didn’t accord with moderate
At that time?—At that time. That’s right.
Just if you could bear with me, Professor Byrne. And on page 12 of your
initial report, you refer to the Mini Mental State Examination.
You note he
scored 15 out of 30 and scores of 18 out of 30 and below are found in people
with at least moderate dementia?--- Commonly.
And many whom are in residential aged care facilities and need assistance.
Given the reporting from [the defendant’ wife] at
the time, was the level
of assistance he was being provided at that time not in the area of what one
would get in terms of assistance
in respect of activities of daily living if he
had been in residential care?--- I don’t think so, because she was
a low level of assistance with complex instrumental activities of
daily living but not with basic activities of daily living, which
normally expect someone to require in order to go to a nursing home. So I
thought there was a mismatch
[66] As to the
defendant’s abnormal slowness in completing the trail-making tests, Dr
Till says that the most that can be concluded
is that the defendant was
abnormally slow compared to equivalent peers. He thought that while behavioural
features in his completion
of this measure might suggest insufficient effort, he
thought it more likely having regard to all the assessments which had been
that the behavioural features would likely represent deficient
His oral evidence was
that the defendant’s performance on Professor Byrne’s testing was
“relatively consistent
Further, Dr Till
did not think that failure to complete the second trail-making test was unusual.
He says that there is a high rate
of failure to complete this test amongst
people with dementia.
The Defendant’s Behaviour at Hearing
Professor Byrne gave the evidence I quote at [52] above, the defendant reacted
as described:
“HER HONOUR: And I’ll just –
I’ll just interpose. That – as you were saying that, [HYX] rolled
eyes to the ceiling, shook his head and shrugged his shoulders in a
contemptuous manner, which indicates to me – and I would
like your opinion
on it – that he well understood what you just were saying at a rapid rate
of speech to Ms Loode. Are you
able to draw any - - -? ---Well, thank you, your
Honour. I – I wasn’t watching the screen.
I know you can’t – I know you can’t see it?--- But
I’ll take you at your word that that’s what happened,
and I think
it’s very telling.
Yes. It does to – I – I would interpret that as meaning that he
could understand the import of what you were saying,
and you were using
relatively complicated language and you’re speaking relatively quickly?---
I agree with that, and I think
it goes to fitness, as well, because it goes to
I will ask Dr van de Hoef about it, too, because she saw it and you
didn’t. But---? --- All right.
But I do – I am forming views as I watch him, and that’s –
it’s – it’s important, I think, that
I record them and to get
expert opinion on
[68] I would
comment that Professor Byrne gave evidence in an intellectually energetic way.
He was very engaged in the process.
Ms Loode was at the end of the Bar-table
closest to the witness box and at the time of the evidence just recorded,
Professor Byrne
was very engaged with her and speaking rapidly. The video
monitor on which the defendant appeared was behind Professor Byrne so
not see the defendant as he spoke. Dr van de Hoef was sitting in the jury
box facing a larger-than-life-size projection
of the defendant’s head and
shoulders at the time. She said this:
“My understanding of
your opinion is, in fact, that you feel that [HYX] is in a position where he
would be able to understand
proceedings and participate in them. You
would’ve just seen the interaction around [HYX’s] response to some
of Professor
Byrne’s evidence. Was that something you witnessed yourself?
Were you looking at the screen?--- Yes, I was.
Are you able to give the court your impressions of that, and perhaps whether
you clinically – think it’s clinically significant?---
Honour’s commented on it, and you’re asking me to comment on it too.
In some ways it’s a little unfair,
that question, because [HYX’s]
attending this hearing on a screen.
Yes?--- Unfortunately for him, there’s a room full of psychiatrists and
anybody sitting over there will have been watching him.
There seemed to me
– to me to have been a number of occasions during this morning’s
hearing where [HYX] has clearly
and rapidly understood what was being said.
What her Honour referred to was a striking example of that, but there were other
too, including reference to his past alcohol abuse, which he actually
told me about himself in our interview, and he looked surprised,
instantly, the
moment that was raised. So I think in terms of what we’ve heard about his
slow processing and ability to retain
information and – and understand it
– comprehension – which goes to the heart of fitness for trial, too
one of the many things, there has been evidence this morning that he has
understood at least some of the very relevant things that
have been raised in
this morning’s hearing and understood them quickly.
Thank you, Doctor. Now ---
HER HONOUR: Just before you leave that, can you say anything further about
even when he’s not expressing through his body language,
I suppose, and
his facial expressions and so forth an understanding of what’s going on,
can you say anything about his general
demeanour as we’ve sat here now for
two and a-half hours?--- I think if it’s accepted or proposed that [HYX]
has a moderate
to severe level of dementia, I am amazed that his apparent
attention and concentration and alertness and engagement, it would seem,
the hearing has been as good as it appears to be. To me, that’s another
inconsistency. So I don’t accept –
not just because of that but for
multiple reasons, I don’t accept that he, at least when I saw him,
suffered from a moderate
to severe degree of dementia.
MS ROBB: And despite not having seen him for some time now, what you see
today is, in fact, consistent with your initial impressions?---
it’s pretty weak evidence overall, but, yes, it’s not consistent, I
think, with moderate to severe level of
observations of the defendant throughout the hearing were that he remained
focussed in a very direct way, staring at the screen
of the video proceedings at
his end. The focus of the picture in the Court was very much on him. It could
be seen that there was
a gentleman sitting to his right, but that gentleman was
not often within camera shot. There may have been other people in the room
the defendant. He did occasionally appear to speak to the gentleman on his
right. He sometimes engaged in activities such
as pouring himself a glass of
water and drinking it. However, he remained intensely focussed on the screen
display of what was happening
in the courtroom. There was never an indication
that he lost concentration; looked around the room he was in; asked for
in remembering where he was or what he was doing, or reacted to
goings-on in that room, real or imaginary.
assisting psychiatrists were cautious in the use that could be made of the
defendant’s appearance during the hearing.
“I mean, although I too saw his reaction, the issue of
– and his reaction is not in keeping with that of someone who’s
disconnected from the hearing. Right. His reaction was to something that we
all saw in the hearing that was happening and that
he seemed to react. I mean,
but one has to be very careful not to over egg that one
observation.”
Wider Examination by Professor Byrne
[71] It is clear
that Professor Byrne’s opinions were based not just on the results of
testing but on his assessment of the
defendant at the two interviews he
conducted, in the context of all the information about the offending. Dr
Till’s examination
and opinions were, to the contrary, almost entirely
limited to the administration of testing. As noted above, he assumed that the
defendant had dementia. He did not press him in relation to any of the charges
with which he was faced.
not try to discern whether or not the defendant could remember any of the
offending, or his life at the time, and in the
places, where the offending was
alleged to have taken place.
Till did not have any explanation for how it was that the defendant could
provide details to Dr van de Hoef and Professor Byrne,
which he did not provide
to Dr Till.
To be fair to Dr
Till, his role was primarily to administer testing. It was more the province of
a psychiatrist to conduct a full
interview and examination as to fitness for
trial. This different approach to assessing the defendant as to his fitness for
is very important to my decision to prefer the evidence of Professor Byrne
and Dr van de Hoef. Professor Byrne addressed the matters
“His [Dr Till’s] results are similar to my results,
actually. It’s the interpretation of the results which is at
don’t have any problem with the tests he’s administered or the
numbers that he’s got or his interpretation
of those numbers. It’s
the question of, in the clinical context and for the court in terms of fitness
for trial, do those
results mean that the findings are valid and reliable and do
they then mean that [HYX] is not fit for trial. Now, [HYX] is an unusual
because he [redacted] understands the nature of the court process. He
understands – well, one would imagine he would
understand the defences
that have been employed previously, and so he – he’s not just a man
in the street. And then,
secondly, he’s a youngish man in dementia terms.
He’s not someone in his mid-80s, and this court has seen people in their
mid-80s where – where the question of dementia has been asked. The prior
probability of dementia in someone in their 60s is
much, much lower. It’
quite low. So the vast majority of people walking around in the streets of
Queensland who are in their
60s do not have dementia. So – so there has
to be something to convince me that he’s not in that ordinary category;
he’s in the other category of a very small group of people who do have
dementia. The nature of the offences raised concerns
in my mind [redacted] that
there may be a greater than normal sort of attempt to muddy the waters and
– shall we say. So I
had sort of concerns before I’d even seen him
that there could be issues at stake here, and when I saw him I was expecting
normal, somewhat reticent but – but generally reasonably cooperative
person who would answer questions in good faith, possibly
would be avoidant
and shame and the nature of the offences.
Sure. I could understand that. But
I couldn’t really see what the argument was for exaggerating disability if
the disability
was really there, anyway. It just didn’t make sense to me.
And then it wasn’t just the performance on the cognitive
testing or the
TOMM, the measure of effort. It was his whole presentation over – over
more than – or at least three
hours of interviews conducted on two
occasions that – that just didn’t gel with me and didn’t fit
any pattern that
I’m familiar with from interviewing large numbers of
people with – with dementia. So I immediately thought this is an
exaggerated presentation. It wasn’t simply the numbers. The numbers, if
they’re taken at face value, do indicate, as
Dr Till has said, that [HYX]
probably has moderate dementia.
And so just to pick up on what you’ve said then. So your clinical
assessment, then, is informed by the results of those tests,
which, taken on
face value, as you say, may indicate a particular thing, his life experiences
but perhaps of particular importance,
I think, you’ve distinguished
between non-forensic dementia patients and forensic dementia patients. That the
that, in fact, he is facing the charges may, in fact, be of
material weight?--- Yeah. The demand characteristics of the interview
entirely different - - -
I see?--- - - - for the person being interviewed.
So is it fair to say, then – or, Professor Byrne, I will ask it as a
question. Your fundamental opinion, then, about fitness
for trial and this
man’s current status quo would be - - - ? --- Well, my opinion back then,
15 months ago, was that he was
exaggerating his deficits and therefore I
couldn’t rely on anything he told me.
Yes?--- So I – I took the default position that he was likely to remain
fit for trial.”
[72] Professor
Byrne gave evidence that 80 per cent of people who have dementia, especially the
Alzheimer’s type, have no insight
into that fact. As a consequence,
“They don’t tell you there’s anything wrong with them at
all”. In this
sense, the defendant was therefore unusual in explaining to
all the doctors who assessed him that he was suffering from cognitive
which he specified, see eg., [10] and [35] above.
[73] Dr King
specialises in geriatric psychiatry [redacted]. Dr King has been the
defendant’s treating doctor since November
2013 – t 1-54. It seems
to be the case that the defendant attends at that hospital for one or two days
respite per week.
consults with Dr King every six weeks. The defendant has had numerous
admissions [redacted] as an inpatient over the
years under Dr King’s care
which are summarised in her report.
[74] Dr King
gave the opinion at paragraph [3] above in 2014. Her report of 30 July 2018 is
longer. By that stage she had both Professor
Byrne’s report and Dr van de
Hoef’s report which indicated clearly that two independent psychiatrists,
both very experienced
in forensic work and, in the case of Professor Byrne, an
authority on Alzheimer’s disease, had given opinions to the effect
the defendant was feigning or exaggerating cognitive impairment.
[75] In answer
to a question from my assisting psychiatrist Dr Harden, Dr King said that she
was “coming from a role of advocating
and – and treating
[HYX]” – t 1-66. She had never provided an assessment of fitness
for trial before – t
surprised that a treating doctor would give a report to the Court in such
circumstances.
treating doctor to come to the conclusion before or during the evidence at
hearing that their patient was exaggerating
or feigning, the doctor would be
obliged to say so in giving evidence on oath. To do so might well destroy the
relationship between
patient and doctor and might have considerable adverse
consequences for the patient. This is, I would have thought, particularly
in the case of a psychiatrist. It may have other consequences for a doctor who
has [treated] a patient very intensively on
a wrong basis. In this case, Dr
King was not persuaded by the independent reports, or listening to the evidence
of Professor Byrne
and Dr van de
So the problems just
discussed did not arise. However, it must be recognised that there will be
factors, conscious and unconscious,
which would make it difficult for a treating
doctor to objectively assess opinions such as those given as to feigning and
exaggerating
in the current case.
[77] Dr King
acknowledged that she felt uncomfortable in her role and acknowledged, “I
can’t take a forensic role, but
I can help to clarify his underlying
medical problems” – t 1-58. In fact, where the existence and extent
of any underlying
medical problems were squarely in issue, I do not think that
is a sensible distinction for her to make.
[78] The first
eight-and-a-half pages of Dr King’s report simply summarise her (quite
intensive) treatment of the defendant.
She then outlines that on 5 June 2018,
19 June 2018 and 17 July 2018 she had specific interviews with the defendant for
the purpose
of assessing his fitness for trial, and that on 24 July 2018 she had
a specific interview with the defendant’s wife for the
purpose of gaining
information for this proceeding. On the first of those three occasions she
administered one cognitive testing
instrument.
[79] In the
information which Dr King summarises as given by the defendant, there is less
detail of his childhood, upbringing, and
work history than in the independent
reports. He gave very sparse details about the proceedings and how he would
approach them.
Dr King did
not ask questions to see if the defendant did in fact have any memory around
– t 1-59. She took his comments
– that she would have to ask his wife – at face value – t
1-60. She relied
upon the fact that he could tell her nothing about the charges
in her assessment that he was not fit for trial – t 1-60. She
that his inability to give that information was consistent with his low
performance on testing – t 1-62. She did
not deal with the circumstance
that both Professor Byrne and Dr van de Hoef had extracted information from him
periods of time – t 1‑63.
[80] Under the
heading “Consideration of other Professional Reports”, Dr King gives
a very brief summary of her understanding
of the information in other reports to
the Court but does not offer any analysis or criticism of any other
[81] In her
report Dr King says:
“[HYX] has displayed evidence of
significant cognitive decline over the 4.5 years I have known him. He has shown
memory, frontal lobe function, verbal fluency, attention, and
concentration.
This is supported by serial standardised cognitive screening tools and serial
neuroimaging with MRI and SPECT scans.
Meeting the criteria for the DSM V conditions for Major Neurocognitive
Disorder: he has deficits in more than one domain of cognitive
function and he
has impairments to his day to day functioning. He is increasingly reliant on
his wife and increasingly dependent
on hospital staff during admissions.
I would describe his current level of overall cognitive impairment as
[82] It is clear
from her evidence that Dr King interprets this decline as being typical of the
progression of Alzheimer’s disease
conclusions are not entirely convincing when the evidence for them is examined.
[84] Dr King
organised magnetic resonance imaging and PET scan testing. In her report she
quotes from the radiologist’s reports
The radiologist’s
report on the MRI report speaks of quite mild progressive atrophy and
“slight progression” of
white matter changes. This report does not
say anything about cognitive functioning and, indeed, does not mention dementia.
quotes directly from the radiologist’s reports, but offers no
analysis or opinion of her own as to the imaging.
[85] Dr King is
seeing the defendant regularly (every six weeks); has had him as an inpatient
under her care several times over the
past few years, and occasionally observes
him briefly in group therapy sessions organised at the hospital. I would have
she could have given a plethora of convincing examples of his functional
disabilities, but she did not. She referred to him forgetting
appointments.
This seems an odd
example to give in circumstances where she reports that [the defendant’s
wife] is acting as full-time carer
for the defendant. If this is so, the
defendant would not be in charge of making and remembering his own medical
appointments in
order to demonstrate forgetfulness by missing
[86] Dr King
gave an example in late 2017 where the defendant misunderstood what another
patient was saying. He became agitated –
t 1-65. This is one isolated
example which maybe Dr King witnessed, but likely someone reported to
Another individual example
was given that the group co-ordinator of the day program had noted that the
defendant asked when the
group was going to complete a particular project after
he had actually completed that project – t 1-71. This information was
hearsay, so that its rendition rather lacked force. Further, once again it is a
pretty isolated example in a context where Dr King
believes this man to have
increasingly severe dementia.
[87] Otherwise
Dr King gave very general evidence that the defendant was quiet, had at times
fallen asleep, and sometimes forgot to
come to his appointment with her from his
day sessions.
He had little
spontaneous language and responded monosyllabically to questions rather than
answering in sentences. He described
a low mood and lacking energy. He
reported being worried and feeling confused in a dysphoric way.
cognitive testing tool ACE 111 which Dr King administered on 5 June 2018 put the
defendant at 58 out of 100, where scores
of 82 and below are highly indicative
of dementia.
Dr King notes that
the defendant’s ACE 111 score and mini mental state score have declined
from 83/100 and 24/30 (respectively)
in 2013, to 58/100 and 13/30 in 2018 and
2017 (respectively). She says that this is consistent with the pattern of
cognitive decline
that would be expected with Alzheimer’s
Dr King accepted that
the defendant’s testing scores fluctuated from time to time. She
explained this by saying that she
thought, “There is a fluctuating level
to his capacity” – t 1-56 – and that there were times when the
had had “a catastrophic level of anxiety, and that has impaired
his functioning at that time, cognitive and otherwise”
[89] Dr King
thought that the way the defendant had presented since 2014 was consistent with
his having a progressive Alzheimer’s
disease. She did acknowledge there
was a slight mismatch between some of the testing and his day-to-day abilities
King’s view was that the defendant is not fit for trial. She thought his
dementia was at “the severe end of moderate
level of impairment”
PET Scanning
[91] After all
the reports in this matter had been provided, Dr King organised a PET amyloid
scan. The radiologist’s report
is dated 25 October 2018 and the
radiologist concludes that there was “pronounced beta amyloid
deposition” in the defendant’s
[92] Professor
Byrne said that an amyloid PET scan could be positive for 10 or 20 years before
the onset of any clinical symptoms
– t 1-36. The amount of amyloid
material found in the brain is not strongly correlated with the degree of
cognitive impairment
in any case – t 1-36. Professor Byrne said that
having such a scan as the defendant has, “means that you’re at
higher risk of going on to develop dementia of the Alzheimer’s type if you
live long enough, but plenty of people with positive
amyloid PET scans of their
brains don’t have any cognitive impairment currently. ... they probably
have Alzheimer’s disease,
but they don’t have dementia.”
– t 1-31, l 10. The PET scan did not change Professor Byrne’s view
t 1-29, l 45.
[93] Dr King
said that the most recent PET amyloid scan “supports that he has a level
of Alzheimer’s disease that has
been a part of his progressive cognitive
decline”. I accept that the scan is consistent with her diagnosis and
opinion, but
I do not accept that it provides independent support for his having
a dementia. I prefer the more precise evidence given by Professor
Byrne on this
[94] For all the
reasons discussed above, I prefer all the other evidence in the case to that
given by Dr King.
Time Since Examination by Professor Byrne and
Dr van de Hoef
[95] Three years
had passed between the time when Dr van de Hoef examined the defendant, and this
hearing. Fifteen months had elapsed
between Professor Byrne’s examination
of the defendant and the hearing.
[96] Drs Till
and King gave more recent reports than Dr van de Hoef and Professor Byrne.
Professor Byrne acknowledged that this put
disadvantage.
Professor Byrne’s letter of 27 September 2018 he acknowledged that his
last examination was undertaken more than 15
months ago and therefore “it
is possible that [HYX’s] cognitive function has deteriorated since
then”. However
he said of Dr Till’s second round of testing,
“The validity of these findings, which if taken at face value suggest
of at least moderate severity, rely critically on the application of
honest and consistent effort by the testee. I do not know whether
this was the
[98] In this
context he noted that both Dr King and Dr Till reported that the defendant had
deteriorated over time but he questioned
whether the defendant continued to
exaggerate his performance.
defendant’s performance might be brought about by depression, PTSD,
alcohol abuse or “wilful poor
performance”.
Conclusions
[99] There is no
method of scientifically proving whether or not the defendant has dementia, or
if he has, whether it is mild or affects
him more seriously. As at the date of
Professor Byrne’s last examination, my view is that the evidence does not
show the defendant
to have any cognitive impairment sufficient to make him unfit
for trial. I come to this conclusion for several reasons.
[100] Firstly,
Professor Byrne’s very great experience in examining dementia patients.
For him to say that the defendant performed
unlike any of the thousands of
people he has examined – [56] above, has great weight. This is not just
to rely on the
of a learned medical
Professor Byrne was at
pains to explain why he reached the conclusions he did.
[101] Secondly,
Professor Byrne’s examination, and that of Dr van de Hoef, were of a
different type to that of Dr Till. Dr
Till did not conduct a medical assessment
of the defendant. He did not push him to find out if he could remember the
the times when the subject matter of the charges allegedly took
place. He saw his role (correctly) largely as administering testing
[71] above. Professor Byrne and Dr van de Hoef took a larger view of things and
analysed matters other than the defendant’s
test scores. I thought
Dr van de Hoef explained the difference well at [44] above. Using this
approach, both the independent psychiatrists
came to the same conclusion: lack
[102] Thirdly,
Dr Till started with the belief that the defendant had moderate to severe
dementia. Of course, that is the very question
for the Court. It was not
really Dr Till’s role to come to a conclusion on medical matters. That he
did so did not invalidate
his testing. But it did mean that his interpretation
of the test results was not impartial. When the test results might equally
consistent with lack of effort or dementia, the assumption that in fact the
defendant had dementia meant that Dr Till’s
opinion was a foregone
conclusion.
[103] Professor
Byrne and Dr Till were in agreement that it would be necessary to have cognitive
ability in order to exaggerate disability,
or feign poor results, on testing.
Professor Byrne said:
“I would anticipate if he was
cognitively deteriorated that the extent of any exaggeration would diminish as
cognitive control over the exaggeration. In fact, the fact that
I thought he was exaggerating made me think he still had quite good
Yes?--- Because it requires some cognitive ability and effort to maintain an
exaggeration.”
“[HYX’s] ability to apply markedly reduced effort to cognitive
testing suggests to me that he retains the capacity for
tactical thinking and
behaviour”.
[104] I prefer
Professor Byrne’s view to Dr Till on this point, because of his great
experience, but also because he came at
the test results without an assumption
that the defendant suffered from dementia. This preference is in accordance
with the advice
from my assisting psychiatrists.
[105] Fourthly,
there are a group of indicators which favour the idea that the defendant was
exaggerating or feigning:
(a) The defendant’s complaints of
memory difficulties (to health professionals) emerged after arrest: [28], [32],
[36] and [46]
(b) Unusually for someone with dementia the defendant complains of the
symptoms of it: [72], [10], [35], [37] and [38] above.
(c) The defendant’s performance on testing was remarkably bad;
inconsistent, and not consistent with the descriptions of the
care he needed:
[40], [41], [42], [43], [56], [57], [58] and [61]
(d) The defendant claimed on direct questioning by all three independent
examiners: Byrne, van de Hoef and Till, that he had no memory
of any of the
events the subject of the charges: [11], [38], [45] and [32], [30], [54] and
[55] above.
But to Professor
Byrne and Dr van de Hoef the defendant gave accounts which showed he could
remember the time of the subject matter
of the charges, see the paragraph
references already given.
(e) The defendant’s behaviour at the hearing was to remain focussed on
the screen for about four-and-a-half hours. He did not
at any time appear
vague, unsure of what was going on, or distracted. His facial expression was
intent but neutral for most of the
hearing, but he did at times give every
appearance of understanding what was being said. It was Professor Byrne’s
that he did understand at these times – [67] above. Dr van de
Hoef thought so too – [68] above. Dr van de Hoef said
“apparent attention and concentration and alertness and engagement”
he showed during the hearing were amazing
if it was proposed that he had a
moderate to severe level of dementia – [68] above. I fully accept that a
finding of fitness
cannot be made from these observations. However, they are
not consistent with, say, the person Professor Byrne described at [61]
use the defendant’s behaviour at the hearing as support for the
conclusions reached by Professor Byrne and Dr van
de Hoef that
his presentation at examinations required by this Court was not genuine.
[106] For all
the foregoing reasons my conclusions are that, as at the date of the second
examination by Professor Byrne, the preponderance
of evidence was very clearly
that the defendant was fit for trial. There was no reliable evidence that he
had anything more than
a mild dementia, if any dementia at all. He could
remember the times at which the subject matter of the charges were said to have
occurred, and he had enough cognitive ability to present falsely to those
examining him.
difficult question is whether the evidence still supports a finding of fitness.
Dr Till and Dr King have made more recent
examinations of the defendant.
However, they have been taken in by his false presentations in the past, and
have not forensically
questioned whether he has dementia. There is no reason
why their most recent examinations should have more weight than their original
examinations. Dr Till thought his second round of testing showed
deterioration on some tests. On others, the defendant’s
performance
originally was so bad that it could not decline. Dementia progresses over time,
so a decline is consistent with this.
However, as Professor Byrne said, it is
consistent with various other things – [98] above. Furthermore, the
defendant’s
performance on testing has been inconsistent, and inconsistent
with his reported functioning all through the proceeding in this Court
see the references at [105(c)] above. The worst score he obtained on the ACE-R,
54, was when he was examined by Dr van de
Hoef three years ago.
[108] I am very
conscious that no party bears the onus of proof in the Mental Health Court.
Looking at all the evidence, I am not
persuaded on the balance of probability
that the defendant is unfit.
This was conceded by the
Prosecutor – t 1-24.
See [48] below.
t 1-15, ll 10-15 and ll
t 1-34, l 5.
There was no evidence that the
diagnosis was correct. There was some doubt about it. See Dr van de Hoef at tt
1-47-48 and Dr Harden
There was a civil suit at
least mooted by some of the complainants which preceded criminal charges being
To the contrary, see Dr van de
Hoef’s report p 18, and Professor Byrne’s oral evidence at t 1-31,
t 1-11, l 19 and t 1-21.
Dr Till explained in his
oral evidence that the tests were never designed to be used for
Alzheimer’s patients and that they
thus produce a higher rate of such
people being misidentified as malingering – t 1-3, l 45 – t 1-4, l
7. Dr Harden’s
questioning produced more specific information about
this – t 1-26, l 45 – t 1-27, l 10.
t 1-6, l 15 and t 1-14, ll
This conundrum was nicely
illustrated in oral evidence at t 1-13, ll 20-30.
p 13 of his report, 18
August 2015.
t 1-25. Dr Till thought
confabulation would be very difficult to feign – t 1-25.
p 14 of his report, 18
August 2015.
t 1-15, l 32; t 1-17, l 5
and t 1-23, l 17.
p 8 of his report, 10
January 2018.
See paragraphs 7.4.6 and
7.4.7 of his report.
Paragraphs 8.7 and 8.8 of
his report, 10 January 2018.
See tt 1-47-48. Dr van de
Hoef did not receive enough information to allow her to independently verify the
diagnosis of PTSD.
p 14 of Dr van de
Hoef’s report.
p 17 of Dr van de
Hoef’s report.
p 19 of Dr van de
Hoef’s report.
tt 1-46-47.
tt 1-50-51.
p 19 of Dr van de
Hoef’s report.
p 19 of Dr van de
Hoef’s report.
In coming to that
conclusion, she disregarded the catastrophic ACE-R score of 54 mentioned
p 20 of Dr van de
Hoef’s report.
p 20 of Dr van de
Hoef’s report.
p 21 of Dr van de
Hoef’s report.
p 7 of Dr Till’s
report, 22 October 2017.
See the extract from
Professor Byrne’s evidence at [52] above.
p 3 of Professor
Byrne’s report.
tt 1-34-35.
t 1-30, ll 3-20.
p 11 of Professor
Byrne’s report.
p 12 of Professor
Byrne’s report.
p 13 of Professor
Byrne’s report.
p 14 of Professor
Byrne’s report.
See p 14 of Professor
Byrne’s report.
p 15 of Professor
Byrne’s report.
p 18 of Professor
Byrne’s report.
p 4 of Dr Till’s
report, 22 October 2017.
p 4 of Dr Till’s
report, 22 October 2017.
And yet the defendant does
not require this level of care – a point made by Dr van de Hoef, see [41]
and [42] above, and Professor
Byrne, see [65] below.
p 6 of Dr Till’s
report, 22 October 2017.
t 1-28, l 37.
p 6 of Dr Till’s
report, 22 October 2017.
tt 1-37-38.
tt 1-43-44.
t 1-80, ll 32-36.
t 1-6, l 30 and t 1-10, l
t 1-9, ll 25-47.
t 1-8, ll 20-45.
tt 1-31-32.
t 1-64, ll 25-33.
See my comments in the
Court of Appeal decision of
[2012] QCA 91.
See Dr Harden’s
questioning between t 1-68, l 42 and t 1-69, l 15.
p 10 of Dr King’s
pp 13 and 14 of Dr
King’s report.
p 15 of Dr King’s
p 13 of Dr King’s
See t 1-56, ll 25-45 and t
1-63, ll 32-40.
cf t 1-70, ll 35-40, where
she says that she has only observed his behaviour in his respite group therapy
for “brief periods
tt 1-70-71.
p 12 of Dr King’s
p 15 of Dr King’s
t 1-32, l 35 – t
1-33, l 10.
Makita (Australia)
Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
Professor Byrne’s
report, p 20.
This finding involves
preferring Dr van de Hoef’s evidence to Dr Till’s. I do so on the
basis of the nature of her
examination (discussed above), and also because of Dr
Till’s assumption that the defendant has dementia.
While, in every case
denying the charges, a logical impossibility for someone with no
recollection.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (374 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter