URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIC/2009/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:38:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
QPSU v QFRSO [2009] QIC 27; 192 QGIG 39 (10 September 2009)
[Extract from Queensland Government Industrial
dated 18 September, 2009, Vol. 192, No. 3, pages
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Industrial Relations
s. 282 - case stated to Court
The Queensland Public Sector Union of Employees
AND Queensland Fire and Rescue - Senior Officers Union of Employees
(C/2009/31)
PRESIDENT HALL
10 September 2009
The Queensland Public Sector Union of Employees (the QPSU) is an employee
organisation under the
Industrial Relations Act 1999
(the Act). The
Queensland Fire and Rescue - Senior Officers Union of Employees (the QFRSO) is
also an employee organisation under
the Act. The QPSU has instituted
proceedings in the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission seeking
declaratory relief against
the QFRSO. The Commission's jurisdiction is said to
be derived from ss. 273(h) and 274A of the Act. The matter is currently
the Commission constituted as a Full Bench. On 16 July 2009, the Full
Bench stated the following Question for the opinion of the
"Whether the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission has power under
sections 273(h) and/or 274(A) to make the orders and decisions
sought in the
amended application No. B17 of 2009.".
The parties subsequently developed a Statement of Agreed Facts. The Full
Bench is content to have the Question answered on the basis
of the Statement of
Agreed Facts. The Agreement, I should add, was entered into after an amendment
of the Application for Declaratory
Relief to remove any suggestion that a
representation order was being sought. The Statement of Agreed Facts is as
STATEMENT OF AGREED FACTS
1. The Applicant ('QPSU') asserts that it is entitled under its registered
rules and list of callings to represent the industrial
interests under the Act
of all persons engaged as officers in the employment of the Queensland Fire and
Rescue Service ('QFRS').
2. The Applicant has utilised the asserted entitlement referred to in
paragraph 1 in the making of successive certified agreements
registered under
the Act to cover such employees.
3. The Respondent (Queensland Fire and Rescue - Senior Officers Union of
Employees ('SOU')) by correspondence dated 25 November 2008
to the Deputy
Commissioner of the QFRS, asserted that it 'has, within the scope of its
eligibility rules (Rule 3.1), the ability
to admit as members any and all Senior
Officers from within the Queensland Fire and Rescue Service'.
4. The SOU also asserted in the same correspondence that:
'Under Chapter 12 "Industrial Organisations" - Part 10 "Membership" - of the
Industrial Relations Act 1999
(Qld), the SOU must, on application, admit
such persons to membership, if they are eligible to become a member.
It is also important to note that, in accordance with the eligibility rules
of the SOU, Senior Officers from all three operational
streams of the QFRS have
applied for - and been admitted to - membership of the SOU. This includes
Senior Officers from Urban Operations,
Rural Operations and Scientific
Operations.'
5. In light of paragraphs 3 and 4 above, the SOU has asserted that it is the
legitimate and lawful bargaining agent for those Senior
Officers who have
applied and been admitted as members of the SOU.
6. The Applicant asserts that the Respondent has not, prior to the claim
referred to in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 above, purported to
represent the interests
of Senior Officers engaged in Rural fire operations, and that it is not entitled
in accordance with its eligibility
rule to do so. The Respondent denies this.
7. The Applicant asserts that the SOU cannot admit into membership, nor
represent the industrial interests of senior fire officers
engaged in work
described 'Rural fire operations' and is not lawfully entitled to represent the
industrial interests of such senior
officers now or in the future. If the SOU
is so entitled, it will do so in competition with the Applicant, in the sense
unions will have overlapping coverage to that extent. If it cannot do
so it is acting ultra vires and outside the terms of its registered
8. The Respondent asserts that is has, since its registration as an
industrial union on 22 June 1990, represented the interests of
all senior fire
officers including those senior fire officers in the 'rural fire operations'.
Further the Respondent asserts it
has been involved in, represented and been a
party to, the making of successive certified agreements that cover senior fire
9. The Respondent asserts that in response to its correspondence to the QFRS
dated 25 November 2008, the QFRS responded on 19 January
2009 confirming that
'As the Queensland Fire and Rescue Senior Officers Union of Employees ('QFRSOU')
is a party to the relevant
industrial instruments which apply to senior officers
within Urban, Rural and Scientific QFRS operations, the QFRSOU will be consulted
with respect to any industrial issues which may impact upon Senor Officers'.
10. This disagreement has manifested itself in competing contradictory
assertions by the Applicant and the Respondent to each other
and to the employer
of the relevant employees as to the respective entitlement of each union to
represent the industrial interests
of the affected employees during the
forthcoming round of enterprise agreement negotiations.
11. The Applicant has lodged an Amended Application in the Commission, and
has invoked section 273(h) and section 274A of the Act
and is now seeking:
a) a declaration as set out in paragraph 2(a) of the Amended Application
that is 'that the SOU cannot enrol into its membership and
represent under the
Act the industrial interest of those persons who are employed in the Rural Fire
Division of QFRS';
b) a direction set out in paragraph 2(b) of the Amended Application that is
a direction that 'the SOU, its officers, members, servants
or agents to refrain
from enrolling into the membership of the SOU, those persons who are employed in
the Rural Fire Division of
c) a direction set out in paragraph 2(c) of the Amended Application that
'the SOU to remove from its membership any person who is
employed in the Rural
Fire Division of the QFRS'.
Against this background, the question stated to the Court for its opinion
requires the Court to determine if it has power or jurisdiction
under section
273(h) and/or section 274A to make the orders, decisions, declarations and
directions sought in the Amended Application.
12. The stated case does not require the Court to determine any aspect of the
question as to whether such declarations, orders, decisions
or directions should
be made as a matter of merit having regard to the case before the Commission,
but is confined to the question
as to whether the Commission has the power or
decisions, declarations and directions sought in the Amended
Application, or any of them.".
In the event, no reliance was placed on s. 273(h) of the Act. The
Applicant (to adopt the parties preferred terminology) based its
case on s. 274A
of the Act which provides:
274A Power to make declarations
(1) The commission may, on application, make a declaration about an
industrial matter.
(2) The commission may make the declaration whether or not consequential
relief is or could be claimed.
(3) The application may be made by -
(a) a person who may be directly affected by the declaration; or
(b) an inspector; or
(c) an organisation of employees or employers of which a person mentioned in
paragraph (a) is a member, if it is acting with the person's
written consent;
(d) an organisation of employees or employers who may be directly affected by
the declaration.
(4) Subject to chapter 9, a declaration made by the commission under this
section is binding in any proceeding under this Act in relation
to the issue
determined by the declaration.".
It follows from s. 274A(1) that the
question, whether the Full Bench may grant a declaration that the Respondent
cannot enrol into
its membership and represent under the
Industrial Relations
, the industrial interests of those persons who are employed in the
Rural Fire Division of the QFRSO, becomes the question whether
declaration is a declaration about an industrial matter.
definition of "industrial matter" at s. 7 of the Act. Section 7(2), which is
plainly not material, may be put aside.
Relevantly, s. 7 provides:
"7(1) An industrial matter is a matter
that affects or relates to
(a) work done or to be done;
(b) the privileges, rights or functions of -
(i) employers or employees; or
(ii) persons who have been, or propose to be, or who may become, employer or
employees; or
(c) a matter (whether or not an industrial matter is defined in this section)
that the Court or Commission considers has been, is,
or may be a cause or
contributory cause of an industrial action or industrial dispute.
(3) Without limiting subsection (1) of affecting subsection (2), a matter is
an industrial matter if it
a matter contained in schedule 1.".
[Emphasis added]
Relevantly, Schedule 1 to the Act includes within the
definition of an "industrial matter" the following:
"21. The regulation of relations between employer and employee, or between
employees ...; and
22. A demarcation dispute.".
Schedule 5 to the Act then provides an
inclusionary definition of "demarcation dispute",
"Demarcation dispute includes -
(a) a dispute arising between two or more organisations, or within an
organisation, about the rights, status or functions of members
organisations or organisation in relation to the employment of the members;
(b) a dispute arising between employers and employees, or between the members
of different organisations, about the demarcation or
functions of employees or
classes of employees; and
(c) a dispute about the representation under the Act of the industrial
interests of employees by an association or employee organisation.".
It seems to me that the declaration sought is about an "industrial
matter" in that it affects the rights of the employees of the Rural
Division of QFRSO to participate in the enterprise bargaining regime for which
the Act provides, see ss. 142(1)(b), 143(2) and
156(j) and (k) of the Act.
The declaration sought will determine, as between the Applicant and the
Respondent: (a) whether the
employees of the Rural Fire Division of QFRSO may
or may not request their employer to reach an agreement to which the Respondent
is a party; and (b) whether the Respondent is entitled to be informed of the
making of any agreement and to oppose the certification
of an agreement to which
the Respondent is not a party.
It seems to me also that the declaration
sought is about an "industrial matter" in that it relates to the regulation of
between employer and employee. Of the expression "relating to", Lord
Macnaughten in
Inland Revenue Commissioners v Maple and Co (Paris) Ltd
[1908] AC 22
at 26, "There is no expression more general or far reaching
than that". Of the expression it has been said that it "can signify
great width
of association", compare
Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade v
[1992] FCA 321
(1992) 108 ALR 77
at 86 per Hill J, and "should not be read down in
the absence of some compelling reason* for so doing",
[1982] HCA 16
(1982) 150 CLR 615
at 629 per Mason J. [*For a case in which a
compelling reason emerged see
Rosser v Donges
[1990] 1 Qd R 490
per Byrne J.] The phrase "relates to" is of course a "vague and indefinite"
Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade v Boswell
[1992] FCA 321
(1992) 108 ALR 77
at 94 per Cooper J and context will be everything,
Ltd v Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW)
(1961) 104 CLR 602
Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade v Boswell
, there is nothing remote or tenuous about the connection
between the regulation of the relations between employer and employee and
participation in and representation in the enterprise bargaining regime which is
a means of regulation.
I decline to comment upon whether the declaration
sought is about an industrial matter within s. 7(1)(c). If the Full Bench
that the issues about right to enrol and represent, which sparked the
Application for a Declaration, are or may be a cause, or contributory
an industrial action or industrial dispute, the power at s. 274A of the Act may
be exercised to grant declaratory relief
and represent employees in the Rural Fire Division of QFRSO. However, the
Applicant and the
Respondent have not agreed that the issues between them are or
may be a cause, or contributory cause of an industrial action or industrial
dispute. The facts which are agreed do not permit such a conclusion to be
reached by inference. In any event, s. 282 of the Act
requires the Court to
give an opinion on a question of law: not to give an opinion on a question of
fact. For the same reasons,
I abstain from determining whether there is an
"industrial matter" by way of a demarcation dispute. On that issue, I should
it is apparent from the submissions developed by the parties that there is
not agreement as to the facts on this issue. The Full
Bench may have to hear
The Applicant accepts that the Court cannot presently assert
that the Act arms the Full Bench with power to issue a direction: (a)
Respondent, its officers, members, servants or agents refrain from enrolling
into membership of the Respondent, those persons
who are employed in the Rural
Fire Service of the QFRSO; or (b) that the Respondent remove from its membership
any person who is
employed in the Rural Fire Division of the QFRSO. Should a
declaration about the Respondent's right to enrol and represent be granted
I stress that this Court has not been taken to the merits of the Application)
and be favourable to the Applicant, there is potential
for events to take a
course which may trigger powers under the Act which may support the directions
sought. However, that is all
in the future. There is no basis for assuming
that the Respondent will fail on the merits nor for assuming that if
unsuccessful,
will not abide by the declaration. The Question asked of the
Court should be answered:
(a) The Commission has power under s. 274A of the Act to make the
declarations sought in Application Matter No. B/2009/17; and
(b) The Commission does not presently have power to issue the directions
sought in Application Matter No. B/2009/17.
Dated 10 September
D.R. HALL, President
Released: 10 September
Appearances:
Mr A. Herbert, instructed by Hall Payne Lawyers for
the Applicant.
Mr C. Murdoch, instructed by Clayton Utz, Solicitors for the
Respondent.
Government Printer, Queensland
The State of
Queensland 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (54.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter