URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2003/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Westcourt Tavern [2003] QLAT 25 (2 July 2003)
APPELLANT: Ms Sarah Collins
53 Vico Street
GORDONVALE QLD
APPLICANT: T W Hedley Pty.Ltd
(Second Respondent) P O Box
CAIRNS QLD 4868
FIRST RESPONDENT: Chief Executive,
Department of Tourism, Racing & Fair
Trading, including Liquor
GPO Box 1141
BRISBANE QLD 4001
APPEAL NO. 25 of
PROPOSED PREMISES: Detached Bottle Shop at Shop 7, White Rock
Centre, 194-196 Progress Road, White Rock, Cairns.
DECISION APPEALED
AGAINST: Granting of a Licence for a Detached
Bottle Shop
HEARING DATE: 23 May 2003
TRIBUNAL: Mr J Rolls
Mrs J Harrington
Dr M O’Donnell
DATE: 2 July 2003
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. On 31 May 2002 TW Hedley Pty Ltd lodged an application for a Detached
Bottleshop under a General Licence in respect of Westcourt
Tavern, 200 Aumuller
St Westcourt, Cairns and to be situated at Shop 7, White Rock Shopping Centre,
194-196 Progress Road, White
Rock, Cairns. The proposed trading hours were 10am
to midnight Monday to Sunday. At the time of the application there were already
3 bottleshops operated in respect of Westcourt Tavern. The applicant stated his
intention of transferring the Detached Bottleshop
at Shop 7, Edge Hill to
another General Licence known as Dunwoodys.
2. The Application was advertised pursuant to
Liquor Act 1992
(“the Act”) and 26 objections and one petition containing 52
signatures were received within the prescribed time for
objections.
3. The Cairns City Council and the Assistant Commissioner of Police, Far
Northern Region were asked to comment on the application
pursuant to
the Act. The Assistant Commissioner of Police, Far Northern Region had no
objection to the application.
4. The Acting Manager, City Assessment, Cairns City Council advised that the
Council had no objection from a Land Use Perspective
subject to the
applicant’s complying with the
Food Hygiene Regulation 1989.
However, from a social impact perspective Council strongly objected to a
Detached Bottleshop in the proposed location. The Council
was concerned that
the Bottle Shop
a. Impact on Children due to the close proximity of a school (TAS Primary and
High School) which is within 50m and the BibanBaye Kindy
& Day Care which is
within 200 meters of the proposed
location...
on the Hmong Community Centre and a Performing Arts Studo & School, as the
Detached Bottle Shop is to be located in between
these Centres in the
Impact on the amenity
of the surrounding local community as the area is identified as having some
low-socioeconomic
characteristics
Impact on the
amenity of the surrounding area, as the area is surrounded by residential
properties...
The Council was also concerned that
“the area is dominated by Liquor
outlets and there are 6 within 4km radius of this
5. An Objections Conference, originally to be held on 06 September 2002, was
postponed to 17 September because of a delay in advertising
and postponed again
because of an administrative error. The Conference was held on 25 September
2002 but no resolution was reached
between the parties
6. On 25 February 2003 the Chief Executive determined to grant the application
and the grounds for his decision
application met all Division requirements in terms of the premises and
Information required to be supplied
The local Police did
not provide any objection to the
application
The chief executive
was satisfied that the amenity (in terms of Section 119 of the Act) would not be
unduly affected
Pursuant to
Section 116
Liquor Act 1992
, the applicant satisfied the chief executive
that it is in the public interest for the application to be
7. By notice of Appeal lodged on 08 April 2003 Ms Sarah Collins appeals this
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
8. An application for the approval of a Detached Bottle Shop pursuant to
of the Act is one to which public interest is relevant pursuant to
(1)(b). Pursuant to
of the Act an applicant must satisfy the
Chief Executive and in this case the Tribunal that it is in the public
interest for the application to be granted. If so satisfied,
the Tribunal must
then have regard to the matters specified in
, (c), (d) and (f)
respectively, which are objections made to the grant of the application;
comments from local government for the
area to which the application relates;
comments from the Assistant Commissioner of Police for the relevant locality;
and the impact
on the amenity of the community concerned.
PROPOSED PREMISES
9. The Proposed Bottle Shop will be situated at Shop 7, 194-196 Progress Rd
White Rock on the eastern side of the Bruce Highway
immediately adjacent to the
residential areas of the suburb of White Rock. It is in a neighbourhood
shopping centre occupying a
site on the corner of Progress Road and Leftwich
Street. Other tenancies in the centre include a doctor’s surgery,
takeaway/convenience
store, hairdresser’s salon, the Hmong Community
Centre and the Regional Institute of Dance which is a dance studio for all
The appellant, Ms Sarah Collins, is the owner of the dance studio. The site is
included in the Commercial zone within the Urban
Preferred Dominant Land Use
designation of the Strategic Plan for the City of Cairns and is the only site so
zoned in the general
the site is via Progress Road which is a distributor/collector road
carrying large volumes of traffic and running
parallel to and immediately beside the Bruce Highway. Evidence was given
that the portion of the 4-lane
Bruce Highway adjoining White Rock is “
arguably the busiest in the
and is currently being upgraded to 6 lanes. Accidents are
commonplace.
11. The applicant submits that the proposed bottleshop will provide greater
convenience to residents on the eastern side of the Bruce
Highway both because
of its proximity and because it will enable them to walk or drive without the
necessity of crossing a busy and
accident-prone road. At present, residents in
the White Rock area generally purchase their liquor from the Southside
at Charlotte Close, Woree on their way home from
This requires re-entry to the
peak hour traffic from the other side of the Bruce Highway and it is not
surprising that Sen Sgt Rhodes
of the Edmonton Police sees an advantage in the
placement of the bottleshop in this location if it deters people from crossing
busy Pacific Highway to purchase takeaway
12 The applicant states
proposed bottleshop will be airconditioned and “
will provide a
comprehensive range of competitively priced local and imported beers, wines and
spirits, as well as liquor related
products, and a wide range of non-alcoholic
beverages, some of which will be refrigerated”.
The Tribunal accepts
the assessment of Mr. Reinhold
it is likely to be similar to other standard suburban bottleshops in terms of
quality of services, but will differentiate itself
from existing premises only
by its greater convenience to the residents of the locality.
13. In summary, the applicant argues that there is a clear public interest in
the availability of a bottleshop in reasonable proximity
to the suburb and
readily and safely accessible to residents.
PUBLIC INTEREST
14. There is no dispute on the material before us that the primary locality to
application relates is on the eastern side of the Bruce Highway from the
intersection of the Highway and Anderson Rd in the north
to the industrial area
adjacent to Skeleton Creek in the south. The applicant submits that the
locality also includes the suburb
of Forest Gardens to the west of the Bruce
Highway because the proposed site is the nearest shopping centre to that suburb
be accessed by a signalised intersection at the corner of the Bruce
Highway, Forest Gardens Boulevard and Sheehy Rd.
population of the locality based on the 2001 Census data was 5586. More
than 1000 of these had relocated to the area within the previous 5 years,
in parallel
with new housing developments including Forest Gardens which was first developed
in 1995. The area is rapidly changing, with large
tracts of land that are
presently rural or rural residential being designated for future development.
One such area lies approximately
1km to the east of White Rock where 504 new
lots are expected to add another 1200 people to the suburb’s
population.
It is evident that the
projected population of this area will be significantly higher than it is now.
16. Other Detached Bottleshops in the area are Southside (Red Beret) Bottleshop
approximately 3.2km to the north of the proposed
site and Centenary Cellars and
Grafton Cellars approximately 2.5km and 3km respectively to the south. Mr.
describes them as standard
suburban bottleshops in average condition, selling a typical range of product.
An application has been
made for a further bottleshop in the Mt. Sheridan Plaza
shopping centre approximately 1.5km away and a General Licence with provisional
approval is being constructed at the same location. Other licensed premises in
the vicinity are Woree Tavern and Bottleshop 4km
to the north and Grafton Hotel
4.5km to the south. Both the applicant and the Liquor Licensing Division argue
that this is a very
uneven distribution of bottleshops and that there is an
unreasonable distance between those to the north and those to the south of
expanding suburb of White Rock.
17. Figures relating to the
demographic characteristics of the area are, unfortunately,
based partly on
the most recent ABS 2001 Census and partly on earlier figures
from the 1996 Census. Especially in an area undergoing substantial change,
these statistics do not provide a comprehensive and up
to date snapshot of the
characteristics of the locality.
The locality appears to comprise 3 distinct areas – the older suburb of
White Rock, the new suburb of Forest Gardens and a
residential area between
Hepburn St and Sheehy Road.
It is not possible to describe with any degree of confidence its socio-economic
character as no income figures or other data have
been provided either as
averages or separately for each of the component areas. An evaluation of
objections received by the Division
states that
White Rock contains a wide mix of different socio-economic types, from
state housing and caravan park occupants to upmarket $300,000
plus unit and home
1996 Census data indicates that, at least at that time, the
number of persons unemployed was less than the average and the number
greater than the average. With such a varied picture, the rapidly growing
nature of the locality and the deficiencies in
the available statistical
evidence, Mr. Reinhold’s conclusion that the employment figures and the
large number of new homes
suggest that the socio-economic profile of the area is
rising is not an unreasonable one.
18. The Census data indicates that the area has a significant indigenous
population, with a percentage of persons of indigenous
or Torres Strait
islander origin 4 times the State average and greater than that of Cairns City.
However, no further detail was provided
and it is impossible for the Tribunal,
on the basis of the information before it, to determine what impact, if any, the
may have on this segment of the population.
19. The socio-economic character of the local community was one of the bases for
the strong objection of the Cairns City Council
to the location of the proposed
bottleshop. Council stated that the Safety Officer and Divisional Councillor
were aware of social
problems in the area including vandalism, domestic and
youth problems. A/Senior Sgt Mick Carige at Edmonton Police Station was also
aware of the problems but he did not believe the presence of the bottleshop
would exacerbate the existing situation. Since such
problems are common
throughout society, in the absence of any additional data or substantive
evidence in support of Council’s
contention, the Tribunal agrees with the
Liquor Licensing Division
there are many apparently similar suburbs in Cairns and elsewhere which have
bottleshops nearby and there has been no evidence
of any negative impact on the
amenity of their surrounding communities.
20. The proposed Detached Bottleshop is close to a number of identified
subcommunities including schools and churches. The site
is approximately 100m
across Leftwich Road, directly opposite the Trinity Anglican School which has
both primary and secondary students.
White Rock Primary School is approximately
800m south along Progress Road, the Bibanbye Kindy and Day Care Centre
approximately
200m along Leftwich St and the Regional Institute of Performing
Arts Dance Studio occupies an adjoining premises in the shopping
Trinity Anglican School is also the venue for church services during school term
from 7.45-8.00am Monday to Friday and
9.20-10.40am on Tuesdays and the
congregation of St Francis Anglican Church, Edmonton meets in the school chapel
at 7am on Sunday
mornings throughout the year. In addition, Trinity Baptist
Church lies across Progress Road and, as well as Sunday services, conducts
worship on Tuesdays and Saturdays and other services on Wednesday and Thursday
21. The majority of objections to the siting of the proposed bottleshop were
made by representatives of the schools and churches
and by parents associated
with them. They regarded the sale of alcohol nearby as incompatible with the
educational and nurturing
purposes of a school and contrary to the christian,
community and family values espoused by a religious establishment. They
the fear that the exposure of young people to the sale of alcohol
and/or to persons consuming alcohol would tend to alter their perceptions
alcohol use and “normalise” alcohol consumption in impressionable
minds at a time when problems of alcohol abuse by
teenagers and young people are
becoming more acute.
22. The objectors also expressed concerns for the safety of the children’s
environment and possible interaction between them
and bottleshop customers in
the school grounds, in and about the shopping centre or on their way to the
youth services at the Baptist
Church. Trinity Anglican School already has a
problem with people using their grounds as a thoroughfare and behaving in a rude
abusive manner and they fear that the addition of a bottleshop will
exacerbate the problem.
23. The Tribunal finds it difficult to see how such interaction would occur
involuntarily, and even if it did, how it would pose
a significant risk to the
health and safety of children. Within the grounds of Trinity Anglican School
undoubtedly students would
be supervised by teachers or other staff and it is
reasonable to assume that school students attending the dance studio as part of
their normal school day would be accompanied by a teacher. Ms Collins indicated
that other children attending the dance school were
usually brought there by
their parents who waited to escort them home. It seems to us that these factors
ought to provide sufficient
deterrent to the occurrence of untoward incidents,
unlikely though such incidents might be.
24. On the other hand there are many examples of schools and bottleshops which
have coexisted in close proximity to one
without problems for a
number of years. In Cairns, for example, the bottleshops at Brinsmead,
Kewarra, Centenary, Southside and
Hoare St shopping centres are between 100m and
400m from a school. Kewarra Beach Detached Bottleshop in particular is a
distance from another campus of the Anglican school. Liquor Licensing
Officers indicated that neither Sen Sgt Nolan of the Smithfield
Ms Allison Lieke,
Headmistress of Kewarra Beach Anglican
nor Ms J Roderick whose
house backs on the school grounds could identify any problems associated with
the bottleshop. Mr Reinhold
for the Liquor Licensing Division stated that there
was no evidence in the Division’s files that a school community had been
adversely affected by the presence of a detached bottleshop
25. Ms Collins is anxious that parental concerns about the exposure of their
children to the bottleshop will have a detrimental effect
on her business. The
Tribunal is unable to judge the strength of parental opposition or the course of
action concerned parents might
take. However, evidence was given that there
were a much higher number of objections to a previous application for a
at this site and that community attitudes to bottleshops had changed
over the years as the community observed the largely trouble-free
operation of
such premises. While it is still the norm for objections to be received to the
location of bottleshops close to schools,
indicates that, once
the shop is operational, as, for example, at Edge Hill in Cairns, it is
supported by local residents.
26. No evidence was submitted, nor does the Tribunal have any reason to believe
that the applicant would operate this bottleshop
in an unprofessional or
unlawful manner. On the contrary, the applicant has “
a very good
operation of 26 Detached Bottleshops throughout Queensland of which 16 are in
the Cairns area.
27. While the concerns of the schools, churches and parents are understandable
genuinely held, the Tribunal is not convinced, on the evidence before it, that
the siting of the bottleshop in the proposed location
would pose a sufficient
moral or physical threat to justify refusal of the application.
AMENITY ISSUES
28. The appellant and other objectors raised concerns about perceived traffic
and parking problems generated by the placement of
the bottleshop in the
29. Concern was expressed about increased traffic in Progress Road in particular
and for the safety of students in transit to and
from school on the local roads.
However, students would already be accustomed to dealing with the heavy traffic
associated with the
adjacent Bruce Highway and there seems unlikely to be more
than negligible effect on local roads caused by traffic to the bottleshop.
principal area of concern would be where there is a likely concentration of
students on foot or bicycle, in cars or buses, at
the main entrance of Trinity
Anglican School in Leftwich St. However, the lack of a vehicular entrance to
the shopping centre from
In addition, given that , as mentioned earlier, local residents customarily buy
their liquor supplies
on the way home from work, it is less likely that the peak
business period for the bottleshop will coincide with either the start
finish of the school day.
30. Evidence before us is that the shopping centre at present generates only
limited traffic. A small supermarket closed down because
it could not generate
sufficient business and the doctor’s surgery is thought to operate only at
certain times of the week.
The owners of the shopping centre could reasonably
be expected to take steps to ensure that all shops are fully operational. If
this site is not used for a bottleshop, it will undoubtedly become some other
kind of retail outlet which may well generate more
through traffic than a
bottleshop is likely to do.
31. On the basis of the evidence before us we are not satisfied that there will
be any traffic problems caused by the establishment
of the proposed premises
which would justify refusal of the application.
32. We are also not satisfied that there are likely to be significant parking
problems. There are 62 parking spaces provided in
the centre and the appellant
argues that the carpark is congested especially in the afternoons when parents
bring their children
to classes at the dance studio. The congestion is
apparently caused by parents who park there to wait for their children coming
the Trinity Anglican School at the end of the school day. Even in the
unlikely event that the peak times for the bottleshop coincided
with the current
congestion, the carpark has been provided for customers of the shops in the
centre and not for the convenience of
parents of school students. It would be
unreasonable to consider refusal of the application on these grounds.
33. In summary, we are satisfied that any traffic or parking problems which may
arise are unlikely to cause undue inconvenience to
residents of the locality or
to those passing through or doing business in the area and are unlikely to
result in any lessening of
the area’s amenity.
34. The Tribunal notes that a Liquor Licensing Advisory Panel was convened on 24
February 2003 to review the information included
in the Liquor Licensing
Division’s investigations of the application. The Panel considered that
the review of the available
information supports the Liquor Licensing
Division’s conclusions and recommends that the Chief Executive grants the
subject to the conditions proposed.
35. The Tribunal in determining this application has given full consideration to
the objections raised and although the objectors’
concerns are genuine and
their perceptions are understandable, in the end the Tribunal is not persuaded,
on the basis of the material
placed before it, that approval of the proposed
Detached Bottleshop would have any significant impact on the amenity of the
surrounding
36. Having considered all matters to which we must have regard pursuant to
of the Act, the Tribunal is satisfied that it should exercise its
discretion to approve the application. We are satisfied on the
basis of all the
evidence before us that the establishment of the proposed Detached Bottleshop is
in the public interest and will
not in our view have any adverse impact upon the
amenity of the community concerned.
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
33. The Tribunal orders that the decision of the Chief Executive of 25
February 2003 to grant approval for a Detached Bottleshop
to be operated under
the General Licence of Westcourt Tavern, 200 Aumuller St, Cairns and to be
situated at Shop 7, White Rock
Shopping Centre 194-196 Progress Road, White
Rock, with trading hours of 10am to midnight Monday to Sunday be confirmed,
to the same pre-conditions for commencement of trading as imposed by the Chief
............................
Mr J Rolls –
Chairperson
For the Liquor Appeals Tribunal
Rolls Dr M O’Donnell Ms J
Chairperson
Appeal Book pp
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book
Appeal Book p37
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (60.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter