URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Halliday, Jack v Houseman, Arthur [2003] QBT 14 (3 April 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 014
Halliday v Houseman
[2003] QBT B360-01
HALLIDAY Jack
HOUSEMAN Arthur
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
3 April 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
24 July & 7 & 8 November 2002
DECISION OF:
Mr P. Lohrisch
CATCHWORDS:
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
REPRESENTATION:
Self-represented with Mr Loxton
SOLICITORS:
RESPONDENT:
Finemore Walters & Story
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Introduction and
This application commenced as an
application brought in the Magistrates Court by the Applicant to recover the
balance owing by the
Respondent, namely $1,820, under a building contract
(“the building contract”) entered into between the Applicant and
Respondent. The building contract was for the construction by the Applicant of
what is described on the plans as “proposed
extensions and
The application was transferred to the
Tribunal. The Respondent counterclaimed essentially on the basis that the
failed to carry out the works in a proper
and workmanlike manner (workmanship issues); and
failed to carry out the works in a
structural sense in accordance with proper engineering practice (structural
The Respondent did not contest that $1,820
was the balance owing under the building
Workmanship and structural issues
(initially set out in Exhibit 1) are dealt with by the Respondent primarily in
reports by Mr Neumann,
an inspector with the Queensland Building Services
Authority (“the Authority”) and Mr Bywater, an engineer engaged by
the Respondent. As well, and to an extent repetitively, Messrs Wardrop and
Gower, licenced builders and a Mr Nelson purport to provide
reports upon the
adequacy of the structure designed and constructed by the Applicant. These
issues will be addressed during the
course of the review of their
Additionally, as far as the Respondent is
concerned, there are matters involving the damage and repair of a sewer pipe and
Whilst not lessening the impact of the
workmanship issues, in my view, the structural issues, dealt with in reports by
the Applicant’s
engineer Mr Strachan and the Respondent’s engineer
Mr Bywater, predominate as to whether the subject structure has been adequately
constructed and what should be its fate.
It is for this reason that I requested the
engineers during the course of the hearing to confer on matters subject of their
Whilst no written document was prepared as to points of agreement and
disagreement further to that contact between the engineers,
I elected to have
the engineers oral evidence heard early in the proceedings and consecutively so
that the evidence on structural
matters could be more readily weighed.
Accordingly I have dealt with the engineers’ evidence on the structural
issues common
to them, together with my critique as to same, under the one
evidentiary heading.
I should say initially that it was Mr
Bywater’s evidence that he and Mr Strachan were generally in agreement
upon matters raised
in Mr Bywater’s first report, although Mr Strachan
seemed reluctant in oral evidence to concur in that assessment. Nonetheless
seemed to me that the actual substance of Mr Strachan’s oral evidence
largely confirmed Mr Bywater’s assessment of
their contact.
Further I have dealt with the
Respondent’s evidence first as the hearing involved entirely the
Respondent’s counter-claim.
Respondent’s
Arthur Houseman
Mr Houseman’s evidence is that the
parties entered into a small works contract (the building contract) in the sum
of $9,912.80
for the construction of an extension to his house at 156 Dillon
Road, Agnes Waters.
Mr Houseman said that he became
increasingly concerned during construction as to whether the extension had been
built in a proper
and workmanlike manner. Notwithstanding he said, upon the
rectification by the Applicant of mismatching guttering, and the use of
rather than colour-bond guttering to remove water, he made a last progress
payment of $2,000.00 bringing the balance owing under
the contract to $1,820.00.
It was this amount he said which was subject of an action commenced by the
Applicant in the Magistrates
Court, Bundaberg. This amount owing, as I have
said, is not disputed by Mr Houseman. In fact Mr Houseman has paid this money
the Tribunal’s trust account pending resolution of his
counterclaim.
Mr Houseman produced to the Applicant a
list of defects of some of three pages in length under headings
“roof”, “guttering”,
“structure”,
“decking”, “earthworks” and “extra notes”.
The defects list by Mr Houseman
is in the annexed documents to the report of Mr
Neumann of the Authority dated 19 December 2001.
Mr Houseman has no relevant trade
qualifications in respect of works such as these. As a result Mr Houseman
obtained reports from
three persons as to the alleged
Mervyn Gower licensed builder of Agnes
Water, 1770 Building Constructions Pty Ltd dated 2 September
Mr P M Wardrop
Mr Darryl Nelson
Notwithstanding the forwarding of the
list of defects, Mr Houseman said that the Applicant commenced proceedings in
the Magistrates
Court, Bundaberg for the balance owing under the contract.
These proceedings were commenced on the 13 July 2001. The proceedings
transferred to the Tribunal on the 3 September 2001.
On the 9 November 2001 the Tribunal
ordered that the Authority provide a report as to:
details of defective or incomplete work;
the time within which rectification or
completion should be finalised.
Further to that order the Authority
provided a report through its inspector Mr Neumann dated 19 December 2001(the
first report).
On the 26 February 2002 the Tribunal
further ordered that:
The Applicant be given access to the
premises to address defective items listed in the first Queensland Building
Services Authority
report; and
The Authority provide a further report to
the Tribunal as to such rectification works.
The Authority provided that further
report dated 21 March 2002 (the second report).
Neumann’s Evidence
As noted Mr Neumann provided two reports
dated 19 December 2001 and 21 March 2002.
The first report established a number
defects or possible defects (the latter subject to engineering advice), with the
second report
dealing with the extent to which the items identified in the first
report had, or had not, been rectified.
Of primary relevance in this proceeding
is the extent to which defective items identified in the first report had been
The matters left outstanding according to Mr Neumann’s second
report are as follows:
Mr Neumann made reference to his first
report as follows:
The licensee is to provide
all necessary documents to the certifier to obtain a complete building approval.
On completion of the following
recommendation obtain engineering certification
and an occupation certificate”.
Mr Neumann noted that the
Applicant relied upon a certificate from his engineer Stephen Strachan dated 12
November 2001. Mr Neumann
further noted that that certificate had not certified
one item, namely, “connection of the existing residence is not certified
Mr Neumann further indicated that the Applicant had
carried out work to secure the bargeboard to the existing house frame, however
the overhanging roof battens of the existing building support the weight of the
new roof. In this regard Mr Neumann noted in his
first report that, in his
view, the fixing of the carport roof to the fascia is not acceptable, unless the
fascia’s attachments
to the existing building are upgraded, and that the
effect of the extra uplift upon the existing building is checked and/or
Mr Neumann conceded that these were engineering matters.
In his first report Mr Neumann included
the following:
The building is to be set out so
that it is square and in line with the existing building.”
Neumann explained that the Applicant had extended the rafters on the left side
of the carport so that the fascia lined up with
the existing building. He noted
however that the verandah floor and post do not line up with the existing
building, and that the
fascia and columns on the other side of the carport do
not line up with the existing building. Mr Neumann agreed under cross
examination
that he had taken no actual measurements in this regard either
diagonally or otherwise.
Mr Neumann said that, in order to put the
building back in square, as he had recommended in his first report, the columns
to be dismantled and shifted, the roof removed and that new footings
may be necessary. He said that it would be necessary to have
to just about pull
the whole structure down, and that this would involve significant work.
In his first report Mr Neumann
identified the following matter:
footings have not been inspected they should be checked in at least two
locations. If found to be defective they are to be
rectified in accordance with
the engineer’s direction.”
Mr Neumann said that at the
reinspection he was informed by the Respondent that the building certifier
required photos to be taken
of footing holes to show their depth. As at the
date of Mr Neumann’s report it was apparent that the certifier had not
those photos.
In his first report Mr Neumann identified
the following problem:
A method of securing the
columns to the footing to be checked by an engineer. If found to be defective
they are to be rectified in
accordance with an engineer’s
direction.”
Mr Neumann said that the fastening of the columns
had not been inspected and certified.
In his first report Mr Neumann identified
the following:
The method of attaching the
carport roof to the existing building and the effect of the increased load
placed upon the existing building
tie-down and bracing should be checked by an
engineer.. If found to be defective it should be rectified in accordance with
the engineer’s
direction.”
As this matter had already
been considered in item one, Mr Neumann expressed his concerns as being that no
consideration had been
given as to whether the existing structure, that is the
overhanging roof, can resist the extra load of the carport roof.
that there is no engineering certification to satisfy this matter.
Mr Neumann identified the following in
his first report:
As the alteration of the
frame will require the roof being removed and with the straightening and
squaring of the building, the existing
roof will be found to be unusable as the
existing holes in the roof will not line up with the new position of the battens
The roofing
is to be replaced and installed in a workmanlike
Mr Neumann noted that the Applicant had replaced some
of the roof which had only partly rectified the problem. He noted the following
items as not having been rectified namely - holes in the roof; dents in the
iron; large amount of silicone sealer; line of ridge
capping has been improved
but is not in line; a
hump in the ridge where the new joins the existing;
and insufficient lap where the sheets join.
In his first report Mr Neumann
identified the following:
All welds that have
signs of rust are to be cleaned down and re-treated with a product suitable to
the constructions environmental
Mr Neumann noted
that the Applicant had coated the welds and plates with a cold galvanising
paint. The paint was suitable but there
were some small areas which had not
been adequately covered.
Mr Neumann identified in first report
the following:
The method of fastening the
verandah floor frame to the columns on the existing building is to be checked by
an engineer. If found
to be defective it is to be rectified in accordance with
the engineer’s direction.”
Mr Neumann noted that the
Applicant had increased the number of brackets and extra footings to secure the
floor joist to the existing
building as well as providing extra fixing of the
columns to the floor bearers, but had not fixed the bolt shown in photograph 39
of his first report.
Additionally Mr Neumann noted that the top of the
column has been fixed using selastics and pieces of tin which was not suitable.
He said that the problem was one of water penetration eventually causing the
column to rust out which was a major problem. In his
oral evidence he said
that, if the columns were to be replaced, then the floor of the verandah would
have to be removed which would
involve significant works.
In his first report Mr Neumann identified
the following:
The floor boards of the verandah
that are not supported by a joist are to be provided with adequate
Mr Neumann said that the Applicant had installed
support under the ends of the floor boards by installing pine packing pieces.
said, if the pine had been treated, it would be suitable, however there was
no way of checking this and it would have been better
if the packing had been
hardwood which was the same as the remainder of the floor frame. Otherwise Mr
Neumann considered that the
attempted rectification was satisfactory.
In his first report Mr Neumann identified
the following:
The steps are to be removed and
reinstalled with adequate support and the step bolt cut off. The path is to be
extended so that there
is no gap between the path and the
Mr Neumann said that the steps had been altered making
them secure and safe however the step stringers had been encased in concrete
dirt and the concrete had been roughly finished. He said in his oral evidence
that, in his view, the stringers would rot out
In his first report Mr Neumann identified
the following:
The sewerage pipe broken during
construction should be inspected by a qualified plumber. If found to be leaking
or inappropriately
repaired, it is to be rectified by a licensed qualified
Mr Neumann said that this has not been done. He
said that, if it had been repaired properly and concreted around, then it would
be satisfactory. As to rectification he said that, in certain circumstances, it
might be easier to re-route the pipe than digging
it up and repairing
In his first report Mr Neumann
identified:
The steel frame should be cleaned
to remove all dirt.”
Mr Neumann confirmed that the frame had
been cleaned except for one area. He agreed that the matter was minor.
In his oral evidence Mr Neumann agreed
that any damage to an electrical underground conduit should be checked by an
electrician or
someone qualified to determine that repairs undertaken by the
Applicant were adequate. This matter did not appear in either of Mr
Neumann’s two reports.
Gavin Stephen Bywater and
Stephen Strachan
Messrs Bywater and Strachan are engineers
for the Respondent and Applicant respectively.
The Respondent referred matters involving
engineering expertise to Leddy Sergiacomi and Associates Pty Ltd. Mr Bywater of
was the responsible engineer. Mr Bywater provided two reports (the
second in answer to the report of the Applicant’s engineer
Mr Strachan).
Mr Bywater also gave oral evidence. Mr Strachan was the projects’
engineer engaged by the Applicants.
Mr Bywater is a senior structural
engineer with Leddy Sergiacomi and Associates Pty Ltd. His expertise to give
evidence in matter
under review was not challenged.
The structural matters which he
identified are as follows:
measurement of the existing rafters indicated a C150 section had been used and
that the maximum gauge thickness of the rafters
was 1.9mm. Accordingly Mr
Bywater adopted a C150/19 rafter in his assessment. Mr Bywater noted that the
drawings prepared by the
Applicant and certified by Mr Strachan indicated a
C200/24. He said that that size member had not been used.
As to the adequacy or otherwise of the
“as constructed” rafters Mr Bywater identified two possible design
The assumption that the frames had been
designed as portal frames or
The assumption that the structure had
been designed as a braced structure.
He said that the structure did not comply
with either scenario. He said that, in reviewing the design drawings and based
observations, the structure did not incorporate any lateral bracing
(cross bracing or the like), and accordingly it could not be
assessed as a
braced structure. As a portal structure Mr Bywater said that a design check
indicated that the rafters were insufficient.
He said this would mean the
structure was laterally unstable in a high wind as there is no
Mr Bywater said that adequate stability
could be achieved by:
Starting again with a properly designed
structure; or
Substantial rectification works including
bracing between posts which would have some effect on the useability and
serviceability
of the structure. This would be an attempt to convert the
structure to a braced structure.
I should note that in his report Mr
Strachan (the Applicant’s design engineer) responds upon the need for
bracing in the following
Bracing system
is not required as the lateral wind forces are small and resistant through the
roof sheeting and fixings.”
Mr Strachan however did not answer the
substance of Mr Bywater’s allegation that the rafters are inadequate as a
portal frame
structure. Further Mr Strachan criticises Mr Bywater’s
initial report indicating that the report suggests that one only of
the rafters
was under strength, and that a complete analysis of the structure had not been
undertaken.
In his oral evidence however, Mr
was uncertain as to whether the rafters
were 150 or 200 (as the plans required);
did not recall that rafter size was
changed on his inspection as was suggested to him by the Applicant;
agreed that, as a portal frame
structure, the rafters were inadequate.
Whilst initially being undecided as to
whether rectification required the bracing of the structure or upgrading the
size members (namely
by placing another member beside the existing), Mr Strachan
opted for the latter, as, in his words, the roof would not need to be
Further Mr Strachan said that, whilst
acknowledging that the current design does not incorporate a braced structure,
he conceded that
in introducing bracing there was no guarantee that it would be
in the right place and further that it might block
Top Hat Purlins
In his first report Mr Bywater refers to
the following aspects:
The gauge of the top hat purlins could not
be accurately determined that is, whether at 66mm they were 0.75 or 1.00 in
A design at 1.00mm would mean that they are adequate to resist wind
uplift loads.
Purlins need to be lapped over each
rafter by 450mm. The drawings do not stipulate lapping requirements, nor does
Mr Strachan’s
certificate make comment upon lapping
requirements.
Two purlins in the 4.0m bay have been
doubled up and as such are structurally adequate to resist wind uplift loads.
The two purlins
that have not been doubled are structurally
inadequate.
Fixing of the purlins to the rafters via
two number 12 gauge tek screws is insufficient to resist wind uplift
Mr Strachan’s comment upon this in
his only report is:
The size and fixing of the
purlins has been determined to be adequate.”
To this Mr Bywater’s response in
his report is to concur with this comment but to qualify by saying the top hat
sections are
considered adequate provided they are indeed 1mm gauge and lapped
over each rafter. Mr Bywater went on to reiterate that lapping
requirements
were not indicated on the drawings, nor is it apparent that Mr Strachan’s
certificate (relying as it does, on
the plans and not on any inspection) makes
reference to lapping. Accordingly, in Mr Bywater’s view, it is not clear
allowed for in Mr Strachan’s design checking
Mr Bywater in his first report stated
that the plans nominate all footings as 450mm in diameter and 600mm in depth.
On this basis
Mr Bywater concludes:
based on allowable bearing pressure of
100kPa the nominated size of the footings in the plans is suitable for posts
supporting the
verandah deck loads; and;
as to uplift capacity of the footings
under the five roof supporting posts, assuming an allowable shaft adhesion of
20kPa (ignoring
the top 300mm of soil), these footings are insufficient in size
to resist uplift loads. Mr Bywater
considered the above assumption as to
20kPa appropriate for the soil type he noted during his site
inspection.
Mr Strachan in his report
“The assumed value of Skin Friction
(20kPa) is considerably less than the actual value which is estimated at 200kPa
to the presence of moderately weathered rock. Thus they are able to
resist the uplift loads expected.”
To this Mr Bywater responded in his
second report:
A Skin Friction of 20kPa was
adopted because it is an appropriate value for the likely foundation
200kPa (being ten times the
value adopted by Mr Bywater) is considered doubtful, as to achieve anything like
this value the footings
would have to be socketed into solid competent rock of
very high strength which is not considered the case at this site. To justify
such a high skin friction, testing of foundation material would be
In oral evidence Mr Bywater confirmed
that he had that morning discussed the matter with a geotechnical engineer who
had confirmed
that, in order to achieve the value quoted by Mr Strachan,
excavation into complete rock would be needed.
On this basis it seems, Mr Bywater
considered it not unreasonable to assume 20kPa in his calculations. Indeed Mr
Bywater thought
the skin friction could range between 10 and 40kPa. Mr Bywater
thought that 50 to 100kPa may be sufficient to achieve the uplift
capacity in
this instance. He agreed that geotechnical tests of the ground would determine
this, and that no soil test of any form
had been performed on this
Mr Strachan in oral evidence confirmed
that there had been no geotechnical tests done on this site. He said however
that he had tested
other sites in Dillon Road and had based his views as to skin
friction on those tests as he considered the ground would be similar.
Strachan confirmed that those other tests had not been for skin friction.
Mr Strachan confirmed also that he had
not inspected the footings of this site, his comments being based solely on the
I should note at this point the evidence
of Mr Baldwin. Mr Baldwin was the backhoe operator engaged by the Applicant to
dig a number
of holes on site for the footings. Mr Baldwin said there were a
few holes on what he called the
(maybe one or two
holes) where he hit rock, although generally he was able to get down to 500mm
for each of the holes that he dug.
He said there was quite a bit of rock on the
right hand side of the works, although the ground became softer progressing
Mr Baldwin’s evidence, in my view,
is that of the only person who experienced the ground at this site first hand.
It is clear
that Mr Baldwin is describing ground which is of variable texture
and cannot generally be designated, as Mr Strachan would have it,
“weathered rock”,
nor for that matter, as Mr Bywater would
have it, as being effectively soil and clay rather than any rock. This suggests
neither of the assumptions, on which the views of both experts are
based, are reliable, and that neither engineer could arrive at
any worthwhile
conclusion as to the actual uplift capacity without soil tests and a
geotechnical assessment.
Nonetheless, preferring the evidence of
Mr Bywater on this matter to that of Mr Strachan, it is clear that the design of
these footings
is inadequate as it is based on an assumption as to a skin
friction which is, at best, unreliable, and probably as a generalised
grossly overstated at 200kpa.
The Applicant builder undertook these
works and the design of the works without reference to an engineer towards
ensuring that the
works, including the footings, were based upon sound
engineering, and, in this case, geotechnical assessment. This meant, in my
view, the possibility of having soil tests done and a test for skin friction, if
the engineering advice required such assessments.
There were obvious risks to
the Applicant in adopting such a course.
In his initial report Mr Bywater
indicated that, where existing fascia of the house supports the verandah roof,
it is important that
the strength of the original roof system behind the fascia
be investigated, as it is likely to be of insufficient strength and inadequate
to resist uplift loads. Indeed Mr Bywater concluded that the new works to the
existing fascia were inadequate.
Mr Bywater said that strengthening
normally involves removing the roof and/or soffit sheeting and installing
additional members, fixings
and tie downs. Designing such a system in turn
requires knowledge of the existing framing.
Mr Strachan agreed in his report that the
existing structure needed upgrading in this regard. He said however that the
builder would
not have allowed for this work, in his quotation, and that it
possibly was an extra to the contract.
Mr Strachan’s oral evidence on the
matter of the fascia board is that he spoke to the Applicant about it, coming to
the conclusion
that he could possibly let it go with extra screws as
reinforcing. Mr Strachan’s oral evidence on this is disturbing as it
attempts to contradict, to an extent, that stated in his written report. That
contradiction was unfortunate as, to my mind, it has
an effect upon his
credibility and independence as an expert in assessing this design and the works
undertaken by the Applicant.
Again I note that the Applicant undertook
the design and construction of this structure. The fact that he did not allow
for the upgrading
of the existing structure in his costings accordingly becomes
irrelevant, as to ignore it breaches his duty of care
Respondent and as well his duty to bring proper and adequate workmanship to the
construction of this structure.
Having undertaken the design and
construct function and deciding to attempt to perform the works in a particular
manner, the Applicant
becomes liable for the result of the design incorporated
as it is in the “as constructed” works, and the subsequent cost
involved in rendering the “as constructed” design satisfactory.
Further the Applicant undertook to have
the works certified. On the evidence of Mr Strachan he cannot certify the
Applicant’s
work because of two matters, one of which includes the
connection of the extension to the existing building. A further complication
is that there is no evidence from either party as to the cost of rectifying the
structure in its “as constructed” condition.
As with the footings the Applicant has
not acted in a proper and workmanlike manner in that he did not have the plans
assessed and
approved by an engineer before proceeding with the works. He has
relied on his own design for the works, or, alternatively a design
incorporated matters upon which he subsequently initiated enquiry from an
engineer, in this case Mr Strachan. He then is clearly
liable for the “as
constructed” works in those circumstances. Notwithstanding that, the
Applicant may have had some
matters, the Applicant, as I have said, remains primarily liable to the
for any structural inadequacy of these
Mr Bywater in his initial report
considered that, by reason of the various problems with the structure, it would
be cheaper to have
it pulled down and start again, rather than attempt
rectification. This item is one such problem, as it seems to me there would
a need to remove roofing both from the existing and the new structures, and that
rectification or upgrading would be far more
difficult with the new structure in
place than it would have been otherwise.
Mr Bywater’s position on this has
been stated earlier. In his second report Mr Bywater disagreed with Mr
Strachan’s comment
that lateral wind loads are small and resisted through
the roof sheeting and fixing.
Moreover Mr Bywater said that his
analysis indicated that the lateral forces generated by a pitched free roof of
the geometry constructed
are considerable. In Mr Bywater’s view metal
roof sheeting and fixings were not adequate as a structural diaphragm, but that,
even with the provision of an adequate diaphragm, the lateral forces still
needed to be transferred to the foundations.
Mr Strachan makes no attempt in his oral
evidence to answer these specifics. His position as to rectification of this
item was generally
unclear, but appeared to be that simply doubling of the
rafters (without having to remove the roof) introduces sufficient strength
the structure.
I must say that I prefer generally the
evidence of Mr Bywater on this and other engineering matters where his evidence
conflicts with
that of Mr Strachan. In my view Mr Bywater is more considered in
his analysis and assessment. Added to this Mr Strachan is protecting
position and the somewhat doubtful certificate he has issued. Indeed his
certificate, being based on the plans only and
not an inspection of the works,
itself introduces factors which require qualification in this instance.
Floor Joist Fixings to Existing
In his first report Mr Bywater stated
“Floor joist adjoining the original
structure should be fixed directly to a structural member. This will involve
removing the
external cladding at sub-floor level and fixing a pole plate to the
existing wall or bearer. If the existing bearer is not adequate
to support the
additional floor loads in this area, a new bearer with stumps will have to be
installed.”
To this Mr Strachan in his report stated
as follows:
“The builder claims that the floor
joists are attached directly to the existing building frame.”
In this regard, Mr Bywater in response
made the point that:
“If this is indeed the case
we would require confirmation of the fixings and member sizes and spans of the
existing members
to each joist being fixed for checking of adequacy. The
existing members were not able to be visually inspected by us due to the
presence of cladding and the like.”
It seems to me that this particular issue
is essentially the same as the issues involving the connection to the existing
I am satisfied, particularly on the evidence of Mr Bywater (which I
prefer) that, in all probability, the existing structure would
upgraded in this regard. Again, for the same reasons noted in respect of the
connection to the existing fascia, I consider
the Applicant has been in breach
of his duty to the Respondent and in breach of the contractual term to carry out
the works in a
proper and workmanlike manner. Because of the Applicant’s
involvement in the design prior to construction (the engineer was
introduced after the structure was complete) and quoting on the construction
without exclusions, the Applicant accepted responsibility
for the adequacy of
the existing structure, and thereby squandered the opportunity to have the
existing structure upgraded at the
cost of the Respondent prior to the existing
works being connected. The further result of the Applicant’s conduct is
presently a certificate cannot be issued for the Applicant’s
Mr Strachan’s Certificate dated 12
Mr Strachan conceded in oral evidence
that his certificate was conditional in that it excluded (does not relate to)
the connection
of the new structure to the existing building. As such it was
not a final certificate for the works.
Mr Strachan agreed in cross examination
that he could not issue an unconditional (final) certificate
The portal frames were inadequate;
The inadequacy of the connections of the
new extension to the existing dwelling.
I should note in this regard that Mr
Pellow, the building certifier, said in his evidence that the reason why there
was a requirement
for an engineers’ certificate is that this is a steel
structure. He said that he could not pass the building unless he has
certificate. He said further that no final certificate would be issued as far
as he was concerned, until such time as this
litigation was completed and the
Authority’s concerns had been satisfied.
Mr Nelson provided a statement which is
Exhibit 13. He listed nine items where he said the structure fails. He said
that the structure
involved bad workmanship and should be
dismantled.
Mr Nelson said that he was 40 years as a
bricklayer but is not licenced as a builder. His expertise to give evidence as
to structural
and cosmetic matters pertaining to the building work generally
therefore is of limited value and, to that extent, I do not place
reliance on it, other than perhaps in a corroborative sense.
On matters of general observation however
I believe Mr Nelson is of some assistance by way of, as I have said,
corroboration of the
testimony of others possessing the necessary
In particular Mr Nelson
the building is out of square by at least
100mm to the original building. He agreed in cross examination that he did not
the diagonals of the structure.
of the pine fascia boards to which the new structure is fixed and joins to the
original house, is rotten.
the guttering
sags by approximately 1 inch in the
Screw holes have been left in the
iron and backfilled with Silastic.
rise in the ridge capping coming off the existing
Peter Wardrop
Mr Wardrop provided a statement (Exhibit
14) and gave oral evidence.
Mr Wardrop said he had been 35 years in
the building industry having held a general licence until he let it go last
year. He said
he is currently a carpenter employed by Q Build.
He said his statement was prepared after
rectification work had been undertaken by the Applicant.
Mr Wardrop identified four main areas of
the connection to the
the connection of the posts to the
the type of purlins
Mr Wardrop recognised that the above were
matters to be determined by engineers and he clearly deferred to their opinion
structural soundness of the extension (and, for that matter, the
original house).
Mr Wardrop referred also to the following
instances of poor workmanship:
failing to seal posts under the verandah
and the two steps;
the roof had
the gutter had dents in the south
one side of the structure appeared
to be out of alignment, that is, out of
secondhand timber had been used in
the front stairs.
He said that he would rate the
workmanship as four or five out of ten and would not pay for
Mervyn Gower
Mr Gower is a registered builder. At the
request of the Respondent he provided a quote which involved pulling down and
removing the
current structure and replacing it with a new structure. The quote
included engineering works. His quote inclusive of GST was $27,522.
said that in quoting he looked at the structure to establish what was required
Mr Gower said he attended the site on a
couple of occasions. He said that, in his view, the various problems with the
works could
not be rectified, and that the extension should be pulled
He said he did not consult an engineer to
quote on the job, and that he allowed a little more in the price to cover
engineering requirements.
Mr Gower noted particularly that the gutters sagged
(he thought partly because of the fall in the fascia), and that he would employ
a licenced person to install the roofs and guttering.
Mr Gower was cross examined as to his
price by Mr Loxton who appeared on behalf of Mr Halliday. Apart however from
some evidence
from the Applicant himself, no evidence was called by the
Applicant towards challenging Mr Gower’s quote. In that context
examination lacked substance in my view and did not essentially damage the
credibility and reliability of the quote or
Mr Gower’s evidence as to it.
Mr Munro is a licenced builder. As with
Mr Gower he was asked by the Respondent to quote for dismantling the structure
and reconstructing
it. His quote is Exhibit 19.
Although his quote does not mention
pulling down or removing the house, Mr Munro confirmed in oral evidence that the
quote included
those matters.
Mr Munro said that, when preparing his
quote, he worked off the plans as to what already had been built. He said that
he obtained
quotes from sub-contractors, calculated the concreting, worked off
prices from Hynes for the timber and contacted Hayman Fabrications
steel required and for estimates.
Mr Munro said that he factored in labour
for two tradesmen at $35 per hour plus a labourer.
Mr Munro said in cross examination that
he concluded for himself when inspecting the structure that the only way to
rectify these
works was to pull down the structure and start
Mr Munro’s quote was for $26,850
excluding GST.
David Pellow
Mr Pellow the Building Certifier for this
project gave evidence. I have already referred, in the context of my assessment
engineering evidence, to Mr Pellow’s position upon final
certification of this structure.
Mr Pellow said he was approached by the
Applicant for approval of the works on or about 7 December 2001. He said Mr
Halliday then
asked if he could carry on with the excavation of the foundations.
Mr Pellow said that this was okay by him as he, as a certifier,
was not required
to carry out an inspection of the foundations for the carport. He said that he
was later supplied with photos of
the excavation (at his request) which appeared
to him to be correct, and as a result of which he prepared a letter dated 24
Mr Pellow confirmed that the drawings had
been prepared by the Applicant. Mr Pellow said that even after being on site
with the engineer
Mr Strachan, he did not have (and needed) a certificate from
an engineer unconditional in all respects, and that he could not issue
certificate until he had that document. Mr Pellow said that his concern was
with the structural issues, and that he could
not comment on workmanship.
Applicant’s Evidence
Mr Halliday provided statements (Exhibits
21 and 22). He said he was approached by Mrs Jacobsen on behalf of the
Respondent saying
that they wanted a carport built. He said he met the
Respondent who provided him with a sketch of what they
He said he was asked to price the job in
three stages however, when the Respondent accepted the quote, the Respondent
decided to do
the whole job. He said that contracts were then signed and
materials ordered.
Mr Halliday said he believed David
Pellow, the Building Certifier, had passed the matter to the engineer Mr
Strachan, however half
way through the job he realised that had not occurred and
he then engaged Mr Strachan.
He said both Messrs Pellow and Strachan
inspected the job on two or three occasions noting a few defects and things left
said it was a grade ten in building so he thought there was no great
He said that, as to certain rectification
of the roof, he engaged Barry Loxton who was on site on 28 February and 1 and 2
In that regard I note that the Authority’s inspector’s
second report was forthcoming after a re-inspection on 21 March
2002, that is,
subsequent to Mr Loxton’s rectification work.
Mr Halliday said that, after Barry Loxton
left the site upon completion of his rectification work, he, Mr Halliday, had
not been back
to the site. He said that he had offered to return to fix what
has to be fixed. He said he had built the structure to what Mr Strachan
required and as related in his certificates.
Mr Halliday said that he believed that the
job could be finally certified by Mr Pellow. As to the connection to the
existing structure,
he said that Mr Strachan said that more screws would be all
that was necessary. He said he now agrees that this was not satisfactory,
it was not as originally directed by Mr Strachan. He said this work was not
quoted and would be an extra cost.
As to the alignment of the structure he
said that everyone was going by sight and had taken no
measurements.
As to the footings he agreed that some
did not reach the depth stipulated in the plans because of
As to the bolts used, he agreed M16
bolts were nominated on the plan but that, after enquiry (presumably of Mr
Strachan), M12 bolts
were thought to be just as good.
As to the rafters he said that he had
amended a set of plans to show to Mr Strachan that he had changed the rafters.
This was apparently
based on the plans. I should note at this point that there was no suggestion
Mr Strachan in his evidence that rafter sizes were okay, and that Mr Strachan
only came onto the scene at least half way through
the job, namely in May or
As to the holes in the roof Mr Halliday
could not agree that they existed as he said he had swept and hosed the roof.
He admitted,
of course, that he had not been on site after Mr Barry Loxton had
left the site.
As to the verandah floor he said that
brackets had been screwed to the existing bearers through the cladding. Mr
Halliday said he
had made no allowance in his scope of works for checking and/or
reinforcing the existing structure. He said this in the context
that he did not
consider that the price included these matters, and accordingly they were not
part of his scope of works and responsibility.
As to the stairs Mr Halliday said that,
in his view, this was not part of the contracted works. He said he did not
agree that the
contract had been varied but that, when there was a dispute, he
said that he would construct the stairs to keep the Respondent happy.
He agreed that he had built the stairs
but did not agree that they were unsatisfactory. He said the stringers were
encased in concrete
not in dirt. He confirmed that the stairs were not his
responsibility.
As to the sewer pipe he said that he had
repaired it having dug 100mm under the pipe and completely backfilled the
As to the rotten bearer he agreed that,
if it was rotten, it would require rectification.
Generally Mr Halliday agreed partly with
the workmanship allegations, although said they were not major but needed
rectification.
For example, he agreed that the galvanised paint needed
rectification.
Barry Loxton
Mr Loxton provided a statement (Exhibit
16) and gave oral evidence. As well Mr Loxton assisted the Applicant during the
essentially as the Applicant’s
friend/advocate.
Mr Loxton said that he was a qualified
boilermaker holding a licence as a concreter (including concreting and metal
fabrication).
Mr Loxton said that he was called in by
the Applicant when Mr Neumann issued his first report listing defects. He said
he physically
checked all items in Mr Neumann’s
Mr Loxton said that on inspection he
found the structure to be square and in line, however one portal frame was 40mm
short on one
side, causing the gutter alignment to appear as if it was out of
line with the existing. He said this was rectified by extending
40mm. He said for this purpose he removed one side of the roofing and replaced
it with new roofing materials.
He said roof battens were strengthened
to a 3.6 metre span as directed by the engineer, and that the whole of the roof
was re-screwed,
rectifying the mis-alignment, screws and neoprene seals on
completion.
Mr Loxton said he checked roof leaks and
any other imperfections and nothing was found. He said he believed the dents
were caused
by inexperienced persons walking on the roof after he left the
Mr Loxton said, in his view, the job had
been completed in a tradesmanlike manner, and that Mr Halliday had completed the
and above his scope of works quoted.
As to the alignment of the structure Mr
Loxton said that he measured the diagonals and discovered that the structure was
of square to the face of the house. Mr Loxton said that measuring
the diagonals was the only true method to gauge whether or not
a building was
square. Mr Loxton did not produce any detail as to the measurements he took,
nor did he mention in his statement
having taken those measurements, merely that
he found the structure to be square and in line. Mr Loxton said he needed to
that the structure was square, because he had to remove half of the
Mr Loxton conceded that, because of the
fixing of the sheets, the structure looked to be out of square, and that this
was so even
after he ran the tapes over it.
As to the guttering Mr Loxton confirmed
that the gutter on the left hand side did have a 40mm kink, however contended
that this was
because one of the portal frames was 40mm too short. He said he
repaired the portal frame by welding a piece of purlin and cold
galvanising the
As to the downpipes Mr Loxton said he
could recall a discussion with the Respondent ending in agreement (concluding in
a signed document
which was produced) to leave the downpipes the way they were
rather than insert further downpipes which the Respondent did not want
water would be lost. Mr Loxton said he explained to the Respondent that the
downpipes would not deal with the roof water,
and that water would sit in the
As to dents, holes and leaks in the roof
Mr Loxton said there were none when he left the site. Further there was nothing
the roof or in the gutters.
Mr Loxton agreed that capping to the
columns has to be rectified otherwise columns will rust.
Whilst he said that he had replaced
battens Mr Loxton agreed that two were missing. He did not agree that doubling
up of battens
was unattractive.
Phillip Ian
Mr Baldwin confirmed that he was
employed by the Applicant to bore pier holes on the subject property. I have
previously referred
in part to Mr Baldwin’s evidence in the context of his
observations during his oral evidence upon the nature of the ground
he bored the pier holes.
Otherwise Mr Baldwin stated that two
incidents occurred on the job as far as he was concerned. Firstly a sewer pipe
was broken about
500 – 600mm below the ground. He said Mr Halliday went
to the hardware store to purchase a 100mm slip coupling to repair the
said that the pipe was exposed and cleaned ready for the repair before the
repair was undertaken.
Mr Baldwin said that secondly he was
informed by the Respondent of the position of the power cable and was told it
was not at the
legal depth 500-600mm because of some rock. He said the
Respondent indicated that the line was close to one of the pier holes so
safety reasons he decided to leave it and dig it by hand.
Mr Baldwin said he started boring the
next hole across when he noticed a bit of orange conduit at the edge of the
hole. On inspection
Mr Baldwin found it to be the power cable. The conduit was
cut but the wires were not broken. He said the Respondent was informed
Applicant sleeved the conduit.
Mr Baldwin said the power cable was
100-150mm below ground level and was not marked with warning tape nor covered by
concrete as required
when the legal depth is not achieved. Mr Baldwin
considered it fortunate that no damage was done to the power supply or to anyone
Mr Baldwin said the Respondent was happy
with the repairs which in his view were done quickly and correctly.
Mr Dobie is a licenced plumber. He had
a telephone conversation with the Applicant on 21 March 2002 and provided a
statement further
to that phone conversation. Mr Dobie said that he spoke with
the Applicant about a broken sewer line which the Applicant had repaired
subject site. He said the Applicant informed him that he had replaced a broken
100mm PVC sewer line with new pipe and two
slip couplings which is normal
practice for repairs and replacement of broken pipes by plumbers, builders and
maintenance
Submissions
Respondent’s
Submissions
The Respondent submitted that the
Applicant had breached the building contract by:
failing to design the structure to
comply with engineering requirements and the Building
failing to build the structure in a
workmanlike and tradesmanlike manner;
failing to comply with the statutory
warranties of the
Domestic Building Contacts Act
pursuant to clause 28 of
the contract;
breaching the express warranties
contained in clauses 28(a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) as referred to in the
failing to building the structure to a
standard sufficient to qualify for Local Government
performing work, being sewerage and
electrical works, without the appropriate and necessary
failing to rectify the works as
directed by the Queensland Building Services Authority (“the
Authority”) and Mr Houseman
pursuant to the
altering the drawings without the
knowledge and consent of Mr Houseman.
As a result the Respondent seeks under
section 91 of the
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
the following
the claim of the Applicant to be
dismissed and therefore relief from payment of any further sum to the
the refund of all monies paid to the
further, damages in a sum to enable
rectification or rebuilding of the structure erected by the
further or in the alternative with
respect to rectification, the matter be referred to the Authority (and the
Statutory Insurance
Scheme if required) for rectification matters as provided by
this Tribunal to be
undertaken;
The Respondent submitted that a summary
of the critical matters are as follows:
the current rafters are insufficient
– see the evidence of Messrs Bywater and Strachan;
the structure is not adequately affixed
to the existing house – see the evidence of Messrs Bywater and
the connection of the floor joists to
the existing dwelling is uncertified;
the stumping under the verandah decking
is extremely poor – see the evidence of Mr Bywater;
the capping on the stumps under the
verandah has not been undertaken properly and water ingress and hence rusting
will also occur
– see the evidence of Messrs Bywater and
the workmanship demonstrated to the roof
installation is poor.
The Respondent submitted that the only
proper way to address those workmanship issues is to fully replace the roof
structure at the
time the structural work is undertaken.
The Respondent further submitted that
the Applicant gave evidence that he is personally unfit to undertake any
reinstatement or repairs.
The Respondent said further that the Applicant has
had a previous attempt to rectify the structure which was unsuccessful, and that
therefore it was unreasonable for the Respondent to be required to accept the
Applicant’s further attempt at rectification.
On engineering matters the Respondent
submitted as follows:
The Respondent submitted that Messrs
Bywater and Strachan now agreed that the rafter structure currently installed
was inadequate
as a portal frame structure. Further the Respondent submitted
that the engineers determined that the structure was not acceptable
as a braced
structure. The Respondent submitted that neither engineer was able to indicate
whether the current structure would be
able to be modified successfully as a
braced structure to maintain its original design intent for use as a carport
area, with Mr
Strachan indicating a possible solution, being the doubling up of
the rafters.
The Respondent submitted that Mr
Strachan’s possible solution was beyond the design scope of the original
contract and should
not be considered by the Tribunal, particularly because of
aesthetic considerations and the unreliability and uncertainty of Mr
evidence as to column strength and durability in a doubling up
It was uncontested that the doubling up
of top hats was missing in two (2) locations. The Respondent further submitted
that Mr Darryl
Nelson indicated that, despite doubling up of the top hats, they
had sagged in the larger bay. This, in the Respondent’s submission,
called into question the use of these top hats over the 3.6 metre span in the
larger bay.
The Respondent submitted that the
engineers were in disagreement as to the allowable friction strength in relation
to the footings.
Further, the Respondent submitted from the evidence of Mr
Baldwin that there were at least four (4) footings which did not reach
design depth of 600mm. Further, the Respondent submitted that Mr
Houseman’s evidence-in-chief was that there were at least
six (6) holes
which did not reach this depth. The Respondent submitted that the size of the
footings had not been increased where
the required depth had not been achieved.
The Respondent submitted that Mr Bywater stated that there was reduced
resistance to uplift
in the circumstances.
Existing Fascia
The Respondent submitted that it was
agreed by Messrs Bywater and Strachan that the connection of the new works to
the existing fascia
was not adequate. This may in turn require investigation
and upgrading works. In any event, the structure is currently unable to
a final approval without these works being undertaken.
Floor Joist Fixings to Existing
The Respondent submitted that Messrs
Bywater and Strachan agreed that the Applicant’s apparent method of fixing
the floor joists
to the external cladding of the existing building to an
internal joist by the screw method needed to be checked, having regard to
increased load placed on the existing house.
The Respondent further submitted that it
was conceded by Mr Strachan, and supported by the evidence of Mr Bywater, that
in engineering
terms the current structure is clearly inadequate, both in terms
of its affixing to the existing fascia, and also its overall design
as a portal
rafter system.
The Respondent submitted that, as
indicated in Clause 8.4 of Mr Bywater’s initial report the majority of the
structure would
need to be rebuilt, and that the rectification works required
would be a greater magnitude than the initial structure, and therefore
structure should be dismantled and rebuilt to the appropriate Building Code and
engineering standards. The Respondent in that
regard then noted the quotes of
Messrs Gower and Munro, the credibility of which, in the Respondent’s
submission, had not been
disturbed under
cross-examination.
The Respondent further submitted that
workmanship issues were significant and relied in that regard upon the evidence
of Messrs Wardrop,
Nelson, Neumann and Bywater.
The Respondent further submitted that Mr
Pellow required an unconditional engineer’s certificate, and that this
would not be
forthcoming unless certain engineering requirements were met and
supported by an engineer’s certificate.
Damage to Sewerage Pipe and Electrical
The Respondent submitted that the damage
to the sewerage pipe and electrical conduit should be investigated and repaired
at the Applicant’s
expense. The cost of those repairs was respectively
$262 (a quotation from D K W Plumbing) and $300 which was an amount assessed
the Respondent without any corroborative evidence.
The Respondent further submitted that he
should be entitled to his costs as well as costs of a previous adjournment
thrown away.
A reasonable allowance for legal costs in this latter regard was
$800 in the Respondent’s
submission.
Applicant’s Submissions
Essentially the Applicant took the view
that any defects were minor and could easily be rectified at small
The Applicant further made submissions
on the following matters:
The Applicant submitted that Mr
Bywater’s statement is inaccurate and that the works are
acceptable.
The Applicant submitted that the top hat
sections over a 3.6 metre span were more than adequate and complied with
Building Codes.
The Applicant agreed that two (2) sections were missing and
should be rectified.
The Applicant submitted that footings
had been certified by Mr Pellow on the supply of photographic proof and accepted
by Mr Neumann
for the Authority.
Fascia Fixing
The Applicant submitted that no further
fixing or attachment other than that previously required by Mr Strachan was
required within
the Applicant’s scope of works, and that any further works
in this regard will be at extra cost to the Respondent.
Floor Joist
The Applicant submitted that the fixing
of the floor joist to the existing structure as per the suggestion of Mr
Strachan was standard
building practice, and that Mr Bywater had not carried out
proper inspection, as he had claimed he could not get under the
The Applicant submitted that inspections
by Messrs Halliday and Neumann found no evidence of this, and that it was simply
coming away from the bearer which was acceptable.
Fly Bracing
The Applicant submitted that this had
been installed to standard building practice and that, if there is a problem,
rectification
was only minor work.
Workmanship
The Applicant submitted that Mr
Bywater’s comments on workmanship had been made not having performed a
detailed inspection.
Generally the Applicant submitted that
the structure is adequate, and that, further to Mr Strachan’s
certification dated 5 July
2002, Mr Bywater’s comments to pull down the
structure and rebuild it should be dismissed.
As to the damage to the sewer pipe and
the electrical conduit the Applicant submitted that he should not be responsible
for either,
as both had been repaired satisfactorily and within the requirements
of the relevant standards.
The building contract was a contract
whereby the Applicant undertook to design and construct the structure the
subject of the plans.
The plans were prepared by the
It is common ground that the contract
price was $9,912.80. There were no exclusions (for example, as to the cost of
obtaining any
engineering advice and acting upon it) to the works undertaken by
the Applicant in the building contract. Indeed, it is clear from
the evidence
that the Applicant not only prepared the plans, but consulted with the building
certifier and later consulted with Mr
Strachan, engineer, as to the drawings he
prepared. Consultation with Mr Strachan was because the building certifier
required an
engineer’s certificate as to structural matters before issuing
his final certificate.
In undertaking such a design and
construct contract, and notwithstanding that the Applicant later consulted an
engineer on structural
matters, the Applicant remains primarily responsible to
the Respondent in respect of all of the works and the manner in which the
were undertaken, both structurally and
Yet further, the Applicant has
not only contracted to produce a result, namely a structure built in a proper
and workmanlike manner
to proper standards, but also one that includes all that
is necessary to achieve that result.
In this context it is not open to the
Applicant to say in defence to the Respondent’s counter-claim that certain
were not followed (for example, the investigation of the original
building’s fascia and its strength and capacity to resist
uplift loads),
and that accordingly, as he had not costed such matters (including, in the above
example, remedial works on the original
building) into his quoted price, he was
not responsible. Vis-à-vis the Respondent, structural matters became the
Applicant’s
responsibility under the building
The foregoing, of course, becomes
particularly pertinent to the engineers’ evidence on structural matters
and my findings in
that regard. I have already dealt with the engineering
evidence, the respective positions of the engineers and, to an extent, my
preferences on certain aspects.
The following then represent a summation
of my findings on structural/engineering matters:
I prefer Mr Bywater’s evidence on
this matter to that of Mr Strachan where there are inconsistencies and
disagreements.
Mr Strachan does however agree that the
bracing was inadequate and needed rectification. Mr Strachan’s possible
solution was
to double up on existing members. I agree with the
Respondent’s submission that this constitutes not so much rectification
a change in the design, and therefore a variation to the contract works and is
undesirable aesthetically. The impression I had
was that Mr Strachan himself
seemed less than satisfied with it as a solution, and was suggesting it as a
possible low cost solution,
because the roof would have to be removed
I further agree with the
Respondent’s submission that neither engineer was satisfied that the
current structure could be braced
and still maintain the original serviceability
of the design (for example, blocking through ways etc).
In my view, what the evidence
establishes on this aspect is a substandard structure where suggested modes of
rectification to the
“as constructed” structure were unsatisfactory
and could, as they were, reasonably be rejected by the
Respondent.
It is common ground that the doubling up
of top hats was missed in two locations and required rectification work.
Further, as submitted
by the Respondent, the Respondent’s builders
questioned the use of these top hats over the 3.6 metre span in the larger bay.
As noted, in addition to the above, Mr
Bywater had problems with the gauge of the top hat purlins, their lapping, and
the fixing of
the purlins by two (2) no. 12 gauge tek screws in terms of
resisting uplift forces.
By and large Mr Bywater was satisfied
that, if the above requirements were met, then he would be satisfied with this
item. On the
evidence presented (including Mr Strachan basing his certificate
in this regard on the plans, and his failure to stipulate lapping
requirements
in his certificate), I was not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that
the requirements of Mr Bywater had been
met by the Applicant.
I have already made findings in respect
of this matter in my earlier assessment of the engineering evidence. To
reiterate, and for
the reasons noted, I consider the design of these footings to
be inadequate.
Again I have made findings in respect of
this matter. Without having investigated the existing structure, no engineer
can certify
this structure in this regard. It is not enough now for the
Applicant to say that Mr Strachan advised a possible corrective measure
could possibly suffice. The point now is that Mr Strachan seems to have
re-thought the matter, and to have resiled from any
such position and is not
prepared to certify the structure unless there is investigation and, if
necessary, upgrading of the existing
In turn Mr Pellow will not act on final
certification unless there is such engineering certification. This clearly
represents improper
workmanship in the context of this
It is in respect of this item that Mr
Bywater suggested that it would be cheaper to pull the structure down and start
again, rather
than attempt rectification. Added to this is the fact that Mr
Gower and, to a lesser extent, Mr Munro would not quote upon rectification
this structure with its considerable faults. Indeed it would probably be
difficult to find any builder prepared to take the risk
of attempting
rectification of this structure, adopting as that must, someone else’s
albeit defective and/or doubtful, workmanship.
In the circumstances I prefer Mr
Bywater’s view on such matters, corroborated as it is by the others I have
Floor Joist to Existing
As with the fascia fixing, I have
already made comments as to this matter. Clearly the Applicant has been in
breach of his contract
with the Respondent by failing to investigate and, if
necessary, upgrade the existing structure to ensure that the works were
appropriate.
Certification
As I have already indicated Mr Pellow
was not prepared to issue a final certificate in respect of this structure
without an unconditional
certificate from an engineer. That will not be
forthcoming without:
the portal frames and the bracing being
rendered adequate;
the connections of the new extension to
the existing dwelling being rendered adequate.
All things considered I am of the view
that it would not be reasonable to attempt, or require the Respondent to
attempt, rectification
of the structural matters to which I have referred.
Indeed, as I have noted, there remains the practical consideration that no
builder could be found to perform such rectification works on a
structure such as this.
In any event, I consider that any such
attempt at rectification would both:
be giving the Respondent a structure
which was patched and mended to such an extent as to be beyond what a party
could reasonably
expect, and be prepared to accept, under a contract such as
in all probability (on the evidence
particularly of Mr Bywater which I accept) attempted rectification would be more
expensive than
pulling the structure down and rebuilding
Accordingly, based only upon my view of
the engineering matters to which I have referred, I consider
the Applicant has been in substantial
breach of this contract with the Respondent to perform the contracted works with
due care and
attention and to proper and reasonable standards. In that regard
the Applicant has breached the term implied in all building contracts,
undertake works in a proper and workmanlike manner; and
as a result of the breaches, the only
reasonable course open to the Respondent in order to obtain what he had
bargained for under
the contract would be to have the structure pulled down and
Because of my findings on such
structural matters it is unnecessary for me to consider workmanship matters, as
these are disposed
of by the course that I have
determined.
There remains however the matter of the
plumbing to the sewer pipe and the electrical conduit. I am not satisfied on
the evidence
that these matters have not been properly attended to. There is no
suggestion of any leak in the sewerage pipe and the manner that
the Applicant
adopted in repairing this pipe appears to be consistent with proper plumbing
practice. Further, the evidence of Mr Baldwin on the matter of the
electrical conduit did not suggest that the electrical wire itself
was damaged,
but merely the conduit, and that this was properly repaired. In the
circumstances I dismiss both of these claims.
Having determined that the appropriate
course is to dismantle and reconstruct the carport and extensions I turn now to
the quotations
by Messrs Gower and Munro. The suggestion by the Applicant was
that the quotations, being considerably more than his quotation for
were excessive. There was no independent evidence to support this contention,
although it is of note that Messrs Gower
and Munro seem quite independent of
each other and yet have come to an assessment of the cost of dismantling and
rebuilding in amounts
substantially similar.
Having regard to their evidence on these
matters I am satisfied that the amounts of their quotations for these works were
reasonable,
and I adopt the lower of these quotes, namely that of Mr Gower, as
the appropriate quantum of damages to award the Respondent pursuant
Applicant’s breaches as I have found them to
In order to give the Respondent what he
had bargained for under his contract with the Applicant, it is necessary also to
the Applicant repay to the Respondent the amount paid by the
Respondent to the Applicant under the contract, which amount was effectively
thrown away by the result of the Applicant’s work having to be dismantled.
This amount is represented by the contract price
of $9,912.80, less the amount
claimed by the Applicant as being unpaid under the contract, namely $1,820.
This comes to $8,092.80.
To this is to be added Mr Gower’s quotation of
$27,522, making a total amount by way of damages payable by the Applicant to
Respondent of $35,614.80. I order that that amount be paid by the Applicant to
the Respondent within 28 days, failing which
the Applicant shall in addition pay
interest at the rate of 10% on so much as shall remain unpaid until it is
As to costs, I consider it appropriate
that the Respondent be awarded his costs on a party and party basis. In respect
of such costs,
the legal professional element of those costs is to be determined
in accordance with Scale G of the Magistrates Court Scale of Costs.
Additionally the Respondent would be entitled to any outlays, including costs of
obtaining experts’ reports and having those
experts attend the hearing.
Any other appropriate outlays can be considered in due course. Any disagreement
as to the quantum of
costs should be referred to the Tribunal for
assessment.
Yet further I
That monies paid into the Tribunal’s
Trust Account by the Respondent on account of the Applicant’s claim be
the Respondent.
That the Applicant’s claim against
the Respondent be
........................................
P LOHRISCH – MEMBER
QUEENSLAND BUILDING
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 014
Application No:
JACK HALLIDAY
18 Jobson Road
AGNES WATER Q 4677
Respondent:
ARTHUR HOUSEMAN
C/- Finemore Walters & Story
BUNDABERG Q 4670
Section 93 –
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
Upon hearing Mr Halliday and Mr Loxton on behalf of the Applicant
and Mr Ebert on behalf the Respondent, the Queensland Building Tribunal
the following orders:
That the monies held in the Queensland
Building Tribunals Trust Account be paid to the Respondent
That the Applicant pay to the Respondent
the sum of thirty-five thousand, six hundred and fourteen dollars and eighty
($35, 614.80)
within twenty-eight
days from the date of
this order, failing which the Applicant shall in addition pay interest at the
rate of 10% on so much as shall
remain unpaid until it is
That the Applicant’s claim against
the Respondent be dismissed
That the Respondent be awarded his costs
on a party and party basis in accordance with Scale G of the Magistrates Court
Scale of Costs.
Additionally the Respondent will be entitled to any reasonable
outlays, including costs of obtaining experts’ reports and
having those
experts attend the hearing.
The parties are given leave to refer any
dispute as to the quantum of costs to the Tribunal for
assessment.
..........................................
MR P. LOHRISCH – MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Date: 3 April 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter