URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cooney, D. J. v Leahy, G [2003] QBT 24 (16 May 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 024
Cooney v Leahy
[2003] QBT B133-02
COONEY David James
LEAHY Gayden
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
16 May 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
14 March 3003
DECISION OF:
Mr P Lohrisch
CATCHWORDS:
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
REPRESENTATION:
Self-represented
RESPONDENT:
Self-represented
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Introduction
This is a claim by a builder (“the
Applicant”) against his subcontractor (“the Respondent”) for
damages for
negligence/breach of the subcontract.
Particulars of the alleged breaches are
essentially that the subcontractor:
failed to carry out the
subcontractor’s works in accordance with engineer’s drawings and
specifications; and/or
failed to carry out the
subcontractor’s works to a standard acceptable to the building
The Applicant was also the Applicant in
review proceedings Q292-01 (“the review proceedings”) brought to
review a decision
by the Queensland Building Services Authority (“the
Authority”) to issue a Direction to Rectify to the Applicant requiring
Applicant to undertake rectification works in the form of underpinning to the
structure built on the site.
Consent Orders were made in the review
application whereby the Applicant agreed to rectification works in the form of
the underpinning
of four piers to the verandah. No findings were made (or
required) in respect of the rectification work as a result of agreement
reached and the Consent Orders made.
At pages 5 and 6 of his statement in this
application dated 16 January 2003, the Applicant refers to the review
proceedings and, in
particular:
inspection holes (“the inspection
holes”) were drilled in front of the existing verandah piers, exposing the
four of the existing piers intended to anchor the verandah
the inspection holes drilled on 9
August 2002 went to a depth of 2.7 metres and to natural
the inspection holes revealed that the
four piers extended only to a depth of approximately 1.2 metres, that is they
sat in uncontrolled
fill which existed in that area rather than being piered to
rock as required by the footing design;
the result was that, on the engineering
advice in a report of Bowler Geotechnical and an Auspacifik Design Engineers Pty
Ltd underpinning
plan, the Applicant agreed to undertake underpinning works to
fix the damage to the verandah slab caused by the failure of the four
the cost of the underpinning works are,
together with consequential expenses (for example legal costs associated with
the review proceedings),
as noted in the statement of Heather Cooney dated 16
January 2003.
I should note that neither in his Defence,
nor in his statement or oral evidence, did the Respondent take issue with the
above matters,
save for contending that the damage to the verandah slab was
caused exclusively by the lateral mobilisation of fill material rather
vertical settlement of the piers. In this regard the Respondent noted that
Auspacifik Design Engineers Pty Ltd considered
that it was more likely that
movement within the structure was due to lateral movement, not vertical, with
such lateral movement
being in part due to the extensive site works carried out
by the owner. In other words the damage, of which the Applicant complained,
the result of the homeowner’s activity, and that vertical settlement of
the piers afforded no significant contribution
to the damage to the
In the above regard it is worthwhile
extracting the following which formed part of the material filed in the review
proceedings and
in evidence in these proceedings:
letter from Bowler Geotechnical Pty Ltd
to the Authority dated 25 March 2002:
FILE 3 3-1310-01
SITE: 70 AYLESHAM DRIVE,
COONEY VS QBSA
QBT APPLICATION NO.
Further to your letter dated 12 March 2002, and our
investigation into the above damaged residence (our ref.4476cg.01 dated 10
2001). We have reviewed the supplied Auspacifik Design Engineers Pty
Ltd reports, dated 3 December 2001, and 8 February 2002 and
make the following
responses to your queries.
We stated in page 10 of our report that we believe
‘the cause of the movement is the settlement of the footings which have
been supported in uncontrolled fill, in conjunction with mobilisation of the
fill material moving laterally away from the house’
and on page 12 that
‘the lack of piering to rock is contrary to the footing design prepared
for the residence’.
The Auspacifik report indicates that
they do not consider that vertical settlement of the piers was of any
significant contribution.
We do not agree with this assessment. Fill material
of inadequate bearing capacity was found to a depth of 2.4m in Borehole #1.
consider that supporting footings in uncontrolled fill of inadequate bearing
capacity is likely to be subject to vertical settlement.
To our knowledge no
survey of any sort has been carried out that could conclude that no vertical
movement of the brick piers had
As stated in our
original report, on page 10, it is likely that the fill was not keyed into the
original sloped ground, possibly
leading to some mobilisation of the fill
downslope along the fill/natural interface which may form a plane of
It is considered likely that the movement to the brick
piers would have been lessened if the fill was not moving laterally, however,
the founding strata is still uncontrolled fill of inadequate bearing capacity,
movement would still be expected. It is considered
that the two components
(vertical and lateral movement) cannot be quantified separately, and that a
combination of the two was the
most likely cause of
The crack plan in our report, Figure 5, shows numerous
cracks along the rear of the residence, eight (8) of the brick columns, and
several main wall locations.
The patio slab has several causes
of failure, including but not limited to the lack of contraction joints, the
lack of tie-in to
the main house footings, and its being supported on
uncontrolled fill.
SCOPE OF RECTIFICATION
It is considered that the suggested underpinning
locations given in our report should be adopted for several reasons including
not limited to:
The large number of cracks both
along the rear main building line and 8 of the brick
The presence of
uncontrolled fill of inadequate bearing capacity beneath the
The inadvisability of
founding a structure partly in rock and partly in uncontrolled
It should be pointed out that, as always in
these situations, the extent of work required will be confirmed on site, when
depths are exposed. However, it is not considered that underpinning
solely the 3 worst brick columns will be sufficient to prevent
further movement
of the superstructure from continuing.
Regarding the verandah
slab rectification, the details provided in the Auspacific report appear
appropriate.
Consideration could also be given to providing a
retaining wall to prevent future lateral movement or fill, or removing benching
and recompacting the uncontrolled fill (with sufficient support to the residence
during this work).
We trust this meets with your requirements.
If you have any queries please contact ... on ...”
Minutes of meeting on site on 1 May
FOR QUEENSLAND BUILDING
QBT: Q292-01
70 AYLESHAM DRIVE, BONOGIN
ON SITE 1/5/02
ATTENDEES Claudia Gibney, Bowler Geotechnical
James Taylor, James Taylor
Julian Davies, Auspacifik Engineers
(AUSPACIFIK)
Gayden Leahy, Leahy Concrete & Excavation
ALSO PRESENT: Klaus & Ingrid Weringhaus
ISSUES DISCUSSED
FILL PLATFORM
Fill place beneath
residence/verandah during main earthworks – BOWLER suspects the fill was
not benched when it should have
been. All agree (TAYLOR, AUSPACIFIK, LEAHY).
Benching was specified in original engineer’s design. All agree that the
was probably not compacted to a controlled standard. All agree that
landscaping fill was placed by owner outside main platform after
construction.
TAYLOR & BOWLER believe that the landscaping
fill would not have had any effect on the issue at hand. AUSPACIFIK & LEAHY
state that the placement of the landscaping fill may have impacted negatively on
the issue. LEAHY & AUSPACIFIK point out that
the BSA inspection report
pages 153 and 154, by Garry Carpenter stated that the owners said they placed
2500 tons of fill in the
rear landscaped area. Owners state that this fill was
placed, but no heavy machinery was used for this.
THREE BRICK
COLUMNS WITH THE MOST DAMAGE
According to the design detail,
all footings were supposed to have been piered to rock. There was at least one
pier to 1.35mm deep
as noted by the BSA, but this was
in rock, and
was in fact founded in uncontrolled fill. LEAHY pointed out that the builder
has stated remembering that the piers
went to 3.0 metres deep. LEAHY pointed
out that if this was an issue, why wasn’t it inspected and dealt with at
the time of
construction.
VERANDAH/PATIO
Numerous cracks are present in the patio slab, which is
also moved away by – 17mm (max) from the house. No control joints
present. The design had specified that the slab was to have been tied into the
main footing, and were to be control joints (as
stated in the design notes).
All agree that control joints are standard industry practice. (Illegible)
stated that he was instructed
at the time by the builder not to do the control
joints as the would be saw-cut when tiles were put in. LEAHY states that he
have put tie-in bars in if he was supposed to but can’t recall this
specific issue, and states that tie-ins were marked on
one drawing but not on
RESPONSIBILITIES
BOWLER, TAYLOR
& LEAHY are of the opinion that the builder should have ensured that the
footings were constructed in accordance
with the design. AUSPACIFIK is of the
opinion that as Council inspected the footings, responsibility should rest with
RECTIFICATION
BOWLER, TAYLOR & AUSPACIFIK recommend that the
entire patio slab be demolished and re-constructed to engineering design with
regard to the uncontrolled fill. LEAHY disagrees with re-constructing the
entire slab, but that only the worst affected area should
be fixed, for the
reasons of minimising costs. LEAHY stated that he thinks that he should have
been called and advised of the problem
when it occurred seven years ago so that
IF he thought there was any responsibility on his part he could have addressed
TAYLOR & AUSPACIFIK recommend that all pad footings (to brick columns) and
main residence edge footings should be looked
at and underpinned to rock, if not
already founded in rock, although AUSPACIFIK thinks that the main residence is
performing adequately.
LEAHY does not think that any work is necessary to the
main residence as it is performing adequately.
All agree that
after underpinning & jacking all brick columns should be repaired and
re-pointed. TAYLOR stated that the internal
vertical cracks referred to
previously should also be re-pointed at the same time. BOWLER agrees.
AUSPACIFIK & LEAHY disagree,
because, as stated previously the house is
performing adequately.
LEAHY stated that he would no longer take
responsibility for any blame due to the excessive time delay in bringing the
him. He states the builder should take responsibility as he should
have addressed it much earlier.”
Relevant parts of the report of
Auspacifik Design Engineers (Julian Davies) dated 3 December
“3 December 2001
29 Dewberry Way
GAVEN/NERANG Q
RESIDENCE AT LOT 107 AYLESHAM DRIVE CANTERBURY
Further to our correspondence dated 29 July 1999,
Mr Julian Davies a Structural Engineer from Auspacifik Design Engineers Pty Ltd,
carried out an additional inspection of the cracking that has occurred at the
base of the brick patio piers to the rear of the above
residence. This
inspection was undertaken on Monday 26 November 2001.
come to our attention through various site investigations that have been
undertaken by others, since our initial inspection
on the 29 July 1999, that the
presence of concrete piers to rock, below the pad footings to the brick piers
can not be confirmed.
At the location of the rear most piers, the depth of the
fill is believed to be in the order of 3.0m.
The extent of the
cracking inspected, which was initially limited to the 3 piers closest to the
rear of the site, has in our opinion,
not worsened since our first inspection in
July 1999. The width of the cracks range from 5 to 15mm. The brick piers at
this location
are supported on square concrete pad footings and not on bored
piers founded on the weathered rock as previously thought. Each pier,
above and below the location of each crack has moved out of vertical with the
outer most point of the pier still at the crack
Whilst there may have been some downward vertical settlement
of the founding material below the base of the brick piers due to the
the bored piers to rock, it would appear that the majority of the movement of
the fill material below the patio slab,
and extending rearward, has been in a
predominantly lateral direction towards the rear of the site. It would appear
in our opinion
that the footing below the brick pier has also moved along with
the fill causing a rotation at the base of the pad footing and hence
resultant crack. ...
Yours faithfully
Julian Davies
J.S.J. Davies
B.Eng.(Hons),
CPEng., M.I.E.Aust., R.P.E.Q., NPER-3”
Relevant parts of a further report of
Auspacifik Design Engineers (Julian Davies) dated 8 February
“Further to our correspondence dated 3
December 2001, Mr Julian Davies a Structural Engineer from Auspacifik Design
Pty Ltd, carried out a third inspection of the cracking that has
occurred at the base of the brick patio piers to the rear of the
residence. Additional inspections were also carried out to investigate the
reported cracks to some of the internal brickwork.
These inspections were
undertaken on the morning of Wednesday 7 February 2002.
come to our attention through various site investigations that have been
undertaken by others, since our initial inspection
on the 29 July 1999, that the
presence of concrete piers to rock, below the pad footings to the brick piers
can not be confirmed.
At the location of the rear moat piers, the depth of the
fill is believed to be in the order of 3.0m.
As reported in our
letter dated 3 December 2001, the extent of the cracking inspected, which was
initially limited to the 3 piers
closest to the rear of the site, has in our
opinion, not worsened since our first inspection in July 1999. The width of the
range from 5 to 15mm. The brick piers at this location are supported on
square concrete pad footings and not on bored piers founded
on the weathered
rock as previously thought. This was verified during inspections by both Bowler
Geotechnical and the QBSA. During
the inspection by the QBSA, it was noted
however, that a bored pier did exist extending some 1350mm below the verandah
slab level,
yet well short of the rock. Each brick pier, both above and below
the location of each crack has moved out of vertical alignment.
The outer most
point of each pier is at its crack location. Some movement is also evident at
the top of each pier where it supports
the roof structure.
Whilst there may have been minimal downward vertical
settlement of the founding material below the base of the brick piers due to
absence of the bored piers being founded on to rock, it would appear that the
majority of the movement of the upper levels of
the fill material below the
patio slab, and extending rearward, has been in a predominantly lateral
direction towards the rear of
the site. The footings below the base of the
brick piers have also moved laterally along with the fill, resulting in a
below the base of each of the pad footings and has caused the
horizontal crack that can be seen at the rear of the brick piers.
Conclusions:
It would appear
from our observations above, that the areas requiring rectification work are
limited to the three brick piers at
the rear of the house and the verandah
The brick piers have shown considerable movement. This is
more than likely due to the lateral movement of the upper levels of the
material in the vicinity of the piers. The depth of the bored piers as revealed
by the QBSA puts it in the top of the firm
fill layer as logged in Borehole Log
Sheet No. 2 contained in Bowler’s Report. This fill at the base of the
bored piers appears
to be supporting the vertical loads carried by the brick
piers. The absence of the bored piers to rock is due to concrete not being
placed by the concreting subcontractor following inspection and approval of the
footings by the council dated 6 September 1994.
The lateral movement of the
upper levels of the fill material could in part be due to the extensive site
works carried out by the
owner, whereby some several hundred cubic metres of
fill was placed, terraced, and landscaped, in the area immediately above and
adjacent to the toe of the original fill batter behind the piers. This was
carried out following completion of the building works.
The absence of tie back
beams from the pad footings to the main structure could also have allowed the
base of the piers to move,
this would in our opinion, have occurred even with
the placement of the bored piers all the way to rock.
Whilst we agree that the bored piers located below the brick
piers should have been taken to rock, and that the verandah slab should
been tied back to the main footings as stipulated in the footing design, we
would suggest that the bored piers themselves at
the present time appear to be
adequately carrying the vertical loads. Had the base of the brick piers been
tied back to the main
footings and the subsequent earthworks above and adjacent
to the toe of the original fill batter not have taken place, we believe
damage that has occurred to the brick piers at the rear of the house would not
have taken place. The placement of control
joints in the verandah slab would
also have minimised the extent of cracking that is
Recommendations:
our recommendation that the three brick piers at the rear of the building be
underpinned, the underpinning detail as proposed
by Bowler Geotechnical (refer
to Figure 8 of their report) would be adequate.
recommend that the verandah slab be removed; concrete beams be located between
all brick pier footings located on piers
within the fill areas and tied back to
the external wall footings; the sub-base recompacted with sand and the slab
re-poured with
control joints positioned at each pier location and at 3.0m
maximum centres: and reinforcing bars be drilled and epoxied into the
wall footing extending into and lapping with the slab
reinforcement.
We shall provide the necessary structural
documentation required to implement the above recommendations should they be
We trust this is the information you require. Should
you require further information, please do not hesitate to contact the
undersigned.
Yours faithfully
(signed) Julian
J.S.J. Davies
B.Eng.(Hons), CPEng.,
M.I.E.Aust., R.P.E.Q., NPER-
For and on behalf of
AUSPACIFIK DESIGN ENGINEERS PTY
(Registered Professional Engineering Unit of Qld No.
It is to be noted
At the site meeting Bowler Geotechnical
acted for the Authority, James Taylor for the owners, Julian Davies of
Auspacifik Engineers
for the builder, this Applicant Mr Cooney and Mr Leahy for
The minutes appear to have been signed
and acknowledged only by Julian Davies.
Further the Respondent said in his defence
to this application that he was not responsible for digging of the four
defective pier
holes and did not contract with the Applicant to perform these
The Respondent does concede however that
he was responsible for placing the concrete in the four defective pier
The Applicant’s
David James Cooney
Mr Cooney said that the Respondent was
engaged as a subcontractor to undertake the footings, piers and concreting work
for the house
of a Mr and Mrs Werninghaus constructed by the Applicant at
Canterbury Downs in late 1994 and early 1995. Mr Cooney said that the
Respondent had been a subcontractor to him on eight or nine jobs prior to this
project, and he considered the Respondent to be a
reputable contractor having
had no other difficulties with the other projects. He said it was his practice
to have the Respondent
quote for the job, and then to render claims for
Mr Cooney said that on about 6 June 1994
the Respondent quoted in the amount of $26,898 in respect of subcontract works
to be undertaken
on the Werninghaus’ project. Mr Cooney said the quote
was dated 6 June 1994, the quote being consistent with what was normally
case. The quote was not signed by the Respondent.
Relevantly, with respect to the
Respondent’s scope of works, the quotation refers as
“to dig, supply concrete and place
pier holes where necessary
to dig out footings
to dig and place concrete piers for verandah
Mr Cooney said that the scope of the
Respondent’s works in the quotation clearly referred to the excavation of
pier holes and
footings, together with other usual works associated with the
pouring of pier holes, footings and slabs. Mr Cooney explained that
involved a house slab secured by footings (and piers) and a verandah slab
(patio/balcony) which was to be secured by piers.
Mr Cooney said he passed the
Respondent’s quote to Mr Werninghaus for approval and the Respondent was
then given authority to
commence work.
Mr Cooney said that he had not seen,
until the Respondent had produced his material in these proceedings, a copy of
an undated quotation
from the Respondent for the same scope of works as the 6
June quotation, but with the price quoted at $28,498. Mr Cooney said that
did not recollect any conversation between himself and the Respondent whereby
the digging of the verandah piers was excluded from
the Respondent’s scope
of works. In that regard Mr Cooney pointed out that the scope of works in the
two quotations are the
I should note that Mr Cooney in his
statement in reply to the Respondent’s statement denies categorically that
he accepted the
quote after discussions about the Respondent’s inability
to dig piers due to the Respondent not owning any equipment with which
piers beyond a particular depth. Mr Cooney said that it would be curious to
expect that such an item would be quoted upon
by the Respondent, if in fact the
Respondent did not have equipment to, or intend to, carry out the digging of the
Mr Cooney said that as the registered
builder on site it was his role generally to supervise all trades, and that his
practice in
that regard was to attend on site approximately twice per day,
usually once in the morning and once in the afternoon.
Mr Cooney said that he provided Mr Leahy
with all of the contract drawings relating to his works under the subcontract,
namely footing
plans, slab design plans and soil tests.
Mr Cooney said that the Respondent
attended to the following works in accordance with the quote and subcontract,
the supply of machinery and
the excavation of all
the drilling of all pier
holes (for house and
verandah/balcony);
the pouring of
concrete to footings and piers;
the preparation and pouring of the
house and verandah slab.
Mr Cooney said that, when on site, he
observed that the footings were excavated by a backhoe and the pier holes were
drilled with
an auger which he said were both hired from Half Penny Machinery
Hire of Nerang.
Mr Cooney said that he could recall being
on site at the time when the pier holes for the verandah slab were drilled. He
was during an afternoon visit to the site in late 1994. He said he
observed that the pier holes for the verandah piers were drilled
ground, and that, after observing the excavation, he contacted the Local Council
and arranged for an inspector to attend
to certify the footings and pier holes.
He said he remained on site until the Council inspector arrived and indicated
his approval.
He said that about that time concrete trucks had arrived, but
that he had left the site shortly after the Council inspector
Mr Cooney said that, in discussions with
the Respondent, he confirmed the Respondent would arrange for the pouring of the
to the footings and pier holes that afternoon. He said that he made
clear to the Respondent before he left the site that none of
the holes were to
be left open over night, as he did not want the excavation or drilling
compromised by backsliding or subsidence
before the pouring of
Mr Cooney said that he returned to site
on site. He said that he observed that 75% of the footings and piers
of the house appeared to be in set concrete (indicating they
had been poured the
previous afternoon) and that the balance of the house footings and piers,
including the piers to the verandah
were filled with wet concrete (indicating
they had been poured that morning). Accordingly he deduced that the pouring of
the concrete
to the verandah piers had occurred the morning following their
excavation.
Mr Cooney said the Respondent lodged two
claims for payment with him, the first being dated 19 September 1994. He said
that, as was
clear from that invoice or claim, the description of the works
performed by the Respondent included the items previously referred
to in respect
of the quote of 6 June. Further the quoted price referred to in that
claim/invoice was $26,898, the same as the 6
June quote. Mr Cooney explained
that there was an exclusion in that claim/invoice on account of the verandah
slab which was poured
later and subject of a second invoice, the area of the
verandah slab being increased from 107 square metres to 125 square metres
request of the homeowner.
Mr Cooney next referred to the
circumstances in which the need arose for the rectification works performed by
him. I have previously
referred to this in an earlier part of this
Mr Cooney said that from his observations
of the drilling of the pier holes in 1994 he is quite confident the pier holes
in 1994 were definitely deeper than the 1.2 metres revealed by the
inspection holes. He therefore formed the view, as already noted,
concrete was not poured into the pier holes that evening as he had insisted, but
the following morning, and that, between
the excavation of the pier holes that
afternoon and the pouring of the piers the following morning, there was some
subsidence in
four of the pier holes. He said that the concrete then appeared
to have been poured into the uncontrolled fill at the bottom of
the pier holes,
thereby causing the instability to the verandah slab, which was the cause of the
need to undertake rectification
work (namely underpinning) in accordance with
the Authority’s direction.
Mr Cooney said that the carrying out of
rectification work has resulted in him incurring significant expense, the
particulars of which
are referred to in his wife’s statement filed in
these proceedings.
Mr Cooney specifically denied accepting
liability for the precision of the piers, and reiterated that he observed the
excavation of
the piers by the Respondent to natural ground. He said that the
ordering and pouring of concrete was the responsibility of, and
control of, the Respondent, pursuant to the Respondent’s
Mr Cooney provided a further statement
filed in the proceedings dated 13 February 2002, in which he referred to and
attached the Authority’s
Statement of Reasons in the review proceedings.
The Applicant relied upon the documents annexed to that Statement of Reasons in
support of this claim. The engineering reports and minutes of a meeting
extracted earlier in this decision form part of such annexed
Heather Cooney
Mrs Cooney said that she is an employee
in her husband’s business and has particular knowledge of the financial
records of the
She said that she caused to be prepared
from the MYOB records a spreadsheet of costs associated with the rectification
work undertaken
on the Werninghaus’ project. She referred to three
credits from that spreadsheet which she said related, not to the rectification
work, but other works undertaken at the request of Mr Werninghaus, and that
these credits had been deleted. She attached the spreadsheet,
which listed a
number of items, and arrived at a net amount after the credits of
$20,847.64.
Additionally the Applicant claimed the
amount of the GST at 10% (as a taxable supply in respect of materials and
labour) which would
be payable, if the Applicant was successful in the recovery
of the whole or part of the items noted. This GST amounted in total
Additionally she said that the Applicant
incurred legal fees of $11,010.60 in retaining the services of Messrs Short
Punch & Greatorix,
Solicitors, and launching and prosecuting the review
proceedings, which the Applicant alleges only arose because of the
Respondent’s
negligence/breach of contract in failing to properly dig
and/or construct the piers to the verandah. Particulars of these accounts
The total claim by the Applicant then is
$33,943. I should say that in respect of none of the items noted above has the
taken issue as to either their quantum or
Respondent’s
Gayden Leahy
The Respondent said that his original
quotation was not the quotation of 6 June 1994, but an undated quotation prior
to the 6 June
quote which was in the amount of $28,498. He said that that
earlier quote had been signed by him.
He said that the subsequent quotation for
$26,898 arose as the result of discussions in which he, Mr Leahy, told the
Applicant of
his inability to dig certain piers, as he did not own the necessary
equipment – that is to say piers beyond that which the
backhoe (which he
had on site) could dig. These piers particularly related to the verandah piers
which were to be dug to some depth.
Mr Leahy confirmed that he had been given
the plans relevant to his area of work. He said that he did not engage Half
Penny Machinery
Hire for any earthmoving works, but moreover Bastemeyer
Earthmoving. He produced dockets from that firm which showed that it performed
earthworks on this site on 5 September 1994.
Mr Leahy said that his dockets for
concrete from Readymix concrete delivered to the site show that all deliveries
were on 6 September
1994, the day following the earthworks. He said that the
invoice proved that all of the footings and piers poured by him on 6 September
were in fact completed on one day rather than going over into the next day. He
denied that any of his men were on site the following
day. Mr Leahy reiterated
that, as far as his records were concerned, the concrete must have been poured
the same day, rather than
the following day as alleged by Mr
As to the digging of the piers, Mr Leahy
produced a letter from his accountants who had reviewed the Respondent’s
The letter stated that there was no account produced by the
Respondent through the relevant financial year for Half Penny Machinery
Mr Leahy said that, if Half Penny Machinery Hire had been used for the drilling
of piers, then this was by others, and was
not paid for by
In apparent support of his explanation as
to the two quotations, Mr Leahy produced two other quotations in respect of
other sites,
on which he had performed works for the Applicant. Mr Leahy
pointed out that those quotations had in fact been signed by him, and
both stated that piers would be charged extra.
I should note that, in my view, this
contradicts somewhat Mr Leahy’s explanation as to his discussion with the
Applicant to
the effect of his inability to dig certain piers, as he did not own
the necessary equipment. Further it seems to me that, if these
deleted from the first quotation produced by Mr Leahy, then one would expect in
the second quotation some notation that
piers would be charged extra, or that
the excavation of certain piers was being excluded. As it is the two quotations
in substance,
apart from their price, are the same, as is the invoice that
Mr Leahy confirmed that it had always
been his policy that all works be carried out in accordance with the
engineer’s drawings,
and that all works had been carried out to a standard
acceptable to the building industry.
Mr Leahy, both in his statement and oral
evidence, conceded that he was responsible for the pouring of the concrete into
the relevant
four piers. Indeed Mr Leahy confirmed as much in his letter dated
28 February 2000 to the Tribunal. As well that letter is relevant
quotations. The letter is in the following
Re: Application –
With regards to the above Application, I would like
to state that I most vigorously deny any and all responsibility and object to
the applicant’s application for myself to be joined in this matter.
However I will be unable to attend this hearing on 7 March
2002 as I will not be
in Australia at that time and will not return to Australia until 18 March 2002.
(A copy of my e ticket is
The evening of 25 February
2002 is the first instance that I have had any knowledge of the above complaint
and it is now seven and
a half years since the work was completed. I have been
unable to locate either a Quotation or Invoice for this job, however I do
two other quotations addressed to the same builder which specifically state that
no bored piers have been allowed. You can
therefore see that it was my practice
at that time not to include piers in the concrete work costing, as this would
have been provided
as separate quotation if it were required. At that time
Klaus Werninghaus and David Cooney did all earthworks including
I would prefer to attend this hearing myself to defend
all allegations that are made against me, so request that the proceedings
adjourned until I return to Australia, however if this is not possible, I
request that you telephone me in New Zealand so I may
give any clarification
that may be needed on any point during the course of the hearing. (Phone
number: ...)
I am not disputing the fact that I did pour the
concrete at Lot 107 Aylesham Drive, Bonogin, however I am disputing any
in respect to this job. I distinctly recall Klaus Werninghaus and
David Cooney were responsible for the earthworks being carried
included bored piers. Your Building Services Authority Initial Inspection
Report dated 8 May 2001 states, ‘Mr Werninghaus
said that he recalled that
all the footings for the piers went down to weathered rock but the rock sloped
As I no longer have any original plans or any
other materials with regards to the work completed at the time, I can only rely
the fact that the work was passed and signed off by the then Albert Shire
Council. Letter from Gold Coast City Council shows that
the Footings were
approved on 6 September 1994 and the Slab approved on 13 September 1994. All
work was completed in accordance
with instructions from David Cooney and Klaus
Werninghaus and then approved by Council where everything was satisfactory at
On reading the material provided by yourselves, I see
a letter from DJC Constructions stating: ‘The next morning my Engineer
and I went to his property alone to discover that several hundred metres of
solid fill has been placed right next to the problem
piers. We also noted he
has since poured patios and done other additional ground works to this area. In
our opinion the extra soil
being carted in or compacted, has caused the pier
footing some disturbance.’
Reading you
‘Engineer’s Report Request’ shows that the Inspector’s
Remarks of ‘It appears that design
inadequacies may be the main
contributing factor causing the distress to the structure’, further
highlights the fact that we
were in no way responsible for any problems that Mr
Werninghaus has experienced at his property some seven and a half years after
completed our concrete placement. I have not been informed of any complaint in
respect to this project until some seven and a
half years after its completion
i.e. 25 February 2002.
In The Conclusions by Auspacifik Design
Engineers Pty ltd they find it more likely that the movement in the structure is
movement not vertical. They also concur that this movement could in
part be due to the extensive site works carried out by the owner,
whereby some
several hundred cubic metres of fill was placed, terraced and landscaped in the
area immediately above and adjacent
to the toe of the original fill batter
behind the piers.
With regard to the contraction joints not
having been placed in the verandah slab, once again I distinctly remember, Klaus
Werninghaus
stating to me at that time he was planning to tile his verandah and
intended to put the expansion joints in when the tiles were laid
so that the
joints would be in alignment with the tiles for aesthetic reasons. For this
reason no contraction joints were placed
at his instruction.
can only reiterate that after seven and a half years, together with extensive
earthworks being carried out in the immediate area
by others, and my practice at
that time not to allow for piers unless done by others, I accept no blame
attached to me in any way.
I trust that you will also come to
this same conclusion.
Mr Leahy apparently later located the two
quotations to which he referred in his evidence. Mr Leahy’s explanation
was that the two quotations were located on the computer system. That
seemed to me somewhat curious, given that one of them (he
identifies it as the
undated one and the first in point of time) is signed. The only explanation can
be that Mr Leahy subsequently
signed it having apparently found it on his
computer system. Further presumably Mr Leahy searched well for any material
sending the letter to the Tribunal. In that context it seems somewhat
unusual that the prior undated quotation (which was important
to his position)
only subsequently came to light.
It is clear from the evidence that the
Respondent’s two quotations and his subsequent invoice all refer to the
Respondent being
responsible for and having dug the piers as well as also having
placed the concrete in the subject pier holes.
The Respondent has attempted in his
evidence to resile from this by reference to records from the backhoe
contractor, and also lack
of records from Half Penny
It seems unusual to me that in his letter
to the Tribunal the Respondent could not locate any quotations and other
relevant material
relating to this job, although apparently did so later in the
form of an undated, but signed, quotation which the Respondent said
his computer records. Further it would seem unusual to have a signed copy on
the computer records.
It seems to me that the Applicant’s
evidence on this aspect is far more consistent and therefore reliable than the
Respondent’s,
and in the circumstances I prefer the Applicant’s
evidence to the effect that there was one quotation only, and further that,
consistent with that quotation, it was the Respondent who was responsible for
digging the pier holes and the concreting of them.
Nonetheless the Respondent does not deny
he was responsible for the placing of concrete in the pier
In that regard it seems to me that
whoever dug the pier holes, the evidence of Mr Cooney (which is not challenged
by the Respondent
and which, accordingly, must be accepted) was that the piers
for the verandah (including the defective piers) were excavated to weathered
rock, that is natural ground. This apparently is supported by an inspection by
the Council inspector, and also by the homeowner
who provided a statement to
that effect in the review proceedings.
The homeowner further, and somewhat
usefully, observed that the rock sloped steeply. It is accepted by the parties
that the ground
above the rock is substantially fill in the relevant area, and
perhaps this gives some explanation as to why these defective pier
subject to such subsidence and filled to such an extent. A further explanation
is to be found in the Bowler Geotechnical
report dated 25 March 2002 (previously
extracted in this decision), in which reference is made to the fill having been
unlikely to
have been keyed into the original sloped ground possibly leading to
some mobilisation of the fill down the slope.
It was not therefore, to my mind, the
digging of the piers which necessarily constituted negligence/breach of contract
give rise to any damages’ claim by the Applicant. Based on the
above then, between the digging of the piers and the pouring
of the concrete,
the defective pier holes were subject to significant filling and/or subsidence.
On any view of the evidence the
matter of the pouring of the concrete into the
defective pier holes was left in the hands of the Respondent, the Applicant
left the site. In this regard whether or not the piers were poured that
afternoon or the following morning becomes irrelevant and
not an issue, as the
reality was that the piers should not have been poured, because they had been
filled/subject to subsidence to
such an extent that they did not then extend to
rock as the plans required.
Again it is not in issue that the
concrete in the defective pier holes extended only to 1.2 metres, when in fact
it should have extended
to 2.7 metres. The discrepancy then at 1.5 metres is
substantial. For current purposes the remaining piers for the verandah (some
five in all) did not appear to have been similarly affected, or affected at all,
by subsidence.
In my view, it is clear
The defective pier holes filled to a
depth of about 1.2 metres between their digging and the pouring of concrete into
them, so that
their depth became approximately 1.2 metres rather than
approximately 2.7 to 3 metres. The cause of these pier holes filling to
extent was probably subsidence caused either or both naturally and/or by
activity in the form of the placing of uncontrolled
Given the considerable difference
between the defective pier holes’ required depth (at 2.7 metres
approximately) and their depth
at the time of pouring (that is, 1.2 metres), it
would or should have been apparent to anyone checking the holes that there had
substantial filling of the holes. This would be particularly so if that
person was as experienced as was the Respondent, and one
who, of the
Respondent’s own admission, performed works according to the plans and
specifications. In that regard it is common
ground that the engineering plans
required that the verandah piers extend to rock/natural ground. It was
therefore incumbent upon
the Respondent to check that rock/natural ground had
been achieved and maintained before the concrete was
Further, the concrete used in the
defective pier holes must have been considerably less (to an experienced
concreter properly overseeing
the matter) than that which would have been
expected, given that the piers stretched to their intended
It is clear that the Respondent knew
the depth to which the holes were to be dug because, on his own case, he had,
when informed as
to the depth required for the verandah piers, informed the
Applicant that he did not have the machinery to dig piers to such a
The Respondent (both as part of his
scope of works and by reason of my findings on the evidence) had sole control
and responsibility
over the pier holes at least from when the holes were
inspected by the Applicant and the Council inspector to and beyond when they
were poured by the Respondent, or at his direction.
The Respondent’s evidence was
that he recognised that subsidence was a problem, particularly on a steep and
filled site such
as this, and that it can cause major defects (refer to page 2
of the Respondent’s statement). It was, in such circumstances,
incumbent upon the Respondent to have checked the pier holes for subsidence or
fill before they were filled with concrete
under his supervision and
Such a check would, or should have,
alerted the Respondent to the fact that the depth of the pier holes was not as
they should have
been or were required to be by the plans and
specifications.
The Respondent was, and knew he was,
the last and only person in a position to finally check that the depth of the
pier holes remained
as required by the plans. The Respondent by his scope of
works (in particular the pouring of concrete) was charged with ensuring,
under a duty of care to ensure, that the pier holes were free from subsidence
and/or fill prior to the pouring of concrete
and extended to rock/natural
ground. It is clear that the Respondent did not do this, or did not perform
this task adequately and
to the required and reasonable standard of
The Respondent is accordingly both in
breach of his duty of care to the Applicant and in breach of the implied term in
every contract
or subcontract of this nature, namely that the parties would
employ proper workmanship in the performance of works on
As I understand the respective positions
of the parties from their evidence, it is common ground that the damage to the
was as a direct result of the four piers being placed in fill rather
than to rock, and thereby being subject to, in all probability,
a combination of
lateral pressures from the fill and the resultant effects of inadequate bearing
capacity of the site.
Indeed, it is difficult to disassociate
the vulnerability of these piers, due to them being grounded in uncompacted fill
rock/natural ground, from the lateral forces created by that
uncompacted fill.
This, it seems to me, is particularly so
in circumstances where other piers supporting this verandah which were grounded
in rock are
performing. Accordingly I do not accept Mr Davies’ expressed
view that the problem would have arisen notwithstanding that
the defective piers
extended to rock/natural ground.
Indeed in this regard Mr Davies’
two reports seem inconsistent in this regard in that one report refers only to
negative effects
being created by the uncompacted fill. This suggests to me,
consistent with the Bowler & Associates’ report, that it was
combination of the lateral movement of the uncompacted fill and the failure of
the defective piers to be drilled and/or poured
to rock/natural ground which
caused the problems experienced by the homeowners.
In any event that is, I think, the better
view from the engineering material to which I have earlier referred. Moreover I
Bowler Geotechnical are specifically geotechnical engineering
consultants rather than, as with Auspacifik Design Engineers (Mr Davies),
consulting civil, structural and hydraulic engineers. As such Bowler
Geotechnical appear more expert in matters involving the likely
or probable
performance of this site beneath ground level.
In any event I consider the suggestion of
lateral movement being due to exclusively subsequent site activity by the
somewhat speculative and without proper basis, when it is
considered that inspection holes dug against the defective piers revealed
the concrete had reached 1.2 metres only, as against the 2.7 metres required to
achieve natural ground/weathered rock.
The result must be that the unchallenged
quantum of damages claimed by the Applicant as the result of the
Respondent’s negligence/breach
of contract is recoverable in full. That
amount, as I have noted, is $33,943 and an order should accordingly be made in
that amount
in favour of the Applicant and against the
Respondent.
I order that the Respondent pay the
Applicant the sum of $33,943 within 28 days from the date of this order, failing
which the Respondent
in addition shall pay interest at the rate of 10% on so
much of that sum as is unpaid until it is
MR P. LOHRISCH –
QUEENSLAND BUILDING TRIBUNAL
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 024
Application No:
David J Cooney
C/- Short Punch & Greatorix
GOLD COAST MAIL CENTRE QLD 9726
Respondent:
Gayden Leahy
13 Edelsten Court
CARRARA QLD 4211
- Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
Upon hearing Mr Cooney the applicant and Mr Leahy the respondent,
the Queensland Building Tribunal makes the following orders:
The Respondent will pay to the Applicant
the sum of thirty three thousand nine hundred and forty three dollars
within 28 days from the date of this order, failing which the
Respondent in addition shall pay interest at the rate of 10% on so much
sum as is unpaid until it is
......................................................
MR P. LOHRISCH - MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Date: 16 May
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (173 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter