URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBCCMCmr/2025/394.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moorooka Links [2025] QBCCMCmr 394 (5 November 2025)
ADJUDICATOR’S ORDER
Office of the
Commissioner
for Body Corporate and Community
Moorooka Links
[2025] QBCCMCmr 394
Anastasia S. Glover (
The Body Corporate for Moorooka Links (
All owners (
affected persons
Moorooka Links CTS 41371
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 227(1)(2)
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation Module)
Regulation 2020
Accommodation Module
APPLICATION NO:
DECISION DATE:
5 November 2025
DECISION OF:
M A Schmidt, Adjudicator
CATCHWORDS:
REASONABLENESS – where a lot owner sought approval (required by a
BY-LAW) to make an IMPROVEMENT to her lot, whether committee
acted reasonably in
deciding to refuse approval.
committee acted unreasonably in refusing to grant approval for an improvement to
Lot 90, proposed by its owner, pursuant to the
application made on 16 March
(with further requested information provided on 27 March) and refused by a vote
outside of a committee
meeting, communicated to the applicant by email from the
body corporate manager on 31 March 2025 and recorded in the minutes of the
committee meeting held on 14 May 2025.
committee is deemed to have approved the owner of Lot 90’s application to
make an improvement to her lot, subject to the
conditions contained in the
application and by-law 9.
7 days, the body corporate must reimburse Anastasia Glover $220.60, being the
fees she paid for her conciliation and adjudication
applications.
REASONS FOR DECISION
[1] Anastasia
(Sia) Glover, owner and occupier of lot 90, brings this application against the
body corporate disputing the committee’s
refusal to approve her request to
install a custom timber structure in her courtyard (on her patio). She argues
the committee’s
refusal was unreasonable. She seeks orders that she be
granted approval for the structure and also reimbursement from the body
for the conciliation ($110.30) and adjudication ($110.30) application
fees she has paid.
Preliminaries
[2] Moorooka
Links was established in April 2010 with the registration of Survey Plan 210721,
a building format plan of subdivision.
It contains 119 lots in a development
comprising a mixture of 2-storey townhouses with common walls in 4 buildings;
and apartments
in 2, 5-storey buildings. Lot 90 is a 2-storey townhouse in
Building B, which contains only lots 90,
and 119. Lot 90 has a ground
floor area of 100m
, including an 18m
patio at the
North-West end of the lot. A 73m
area of common property which lot
90 has been granted exclusive use of as a
, surrounds lot 90 on the
North and West sides of the lot to the scheme boundaries and on the Eastern
side, to the boundary with lot
119 and to the South, in line with the entry to
the lot. There is a gate in the fence on the Northern boundary of the scheme,
direct pedestrian access from Hamilton Road to the exclusive use
courtyard of lot 90.
[3] Submissions
in response to the application were sought from the committee and all owners
(excluding the applicant). 3 submissions
were received: 2 from owners and 1
from the committee. The applicant inspected the submissions and provided a
reply. By email on
3 November 2025, I requested from the committee the minutes
of any committee or general meetings held since 26 February 2025. That
information was provided by email on 4 November 2025.
The Proposed Improvement
applicant says she wishes
to install an enclosed custom timber structure,
effectively creating an enclosed and weather-proofed section in my outdoor
. The following details are provided:
Will be placed
on the paved area (under the pre-existing patio roof) on top of the tiles and
within the patio frame
Is a separate
structure (not a renovation) and therefore temporary (able to be
uninstalled/removed), fixed to the ground to ensure
safety/security
treated timber, on a treated pine base of 2.85m x 3.25 m, with pine cladding
that is painted to match the current house,
so is in line with the aesthetics of
the complex
installation by a licensed carpenter (Centaur Carpentry Pty Ltd) and licensed
electrician (Fallon Solutions), with all
necessary insurances, meeting all
safety requirements.
Skillion roof
(flat with slight angle) to sit below the current patio roof and be made from
Internal walls
and flooring will be particle board and insulation included; window and double
doors for accessibility
Estimated cost
to design, build, paint, deliver and install is $15,625
Installation
will take approximately 2.5 days as the product is pre-fabricated
debris will be minimal. Contractor is responsible for removal of any rubbish or
Purpose is to
create a usable personal space (for yoga, meditation, dance, etc) that cannot be
impacted by the weather, and can be
used without any negative impact on
neighbours.
install dark grey outdoor blinds (as has been previously approved for other
owners) if viewed as visually obtrusive.
[5] The area on
which the proposed improvement is to be installed appears to be entirely within
the boundaries of lot 90 (ie on the
ground floor tiled/paved patio, under the
existing patio roof line). The applicant says the area cannot be seen from the
[6] Apart from
compliance with any applicable by-laws, there is no requirement for an owner to
seek body corporate approval for any
improvements proposed to be made wholly
within the boundaries of their lot.
community management statement (CMS) for a community titles scheme is binding on
the body corporate and each member of the
body corporate, as if it included
mutual covenants to observe its provisions and as if each person bound by it has
signed the CMS
under seal.
By-laws, which (among other things) may regulate the use and enjoyment of lots
and common property, appear in a scheme’s CMS
and therefore bind bodies
corporate and all members.
Section 94(1)(b)
of the Act specifically requires a
body corporate to enforce the by-laws.
[8] My perusal
of the current CMS recorded on 8 July 2015 reveals the following by-law, which
relevantly provides:
9. Renovation, Improvement of a Lot or
Common Property
9.1 Subject to By-law 8.2
owner or occupier must
make, or permit, any structural alteration or
external addition, renovation, and any improvement to any Lot or Common
Property nor
do anything to vary the external appearance of the building
without the prior written consent of the Body Corporate Committee,
observe the applicable provisions of the Act for making of improvements.
9.1.1 For bylaw 9.1 this shall include any alterations to gas, water or
electrical installations, the installation of any external
blinds, fence,
pergola, screen, awning, air conditioning system or other structure or
outbuilding of any kind
9.1.3 Such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
9.2 In giving its consent to any improvement the Body Corporate may:
9.2.1 obtain
advice from consultants; and
9.2.2 recover
the costs of obtaining advice from consultants from the person seeking the Body
Corporate's consent.
structural alteration of external addition, renovation, and any improvement made
or sought by an owner or occupier must
be maintained in a state of good
condition and repaired by the owner or occupier unless the Body Corporate
resolves to the contrary
by special resolution in general meeting; and must
comply with all requirements.
Committee may give written notice to an owner or occupier or a Lot requiring
that the improvements be put in a state of good
condition and repair (including
where necessary, renewal, replacement or removal of the whole or part thereof)
and if such notice
has not been complied with to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Committee within 14 days of the date of that notice, the Committee
its absolute discretion, cause the improvements to be put in such a state or the
obligations under these by-laws to be carried
out in accordance with the notice
and the owner or occupier (as the case may be) will forthwith pay the costs
incurred or payable
by the Body Corporate in that regard on
9.5 In making an
improvement, renovation or alteration to a Lot an owner or occupier must:
9.5.1 rectify
any damage sustained to the Common Property;
9.5.2 not remove
or interfere with any load bearing wall or support without the Body Corporate' s
9.5.3 allow the
Body Corporate to inspect the Lot and give to it, upon request, any plans and
specifications it considers necessary
to enable it to give its
9.6 For the
purpose of this by-law “improvements” includes walls, windows,
garage roller doors, screens, gates, walkways,
paths, driveways, yard,
landscaping, garden, plants and irrigation, and drainage facilities located
within a Lot or Common Property.
[9] It is clear
from by-law 9.1 that body corporate permission (via the committee) is required
for the applicant’s proposed
improvement (however it is variously
described by the applicant, the committee and each of the 2 submitting owners)
to her lot.
By-law 9.1.3 specifically states that permission shall not be
unreasonably withheld. In any event,
section 100(5)
of the Act requires the
committee to act reasonably in making a decision. That includes in making
decisions on whether to give approval
for improvements to lots pursuant to the
[10] The primary
issue in dispute is whether the committee failed to act reasonably when it
decided not to approve the applicant’s
request to make an improvement to
Acting reasonably – committee decisions
a committee is considering whether to grant permission for an improvement to a
lot in accordance with the by-laws, its
role is to consider the interests of the
person seeking approval, as well as how the improvement could affect other
owners or the
scheme property.
committee must decide each request based on the circumstances and in the context
of the particular scheme. It must consider
relevant, evidence-based factors and
exclude irrelevant ones.
committee has genuine fact-based concerns, the committee should consider whether
those can be overcome or sufficiently addressed
by the imposition of
conditions.
[13] When a
committee’s decision-making is challenged, the role of the adjudicator is
to evaluate whether the committee ignored
or failed to genuinely consider any
relevant factors, or whether it acted on irrelevant
The role of the
adjudicator is not to weigh the factors nor substitute their own views or
conclude that another decision would have
reasonable.
[14] The test
for whether a decision is reasonable is
[15] Where a
committee fails to act reasonably in making a decision, an adjudicator may
intervene to make an order that is just and
equitable, including giving effect
to a motion that was not passed
[16] Importantly,
the person challenging a decision bears the onus of substantiating that the
committee failed to act reasonably.
They must show, for example, that the
decision lacked a logical basis
or plausible justification.
The application/s & committee’s decisions
applicant’s first application was considered at a committee meeting on 26
February 2025. The minutes of that meeting
record that the motion to approve
the application was defeated with 7 votes in favour and nil against. It was
noted that the committee
had requested that the owner submit a complete
application in order that it be given due consideration.
applicant made her second application on 16 March 2025, using the
“Renovation Application” form provided by the
body corporate manager
and including the quote from Wills Cubbies & Cabins dated 17 February 2025
and a photo of the patio area
in which the structure was to be installed.
committee requested further information as to exactly where the cubby was to be
erected and how high it was (communicated
to the applicant by email from the
body corporate manager on 26 March 2025) and expressed concern about the visual
impact. The applicant
provided further information including photos of the
location and timber cladding to be used, and offering to install external
by email to the body corporate manager on 27 March 2025.
[20] By email on
31 March 2025 from the body corporate manager, the applicant was advised that
the committee had voted 4-3 against
approving the application.
[21] By email to
the body corporate manager on the same date, the applicant asked the committee
for specific reasons for the decision.
applicant asked the committee to reconsider her application, by submitting a
motion for committee consideration on 5 April
[23] The body
corporate manager emailed on 10 April 2025 confirming that it had been sent to
the committee and also providing the
following general response as to why the
committee refused the application:
From the details of the quote the
proposed installation appears a habitable space and could be used
as a bedroom or living space. Even with a ceiling height under 2.4 m it has
enough openings and
ventilation as well as electrical connections and insulation to be considered
If a living space was added to the unit then the body corporate fees should
be increased accordingly. The application doesn’t
consider that
Approving this installation would also set a precedent for future
applications to enclose verandas etc. though out the complex. These
spaces were
never designed to enclosed and if they were this may cause issues with the
establishing maintenance responsibilities
and insurance for the body corporate
in the future.
[24] The body
corporate manager emailed the applicant on 14 April 2025 advising that the
committee had reviewed but advised that they
did not wish to change their
[25] Minutes of
a committee meeting held on 14 May 2025 record the following:
90 - RENOVATION APPLICATION
The Committee defeated the motion to approve Lot 90’s
application for the installation of an external structure in their
MOTION DEFEATED
Votes: Yes – 2 No – 5 Abstain – 0
It was further noted that the owner of lot 90 had made a conciliation
application to the office of the the Body Corporate Commissioner
in relation to
this matter and that the Committee would not attend conciliation with the owner
as a majority decision had already
been reached and clear rationale provided to
the lot owner for the rejection of the application.
Reasons for refusal
Permanent or temporary habitable space?
[26] According
to the 10 April 2025 email noted above, the committee had concerns that the
proposed installation appeared to be a
habitable space and could be used as a
bedroom or living space and that if a living space was added to the unit, then
the body corporate
fees should be increased accordingly, and the application
didn’t consider that process. This concern was re-iterated in the
committee’s submission.
[27] Margot
Tidey, owner of lot 83, who made a submission strongly supporting the
committee’s decision, details the same concern.
She says the improvement
clearly constitutes a house extension or separate dwelling; it is an enclosed
weatherproof fully habitable
room of standard bedroom size of 2.85 x 3.25m =
floor area with a standard 2.3m ceiling height, insulation,
internal walls, ceiling and flooring, electrical conduits, skillion roof
French doors with a construction cost of $15,625.
[28] The owner
of lot 83 says the proposed structure is permanent not temporary. She asks
‘How would the body corporate legally
enforce removal of a property
improvement it approved?’ It could not. This makes it a permanent
structure. The applicant’s
stated intention to remove the structure at an
unspecified time in the future is unacceptable and not legally binding.
Pitman, owner of lot 77, agrees. He strongly objects to approval for the
structure being granted. He thinks it’s
unfair to define the structure as
temporary. He says most buildings are temporary with the right tools.
applicant says installing a structure that could be considered
‘habitable’ is not in direct contravention of
any by-laws. She
undertakes that the structure will not be leased, rented or otherwise used as a
habitable space. She says it is
a recreational space for use by the current
members of the household and their guests. There is no intention for the space
used as a bedroom or for it to be otherwise occupied overnight.
applicant says the nature of the proposed structure being a “habitable
room” is not reasonable grounds for refusal
given that the specifications
have been provided transparently throughout the process and the committee
acknowledges that the intended
use of the space is “as a private
recreational space”.
[32] As the
structure is not attached to the exterior walls of the existing dwelling and has
been designed specifically to be demountable
(dismantled for reinstallation in a
new location), she has consistently referred to the structure as temporary.
applicant refutes the committee’s suggestion that the structure will be
used as a habitable space. Even if it were
to be so used, she says that fact
alone is not an objectively reasonable basis to refuse to grant approval.
[34] I agree
with the applicant that whether the proposed improvement constitutes a permanent
or temporary habitable space is not,
in and of itself, a relevant consideration.
It does not constitute an objectively reasonable basis to refuse to grant
Increased value/lot entitlements
committee raised concerns in its submission that the addition of an enclosed
space would enhance the functionality and possibly
the value of lot 90 without
any adjustment to the owner’s contribution to shared costs.
[36] The owner
of lot 83 submits it would be reasonable to expect that the structure will
increase the property value of lot 90 enormously
because it will be bigger by
one whole room. She says this would have to be accounted for by the body
corporate in the by-laws and
property value and fees. The feasibility and costs
of doing this is not known.
applicant says the lot entitlements were established at the commencement of the
scheme and do not include capacity to vary
for improvements. However, the
by-laws contemplate improvements, do not stipulate changes in contributions
after any renovation
or improvement to a property, and do stipulate that
approvals should not be unreasonably withheld.
[38] She says
the explanation from the body corporate fails to refer to any by-laws and to
acknowledge the temporary nature of the
structure, which is inconsistent with
the reasoning provided.
applicant accepts that the proposed improvement does benefit the occupants of
unit 90 but denies that it adversely affects
any other users of the complex.
The temporary nature of the structure confirms that it will not substantially or
permanently change
the integrity of unit 90 or its value.
applicant notes that the committee has previously granted approval for fixtures
such as outdoor blinds and air-conditioning
units, which could be deemed as
adding value to a property, and in those cases did not deny the improvement
because of a required
adjustment to the owner’s body corporate
contributions. She says that if the primary concern is that this will
substantially
and unfairly raise the property value of lot 90, she will confirm
that upon the sale of her lot, she will not include the structure
as a fitting
to be part of the sale. The design of the structure is that it is capable of
being dismantled and reinstalled elsewhere
in the future.
[41] I agree
with the applicant that the fact that the improvement might increase the value
of lot 90 is an irrelevant consideration,
as is any suggestion that any increase
in value should be reflected in contribution or interest schedule lot
entitlements, which
were set at the scheme’s establishment. Neither the
contribution nor interest schedule lot entitlements for this scheme are
Lot 90 has a contribution schedule lot entitlement (CSLE) of 74 and an interest
schedule lot entitlement (ISLE) of 96 (one
of the highest in the
Scheme appearance/precedent
committee submitted that approving the installation raised concerns that
townhouse and ground floor apartment owners
might build their own
versions of similar enclosed structures and that this could alter the uniform
appearance and architectural consistency
of the scheme. It says such precedent
may lead to a proliferation of non-standard additions, diminishing the visual
cohesion intended
by the original design and complicating future approval
[43] The owner
of lot 77 thinks it’s unfair to allow the construction of this structure
without allowing, for example, units
to enclose their balcony areas or ground
floor units to install similar structures. He says this would change the
aesthetic of the
complex and while this specific request would have a limited
effect on this, it would be unfair to apply different rules to each
[44] The owner
of lot 83 agrees. She says allowing the structure may set a precedent. It
would negatively impact the character of
the scheme. It will make the building
bulkier by reducing the setback from the street frontage.
applicant replies that the proposed area the structure is to be installed in is
the personal courtyard / garden area lot
90, which is surrounded by a 1.8 metre
high fence.
applicant says each owner has the right to submit a request for renovation or
improvement to the committee. Each application
is considered on its own merits,
therefore in that regard, it is a fair process.
[47] Lot 90 is
unique in the complex in relation to the outdoor space; only two other units
enjoy a similar-sized outdoor space.
It is most likely that these units have a
premium that was already applied on purchase. The applicant says the decision to
this temporary structure should not be equated with permanent changes to
an outdoor area or balcony (such as enclosure) as that is
a substantive and
permanent change to the building structure, which would be considered a
[48] As to the
improvement changing the aesthetic of the complex, the applicant notes that
shade sails / outdoor blinds which are
also fixtures have been approved for
other units in the complex. This too changes the aesthetic of the complex.
Further, the proposed
improvement is only visible within the confines of lot 90
and its exclusive use area and therefore will not affect the aesthetic
[49] Regarding
consistency with scheme appearance and use, the applicant notes the committee
has indicated that other residents may
make application for a like structure
which may be incompatible with the aesthetic of the scheme. She notes that there
argument that her proposed improvement adversely affects the
aesthetic of the scheme as she has gone to some length to ensure that
appearance of the proposed improvement is sympathetic to the current structure.
Should any future applications not be
aesthetically sympathetic, this would be a
basis for future applications to be rejected. She says to refuse her
application because
of potential future applications that are not aesthetically
sympathetic would be an unreasonable refusal under clause 9.1.3 of the
[50] I agree
with the applicant. Although what the applicant’s proposed improvement
would look like is a relevant factor for
the committee to consider, the concern
that future applications which may not be aesthetically sympathetic might be
made, is purely
hypothetical.
also note by-law 29.1 which provides that
all balconies and
must remain
unenclosed with no shutters, glazing, louvers or similar permanent
. There have been no specific objections raised with the
aesthetics of the applicant’s proposed improvement. The owner of
acknowledges that this specific request would have a limited effect on scheme
aesthetics. It is almost entirely obscured
from view except from within lot 90
and its exclusive use courtyard.
Insurance and maintenance risk
committee submits that approval of such structures introduces ambiguity over
long-term insurance liability and maintenance
responsibilities. If these
structures become damaged or affect surrounding common property, it says there
is a risk that the body
corporate would be drawn into responsibility
applicant says she has confirmed with the Brisbane City Council (BCC) that the
improvement is not considered an extension
and as such is not considered a
“part of the property” which would create a liability for the body
corporate. Should
the committee require her to enter into a binding agreement
confirming that the insurance and maintenance of the proposed improvement
sole responsibility, she is happy to do so.
[53] Further,
the applicant says that it would be a condition of approval that she accept
responsibility for the improvement including
insurance and maintenance. By-law
9.3 provides that “...any improvement made...must be maintained in a state
of good condition
and repaired by the owner...”
applicant says the location of the proposed improvement does not impede access
to the structure that is under the control
of the body corporate. The only
impediment may be underground works required under the current footprint of Unit
90 and if so, the
structure is capable of being demounted during the works in
question. That is the temporary nature of the improvement. There is
impact to the access to the dwelling or the area of the body corporate’s
responsibility.
proposed structure is made from treated pine and is located on an existing tiled
footing. The applicant is responsible for
all maintenance including pest
control. She says there is no impediment to termite inspections by the body
[56] To the
extent that maintenance and insurance concerns were relevant, they were
adequately addressed by the applicant, by-law
9.3 (which makes the applicant
responsible for maintenance), and by the legislation.
Section 192
Accommodation Module requires the applicant to give the body corporate details
of the nature and value of the improvement
if, because of the improvement, the
fixtures and fittings forming part of the lot are of a higher standard than the
fixtures and
fittings of lots generally and the premium for reinstatement
insurance required to be taken out by the body corporate is likely to
Section 191
of the Accommodation Module allows the body corporate to adjust the
contribution payable by an owner (which is generally proportionate
to the ISLE
of the lot) in a way that fairly reflects the extent to which the premium
relates to fixtures and fittings that form
part of the lot and are of a higher
standard than the fixtures and fittings of lots generally.
Insufficient information
committee says the applicant submitted multiple versions of her application to
the committee over several weeks. The committee
requested clarification,
Location and
height of the structure;
Visibility and
design considerations;
Potential use of
the structure;
committee voted on the revised application and it was defeated by a majority
vote (5-2).
committee says it followed due process, allowed ample opportunity for the
applicant to revise and resubmit her application
to address concerns raised, and
gave detailed feedback throughout.
[60] The owner
of lot 83 submitted that the information provided by the applicant was
insufficient to determine whether the structure
could be considered as either a
separate dwelling or a stand-alone studio/granny flat or a patio enclosure. She
says no 2D plans
nor drawings or photos were provided of the position and
orientation of the proposed structure under the existing patio, nor its
relationship to the yard and street front and boundaries. Further, the impact
and provision for water drainage was unclear.
applicant replies that on her first application, she provided basic details via
email, as the template form was generic and
could not initially be accessed.
Upon request by the committee, she completed the template form and provided more
details, including
the full quote outlining the complete fit out and fittings of
the structure. She further provided photographs of the specific area
she is seeking to install the structure on a temporary basis. She has
repeatedly indicated that she would provide any further
material required and
also offered to show the area in person. After the photographs were provided,
there was no further request
for additional material.
applicant says she sought guidance from the body corporate manager over email
and phone to ensure wherever possible that
her application was complete and that
she was providing information which would be of assistance to the committee.
Hence the more
detailed information that was provided in each iteration of the
application.
[63] She was
advised by the body corporate manager that the application was defeated by a
vote of 4-3 (by email dated 31 March), not
5-2 as stated by the committee in its
submission and recorded in the minutes of the committee meeting of 14 May 2025.
[64] Regarding
due process, the body corporate manager provided general information on
applications for improvements, but stated repeatedly
that the committee was
under no obligation to advise why they had denied the application. She
repeatedly requested reasons for the
denial so that she could revise and
resubmit, but this was not sent to her until after she submitted a request for
reconsideration
to the committee. The committee advised they did not wish to
change their votes, so on that basis the application was not approved.
applicant cannot be accused of providing insufficient information in
circumstances where there were no further requests for
additional material after
she provided the photographs in her email of 27 March 2025.
Other concerns
[66] Although
not cited by the committee as reasons for refusal, the owner of lot 83 raises
some other concerns in her submission,
including the following:
Regardless of
what the structure is called, it most likely requires BCC planning development
approval. No development application
or approval was provided by the
The structure
would likely negatively impact the provision of daylight and ventilation to
existing habitable rooms in the adjoining
Maintenance of
access paths to doorways and windows to the existing building is uncertain. No
plan of the exact location of the structure
was provided showing access
pathways. It may impact fire safety and emergency services access.
Noise levels
coming from such a structure cannot be regulated because construction standards
for sound proofing and building quality
would not be the same standard as the
original complex itself.
applicant responds to these concerns as follows:
proposed use and size, it does not require planning approval from BCC. This has
been confirmed directly with the Council.
No building permission is required
for structures under 10m
The structure
will be installed in the existing outdoor area of the unit which already meets
all compliance issues for drainage issues.
In respect of
fire safety, there is an evacuation route suitable for the size of the building.
Further, there is a window that is
capable of being an exit route. There are
sufficient routes of egress. In respect of changes to the main structure from a
safety perspective, there remain four egress routes from the main living
area to the exterior of the building for safety purposes.
There are no
hazardous materials that will be stored in the structure; as noted, its uses are
inconsistent with the storage of hazardous
materials. The space will not be used
as a tool shed so again there is no additional risk of flammable items.
There are no
limitations to the egress routes of adjoining structures, therefore the
improvement does not adversely affect any adjoining
structure, and therefore
does not change the management and fire safety protocols of the body
There is no
impediment to the access of emergency services, as there is substantial access
to the property. Further, the location
of the improvement does not adversely
impact emergency services access to any other part of the property under the
control of the
body corporate.
The situation of
the improvement on an existing open space, roofed patio will not adversely
affect any other unit’s access to
light, further there is no impact to any
common area.
As the proposed
improvement will be installed on the existing footprint of Unit 90 there is no
change to the external footprint of
the complex.
The proposed
improvement is not a separate single dwelling and does not require council
approval for development. However, as with
all structures, she will be required
to meet all building standards within the legislation.
Noise will be
reduced, as activities will be conducted inside the insulated space rather than
out in the open courtyard. In addition,
she has raised this with her neighbour
at Unit 119 and they have no objection to the proposed
improvement.
[68] To the
extent that any of these matters may have formed part of the committee’s
consideration of the application, I consider
that they have been adequately
addressed by the applicant.
Response to Claim for Cost Reimbursement
applicant seeks reimbursement of $220.60 for the conciliation and adjudication
fees she paid because the committee did not
participate in conciliation.
committee says it did not intentionally avoid participation and cost recovery
should only be ordered where the respondent's
conduct is unreasonable. The
committee maintains it acted fairly, in good faith, and in accordance with its
statutory obligations.
[71] The Act
provides that, if asked, an adjudicator may order a respondent to pay the
application fees for a conciliation application
and adjudication application.
This order can only be made if the adjudication application was for the same
dispute as a conciliation
application that ended because the respondent failed,
without reasonable excuse, to participate in the
conciliation.
criteria have been met here. Conciliation application 0385-2025 related to the
same dispute. The body corporate advised,
in writing, that it declined the
invitation to attend conciliation on this matter.
certificate issued by the conciliator states that “
I consider the
respondent did not make a reasonable attempt to participate in
conciliation
[74] I will
order reimbursement of $220.60 by the body corporate to the
committee says by-law 9.1.3 does not compel it to approve every request, but to
apply reasonable judgement. It says the
decision to refuse the
applicant’s request was based on careful consideration by all 7 committee
members. The applicant argues
that consent was unreasonably withheld.
[76] Based on
the material before me, I have formed a view that the committee based its
decision to refuse the applicant’s improvement
application on concerns
that were either irrelevant; or, if relevant, were adequately addressed by the
applicant, by conditions in
by-law 9.1, or by the legislation. I am satisfied
the committee failed to act reasonably in refusing the applicant’s
application
to make an improvement to her lot.
[77] I have made
orders deeming her improvement application to have been approved and for
reimbursement of her conciliation and adjudication
application fees as a result
of the committee refusing to participate in conciliation without reasonable
Lot 91 on SP210721 was
subdivided into new lot 91 (an area of 10m
adjacent to the garage on
the ground floor) and lot 119 on SP 273914 in July
By-law 28 grants
exclusive of courtyard and balcony area “GC” on the Plan in annexure
A to lot 90
Section 59 of the
Relates to signage and is
not here relevant
Body Corporate
for Beaches Surfers Paradise v Backshall
[2016] QCATA 177
@ [42] and [23]
“reasonable action is evidence-based and rational.”
@ [42]-[45]
See Beaches
Seabreeze On Reid
[2022] QBCCMCmr 246
[2020] QBCCMCmr 486
Gold Coast Apartment
Management P/L v Price & Ors
[2017] QCATA
Only lots 36, 38 and 39
are higher, on an ISLE of
See, for example
Atrium Resort
[2023] QBCCMCmr 501
@ [12] (“refusal based on merely
hypothetical concerns is likely to be unreasonable for the simple reason it is
not evidence-based”)
“Decks” and “patios” is the terminology used in the
registered survey plans
Section 280, Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (336 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter