URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QADT/2009/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fraser v Mission Australia and Mikits [2009] QADT 23 (30 November 2009)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL QUEENSLAND
Fraser v Mission Australia and Mikits
[2009] QADT 23
NICOLE FRASER
Complainant
MISSION AUSTRALIA
First Respondent
MICHAEL MIKITS
Second Respondent
PROCEEDING:
Final hearing
DELIVERED ON:
30 November 2009
DELIVERED AT:
Member Robert Wensley QC
HEARING DATES:
21, 22, 23 January 2009
complaint is dismissed.
will be no order as to costs.
CATCHWORDS:
Discrimination – family responsibilities – work –
part-time position made redundant after restructure – consideration
direct discrimination and indirect discrimination – damages
LEGISLATION CITED:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant represented by Mr Adrian Langford.
Both respondents represented by Mr Bob Davidson.
INTRODUCTION
1. In this matter the
Complainant, Nicole Fraser (“the Complainant” or
“Ms Fraser”), alleges unlawful discrimination
on the grounds of
family responsibilities in the area of work. In particular, it is alleged that
the Complainant was both directly
and indirectly discriminated against by her
employer, the first respondent, Mission Australia, and also by the second
respondent,
Michael Mikits, in relation to the activities associated with the
termination of her employment as the Queensland State Marketing
Employment Services Mission Australia, in June 2007.
Australia was and is a national community services organisation, employing about
3,500 people across Australia. It has two
major areas of activity. One is
community service work, such as drug and alcohol rehabilitation. The other area
is employment services,
operating in the jobs network, assisting job seekers to
find employment. Mission Australia is a Christian-based, non-denominational
not-for-profit organisation.
material times, Mr Mikits was the Complainant’s superior, but she did
not report to him. He was the Queensland State Employment
Services Manager for
Mission Australia. The Complainant reported to Ms Morgan, the first
respondent’s National Employment
Services Marketing Manager.
complaint was lodged with the Queensland Anti-Discrimination Commissioner on
9 July 2007 and accepted on 1 August 2007. It alleged
discrimination
because of parental status and family responsibilities.
of the complaint were provided as follows –
27 October 2005, I was offered a 12 month fixed term position of State
Marketing Employment Services Qld/NT commencing 28 November
17/11/2006, I received notification from the then National Employment Services
Marketing Manager Di Morgan (my manager) outlining
that my position would become
permanent effective 17/11/2006...In addition, Di Morgan confirmed that I would
commence maternity leave
on 5th January 2007 and would return to work on a
part-time basis effective 16 April 2007 initially for 15 hours per
week (2 days)
and then increased to 24 hours per week effective
01 July 2007...
was only able to return to work on a part-time basis on account of my
responsibilities as primary care-giver to my
to a Company restructure in March 2007, Di Morgan’s position...was made
redundant effective approximately early June 2007.
At this time, my role...was
made to report to Mr Michael Mikits, State Employment Services Manager Qld.
Monday 2 July 2007 my role of State Marketing Manager was made redundant
effective 27 July 2007. The reason cited for this decision
In the previous structure marketing consultants in
Queensland reported to you as the State Employment Services Marketing Manager.
I have reviewed the requirements for marketing support in Employment Services
Queensland, and have resolved that my requirements
are for a full-time
co-ordinator only, who will report directly to me. This re-structure will
result in the abolishment [sic] of
your role as Queensland Employment Services
Marketing Manager...
position of State Employment Services Marketing Coordinator previously reported
to my role and was a full-time 12 month fixed
contract role expiring in
August 2007 and was primarily used to cover my maternity leave.
was not given an opportunity to apply for the remaining Marketing Coordinator
Role, even after I told Michael Mikits that I would
be happy to work in any
other suitable position.
Australia has only made the Queensland State Employment Services Marketing
Manager’s role redundant. The equivalent
Marketing Manager roles in all
other States have remained intact.
I believe that I have been unfairly dismissed from my role...as I was
discriminated against on the basis of my parental status and
responsibilities due to my inability to continue working full-time. Also, at
no time was I given an opportunity to be considered
for the fixed-term Marketing
Coordinator position, even though I possessed the relevant skills and experience
for the role. Not
only has this caused me a great deal of stress and anxiety,
but also has placed a great financial strain on my family.
I feel that it is unlikely that I will secure another suitable part-time
marketing role in the near future as these positions are
rarely advertised and
highly contested.
I have sought advice on the matter and seek an appropriate
evidence-in-chief, Ms Fraser said —
Mr Mikits has made a discriminatory decision because of the fact that I had
a baby and that’s why I was made
This, in a nutshell, is the Complainant’s case.
ahead, the respondents deny that there was discrimination of any kind. Their
case was and is that the Complainant’s
position was abolished in a genuine
corporate restructuring exercise and that there was a bona fide redundancy for
operational reasons.
unsuccessful conciliation conference was held on 13 September 2007. The
matter was referred to the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
on 8 October 2007.
It proceeded in the Tribunal in the usual way. The parties filed witness
statements and complied with all orders
of the Tribunal. The parties
unsuccessfully attempted conciliation on 3 April 2008.
was granted for advocates to appear on behalf of all parties at the final
hearing, at which I presided, on 21, 22 and 23 January
the hearing, the Complainant was represented by Mr Adrian Langford and both
respondents were represented by Mr Bob Davidson. At
Mr Mikits was no longer employed by the first respondent but a single case
in defence was conducted by both respondents.
the hearing, written statements of numerous witnesses were tendered and oral
evidence was given by the Complainant, Mr Mikits and
other witnesses, to
which evidence reference will be made in due course. Witnesses giving oral
evidence were cross-examined. The
proceedings at the hearing were recorded and
a transcript was produced, including a transcript of the extensive and very
closing oral submissions of the advocates.
opening the case for the Complainant, Mr Langford stated that the complaint
was of both direct and indirect discrimination, associated
with the termination
of employment.
to direct discrimination, the case was stated to be that two of the attributes
outlined in
Anti-Discrimination Act
(“the Act”) were present, namely, parental status
(Section 7(d))
and family responsibilities
(Section 7(o)).
say that there was no dispute that, at the relevant time, the Complainant had
these protected attributes.
of the Act provides–
7. Discrimination on the
basis of certain attributes prohibited
The Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of the following attributes
(d) parental status;
(o) family responsibilities;
in opening, Mr Langford referred to Section 10 of the Act, with
respect to direct discrimination, and to Section 11, with
indirect discrimination. I shall set out and consider in appropriate detail
these provisions of the Act in due course.
For present purposes, it is
sufficient to record that the case as opened was that direct discrimination
occurred in two distinct
ways, namely, because the Complainant was not offered
or given the opportunity to discuss suitable redeployment opportunities prior
termination and, second, by reason of the termination itself.
was asserted that the evidence would show that the respondents made no effort to
identify suitable redeployment opportunities for
the Complainant and that that
failure involved disregard for Mission Australia’s policies and procedures
on the issue, as well
as the ignoring of HR advice on the issues. It was
contended further that, in fact, no genuine consideration of redeployment even
as to direct discrimination, it was contended in opening that the first
respondent made presumptions regarding the Complainant’s
attributes in
relation to redeployment, namely, that the Complainant was only available to
work part-time and that this was a reason
why the redeployment options were not
considered.
opening, reference was made to an organisational review occurring shortly before
the Complainant’s termination, and it
was asserted that the review
confirmed the ongoing necessity for the Complainant's role. There was an issue
of fact here, because
the respondents’ case was that the review confirmed
the very opposite. Further, it was opened that the Complainant’s
other States were not terminated. At the hearing, there was a factual dispute
on this point, the respondents’ case
being to the contrary.
Mr Langford
opened the case of indirect discrimination by reference to Section 11 of the
Act. I shall consider the legal submissions
in due course, but the essence of
the case is that the employer imposed a term with which the Complainant, because
of the protected
attributes, could not comply. It was stated that the term was
imposed by Mr Mikits on the Queensland marketing function and was
that he required a single full-time coordinator role
way in which the case of indirect discrimination developed, with respect to the
law and the facts alleged in the present case,
was a little complicated. I
shall not consider it further here, but will do so in due course.
Complainant’s case as opened also included claims for general damages,
past economic loss, future economic loss and other
relief. There was no claim
for reinstatement.
opening, the respondents emphasised (as I accept) that the burden of proof lay
with the Complainant pursuant to Section 204 of
the Act. It was submitted
for the respondents that the evidence would show that:-
(a) there was
no contravention of the Act;
(b) all of the
Complainant’s requests that related to her parental status and family
responsibilities had been met;
Complainant’s position of marketing manager became redundant due to the
business needs of Mission Australia and the
Complainant’s parental status
and family responsibilities had no bearing on that decision;
(d) in that
regard, the positions equivalent to that of the Complainant, namely, marketing
manager positions in other States (four
in total), in fact were
will be apparent that disposition of the case requires the resolution of a
number of factual disputes. To the extent necessary,
I deal with them in the
following paragraphs.
record here that I paid careful attention to the oral evidence of all of the
witnesses, and I have considered closely the voluminous
documentary record of
evidence. As well, I have been assisted considerably by well-prepared and
comprehensively presented closing
addresses by the advocates. I shall refer to
the issues raised therein in due course.
FINDINGS OF FACT
considered all of the evidence, I propose to make a series of findings of fact
as to the factual history of the matter, before
turning to the law and its
application to the facts with respect to the complaints made. In doing so, I
shall resolve, where necessary,
conflicts in the evidence. I should say at once
that while there were numerous conflicts, involving particularly the evidence of
the Complainant and Mr Mikits, I regard all the witnesses as having given
their evidence honestly and to the best of their respective
recollections.
instances where I resolve some issue against a version or a recollection of
facts proffered by a particular witness, that will
involve no reflection on the
honesty of the witness, nor on that witness’s credibility.
first witness to give oral evidence was the Complainant. She presented as a
careful, thoughtful and honest witness, very committed
to her cause. However,
since I propose to reject some of her evidence, I record that some of that
evidence, or some deductions made
or inferences drawn by her, involved
conjecture, and some of it was simply wrong as to the facts.
Complainant’s written statement in the proceedings is Exhibit 1.
Complainant finished high school in 1996. After that, she completed
successfully a Bachelor of Business course at Griffith University,
specialising
in the areas of human resources and marketing. From 1999 she spent five years
as a manager with Target, after which
she had a year as marketing manager with
Target. After that, she was marketing manager for two years with the Gold Coast
then marketing manager with a major shopping centre. She has a total
of about eight years marketing experience.
employment history demonstrates that she was successfully, as she put it,
“climbing up the totem pole”. Her aspirations
were to become the
chief executive officer of a company, but these aspirations were interrupted
when she fell pregnant.
was appointed as the State Marketing Manager for Mission Australia Queensland
and Northern Territory Employment Services
Division on 27 October 2005.
She began work in that position a month later. As noted above, she reported to
Di Morgan, the Mission
Australia National Marketing Manager, and her equivalent
in New South Wales was Anthony Rumble. She had one direct report, who worked
one day a week as a marketing assistant.
duties involved matters such as production of marketing materials (including
design, media bookings, price/deal negotiation, printing
and price negotiation
for numerous media); event coordination (including expos and site-specific
events); sponsorship matters (site-specific,
State and national); promotions
(site-specific, State and national); media (releases, stories and advice to
sites on media initiatives);
marketing plans; and competitor analysis.
January 2006, the Complainant discussed with Di Morgan and Anthony Rumble the
need for an extra staff member to assist them because
of considerable workloads.
Ms Morgan agreed, but explained that board approval for the extra money
involved was necessary. A submission
was made in March 2006 and it was approved
in July of that year.
Ms Fraser did not advertise to fill the new role.
June 2006 she found out that she was pregnant with her first child.
Complainant’s predecessor in the marketing manager’s
position, and
had worked from home, as the National Marketing Strategist for the Training
Institute, while she was on maternity leave.
After she returned to work, she
was confirmed in the strategist’s position.
that had happened, Ms Morgan verbally offered the Complainant the permanent
position of the Qld/NT Marketing Manager, knowing
that the Complainant was
pregnant, would be going on maternity leave and only wanted to return to work
part-time. The Complainant
verbally accepted this offer, but nothing was
formalised.
and business needs (as discussed above), the best way forward
was to employ a
full-time marketing coordinator on a 12 month contract. The Complainant
says that she obtained approval for this
from Mr Mikits and Lincoln Hopper
(Queensland State Manager) to ensure that everyone was aware of the proposed
changes and was happy
to proceed.
did not give evidence in the proceedings.
seems that the idea was that the coordinator would work with the Complainant for
would take over from her and
hold the fort
” during the Complainant’s maternity
leave for three months, after which the Complainant would return to work for
per week, i.e. part-time. The Complainant hoped to change her
base to the Nerang office.
position of State Marketing Coordinator, reporting to the State Marketing
Manager, was advertised in July 2006. Details are contained
in appendix 3
of exhibit 1
Queensland and conducted Ms Fraser’s performance appraisal.
results were good, the feedback was positive, and Ms Fraser received a pay
increase, taking her cash payment from $55,000 per
annum to $60,000 per annum,
making a total package, including fringe benefits, company car and
superannuation, of about $87,000 per
Marketing Coordinator’s position did not require marketing experience,
although that was said to be desirable. The position
was advertised only
internally. The successful applicant was Christine Worner, who was appointed in
August 2006. She did not have
any formal marketing experience, but did have
extensive job network experience, as she had been a permanent full-time employee
Employment Services, Mission Australia, as an employment consultant for
almost four years at the Southport office of Mission Australia.
There, in the
role of a case manager, she managed a case load of approximately 100
long-term unemployed and disadvantaged job seekers,
assisting them to overcome
barriers to employment to secure sustainable long-term employment. This did not
involve marketing, although
there was some “reverse marketing” of
prospective employees to prospective employers.
signed a 12 month fixed term contract that was due to expire in August
2007. She reported to Ms Fraser and to Di Morgan.
currently is employed as State Marketing Coordinator for Employment Services for
Mission Australia in Queensland as a
full-time employee.
evidence was taken by telephone from Mr James Hall, the Chief Executive Officer
of Mission Australia. His evidence was not challenged
seriously and I found it
to be impressive. I accept it, and deal with the relevant parts of it
testified that he took up his position in about mid-2006 and that, not long
after that, and commencing formally in September
2006, he initiated an
organisational-wide review of Mission Australia, with a view to identifying a
best practice structure for the
entity. The review involved external advisors
and, internally, involved a staged process. The initial stage involved Mr Hall
his management team, that is, his direct reports, conducting a high level
review of the top structure of the company and the development,
in broad terms,
of a suggested model for the whole of the organisation going forward. Senior
management participated in this phase
of the process, which finished in about
February 2007, when a conclusion had been drawn in terms of what, broadly,
needed to be done
to go forward.
November 2006 there were discussions between Ms Fraser and Ms Morgan
indicating that the contract could not be renewed, because the Complainant would
only be returning to work part-time and the position
was said to require a
full-time manager, it was agreed that the Complainant’s contract would be
renewed. An offer was made
by Ms Morgan that the Complainant, upon return
from maternity leave on 16 April 2007, would have a permanent part-time
initially returning to work two days a week and then increasing hours
to three days a week in the new financial year.
offer was contained in an email from Ms Morgan dated 17 November 2006.
It referred to the part-time position as Queensland and
Northern Territory
Employment Services State Marketing
, as opposed to manager,
but nothing seems to turn on the reference to “Strategist”.
Ms Morgan undertook to forward a
formal letter of offer with all of the
5 January 2007 Ms Fraser began maternity leave. She left her laptop
computer with Ms Worner so that Ms Worner could access relevant
During the period of maternity leave, Ms Worner phoned the Complainant
regularly to ask questions and had some meetings with
the Complainant at the
Complainant’s home with respect to jobs that Ms Worner was doing.
Complainant says that while she was on maternity leave, in March 2007 Mission
Australia underwent a restructure as a new CEO had
been appointed and was
changing the organisational processes. It is evident that the
Complainant’s knowledge of the review
is sketchy. I accept that the full
picture is as per Mr Hall’s evidence referred to above and
says that new organisational structures were released to the company in March
2007 and that these showed her position included
in the new structure, although
reporting to Mr Mikits rather than to Ms Morgan. She says that
the new organisational structures that were sent out to all staff in
March showcasing the new changes
” indicated this. As well, she says
that similar changes were made with respect to State Marketing Managers in other
She said that she was relieved because she felt that her job was
all of the evidence, I conclude that Ms Fraser is mistaken in her evidence
on these points, both in respect of her own position
and in respect of her
interstate peers. However, I accept that she honestly believes in the truth of
her testimony. In this regard,
it is necessary to refer the evidence of
mentioned above, the first phase of the organisational review of Mission
Australia was completed in about February 2007. After
that, the broad proposals
for restructure were announced to everyone in the organisation, and Mr Hall
conducted what he called “
” around the country, in
the period up to July 2007, detailing to staff what was going to happen within
the organisation, the
likely shape of the organisation in the future, and why
changes were contemplated. He
I did is I highlighted that we would put in place an interim management
structure on the 2
of April and the
interim management structure was required to then implement and come back to me
with a structure of how they would
deliver their function underneath their
leadership, and the goal that we had, as far as possible implemented by July the
, at a high level and there was an acknowledgement
that some of the issues we had to face, one, were complex and take a little bit
more time to work out how we restructured completely through the organisation
and, secondly, some of the contractual requirements
meant that we didn’t
want to change the structure or parts of the organisation as quickly as other
parts of the organisation,
but the goal was as far as possible to have the
leadership structure in place by July the 1
the model in place so far as possible by the 1
that year, and all staff were given an opportunity to look at what the proposed
structure of the organisation was going to be
in terms of the business units,
and they were given an opportunity to understand why we were making the changes
and how we were moving
forward and all staff were also given a document which
was around 30 pages long which gave a detailed outline of what the
organisation
was going to be doing going forward and how that was intended to
operate coming forwards.”
said that in the period between 1 March 2007 and the end of that year, a number
of positions were adjusted, a number of roles
were made vacant, and people were
invited to apply for them, and a number of positions were made redundant. In
particular, he mentioned
that all of his direct reports were made redundant and
were required to apply for new roles in the organisation and that, subsequently,
only one of those was successful in maintaining a new full-time role and one was
successful in maintaining a temporary role.
particular relevance (because of the evidence given by the complainant about an
organisational chart that she had seen in March
2007 which she says showed her
position retained, but now reporting to Mr Mikits instead of
Ms Morgan), Mr Hall testified that any
organisational chart which the
complainant may have seen in about March 2007 would not have represented a final
structure. This
was because it was made clear to all staff that in the period
between 1 March and the end of June, the review process was to continue
with, firstly, an interim leadership team put in place by 2 April and,
thereafter, that team being given the opportunity to look
at a range of
structures which might work for their parts of the organisation. Mr Hall
said that during this process there “
was quite a significant number of
models developed and discussed with staff, discussed with managers, and looked
at as options for
the future. It was made very clear in my view to staff that
we were going through a process where we had decided the high level
structure of
the organisation and that underneath that high level that we would be reviewing
what the review of the organisation
would be and we would be looking at a range
of different potential structures under the high level management model and,
speaking, I would have seen through that period of time a significant
number of different options for how the organisation may look
future...we made it quite clear to staff that this was an iterative process and
we understood that what we wanted to do at
high level but there may well be
changes that we would make over the next few months after the
of July to get the model to the point that we were
comfortable with.
intermediate status of any March 2007 organisational structure was emphasised by
Mr Hall in the following evidence —
model was presented in March, I would have said quite clearly that that was not
a final structure for the organisation
and the reason why is I made a commitment
to the organisation in early March that I would finalise the leadership
structure by April
and that between March and
July we would finalise the internal structure within the organisation. The
final most likely structures
going forward for the organisation weren’t
put to me in some cases until after the 1
of July and
accepted by me until that point, and so anything that was produced before that
period of time I would have said was not
a [indistinct, probably final]
structure, it was a structure which had been discussed, it was one of the
options. When we were looking
at structures, [indistinct] organisation would
do, as a whole range of ways you could deliver services. What I wanted to do is
the experts in their particular fields to look at the different options and
discuss the different options with staff and consult
with them...between March
and the end of June...personally I saw a significant range of different options
for what the organisation
might look like and what different parts of the
subsidiary groups within the organisation might look like and I didn’t
and agree a final interim structure until in most cases either the end
of June or early July.
relation to this process, Mr Hall said that he expected that managers and
supervisors would talk to their staff about different
options, present different
options, talk about what would work and what would not work, and that generally
speaking, the aim was,
as far as possible, to make sure that all staff knew that
what was being done in the relevant period was putting in place delivery
structures within the organisation within the leadership structure, and that in
that period there would be a to’ing and fro'ing
and discussion process to
define what the final structure would be for that particular part of the
organisation. He said that all
of the structures finally came to him and his
executive team to sign off on what the final structures would be for the
organisation.
well, Mr Hall stated, and I accept, that anyone who saw an organisational
structure before 20 June 2007 would not have been looking
structure. In the event, I find that Ms Fraser is mistaken in her
testimony that in March 2007 her position as Queensland
State Marketing Manager
was included in the new structure, although reporting to Mr Mikits rather
than Ms Morgan.
returned to work on 16 April 2007, working two days a week. Mr Mikits
agrees that the Complainant was to work two days
per week, upon her return,
until July 2007, at which time she would then work three days per
. She had a
meeting with Mr Mikits and Ms Worner on 18 April 2007. She says that there was
discussion about a number of operational
matters and that she understood that
she was to continue with business as usual. She says that Mr Mikits told her
that there would
be no changes and that he was happy with the way things were
says that upon her return to work, Ms Fraser was granted all of her
requests with regard to hours of work and that she was
allowed to work from the
Gold Coast offices of Mission Australia, rather than from the offices in
Brisbane, where the position was
based, to help facilitate her return to work.
Mr Mikits says
that when he met with Ms Fraser and Ms Worner in April 2007, he had
not completed his review of the structure of the marketing function
Queensland, and advised them that the status quo would be maintained. He says,
At that time I could not identify any need for change, although the
review was ongoing
do not accept that Mr Mikits told Ms Fraser that there would be no
changes, and find that he did say that, in the context of the
ongoing review,
the status quo would be maintained. I find that, at this time, the
organisational review had not been completed
and that Mr Mikits had not
completed his consideration of how the review would affect the Queensland
marketing structure of Mission
her meeting with Mr Mikits and Ms Worner in April 2007, and (it seems)
largely in ignorance of what was then happening in relation
organisational review, Ms Fraser continued working. She had little contact
with Mr Mikits, and some meetings that they had
scheduled with one another
did not take place.
says, and I accept, that at the relevant time he was preparing for a secondment
to the Northern Territory. He says that
he had a telephone conversation with
Ms Fraser, confirming that he would schedule regular reviews with her once
he had an understanding
of the length of the secondment. He advised all of his
direct reports that regular reviews would be disrupted during this
says that, at this time, business was reducing as a result of the buoyant labour
market in Queensland. In part, against
this background, he reviewed the
resourcing of marketing in Queensland. He says that he was finding it difficult
to justify having
a marketing manager with one direct report.
the background that Ms Fraser had returned to work on Monday 16 April
2007, and had met with Mr Mikits on Wednesday 18 April
2007, and further
against the background that the nationwide organisational review was still in
progress, Mr Mikits sent an
Ms Morgan on Tuesday 24 April 2007. It read, in part
“As you can probably guess, I am flying blind a bit
in relation to the positions/salaries/roles/responsibilities etc of the
Marketing staff, and would like to get some clarity...
I’m sure you’ll be able to help me...
For both Chrissie and Nicki, can I please have:
Their salary calculations.
was quite a bit of cross-examination about this email. The Complainant seemed
to seek to make a case that it demonstrated that,
in ultimately making his
redundancy decision, Mr Mikits did not really know about or understand the
detail and significance of the
Complainant’s job as State Marketing
Manager, so that the redundancy decision, which possibly he reached finally on
2007 (as to which, see below), either was not soundly based or,
perhaps, should be seen to be discriminatory, although that is not
clear to me.
cross-examination, Mr Mikits explained that, as at 24 April 2007, he
had a limited knowledge of the relevant positions and he wanted
some clarity
that, on 30 April 2007, that he sent an
email to Kathleen James, in Mission
Australia HR, stating that he had resolved that his requirements were for a
full-time coordinator
is an email of 30 April 2007 and it is part of Appendix 10 to the
Complainant’s Statement. It read in part —
the previous structure, two marketing staff, based in Queensland, reported to Di
Nicki Fraser (State Marketing Manager - 2/3 days per week)
Christine Worner (State Marketing Co-ordinator -
In the new structure, both Nicki and Christine
report to me...I have reviewed the requirement for marketing support in
Services Queensland, and have resolved that my requirements are for a
full-time co-ordinator only...This restructure will result
in the abolishment of
the Manager role...
Seeking your advice on progressing this...”
James gave oral evidence. At the relevant time she was employed as the Employee
Relations Advisor within Mission Australia
(from about 2002 to late 2007). She
reported to the National HR Manager, and had been involved in something of the
order of 10 redundancies
as a result of the organisational restructure.
Her role included providing advice relating to the redundancy of employees. She
and her section had no line management control, and provided advice but not
directions. She had no role in approving redundancies
- that was the
responsibility of line management. She testified, in relation to
Mr Mikits’ 30 April 2007 email to her, that
she saw a clear
distinction between a coordinator and a manager. With respect to redundancies
in general, she said —
“You abolish a position. You
don’t refer to the people that are in the position. It’s the task
that you need someone
to do or that you don’t need being done any more, or
that you distribute to somebody else. In redundancy it’s the position
that you are looking at, not the people. It wouldn’t be because that
Nicole was part-time or anything like that. It was because
need that particular role any more.”
in cross-examination, about the email of 24 April 2007, Mr Mikits
claimed that, in the short period between 24 April and 30 April,
had resolved that his retirements were for a full-time coordinator only. He
explained that, in that short period, he had sufficiently
informed himself of
the needs of the department, and said —
“And prior to
that point in time, there had been other discussions from a broader view from
the organisation that I was privy
to because I was the State Manager with our
State Managers from other States and also - well, predominantly for the State
groups where we were actually reviewing the marketing roles long
before that...there had been discussions. Once the - there was
a release -
prior to the release of the organisational structure I actually had been privy
to discussions about the organisational
structure and the place that marketing
would play in it. So it’s not that at the very last minute there was
consideration
also testified —
“The organisational structure that
was released showed that Employment Services marketing was going to move from
the Marketing
Department in our National Office to the Employment Services part
of our National Office, which meant that the direct reporting lines
employment - the Employment Services marketing staff across the country would
cease being to the Marketing Department and being
reporting through to the
Employment Services Division at national level.”
this point, Mr Mikits concluded —
there was only a week between these two emails to get particularly firm clarity
on the salaries and the positions
and those things but I have had an opportunity
prior to that to give some thought to the structure in
Queensland.
said that he had been involved in numerous discussions with Ms Morgan, the
Complainant, and also with his colleagues in
other States, discussions about
24 April 2007, Ms Morgan replied to Mr Mikits’ email to her of
the same date. She attached information about the Complainant’s
she said, in part —
“Under the current structure,
Nicki is the Qld/NT State Marketing Strategist and Chrissie the Qld/NT State
Marketing Co-ordinator,
who is directed by Nicki to assist in the delivery of
the State Marketing Manager’s role.
In regards to salary, Nicki is on $60K (pro-rata x 2 days per week until
end fin year, then to 3 days) and Chrissie is on $43K...
Please let me know your thoughts on this and hope that the attached job
spec will be of assistance in your team Opps meeting this
Thurs and Fri. This
job spec has evolved (as I wrote it 4 years ago) and any questions that you
or your team may have can be explained
in laymen terms should you provide
further detail.
email suggests that there was a meeting scheduled between Mr Mikits and his
operations people on Thursday and Friday, 26 and
his statement, Mr Mikits says that he had a conversation with each of his
Operation Managers on an individual basis, regarding
the marketing function in
Queensland, and concluded —
(a) Ms Fraser
was not on the same page as the Operations Managers and never would be, as she
came from a pure marketing perspective
and lacked the required knowledge of
employment services;
(b) there was
resistance from the Operations Managers towards Ms Fraser, and there was
tension from Ms Fraser’s perspective
towards the Operations
(c) he needed
marketing to be more targeted at the Queensland frontline;
(d) there was a
need to have a leaner structure to help cope with the reduced customer
(e) he needed a
Coordinator to do the implementation “leg work”, rather than a
Marketing Manager.
evidence generally was confirmed by the evidence of some of the relevant Mission
Australia Operations Managers. These included
Phil Schultz, Scott Wilson and
Joe McKee. The statement evidence of these gentlemen was not seriously
challenged in cross-examination.
The statements were in the form of written
responses to a series of questions, namely:
what was the
consultation process undertaken by Michael Mikits regarding the restructure
redundancy;
the list of
marketing functions taken over by Operations Managers;
whether the
Complainant could have done the coordinator’s role effectively;
Ms Fraser and Ms Worner, “
who had more merit and
what would have
been the business impact/problems if the Complainant had been redeployed to the
coordinator’s role;
coordinator’s role have been done part-time and, if not, why not;
coordinator’s role been done as job share and, if not, why not;
what is the role
of the administration trainee; and
what were the
services provided by the Complainant when she moved from the State office in
Stones Corner to the Gold Coast.
do not intend to canvass the quite detailed responses made to these questions.
In short, the universal view of the Operations Managers
was to the following
(a) the current
structure (i.e. no State Marketing Manager, but a Coordinator) works very well,
and better than the previous structure;
(b) Ms Fraser
did not have the personal characteristics and skills to perform the
coordinator’s role;
(c) Ms Fraser
was difficult to deal with in a variety of ways;
coordinator’s role could not be done part-time;
coordinator’s role could not be done as job share.
general terms, this evidence was confirmed by Helen Eager, the Mission Australia
Nerang Services Manager.
seems likely to me that Mr Mikits’ conversations with his Operations
Managers were held in the last week of April 2007, perhaps
at the operations
meeting or meetings referred to in Ms Morgan’s email, as referred to
above. This is not entirely clear,
because there was a suggestion, in the
evidence, that the relevant meetings with Operations Managers were held much
earlier than
that. Perhaps nothing turns on it. At one stage, Mr Mikits
testified that the discussions with the Operations Managers were held
sent the email to Kathleen James on 24 April, and probably were in the month
before that. There is a potential inconsistency
here, but I cannot resolve
Monday 7 May 2007, towards the end of the day, Kathleen James sent an email
to Mr Mikits. It said, in part —
“You will need
to abolish Nicki’s position, and advise her of this change. I suggest that
you discuss with her any potential
areas where she might like to work in other
than Marketing (a long shot, but always a good idea) to see whether there are
any redeployment
opportunities for her.
I have attached a simple flowchart covering the process of making Nicki
redundant, as well as a template letter you can use. Please
talk to Nicki first
before preparing this letter, as it states the (sic) no deployment opportunities
are available - you need to
check this first.
I am happy for you to give Nicki my details if she wants to chat about the
process. Please make sure you clearly articulate the reasons
for your decision
and that it is not a reflection of her performance in the Manager
is accepted, and I find as a fact, that Mr Mikits did not take
Ms James’s advice about having a discussion with the Complainant
opened on the basis that this failure itself constituted
discrimination.
next day, and at the beginning of the day, Mr Mikits sent an
to his Personal
Assistant, apparently attaching the template redundancy letter provided to him
by Ms James, and saying —
“Please prepare this
letter as best you can...
It is unlikely that I will meet with Nicki before next week, so not
11 to the Complainant’s statement is a copy of the flowchart provided by
Ms James. There was much cross-examination
clear that Mr Mikits did not follow it to the letter. For instance, he did
not prepare a business case,
as the chart suggested should have been done.
However, the evidence of Ms James was that the chart was not an official or
document of Mission Australia, but, rather, was a document that she had
produced for her own purposes, so that it did not have any
mandatory effect.
Ms James also said —
reference to consulting with an employee who was to be made redundant was not
related to an opportunity to source a suitable
redeployment opportunity, but,
rather, really a matter of courtesy;
reference in her email to “
you will need to abolish Nicki’s
” was a reference to making the position redundant, and not
to Nicki as a person.
I accept that evidence.
I accept that the draft redundancy letter was a template, worked up by her, but
was only advisory in nature.
although Mr Mikits did not take some of Ms James’s advice, or
follow the letter of the flowchart, I think that, ultimately,
the handling of
the redundancy was a matter for him. There are reasons, perhaps, to be critical
of him as to how he did so (for
instance, not consulting with Ms Fraser
before the redundancy interview). However, at the end of the day, I think that
all of this
may be about a counsel of perfection, as to good process and
practice. Certainly, in my view, it is not about unlawful discriminatory
of greater force, at least potentially, is the criticism made of the fact that
Mr Mikits instructed his P.A. to prepare the
redundancy letter more or less
immediately upon receipt of Ms James’s advice. At the very least, it
is suggested, this shows
that, at that time, he had made up his mind about the
redundancy, and that really he was only interested in getting a draft of an
appropriate letter, rather than being informed about how he might sensitively
and properly effect the termination. There was cross-examination
along these
cross-examination, Mr Mikits gave what I thought was some rather
unsatisfactory evidence about the email of 8 May 2007, to his
regarding the termination letter. He said —
point in time I hadn’t made a final decision about what I would do. I
still wanted to think about the matter,
myself a bit more. I wanted to talk to
others, the operations managers, a little more about it. I wanted to talk to my
a little bit more about it before I made a final decision...At that
point in time I knew that I didn’t want to meet with Nikki
immediately,
but that I would want to meet - if I went down the path of redundancy I knew I
would want to meet her at some point
in time, but it wasn’t going to be
within the week and for that reason I didn’t want it to be a priority for
find as a fact that Mr Mikits did consult with his immediate superior in
the process of reaching his decision as to Ms Fraser’s
position, and
that his superior agreed with his ultimate decision.
Mr Mikits’ evidence (that at 8 May he had not made a final
decision) seems to be inconsistent with his advice to Ms
30 April 2007, when he said that he had resolved that his requirement was
for a full-time coordinator only. There is also
the suggestion of inconsistency
with respect to when he spoke to his Operations Managers, his suggestion in
cross-examination being
that he had not yet done so, as of 8 May 2007,
where there was other evidence that he had done so earlier, perhaps a
considerable
time earlier, and at least, or more likely, in the last week of
in cross-examination with respect to the email to his P.A., Mr Mikits said
“At that point in time one of the - I was looking
at a possibility of making Nikki Fraser’s role redundant. I wanted
P.A. to prepare the letter for me. I wanted her to also find out for me at that
point in time what payout figures would be involved.
I hadn’t made a
final decision about whether or not that’s the solution that I
wasn’t going to go to, but it was
definitely one possibility...I made that
decision more than a month later than that...It was a period of about six weeks,
testimony again conflicts with Mr Mikits’ decision, recorded in the
email of 30 April 2007 to Ms James, that he had
”, in his mind, the matter of Ms Fraser’s
redundancy.
evidence with respect to when Mr Mikits finally decided to make the State
Marketing Manager’s position redundant is not
very satisfactory. Parts of
that evidence, it seems to me, smack of self-justification and defensiveness.
However, Mr Mikits was
not cross-examined as to whether his evidence on
this point was untruthful and, in the end, I consider that, while his evidence
not particularly impressive, about the precise sequence of events, he did in
fact conclude that the manager’s position should
be made redundant, for
good operational reasons, although I cannot and do not determine when he reached
that conclusion.
light as to Mr Mikits’ decision-making process, with respect to the
Complainant's redundancy, may be shed by evidence
which he gave in
re-examination, as follows —
“I was aware of - and I
was somewhat involved in, the organisational review and so during that fact
finding process I was consulted
with quite heavily. Through that process, I got
to get a reasonably clear view of where the organisation wanted the marketing
to go. So, quite early in the piece, I was getting quite a clear
picture that the State management of marketing was going to change
and that the
review was going to take us to a place where there would be quite national
office-centric management of marketing, I
suppose, from a consistency
perspective and the focus would be on frontline support of the services...It
would have been, certainly,
from the beginning of 2007 and probably a little bit
prior to that as well, when the review started getting underway, because, from
time to time I would be brought into different workshops and discussions about
structures. What that meant is that from a timing
perspective I really
wasn’t making a decision on the fly. I had some time to give some
consideration to how the organisation
wanted the marketing function to look but,
as well as that, I was charged with the ultimate decision about how I would make
the marketing
function work in Queensland and I took some considerable time to
make a final decision of making Nikki’s role redundant.”
his statement, Mr Mikits said —
“20. My overall
conclusion was that the marketing function would be best undertaken as
level management of the function would be with me in my role as State
Operations Managers would take over the strategic side of the marketing role
determining the approach and content of marketing
activities to be
undertaken;
Coordinator position would be retained to support and implement the decisions
made by the Operations Managers; and
State Marketing Manager position would be redundant.
presented the proposed structure to the Operations Managers at our Operations
Managers’ meeting towards the end of April 2007
and received unanimous
agreement that we only needed a Coordinator.
did not prepare a formal business case. I proposed my plan by telephone to my
supervisor, Jo Wyatt (Acting National Operations
Manager), who approved my
plan, and I then sought advice from Kathleen James (Human Resources) regarding
implementation of the new
structure. As the State Manager, I felt that I had
conducted sufficient consultation to come to a decision and did not need to
a business case as per policy and procedures.”
oral evidence, and with respect to his final decision on the State Marketing
Manager’s position, Mr Mikits said —
marketing requirements in Queensland left me with the conclusion that I needed a
marketing coordinator. That frontline
service was what I needed.”
He also said —
“My decision was based around the organisational restructure but was
national office than
marketing and driving the marketing support within the States down to a regional
level. So that was the broad...thinking...The
reasons why I did (make the
organisational change and the redundancy) is that, one, I needed to align my
business with the national
structure and, two, my review of marketing left me at
a point where I really couldn’t justify having a manager reporting to
who only has just one direct report...It didn’t seem right to me to retain
a manager role with just one report when I could
assume those responsibilities
and delegate some of them to the Operations Managers.
Hall gave what seems to me to have been significant evidence in relation to the
consideration of the marketing function in Mission
Australia during the
organisational review process. He said that there were discussions throughout
the process around marketing
functions within the organisation, and that these
discussions would have included discussions about the State Marketing
roles or, more importantly, the function needed within the
organisation in relation to marketing. He said —
“We would have been discussing the functional needs for the organisation
in terms of marketing outcomes and we would have defined
what those functional
needs were and that would have been done in the absence of discussing a specific
role. In fact, this is probably
a relevant point, when we looked at the
structure of the organisation, I made it very clear at the outset of the process
we were looking at were functional needs for the organisation and what
we weren’t looking at were specific individual roles
organisation and that went from senior executive down to the most junior members
of staff...We focussed on what was needed
to deliver the outcomes for the
organisation and what functional needs we had and how we should deliver that
function...Particularly
in relation to marketing, given I have a strong
marketing background, I certainly had clear views on how we should deliver
functions within the organisation. Certainly by the end of June
(2007) we had come to the conclusion that we were changing the
function within the employment services team and how that function was going to
be delivered and particularly move it towards
the more national structure for
delivery of services and, yes, I would have signed off on that. Would I have
personally signed off
on the redundancy (of the complainant)? – No.”
Hall said that Mr Mikits would have been involved in making decisions about
whether he would have a marketing manager, and he confirmed
that, ultimately,
all the marketing managers across the country for Mission Australia, that were
in place at the relevant time, are
no longer in those roles.
as to the marketing function in the Mission Australia organisation, Mr Hall
testified that, as part of the review, it was
decided that marketing
wasn’t working as it was. He said —
wanted to do was to, one, take employment marketing out of a separate
organisation like a marketing group and provide
a senior marketing person within
employment services to lead the strategy and direction for marketing.
Therefore, within the States,
what was needed was really - was really, I guess,
support people who could deliver and implement the strategy which was developed
centrally and the reason we were doing that is to get consistency...Under the
old structure, what we found is we had a range of different
approaches to
marketing...in the organisation... What we wanted to do was centralise, have
one manager in charge of marketing and
define exactly what was going to happen
right across the country, and then locally within the State there was two things
have expected to happen. One there would have been coordinators to
assist the State operations manager to actually just implement
the national
strategy and provide (support?). The second thing that’s quite clear that
we needed to do was actually allow
more freedom to site managers to actually
implement local marketing themselves within their particular communities,
because the nature
of our work is very localised and so we wanted to get more
freedom, and the way of doing that was to have very good centralised
marketing...which
they could use [indistinct] local and which would be done at a
service level...so the goal was to have a centralised national
function...”
whether there was any role for State marketing managers in the new framework,
Mr Hall said —
“No, because the - that role
essentially was - it was too complicated for what [indistinct] and, in fact,
what we were doing
was replicating a skill base in each State that we could have
on a national level, and we wanted to have a national...strategy and
really...for want of a better word local market coordinators or officers...As I
said earlier, across the country also [indistinct]
marketing manager role was
actually removed.”
whether, if Mr Mikits had not decided to terminate or make redundant
Ms Fraser’s marketing manager position, he believed
decision would have ended up being made anyway, Mr Hall said
“I don’t think he would have had any choice
but to do that, because what would have happened when we were looking at the
final structure to the organisation, we would have said that that role
wasn’t needed. So, I don’t think he would have
had choice...but
make that role redundant.
of some significance, Mr Hall said that Mr Rumble’s position as
marketing manager in New South Wales was made redundant
and that Mr Rumble
was appointed to another and different large account-focussed function which, in
due course, was thought not to
have worked and was abolished. This is relevant,
because of Ms Fraser’s complaint that, of all the State marketing
she was the only one working part-time, and she was the only one made
redundant. In fact, it is clear, on all of the evidence, that
State marketing manager positions were made redundant. Indeed, Mr Hall
testified that during the last year, prior to the
probably seen four or five hundred people made redundant from the organisation
because that’s an ongoing process
whether he supported Mr Mikits’ decision in the case of
Ms Fraser’s redundancy, Mr Hall said
“Well, clearly, because we no longer needed those
invited Ms Fraser and Ms Worner to a meeting on
Monday, 2 July
2007 at 11:15 a.m. On that day, at 9:17 a.m., Mr Mikits asked
his P.A. to print out for him the redundancy letter,
addressed to
Ms Fraser. He signed and took that letter with him to the meeting.
meeting was held at Nerang. When he arrived, Mr Mikits invited Ms Fraser
to meet with him at a coffee shop near the Mission
Australia office. They met
at an inside table. There were two Mission Australia Nerang Site Managers
sitting outside. Ms Fraser
said that when they sat down Mr Mikits
I’ll get straight to the point
” and then told
her that she was being made redundant. Ms Fraser began to cry. She says
that she asked if there was any other
work she could do as per the Mission
Australia Policy to try to find a redeployment option and that Mr Mikits said
there was none.
her filed statement, the Complainant said—
asked what would be happening to Christine, my marketing coordinator, and was
told she would be the Queensland marketing
then told him that this was discrimination and that if I hadn’t had a baby
I would still be full-time and we wouldn’t
be having this conversation.
replied — “Christine was already in the role before you had the
replied — “Christine was only put in the role because I was having a
baby and is only a 12 month contract”.
expression then changed and made me realise that he didn’t know this and
had not really investigated our roles.
explained to him that I was the only person in Queensland with any marketing
background and experience and there would be no-one
who could run the State. He
responded that Christine would do it as she had experience. I told him that she
did not and that I
did all the work and planning and I simply gave Christine all
her instructions on how to perform the tasks. He then responded that
know what his experience and history was. I asked him what it was and he told
me that he did not have to justify it to
tried to talk him around, but to no avail. He told me he had put down
3 weeks notice, but would change it to four, which I believe
admission of guilt.”
Fraser and Mr Mikits returned to the office. Mr Mikits handwrote on the
redundancy letter the change in dates and it was photocopied.
copy of the amended letter is appendix 7 to Ms Fraser’s statement
(exhibit 1). The letter reads, in part—
As you are aware, Mission Australia has recently undergone some
organisational structural changes. The impact of these changes has
resulted in
a review of Queensland Employment Services Marketing in Queensland.
In the previous structure, marketing consultants in Queensland reported to
you as the State Employment Services Marketing Manager.
I have reviewed the
requirement for marketing support in Employment Services Queensland, and have
resolved that my requirements
are for a full-time co-ordinator only, who will
report directly to me. This re-struct [sic] will result in the abolishment
of your role as Queensland Employment Services Marketing Manager.
Mission Australia is
committed to retaining staff wherever possible. To this effect I have
endeavoured to find you suitable alternative
employment within other areas of
Mission Australia. Unfortunately, no suitable redeployment option is currently
available to you.
Consequently, your services with Mission Australia will be made redundant
as at the close of business Friday 27 July
, in accordance
with the AWA Agreement and Mission Australia’s Human Resource Policies.
Your entitlements, where applicable,
including payment in lieu of notice, will
be calculated according to these policies, and you will receive your
entitlements and final
payment after your final date of
service...”
left that day and never returned.
of the Complainant’s case was that it was inappropriate for the redundancy
meeting to have been held in the café,
in a public place and in view of
other Mission Australia employees, this point adding colour to the overall case
that Ms Fraser was
treated inappropriately by Mr Mikits.
think that there is nothing in this point. Mr Mikits testified that he had
several meetings, of a confidential and private nature,
in the coffee shop, and
had conducted many meetings there. The Nerang office was a very small one, and,
in his view, it was not
a suitable place to conduct the redundancy meeting. He
was satisfied that the coffee shop was a sufficiently private place and that
one-to-one conversation could be had there without being overheard by anybody
this regard, Helen Eager, the Services Manager for Mission Australia at Nerang,
was outside the coffee shop at the time of the
redundancy meeting. She was
meeting with her Team Leader to review weekly statistics, sitting outside the
café. She saw
Mr Mikits and Ms Fraser enter the café
and sit down inside. She saw them having a conversation, but she took no
However she observed that Ms Fraser appeared to be upset as she
left the café. She said that the door was closed and she
could not hear
anything that was happening inside, and that she was focussed on the
conversation she was having with her Team Leader.
She said that she often held
meetings there.
accept that the Complainant suffered considerable embarrassment and emotional
distress as a result of having been made redundant.
This particularly affected
her at home and in her relationships with her partner and other family members.
I accept, as well, that
her immediate family has suffered substantial financial
pressures as a result of her losing her job. She complains, in particular,
her dismissal has caused her stress, humiliation, hurt, embarrassment and shame.
She believes, honestly, I accept, that her
dismissal was unwarranted and that
having children is a natural part of life and that mothers should not be
punished for trying to
juggle a family and a career.
accept, as well, that Ms Fraser has assiduously attempted, since her
dismissal, to obtain a part-time marketing position in the
Gold Coast area, with
no success. Her evidence in this regard was credible and unchallenged. The
conclusion is that
part-time marketing positions, at least in that
geographical area, are very rare indeed.
also accept that Ms Fraser took temporary employment for a while, in late
2007, as a night filler at a supermarket, to help her
family’s financial
respect to her job search activities, the Complainant said in her oral evidence
“I don’t feel that I should have to take a
reduction in salary because of what’s happened to me. I think that I
done my time. I have done my qualifications. I have done everything that I
needed to do and now is not the time to be going
backwards just because
I’ve had a baby.
is in the context that Ms Fraser has restricted her very extensive job
seeking activities to looking for a job as a part-time
marketing manager (which
jobs are rare) and has not expanded her search to include other types of jobs,
such as sales representatives’
jobs and coordinator jobs. In that regard,
in answer to the question “
So you’ve limited your job search to
an area of work that you admit is as scarce as hen’s teeth, so you
really made genuine efforts to mitigate your losses, have
” she said, “
Well, that’s the area of work that
I’m trained in. That’s what I know. I went to university.
I’ve got qualifications.
I’ve got a great job history and
experience in that area and that’s what I do.
her statement she says—
“116. It is my belief that if
I had not fallen pregnant and had a baby I would not have been dismissed as I
would still be working
full-time. As I’ve had a baby I can only work
part-time hours due to my parental status and family
responsibilities.
mentioned above, in oral evidence, Ms Fraser said, “
Mr Mikits has made a discriminatory decision because of the fact that I had
a baby and that’s why I was made redundant
in her statement, Ms Fraser said —
colleagues in other states who were full-time continued performing their roles.
The only difference between myself
and my colleagues in the other states was
that I was part-time and they were full-time.
I have found above, she was wrong about this, including with respect to
Mr Rumble’s position. Indeed, ultimately, the Complainant,
properly, accepted that the other State Marketing Manager positions were made
redundant. She then said —
“I feel, my personal
feeling if it had been fair they all would have been abolished in March once the
restructure occurred.
It didn’t. So when the restructure occurred after
all this money was spent on a restructure, my position as well as my
colleagues’
positions was retained in the restructure. A few months after
that, I get made redundant. All the rest of my colleagues continue
their job. The New South Wales Marketing Manager who was promoted and the
position was vacant, they even applied for that
role. If it was to be a fair
process, we all would have been made redundant at the same time irrespective of
our status, but we
weren’t, and I was the only one made redundant purely -
and I was the only part-time one.
as it may be relevant, Mr Hall testified that, knowing Mr Mikits to
the extent that he did, he did not believe that Mr Mikits,
or any of his
managers, would make a decision based on an employee’s parental status or
family obligations. He said —
“I mean, I actually am
shocked to hear this to be honest. I made it very clear to my staff, and
particularly my executives
and senior leaders in the organisation, that we
needed to respect people and value people in the organisation. In fact, as part
of the structural change, we changed the value of the organisation to talk about
respect for people and how we dealt with them, and
Michael, in terms of my view,
and I worked with him for just over two and a half years, was someone who not
only (was) an advocate
for making sure that we implemented those values, he was
someone who actually proactively went out to try and get those working within
the organisation.
I think that his evidence is relevant, because it touches on the question of
whether, as a matter of fact, Mr Mikits made his decision
redundancy of the State Marketing Manager’s position based on the
protected attribute, that is, because Ms Fraser
had had a child and could
only work part-time, as alleged by the Complainant, or, as contended for by the
respondents, the decision
was based upon the genuine organisational requirements
of the business.
also complains that no effort was made to find a suitable redeployment
opportunity for her as required by the relevant Mission
Australia policy. She
complains further, that at no stage was she asked if she would return to work
full-time. This seems to be
irrelevant, as in her written and oral evidence she
insisted on several occasions that she could and would only work part-time.
complains also that she was never asked if there was any other area of work that
she might be interested in trying and that, in
no consultation
was ever had with me relating to my dismissal which is also in breach of company
agreed that she did not know what efforts Mr Mikits had made to find her a
suitable redeployment opportunity, but she said
“Based on the paper trails that we have that
I’ve since been privy to, I think that there was no genuine effort, if any
effort at all proven before I was made redundant, to find me a suitable
redeployment opportunity.”
“My redeployment, I feel, I should have been
given an opportunity to explore. It could have included those (a reference to
roles, sales roles and other administrative type roles) as well as
other areas in the business as well if I was offered some
also testified that she had seen a job on the Mission Australia intranet which
might have been suitable for her, but which
was not offered to her. Having
considered the evidence, I do not think that this job was available at the time
of her redundancy
and, in any event, it was not a job for which she was
qualified - it was a sales representative job, and on the evidence,
was not suited or qualified for such a position.
I have said, it is the fact that Mr Mikits did not ask the Complainant
whether she would return to work full-time. As to this,
cross-examination, the Complainant said —
“...I think
it’s highly relevant because he never had a conversation with me,
he’s basing his assumptions on the
fact that I had a baby and I only
wanted to work part-time. I may have wanted to come back full-time, I may have
wanted to do a
lot of things. If he had have asked me and spoken to me, he
would have found out for sure”.
She was then asked, “
But you didn’t want to come back
full-time did you?
”, and she answered, “
Did I? No, I
was cross-examined about whether he made a genuine effort to identify
redeployment opportunities for Ms Fraser. He said
that he did explore
redeployment options and that his review revealed that there were none to be
had. He said —
“My review of the vacancies that were
available revealed to me that there was nothing that was really suitable for
there was something suitable, I would have had that discussion with
her, but there really was nothing suitable for Nikki.
he said that he told the Complainant at the meeting at the café that he
had explored redeployment opportunities for
her, and he said
“I was satisfied I had done a fairly thorough
review of the vacancies that were available at that point in time and that there
was nothing suitable.
also testified that he was quite satisfied that the Complainant’s
preference was to work on the Gold Coast, although he searched
for possible
other positions, because in fact there weren’t vacancies suitable for her,
either on the Gold Coast or elsewhere.
He said that there were no marketing
management positions available and that he knew that Ms Fraser’s
strengths lay in the
management component of her role. He said, “
feel that Nikki would have struggled to go in a job network site and do a
frontline role
If there was a full-time position that
was suitable for Nikki at that point in time, I would have had a discussion with
it, but there were no suitable positions
agreed that he searched on the basis that the Complainant was only available to
work part-time but, as I have said, that
was true. However, he said
“The fact that she was part-time is irrelevant.
There was no position. There was no position for her to go to, either part-time
or full-time. If there was I would have had that discussion with her. If there
was a suitable position, whether it be part-time
or full-time, I would have had
that discussion with her...If there were options to redeploy Nikki, I would have
done so, but there
were no options.
the meeting in the café, Mr Mikits did discuss with Ms Fraser
the possibility of a reverse marketing role for her on a contract
basis. I am
satisfied that he followed up on this suggestion and that is confirmed by the
evidence of Helen
. She said that
she discussed this possibility with Mr Mikits, even though she thought
that, as the Complainant had a marketing background,
whilst she could possibly
perform that sort of role, there were some concerns about her lack of
understanding of the business. In
any event, Ms Eager said that nothing
came of this because there were no such reverse marketing opportunities
available at the time.
the event, while it might have been preferable for Mr Mikits to have had a
discussion with Ms Fraser about possible redeployment
opportunities before
the termination meeting, I find that Mr Mikits properly and thoroughly
investigated whether there were suitable
redeployment opportunities for
Ms Fraser within Mission Australia, and that his search revealed that there
were none. I conclude
that the Complainant was not discriminated against in
this regard.
an important part of her case, Ms Fraser says that approximately two months
after she was dismissed, Christine Worner and Michael
Mikits employed a
full-time marketing assistant to assist Ms Worner, and that
Ms Worner’s contract was made into a permanent
is part of the Complainant’s case that the duties which she performed
prior to her maternity leave effectively were subsumed
into the jobs of
Christine Worner and the full-time marketing assistant, Nelpha Davis. The
Complainant’s case on this point
is that the former employment duties of
herself and Christine Worner de facto were taken up by the duties of Christine
Nelpha Davis so that, in truth, her position was not made redundant,
leading to the conclusion that she (the Complainant) was dismissed
her parental status.
was a great deal of evidence and cross-examination on this topic, which
involved, among other things, a detailed examination
of the position
descriptions of Ms Worner as the marketing coordinator, of the Complainant
as the marketing manager, and of Ms Davis
as the administration trainee.
It is not appropriate, nor is it necessary, to record in detail here all of that
evidence. It is
sufficient for me to express my conclusion that the marketing
manager’s position truly was made redundant, and that it is not
de facto recreated or later performed by Ms Worner and Ms Davis,
although (not surprisingly, because Ms Worner is a
coordinator and Ms Davis assists her in her duties) there are similarities
and overlaps between some of the former functions of the
Complainant and some of
the present functions of Ms Worner.
should also record that I find that, to the extent necessary, and as a result of
the local and nationwide reorganisation exercise,
Mr Mikits has assumed and
is discharging some relevant marketing
functions which
previously were performed by the Complainant.
do not doubt that the Complainant genuinely believed, on the basis of the
limited information which she had, that, between them,
Christine Worner and
Nelpha Davis performed the duties which previously had been performed by the
Complainant and Christine Worner,
with the resultant honestly held belief that
she had been made redundant because she had had a baby, had parental duties, and
only work part-time. It is not in any way to the Complainant’s
discredit that she reached this conclusion. However, on all
of the evidence, I
find that she is mistaken on this point.
her oral evidence, the Complainant —
(a) admitted
that she has no direct knowledge of the duties of Ms Davis;
(b) said that,
having looked at disclosed documents, they show
“...us that to me it makes me believe
that Nelpha Davis does, in fact, work for the marketing department, was employed
in the marketing department, was performing marketing duties, that
previously - would have been performed by the marketing coordinator.
believe that, yes.”
(c) said in cross-examination —
conversations that I’ve had with Christine Worner after my dismissal I
know that she has my company vehicle,
I know that she has my phone, I know that
she has a lot of benefits that I used to have in my role that she didn’t
have as the marketing coordinator. So, I mean, I’m just
looking at a lot of benefits and things, but all of those things she
is based upon what she’s told me.”
(d) agreed that there was a big difference between a trainee and a marketing
coordinator, that it was consistent with the responsibility
of a manager to pick
the best person for available jobs, and that she would have no issue with
Mr Mikits making a decision on who
should fill the coordinators positioned,
based on who would do the best job.
first to Ms Worner’s position, the evidence is that when her
12 month fixed term contract ran out in August 2007, she
continued working,
without a contract, for about two months. Then the coordinator's role was
advertised and she applied for it,
successfully, in about October 2007. The
relevant letter of offer is Exhibit 2 and Exhibit 7 is the position
description for that
confirmed that the job for which Ms Worner applied was a change of status,
from the fixed term position to a permanent position,
and that, as well, the
relevant reporting lines had changed, in the sense that Ms Worner, in the
new position, reported to Mr Mikits,
whereas previously she had reported to
evidence is that Ms Worner now has and uses the mobile phone and computer,
which formerly were used by Ms Fraser. Ms Worner also
uses the car
which was part of Ms Fraser’s package, but the arrangements are
different. Ms Fraser had the car for private
use; Ms Worner does not,
and uses it on a pool arrangement.
are numerous differences between what Ms Worner’s duties presently
are and what Ms Fraser’s duties formerly were.
An organisational
point of difference, of some significance, it seems to me, is that the
Complainant used to have management responsibility
for the State marketing
budget, and had authorisation for spending in accordance with that budget. In
the new system, the marketing
budget was integrated into the State Employment
Services budget, with the consequence that the State Employment Manager has
authorisation
for expenditure. Ms Worner has no such authority.
does not believe that she took over the State Marketing Manager role once
Ms Fraser left the organisation. She agreed that
she did take over some of
Ms Fraser’s former functions, but said, “
However, the
manager side of things, no
said that the coordinator’s position and the manager’s position were
very different roles, the latter being
one doesn’t necessarily mean a capacity to do the other. He
saw them as two very different roles. As well, his view was that
Complainant’s strengths lay in her abilities as a manager, and that the
coordinator’s role was not about management
at all, but required
coordination skills, which Ms Worner has to a significantly greater extent
than does Ms Fraser.
said that after the termination of Ms Fraser, Christine Worner became a
direct report to him. He scheduled monthly reviews
to meet with her, to talk
designed a template for the
marketing plan for Queensland. He had never done
this before. Ms Worner’s brief was then to take that plan out to the
Managers and to work with them to develop the plan. Mr Mikits
explained that under the new regime he assumed responsibility for
some of the
marketing functions which previously had been carried out by the State Marketing
Manager, and the way in which he discharged
those functions was to have monthly
meetings with his coordinator, Ms Worner, and his other direct reports. He
explained that the
purpose of developing the marketing plan was for
Ms Worner and himself to have a document to work from in their formal
monthly meeting,
so that they could track progress against the plan for each of
the frontline sites.
to Ms Davis’s job, it is clear that it is a very different job from
that which was performed by Ms Fraser, and, indeed,
the job which is now
performed by Ms Worner.
gave evidence about how Ms Davis’s position came to be created. Her
position description is Exhibit 8. Mr Mikits
said that when he was
based in Brisbane, at Stones Corner, he had an administration trainee who
reported to him and who provided
additional support to him and his team at that
location. The administration trainee at Stones Corner devoted roughly 50% of
time to assisting Mr Mikits. The other 50% was dedicated to reception
duties, and one day per week to community services. When
Mr Mikits decided
to move his office to the Gold Coast, it seemed appropriate that he should
recruit an administration trainee there
under similar terms to that which had
prevailed in Brisbane. He also considered that such an employee would provide
some support
to the marketing team (in the building next door), as well as
supporting him. Because of government subsidy, the net cost to the
organisation
of an administration trainee was very low.
also said that as well as providing some “
very entry level
trainee-based support
”, the new administration trainee would be
located in the same office as Christine Worner because, after
Ms Fraser’s departure,
Ms Worner was there by herself.
explained that the total full-time equivalent package of Ms Fraser’s
marketing manager position, would be around $80,000
per annum, whereas the
trainee would probably be a net cost to the organisation of about $15,000 per
Mr Mikits had made the decision to create the trainee position,
Ms Worner sent an email dated 16 August 2007 to managers, advertising
the position. The email is Exhibit 3. Ms Davis successfully applied
for the position and took up that employment on 15 October
reported to Mr Mikits; mainly assisted Christine Worner; and performed what
were described as low level support functions,
as compared with
Ms Worner’s highly independent duties. Ms Worner did not do
performance reviews of Ms Davis, and Mr Mikits
did any counselling of
Ms Davis that was required.
gave evidence which was not challenged seriously. It included evidence about
her duties. In this regard, I have considered
was some suggestion, as part of the Complainant’s case, on this point,
that Ms Davis reported to Ms Worner. This was
part of an argument
that, effectively, Ms Worner took over from Ms Fraser and
Ms Davis took over from Ms Worner. That argument related,
in part, to
an organisational chart for Employment Services Queensland dated January 2008,
which showed Ms Davis reporting to Ms
Worner. Mr Mikits
explained, and I accept, that, in that regard, the chart was in error, being
based on something developed several
years ago when Ms Fraser was still
employed by Mission Australia. He explained that the subsequent chart was
prepared by his personal
assistant, using the earlier document, and the former
reporting line was carried over to the new document in error. I find that
is nothing to support the Complainant’s case in this regard.
9 is a letter from TAFE Queensland to Ms Worner, dated 16 January
2008, attaching a training plan for Ms Davis. It has assisted
reaching the conclusions, which I have expressed, about the nature of
Ms Davis’s position and the nature of her duties.
completed her traineeship and has become an administrative assistant with
Mission Australia. She has now been deployed
to a different role in the
organisation.
the result, I find that the Complainant is factually wrong in her honestly held
belief, based on limited information, that after
she was made redundant, her
former duties, and those of Ms Worner, were taken up by Ms Worner and
CONCLUSIONS
A. Indirect Discrimination
claim for indirect discrimination is based upon a particular construction of
section 11 of the Act. That section provides
11 Meaning of indirect
discrimination
(1) Indirect discrimination on the basis of an attribute happens if a
person imposes, or proposes to impose, a term—
(a) with which a person with an attribute does not or is not able to
comply; and
(b) with which a higher proportion of people without the attribute comply
or are able to comply; and
(c) that is not reasonable.
(2) Whether a term is reasonable depends on all the relevant
circumstances of the case, including, for example—
(a) the consequences of failure to comply with the term; and
(b) the cost of alternative terms; and
(c) the financial circumstances of the person who imposes, or proposes to
impose, the term.
(3) It is not necessary that the person imposing, or proposing to impose,
the term is aware of the indirect discrimination.
(4) In this section—
includes condition, requirement or practice, whether or
not written.
An employer decides to employ people who are over 190cm tall, although
height is not pertinent to effective performance of the work.
This disadvantages
women and people of Asian origin, as there are more men of non-Asian origin who
can comply. The discrimination
is unlawful because the height requirement is
unreasonable, there being no genuine occupational reason to justify it.
An employer requires employees to wear a uniform, including a cap, for
appearance reasons, not for hygiene or safety reasons. The
requirement is not
directly discriminatory, but it has a discriminatory effect against people who
are required by religious or cultural
beliefs to wear particular
submission for the Complainant is that a term was imposed, namely
“full-time marketing coordinator only” and, what
is more, that that
term was imposed on the Complainant. It was then submitted that Ms Fraser
was a person with a relevant attribute,
namely parental status and family
responsibilities. It was submitted that because of those attributes, she was
only able to work
part-time, was in the class of mothers with responsibilities
to care for children, not able to work full-time, and could not comply
for the purposes of subsections (a) and (b), it was submitted that it was
necessary to identify a base group for the purpose
of comparison and that, in
this case, the relevant base group was a single person, namely Christine Worner,
as she is the only other person within the marketing department to
whom the term was applied
”. The argument continued that, because
Christine Worner did not have the relevant attributes and could work full-time,
the proportion of persons who don’t have the attributes and are
able to comply is 100%
this line of reasoning, it was submitted that the other comparator was a single
person, namely the Complainant, who could
not comply with the term, so that the
relevant comparative in number was 0%.
it was submitted, with respect to section 11(1)(c), that the imposition of
the term was unreasonable because, in fact, subsequently
a second person, namely
Nelpha Davis, was recruited to the department to do “
pretty much the
same - to contribute in the same way as the Complainant might have
was submitted that the activity “
full-time coordinator only
could have been performed in a job share scenario with the Complainant staying
on in her part-time capacity, and Ms Worner
taking up a part-time
coordinator role.
consider that this analysis is flawed, given the detailed findings of fact made
above, and, further, that the construction of section
11 of the Act,
implicit in it, is incorrect.
I accept the respondents’ submission that what is sought to be
characterised as a term in fact is not a term within the
meaning of the Act, as
is exemplified by the examples given in the Act. I accept the submission that
” properly may be characterised as a term,
marketing coordinator
”, which is a position and not a term,
is not a term. Further, the use sought to be made of the word
”, namely, that Mr Mikits wanted only a full-time
marketing coordinator, and nothing else, properly should be characterised
part of a term is wrong. His decision was an operational one with respect to
what position or positions were appropriate with
respect to marketing in
Queensland, given the national and local analyses of the needs in that area.
it seems to me that the case on indirect discrimination fails at its first
fatal to that case is the fact that what was submitted to be a term was not
upon the Complainant
, as was submitted. If it was a term at all,
it was imposed upon or in respect of a position, but that was the
coordinator’s
position and not the marketing manager’s
position. The marketing manager’s position had disappeared. To me, there
to be confusion of thinking here, involving the proposition that, because
the marketing manager’s position had been redundant,
Ms Fraser ought
to have been offered or considered for the marketing coordinator’s
position, which, because of her parental
status, she could not perform, being
able to work only part-time and that position being decreed to be a full-time
position. I reject
that submission.
fatal to this case was the analysis leading to a conclusion that the relevant
comparison was between Ms Worner as 100% and
Ms Fraser as 0%. The
respondents characterised that part of the analysis as
”. It is sufficient to dispose of the point to say
that I consider it to be wrong, in logic and in principle.
I agree with the submissions of the respondents, on this point, that there was
no imposition of the term on the marketing
manager’s position that could
not be complied with, because that position was not made full-time (which might
have raised a
case), but in fact, was made part-time, for the period commencing
when Ms Fraser returned to work until the time the redundancy decision
found above, I also accept the respondents’ submissions that there was a
large body of unchallenged evidence that, if it
should be a relevant
consideration, Ms Fraser was absolutely unsuited to a marketing
coordinator's position, part-time or full-time.
if there was a “
”, as contended for, I think that it was
reasonable, in the sense that, for good operational reasons, Mr Mikits
decided that
he needed only a marketing consultant and did not need a marketing
manager. This is another nail in the coffin of the Complainant’s
with respect to indirect discrimination.
on this point, I regard the submissions about the possibility of some job share
agreement between Ms Worner and Ms Fraser
as misplaced. Not only are
those submissions hypothetical, but they cannot stand with the findings of fact
made above with respect
to the respective positions of Ms Fraser,
Ms Worner and Ms Davis.
B. Direct Discrimination
closing, as in opening, the direct discrimination case was that the Complainant
was treated relevantly less favourably in two ways:
(a) firstly, in
not being offered redeployment opportunities; and
(b) secondly,
in respect of the termination itself.
was placed upon the admitted fact that redeployment opportunities were not
discussed with the Complainant prior to the termination,
and, in a subsidiary
way, on the fact that Mr Mikits did not follow completely the advice
received from Ms James. It was submitted
that the evidence showed that
Mr Mikits made no genuine effort to search for suitable redeployment
opportunities, and that, in that
respect, the Complainant was treated less
favourably and in an unlawful manner.
argument seems to have been that the absence of consultation was not in itself
proof of discrimination, but was an element of
the greater definition of direct
discrimination.
with this submission was that Mr Mikits presumed that Ms Fraser was
unable to work full-time, because she had a young family,
and he did not test
this presumption with her.
terms of less favourable treatment, reference was made to Ms Worner who,
not having the relevant attributes, was not terminated,
and retained the role as
State Marketing Coordinator
was submitted that the decision to select Ms Fraser for redundancy was
based on her inability to work full-time, and that inability
consequence of her needing to care for a dependant child. It was submitted that
if she did not have her family responsibilities,
she would have been able to
closing submissions, Mr Langford said —
position existed or remained. We’ve got two people in the department.
Christine ultimately ended up with that
role. She told us she didn’t have
the attributes and that she was able to work full-time. Ms Fraser
didn’t end up with
the role. She had the attributes and as a direct
result of those attributes, which I’ve spoken about previously, she was
selected for that role because she couldn’t perform it, and the
respondent was mindful of this and has made mention that he’s
an alternative submission, it was suggested that Ms Fraser was not, but
should have been, invited to apply for the remaining permanent
the findings of fact which I have made above, all of these submissions must
fail. I found that Mr Mikits made a genuine effort
to find redeployment
opportunities. I found that there were no such opportunities, and that this was
why he did not discuss them.
There is nothing in the suggestion that
Ms Fraser might have been invited to apply for the remaining permanent
marketing position
in Queensland, or that there should have been, or might have
been, some consideration of some sort of job share arrangement between
Ms Fraser and Ms Worner.
short, and based upon the clear fact findings set out at length above, the
abolition of Ms Fraser’s position, and her consequent
redundancy, had nothing whatsoever to do with her family or parental status, or
with the protected attributes.
conclusion drawn by Mr Mikits, as to the organisational requirements of
Queensland State Employment Services, endorsed and supported
by his superiors
and the Chief Executive Officer, Mr Hall, were wholly and solely based on
the economic and organisational needs
of Mission Australia.
find that there was no direct discrimination.
C. Remedies
of these findings, it is not necessary for me to make detailed findings with
respect to the remedies sought by the Complainant.
However, I should make some
brief findings about remedy in the event that I shall be proven wrong about the
primary issues of liability.
to general damages, I consider that, had the case of discrimination (direct or
indirect) been made out, and given the unchallenged
evidence about the very
considerable distress and detrimental effect on Ms Fraser’s family
life, the Complainant would have
been entitled to an award of general damages of
do not consider that, had the discrimination claims been successful, either
Mission Australia or Mr Mikits should have been ordered
to apologise, and
nor should there have been any order made against Mission Australia with respect
to its policies and procedures.
to economic loss, I consider that the Complainant has failed to mitigate her
loss. I accept that she has made a very considerable
effort to find further
employment, and has taken part-time work well below her training and experience,
to assist her family’s
financial circumstances. However, she has
persisted, I think unreasonably, in the face of what must have been the obvious
part-time marketing manager’s jobs on the Gold Coast are very
scarce, in not broadening her search, either in geographical
area or in job
subject matter. She is well-educated, with tertiary qualifications and
significant experience, and has been praised
in the evidence for some of her
skills. I consider that any award for damages for economic loss should be
reduced because of her
failure to mitigate, but only to some extent.
the best I can, had I found unlawful discrimination I would have awarded the
Complainant $50,000 damages for economic loss.
all of the circumstances of this case, I do not consider that there should be
any order as to costs.
Orders of the Tribunal will be that —
1. the complaint is
2. there will be no order as to costs.
Robert Wensley
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal Queensland
30 November 2009
Exhibit 11, paragraph 6.
Exhibit 11, paragraph 15.
Although it may be noted that, at this time, Ms Fraser was not a direct
report to Mr Mikits.
This email is part of Appendix 9 to Exhibit 1.
These email exchanges are in Appendix 10 of Exhibit 1.
Exhibit 17, paragraph 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (586 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter