URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McKinnon, Ian v McArthur, Gary [2003] QBT 15 (3 April 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 015
McKinnon v McArthur[2002] QBT B384-02
MCKINNON Ian
MCARTHUR Gary
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
3 April 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
31 March 2003
DECISION OF:
Ms J. McVeigh
CATCHWORDS:
BUILDING CONTRACTS - Whether the tribunal has jurisdiction - Whether there
is a “dispute”
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000, section
REPRESENTATION:
RESPONDENT:
SOLICITORS:
McColm Matsinger
RESPONDENT:
Lambert & Ho
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Introduction
These reasons address whether or not the
tribunal has jurisdiction to resolve the application.
This case highlights the dangers in
proceeding in the absence of legal advice, although by the time I heard the
application both parties
had engaged a lawyer. I found the lawyers involvement
of great assistance. I am grateful for the thoroughness with which they
the application.
In December 1999 the applicant entered
into a contract with the respondent for the construction of a
A dispute arose between the parties. One
of the many issues in the dispute was whether or not the work had reached
practical completion.
The applicant asserted, and continues to assert, that the
work was not practically complete in accordance with the contract.
On 9 August 2000 the applicant filed
proceedings in the tribunal (B059-00) in which, inter alia, he sought an order
that the tribunal
“establish the true date of practical completion for
the contract”
. In his defence the respondent sought
for Practical Completion”
, from which one infers he believed the work
to have reached practical completion.
On 13 August 2000 the parties entered into
a settlement agreement, the terms of which are to be found in full in my reasons
on 5 July 2001 in B059-00. The parties were not represented at that
stage. They did not reach agreement about the date of practical
completion.
On 7 November 2000 the terms of the
settlement agreement were converted to an order of the tribunal pursuant to the
terms of the settlement
agreement. An expert was appointed pursuant to section
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
(“the Act”),
inter alia to investigate and report on the state of completion or otherwise of
the work to be performed
pursuant to the building agreement.
On 2 July 2001 an application was made in
B059-00 by the legal representatives for the applicant pursuant to sections
42(5) and/or
89(1) of the Act. The application sought alternate orders
including a direction in respect of practical completion and consequential
orders about the defects liability period.
The reasons delivered on 5 July 2001 in
B059-00 canvassed the events leading to the making of the application. While I
was satisfied
that there were problems with the interpretation or implementation
of the order made pursuant to section 125 order and indicated
that I would have
varied the order to clarify what needed to be done to assess whether or not the
work was complete, because of the
operation of section 42(6) of the Act and
mindful that the respondent had participated in the process to his detriment I
to vary or revoke the orders made on 7 November 2000.
Mindful of the objects of the Act and
acknowledging the alternate order sought in respect of practical completion, I
“None of the items on the list attached to
the statement of claim have the appearance of being related to work that must be
addressed before the house could be occupied. The fact that the items are
contained in a defects list is a further indication that
the parties believed
the work to be at practical completion by July 2000. Unfortunately the parties
did not provide the tribunal
with a copy of the contract with the consequence
that it is impossible for me to definitively identify the date of practical
thereunder. However, given the failure of the expert investigation
process I am not prepared to remit the issue of completion to
the expert. To
resolve this matter as cost efficiently as possible, I will order that the
applicant be given fourteen (14) days
after receipt of the order to provide a
final defects list to the respondent. The respondent should then act in
accordance with
his obligations under the contract and of the Queensland
Building Services Authority Act 1991 (“the QBSA Act”). Should
future dispute arise the parties should deal with it pursuant to the contract
and if necessary under the QBSA Act, without reference
to this dispute. The
rights compromised previously do not, and could not, include any claims not
included in the claim or defence.”
The applicant did not appeal against that
On 10 December 2001 the applicant filed
an application to review a decision of the Queensland Building Services
Authority (“the
authority”) (Q297-01). He indicated that he did not
agree with the decision of the authority not to issue directions to rectify
items which it categorised as category 2 items on the basis of its determination
that practical completion had taken place more
than six months prior to
notification of the defects. By letter dated 1 February 2002 the applicant
wrote to the registry discontinuing
his review application. It appears the
application had never been served.
On 8 April 2002 the applicant filed an
application to review a decision of the authority (Q073-02). The decision
sought to be reviewed
had been conveyed to the applicant in a letter dated 7
March 2002 in which the authority advised the
the date of practical completion is
still as stated in the decision of the Queensland Building Tribunal (July 2000).
The date of practical
completion is a contractual issue and if you are not
satisfied with the Queensland Building Tribunal’s decision an appeal of
this decision may be considered....”
The authority was clearly wrong in that
the decision of 5 July 2001 did not state the date of practical completion.
Indeed, it clearly
stated that it was impossible on the material then before the
tribunal for a decision to be made about the date of practical completion.
On 10 July 2002 the applicant withdrew
proceedings Q073-02.
On 14 October 2002 the applicant filed
the proceedings currently before me. He sought a determination as to the date
of practical
completion.
On 23 January 2003 I ruled that the
tribunal had jurisdiction to make a declaration, assuming the necessary findings
of fact could
be made to support the making of the declaration, because the
making of the declaration is a procedural rather then a jurisdictional
Sherring Constructions Pty Ltd v UPD Pty Ltd
The matter was further adjourned to
enable the parties to make submissions as to whether the facts of the case
justified the granting
of the declaration
Submissions - Applicant
Mr Wallace of counsel provided thorough
written submissions. He supplemented them with helpful oral submissions.
He submitted that the tribunal was not
functus officio in relation to the issue of practical completion. He referred
Semunigus v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2000] FCA 240
in which it was said that a decision was made when the conclusion on
the matter as a mental process had been the subject of an overt
act of such
character as to give finality to that conclusion. It was said that this would
occur by the tribunal putting its conclusion
beyond recall such as by publically
announcing its decision or communicating it to the parties. Up until this had
occurred it was
submitted that it would be possible for the tribunal to receive
and take into account further material from the parties (X
v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
(2002) 67 ALD 355
at 361). He
submitted that the AAT has followed similar reasoning in holding that it is not
functus officio until it has dealt with
all the issues raised by an application
Re Smedley v Director General of Social Security
(1983) 5 ALD 387.
He submitted that the issue of practical
completion was not included in the ruling of 5 July 2001, drawing attention to
my observation
that the parties had not provided me with a copy of the contract
with the consequence that it was impossible for me to definitively
identify the
date of practical completion. He submitted I did not make a finding one way or
the other and thus I had not discharged
or performed my duty and was not functus
officio at least in relation to the issue of practical
completion.
He submitted that the applicant was not
estopped from revisiting the issue of when practical completion had occurred
because it had
not been resolved. He submitted that for the estoppel to arise
the decision of 5 July 2001 must have resolved all of the issues
applicant currently seeks to raise (R
e Walker and Secretary, Department of
Social Security (2)
(1995) 43 ALD 685).
He submitted that the order of 5 July
2001 itself suggested that I was of the opinion that the tribunal had
the date of practical completion by inference from the
statement that in the absence of a copy of the contract it was impossible
to identify the date of practical completion.
Some matters of fact were raised which
need not be addressed before the jurisdictional issue has been
Submissions - Respondent
The solicitors for the respondent
provided written submissions. Ms Ryan supplemented them orally.
It was submitted that there were four
matters to be considered in relation to the jurisdictional
whether the declaration sought amounts
only to an advisory opinion;
whether the proceedings disclose any
cause of action, and if not whether they ought be struck
whether the tribunal is functus officio;
whether, if the applicant were permitted
to amend his application, the resultant proceedings would amount to an abuse of
It was submitted that it appeared to be
the intention of the applicant to obtain a determination in respect of the date
of practical
completion for use in argument with the authority, to persuade it
to issue a direction to rectify on the basis that notice of category
was given within six months of practical completion. It was submitted that such
an issue could not come before the tribunal
in a domestic building dispute. It
was submitted that the current proceedings should be struck out on the basis
that no cause of
action is disclosed against the respondent, that there was no
dispute as defined by the Act.
Reference was made to the recent decision
of Wilson J in
Queensland Police Union of Employees v State of Queensland
[2002] QSC 231
in which Her Honour declined to make the declaration sought on
the basis that what was being sought was an advisory opinion, not
a declaratory
judgement. She relied on the High Court in
Bass v Permanent Trustee Company
in which the Court noted “
one crucial difference between an
advisory opinion and a declaratory judgement [being] the fact that an advisory
opinion is not based
on a concrete situation and does not amount to a binding
decision raising a res judicarta between the
It was submitted that any finding in
B384-02 would not bind the authority, it not being a party to the proceedings.
It was submitted
that the proper course for the applicant, if he was
dissatisfied with any decision of the authority, was that he apply to review
decision under section 104 of the Act.
It was submitted that the fact that the
applicant chose to institute fresh proceedings rather than to make this
application in B059-00
was indicative of the fact that the tribunal was functus
It was submitted that the applicant is
prevented from commencing a new proceeding based on the same course of action as
the original
proceedings pursuant to the principle in
Port of Melbourne
Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589.
It was submitted that the effect of the
settlement agreement in the original proceedings was to replace rights that the
parties had
in relation to the subject of the dispute with the rights set out in
the settlement. It was further submitted that there having
been no appeal in
respect of the decision of 5 July 2001 the tribunal had fully decided the issues
in the old proceeding and was
without further
Finally it was submitted that through the
exercise of reasonable care and skill the applicant could have introduced any
claims which
he alleged he had with respect to defects in the original
proceedings. It was submitted that it would be contrary to the principles
espoused in
(above) to enable the applicant to proceed at this
To say that these proceedings have had an
unfortunate history is an understatement. No doubt in part this is a product of
that neither party appears to have been legally represented until some
time after they entered into the settlement agreement and
it was converted to
an order of this tribunal.
I reject the submission for the
respondent that the application does not disclose a
. There is no doubt that the parties are not ad
idem on the date of practical completion. Perhaps the statement of claim might
been better drawn to crystallise the issue, but in this tribunal strict
procedures required under the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
are not laid
down. There may well be other reasons that the tribunal lacks jurisdiction but
answer is not that fundamental.
Although the submissions for the
respondent that the declaration sought by the applicant is by way of an advisory
opinion are powerful
I do not think they are made out. If the tribunal
otherwise has jurisdiction and the matter proceeds by refinement of the
and delivery of statements of evidence a hearing will resolve factual
arguments. The situation will be concrete.
I accept the submission for the
respondent that the applicant should be prevented from commencing a new
proceeding based on the same
cause of action as the original proceedings
pursuant to the principle in
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
(above). The claim that the applicant makes in these proceedings is not
merely a claim that could have been raised in B059-00, it
is a claim that was
made and compromised in B059-00.
I cannot understand why the applicant
filed fresh proceedings. If he did not wish to pursue review proceedings there
is no reason
he could not have either appealed the decision in B059-00 or filed
an application for a declaration in those proceedings.
For completeness and in an effort to save
the parties incurring further costs I will address the other issues raised in
submissions.
I accept that the principle to determine
when, for the application of the doctrine of functus officio, a decision has
been made was
set out by the Full Court of the Federal Court in
Semunigus v
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
(above). The requirement
is that a conclusion be reached on a matter as a result of engaging in a mental
process followed by the
translation of that conclusion into a decision by an
overt act of a character that gives finality to the conclusion and which
the re-visiting of the decision before it is made final.
The tribunal has never reached a
conclusion on the issue of practical completion because it was never given the
evidence upon which
such a conclusion could have been reached. This matter is
not analogous to
X v Minister for Immigration
(above). In that case the
tribunal at first instance had material before it which it had not considered
because it was written in
a language other than English. In B059-00 the
tribunal did not have before it sufficient tested evidence going to the topic of
completion in any language. The decision made was that no conclusion
could be reached in the circumstances and on the evidence.
The issue of practical completion is not
an ancillary issue in the nature of costs and thus the decision of the
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal in
(above) is not of
assistance.
As I understand it, the applicant’s
real goal is to persuade the authority to issue a direction to rectify in
respect of what
the authority considers to be category 2 defects which the
applicant considers to be category 1 defects. No doubt in such a review
application determining the date of practical completion will be of some
relevance. There is no doubt that the authority was wrong
in its letter of 7
March 2002. There has never been a decision of the tribunal in respect of the
date of practical completion.
In his report of 3 April 2001 the expert
indicated his opinion that the work was not then practically complete.
Perhaps the issue of practical completion
might be determined in the context of a review application, be it by
re-instating Q073-02
or by filing fresh review proceedings. I have already
indicated to Mr Wallace that if the authority declined to concede its error
deciding that the tribunal had made a decision about practical completion when
it had not, it would seem that the applicant has
a reasonable explanation for
any delay in making the review application and that in the circumstances of this
case all involved have
been aware of the applicant’s position for years
and thus prejudice would be difficult to establish.
These proceedings will be dismissed.
Nothing in the conduct of the respondent
would warrant anything other than an order that the applicant pay his costs of
these proceedings.
......................................
McVEIGH - MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 015
Application No:
McKINNON, IAN
C/- McColm Matsinger
P O Box 737
MAROOCHYDORE Q 4558
Respondent:
McARTHUR, GARY
C/- Lambert & Ho
P O Box 13268
Sections 93 and 61 –
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
Upon hearing Mr Wallace of counsel on behalf of the applicant and
Ms Ryan on behalf of the respondent, the Queensland Building Tribunal
following orders:
That these proceedings be dismissed.
That the applicant pay the
respondent’s costs of these proceedings.
......................................
MS J. McVEIGH - MEMBER
Queensland Building
Date: 3 April 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter