URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2014/120.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cullinan v McCahon [2014] QDC 120 (29 May 2014)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Cullinan v McCahon
[2014] QDC 120
MARK WILLIAM CULLINAN
(appellant/applicant)
CHRISTOPHER McCAHON
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Appeal and costs ruling under
ORIGINATING COURT:
Magistrates Court at Holland Park
DELIVERED ON:
29 May 2014
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
24 April 2014
Farr SC DCJ
appeal is allowed.
complaint laid by the respondent to this appeal is dismissed.
appellant’s application seeking the court to exercise its discretion under
sections 158B
Justices Act
is dismissed.
respondent pay the appellant’s costs of the hearing below pursuant to
sections 158
Justices Act
fixed in the sum of
respondent pay the appellant’s costs of the appeal pursuant to
Justices Act
fixed in the sum of $1,800.00.
CATCHWORDS:
Justices Act 1886
Regulation 2004
Schedule 2 —costs payable to successful
appellant- where costs calculated on schedule scale - where the appellant
applied for
the court to exercise its discretion under
appeal did not involve ‘special difficulty, complexity or
importance’ — fixed schedule scale amount to
A Abaza, solicitor, for appellant
D O’Brien QC for respondent
SOLICITORS:
Andrew P Abaza, solicitor, for appellant
Brisbane City Legal Practice for respondent
[1] The appellant has appealed against the dismissal by a Magistrate on 7 June
2013 of the appellant’s application that a complaint
laid under the
Justices Act 1886
Justices Act
”) for contravention of
Building Act 1975
be dismissed with costs. The appellant
lost on all grounds before the learned Magistrate.
[2] The appellant
contends that the learned Magistrate erred in rejecting the various grounds for
dismissal of the complaint.
[3] On 12 November 2013 the respondent filed a
submission in this court stating that it agreed to this court making the
(a) The appeal be allowed;
(b) The complaint laid by the respondent the
subject of this appeal be dismissed;
(c) The respondent pay the
appellant’s costs of the hearing below pursuant to
Justices Act
fixed in the sum of $3,375.00; and
(d) The respondent pay
the appellant’s costs of the appeal pursuant to
Justices Act
fixed in the sum of $1,800.00.
[4] Hence, the respondent, having conceded that the appeal should be allowed,
has agreed to pay the appellant’s costs in the
amounts allowed under the
Justices Act
and the Justices Regulations 2004 (‘Justices
Regulations’). The costs particularised above were calculated on the basis
of allowing the maximum claimable under the scale items detailed in items 1 and
4 of Part 1, Schedule 2 of the Justices Regulations.
[5] The appellant now
applies to the court to exercise its discretion under
Justices Act
for a “higher amount for costs” to be awarded on
the basis that such higher amount is “just and reasonable having
the special difficulty, complexity or importance of the case”.
understand the appellant’s current submissions, he also seeks that the
costs be assessed by a cost assessor.
[7] Hence, the issues for
determination are:
(a) Should the respondent be ordered to pay costs in an amount above the scale
items detailed in items 1 and 4 of
, Schedule 2 of the Justices
Regulations?
(b) If so, does the court have the power to order that the costs
sought be assessed by a costs assessor?
(c) If the court does not have that
power, what would be an amount that is appropriate in all of the
circumstances?
Legislation
Section 158
Justices Act
(1) When justices instead of convicting or making
an order dismiss the complaint, they may by their order of dismissal order that
the complainant shall pay to the defendant such costs as to them seem just and
reasonable.
(2) When a complaint is before a Magistrates Court which the court has not
the complaint to be
struck out for want of jurisdiction and may order that the complainant pay to
the defendant such costs as to
the court seem just and reasonable.
Section 158B
Justices Act
(1) In deciding the costs that are just and
reasonable for this division, the justices may award costs only—
(a) for an item allowed for this division under a scale of costs
prescribed under a regulation; and
(b) up to the amount allowed for the item under the scale.
(2) However, the justices may allow a higher amount for costs if the
justices are satisfied that the higher amount is just and reasonable
regard to the special difficulty, complexity or importance of the case.
Section 226
Justices Act
The judge may make such order as to costs to be
paid by either party as the judge may think just.
Section 232A
Justices Act
(1) In deciding the
costs that are just for this division, the judge may award costs only—
(a) for an item allowed for this division under a scale of costs
prescribed under a regulation; and
(b) up to the amount allowed for the item under the scale.
(2) However, the judge may allow a higher amount for costs if the judge
is satisfied that the higher amount is just having regard
to the special
difficulty, complexity or importance of the appeal.
Did the case involve special difficulty, complexity or importance?
[12] The appellant was charged as follows:
The Complaint of Christopher McCahon of
Brisbane in the State of Queensland a ‘public officer’ as defined in
Justices Act
as amended and being the Enforcement Coordination
Manager, Enforcement Team, Compliance and Regularity Services, Brisbane,
Division, Brisbane City Council, made this
day of April 2012 before the undersigned, a
Justice of the Peace for the State, who says alleges and avers that he is an
of the Council and that on 21 October 2011, it came to the
Complainant’s knowledge that on 13 September 2010, Mark William
being a private certifier as defined in the
Building Act 1975
, at premises
situated at 631 Grassdale Court, Gumdale in the State of Queensland, more
particularly described as Lot 1 on RP216813,
County of Stanley, Parish of
Tingalpa (“the Premises”) and in the Magistrates Court District
constituted by the Holland
Park Division of the Brisbane District appointed
under, and for the purposes of, the
Justices Act 1886
and within the area of the
City of Brisbane, as constituted by the
City of Brisbane Act 2010
, as amended,
did grant the Building Approval Decision Notice for Addition to Dwelling dated
13 September 2010, before all necessary
preliminary approvals under the
Sustainable Planning Act 2009 were effective for other assessable parts of the
development, contrary
Building Act 1975
[13] The Complaint and Summons also stated the following particulars:
On 13 September 2010 did grant the a
Development Application Decision Notice for Building Work –
Addition to Dwelling, before all necessary approvals under the Sustainable
Planning Act 2009 were effective for the other assessable parts of the
development, namely a Development Permit for Preliminary Approval
for Building
Work issued by Brisbane City Council
[14] Hence, the essence of the charge was reasonably straight forward –
the appellant was accused of granting a Building Approval
Decision Notice for
Addition to Dwelling before a Development Permit for Preliminary Approval for
Building Work was issued. The
appellant has submitted however, that this was a
matter that involved special difficulty, complexity or importance. As I
it, that submission is based on the following considerations either
individually or collectively:
(a) this was a charge that invoked the relevance of a number of Acts each of
significant complexity;
(b) this was a charge that required considerable
work and effort to meet;
(c) the complaint was brought outside the statutory
time limitation;
(d) the complaint should have been brought in the name of
the Brisbane City Council;
(e) the complaint was bad in law;
complaint was vexatious because it allegedly failed to properly continue the
words of the statute in the Sustainable Planning
particulars were inadequate; and
(h) the charge involved an allegation
against the appellant in his professional capacity.
[15] As I have already indicated, the respondent has conceded the appeal.
Accordingly, there has been no hearing on the merits of
the appeal grounds
(which ran to 12 pages).
principles applicable to awarding costs where there has been no determination on
the merits were identified by Hill J in
Australian Securities Commission v
Aust-Home Investments Limited &
(1) Where neither party desires to proceed with litigation the
court should be ready to facilitate the conclusion of the proceedings
a cost order: Stratford and the SEQEB case.
(2) It will rarely, if ever, be appropriate, where there has been no trial
on the merits, for a court determining how the costs of
the proceeding should be
borne to endeavour to determine for itself the case on the merits or, as it
might be put, to determine the
outcome of a hypothetical trial: Stratford supra.
This will particularly be the case where a trial on the merits would involve
factual matters where credit could be an issue.
(3) In determining the question of costs it would be appropriate, however,
for the court to determine whether the applicant acted
reasonably in commencing
the proceedings and whether the respondent acted reasonably in defending them
(SEQEB, supra).
(4) In a particular case it might be appropriate for the court in its
discretion to consider the conduct of a respondent prior to
the commencement of
the proceedings where such conduct may have precipitated the litigation: cf
Sunday Times News Paper Co Ltd v
[1933] NSWStRp 37
(1933) 33 SR (NSW) 371.
[17] Similarly, in Re Minister for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs & Anor;
ex parte Lai Quin, McHugh J stated:
In an appropriate case, a court will make
an order for costs even when there has been no hearing on the merits and the
moving party
no longer wishes to proceed with the action. The Court cannot try
a hypothetical action between the parties. To do so would burden
the parties
with the cost of a litigated action which by settlement or extra-curial action
they had avoided
The critical question in this case is whether or not the prosecutrix acted
reasonably in bringing these
proceedings
[18] Despite the principles enunciated in these decisions, the appellant
initially seemed to be arguing that the appeal grounds raised
by him required
determination:
The appellant seeks a Judgment on the
substance of these matters to vindicate his professional reputation and so that
an evaluated
determination can be made about a higher amount for costs having
regard to the special difficulty, complexity and importance of the
[19] I understand however that the appellants present position is that he does
not seek judgment on any of the matters raised, rather
he has raised them for
the purpose of demonstrating the alleged special difficulty, complexity and/or
importance of the case.
[20] Unfortunately for the appellant, I do not agree
that the case was one which involved special difficulty, complexity or
importance.
[21] There is no doubt that it was a matter that had a degree
of difficulty and/or complexity attached to it. The question however
it amounted to special difficulty or complexity.
[22] “Special”
is relevantly defined in The Macquarie Dictionary as “extraordinary;
exceptional; exceptional in
amount or degree.”
[23] The Macquarie
Dictionary Online defines it as “distinguished or different from what is
ordinary or usual”.
[24] Examples of cases where special difficulty
or complexity was found to exist are Lucy v OCC Holdings P/L & Ors (No 2)
[2008] QDC 169
(‘Lucy No 2”) in reference to Lucy v OCC Holdings Pty
[2008] QDC 004
and Morley v Senewiratne & Anor
[2008] QDC 296.
cases involved detailed legal argument by Senior Counsel in hearings that lasted
for days. Whilst the length of the hearing
and the fact that Senior Counsel was
briefed is not determinative of a finding that a matter involves special
difficulty, complexity
or importance, it can nevertheless be a relevant
consideration in the determination of such an issue. In this matter, the
application
before the Magistrate only lasted for a few hours and did not
involve any issues that were out of the ordinary.
[25] For instance, it can
hardly be said that a matter involves special difficulty or complexity simply
because the relevant legislation
is complex. If that was the criteria for
assessing the issue, then the absurd consequence would be that all matters that
come before
the court under that legislation would fall into the category of
having special difficulty or complexity. Whilst the relevant legislation
matter might have some complexity to it, in my view the charge was quite
straightforward in nature and its particulars were
brief and neither suggested
an especially difficult or complex case.
[26] It may well have been the
case that it was a charge that required considerable work and effort to meet,
but, once again that
does not suggest any special quality. All charges require
work and effort on the part of a defendant and his/her legal representatives.
The degree will of course vary from case to case. I am not persuaded that the
degree required in this matter was specially onerous,
difficult or complex.
Whilst I appreciate that the appellant’s legal representative submitted to
the contrary, it appeared
to me that he had an unfortunate tendency to overly
complicate relatively simple concepts. For instance, he submitted that a
made by a former Lord Mayor at a Council meeting held on 2 March 2010
that “I have put money in the Council budget to literally
pursue private
certifiers, to gather evidence, to take them to the Building Services Authority
(BSA)” added to the special
difficulty, complexity and importance of this
case. In my view, that comment added nothing to the difficulty, complexity or
of the matter as it was clearly irrelevant.
[27] Similarly, he
submitted, on a preliminary point, that the difficulty or complexity of the case
was increased as a result of an
email sent to him on 22 April 2014 (i.e. two
days before the hearing in this court) from the respondent’s solicitor
that if the appellant does not acknowledge that he has seen an earlier
email from the respondent’s solicitor, then that earlier
email would be
re-sent direct to the appellant. I ruled that the appellant’s affidavit
exhibiting this email correspondence
was irrelevant and therefore inadmissible.
It most certainly did not add to the special difficulty, complexity or
importance of the
[28] The appellant’s assertion that this was
a matter that involved special difficulty or complexity also runs contrary to
of the oral submissions made during the hearing by the appellant’s
legal representative, where this interchange between bench
and bar table
ABAZA: Instead this matter went from crisis to crisis. It ought to have been
terminated at a very early date. It had no merit
at the beginning. In fact, it
was doomed to fail and what your Honour sees today, in essence, is that 19
months lapsed before the
Council saw the writing on the wall, and in that 19
months a great deal of expense was incurred.
HIS HONOUR: So you say it was obvious that it was doomed to fail from the
MR ABAZA: Yes. Yes.
HIS HONOUR: Doesn’t that counter against your argument that there
is a special complexity to this matter?
MR ABAZA: No, because the case ...
HIS HONOUR: If it was so obvious from the outset, why would it be
specially complex?
MR ABAZA: Well, because of all these steps that had to be taken. Each
step along the way had to be taken. The application before
the Magistrates
Court had to be taken. The inspections had to occur. The rummaging through all
of these documents had to occur.
The letters pointing out the defects had to be
written. The letters that pointed out the issue of the particulars, they had to
[29] I am in no position to decide whether the appellant’s solicitor was
correct in his identification of that list of duties,
but assuming he is, it
appears to me that he has confused the issue of volume of work with the issue of
special difficulty or complexity.
[30] It has also been submitted that the
issues as to whether the matter was brought outside the statutory time limit and
the matter should have been brought in the name of the Brisbane City
Council added to the special difficulty or complexity of the
case. In fact, the
main question agitated by the appellant in the court below was whether the
complaint was out of time. Neither
of these issues however, involved difficult
questions of law. The first turned on an evidentiary question as to when
knowledge first
came to the complainant and is the type of issue routinely dealt
with in the Magistrates (and Superior) Courts. The second issue
was a discreet
point that could have been succinctly addressed in submissions. In fact, as I
understand it, the submission was reliant
upon just the one authority, that is
Ipswich City Council v Dixon Build Pty Ltd
[2012] QCA 98.
appellant also submitted that the charge was bad in law and/or that the
complaint was vexatious because it allegedly failed
to properly continue the
words of the statute, and that these matters also added to the special
difficulty or complexity.
Once again, in my
view, these are the types of issues that arise frequently in the courts and are
not necessarily demonstrative of
special difficulty or complexity. They
certainly do not fall into that category in this matter given its reasonably
straightforward
[32] The alleged inadequacy of particulars also
does not assist the appellant’s submission as that was a matter that could
have been addressed in pre-trial argument.
[33] Finally, the
appellant has submitted that this matter had a special importance
(a) it was a prosecution that involved an abuse of process; and/or
matter involved allegations against the appellant in his professional
[34] The abuse of process is said to have been constituted by a combination of
factors such as the bringing of proceedings out of
time, the complaint being
brought in the wrong name and the inadequacy of both the wording of the charge
and the particulars. In
my view however, these matters, neither in isolation nor
in combination, result in this case being of special importance. In fact,
do not appear to be issues that are even relevant to that concept.
relation to the second point, I accept that this case was important to the
appellant, as no doubt every criminal case is to
every defendant. To invoke
special importance however, the case must involve more than the charge merely
relating to a defendant
in his/her professional capacity. “Special
importance” is clearly a reference to the importance of the case
in terms of questions of law or public interest (this list is not
exhaustive) and is not intended to refer to the subjective assessment
defendant as to whether the case is important to him or her.
[36] Accordingly, I am not persuaded that this was a case that involved
special difficulty, complexity or importance.
the District Court have power to order that costs be assessed?
[37] Despite my conclusion above, I will nevertheless briefly address this
[38] The appellant initially sought an order for costs to be assessed
but, after receipt of the respondent’s written submissions,
conceded in
reply, that the court had no jurisdiction to order such an assessment under the
Justices Act
[39] That position seemed to change again during oral
submissions where the appellant’s legal representative submitted that
“thought” that the court does have such a power and relied on Reid v
Queensland Police Service
[2007] QDC 21.
In Reid, his Honour Judge Tutt, after
dismissing the appeal, made an order as to costs in the following terms:
appellant pay the respondent’s costs of and incidental to the appeal to be
agreed or assessed on the standard basis under
the District Court
[40] I note however, that there is no mention in the reasons for Judgment of any
submissions having been presented to Tutt DCJ regarding
the issue of the
assessment of damages, which was hardly surprising as the appellant in that
matter was self represented. Given that
there is clear and unambiguous authority
to the contrary, this decision carries no precedent value.
appellant has not otherwise identified the power by which the court can order
the assessment of costs in these circumstances.
[42] The leading authority
on the awarding of a higher amount under the
Justices Act
is Lucy (No. 2). In
that matter Robin QC DCJ held that there was no power to order a costs
assessment under the
[43] Like Robin QC DCJ (and Wall QC
DCJ in Santosa v Guerin
[2007] QDC 337)
I also can find no power that would
allow this court to make an order referring the matter to a costs
1. The appeal is allowed.
2. The complaint laid by the respondent to this
appeal is dismissed.
3. The appellant’s application seeking the court
to exercise its discretion under
Justices Act
4. The respondent pay the appellant’s costs of the hearing
below pursuant to
Justices Act
fixed in the sum
of $3,375.00.
5. The respondent pay the appellant’s costs of the appeal
pursuant to
Justices Act
fixed in the sum of
[44] I will hear the parties as to costs regarding the appellant’s
application seeking the court to exercise its discretion
Justices Act
for a higher amount for costs to be awarded.
Document 1.
(1993) 117 ALR 523.
[1997] HCA 6
(1997) 143 ALR 1
Appellant’s Outline of Submissions as to Costs, filed 16 October
p 1-23 line 1-25.
In fact, these two “issues” were based on the same allegation that
the words “the building development application
includes development other
than building work”, were not included in the body of the complaint.
Paragraph [7]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (148 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter