URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2018/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Florey, Re [2018] QMHC 12 (23 October 2018)
Florey, Re [2018] QMHC 12 (23 October 2018)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of Colin Jeffrey Florey
[2018] QMHC 12
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
23 October 2018
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
7 August 2018, 21 August 2018 and 5 October 2018
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr EN McVie and
Dr ASB Davison (7 August 2018)
Dr SJ Harden and
Dr ASB Davison (5 October 2018)
DETERMINATION:
Forensic Order made
L Falcongreen for the defendant
SJ Hamlyn-Harris for the Chief Psychiatrist
MP Le Grand for the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the defendant Crown Law for the Chief
Psychiatrist
The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
heard a reference in this matter on 7 August 2018 and made a determination
that Mr Florey was of unsound mind at the time of
the offending. Therefore
my order was that criminal proceedings for serious assault on a Corrections
Officer, 5 February 2016, were
to be discontinued.
y view was that a forensic order ought to be made: Mr Florey has a serious
illness into which he has little insight; becomes very
violent when unwell, and
was inadequately treated in prison prior to 5 February 2016, even though he was
on an involuntary treatment
order. A question arose at the end of the hearing on
7 August 2018 as to whether or not I had the power to make a forensic order
which granted limited community treatment (LCT). It was said that the decision
Re M (No 2)
effect that LCT could not be granted to a person who was detained in a jail. If
LCT cannot be granted, Mr Florey would
need to be taken from jail and detained
in the High Secure Service at The Park for the duration of the forensic
t is necessary to say a little more about Mr Florey’s offending. He is
serving a life sentence for murder, rape and grievous
bodily harm. These
offences were committed on
This was a decision of Justice Ann
Lyons made on 30 September 2010. It remains unpublished because M has not yet
been dealt with in
the criminal courts for the offences the subject of that
17 January 1990 and the conviction was on 15 January 1991. Mr Florey was
first diagnosed with mental health illnesses after imprisonment.
began to report voices and antipsychotic medication was commenced. He now has a
diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia which
he “emphatically
e has an antagonistic relationship with the doctors who try to treat him in
prison. He was on an involuntary treatment order well
prior to the offending of
February 2016, but in January 2016 he announced to his treating psychiatrist
that he would no longer consent
to the administration of depot antipsychotic by
injection. Surprisingly, psychiatrists treating prisoners pursuant to
involuntary
treatment orders will not administer depot antipsychotic injections
in jail if the prisoner does not consent. Because of this, the
only remedy in
these circumstances was to make arrangements for Mr Florey to be taken to the
High Security Inpatient Service at The
Park for the administration of an
injection. This was particularly inconvenient because Mr Florey was in the
Maryborough Correctional
Centre. He was not taken to The Park High Secure Unit
for the administration of depot antipsychotic medication, so he went without.
was at that time prescribed an oral antipsychotic as well, but there must be
real doubts as to whether or not he took that medication.
I very much doubt that
he did: he does not believe he has an illness and administration of medication
in prison is not rigorously
supervised.
Therefore from January 2016, Mr Florey was a man with a very serious history of
violence and paranoid schizophrenia who, I suspect,
was completely
unmedicated.
fter the events giving rise to the charge of assault, Mr Florey was moved to
a detention unit in prison and he accepted an increase
in the dosage of his oral
antipsychotic but continued to present as unwell. As a result he was taken to
the High Security Inpatient
Service at The Park on 1 March 2016 where he was
given an injection of depot antipsychotic medication. He only remained at The
for about two weeks. He was discharged on 16 March 2016 and was much more
stable in his mental state once he returned to Maryborough
Correctional Centre.
However, at the beginning of September 2016 he once again began not to
co-operate with his doctors and had to
be taken to the High Security Inpatient
Service at The Park for a week between 21 September 2016 and 28 September 2016
was once again returned to prison.
he seriousness of Mr Florey’s illness; the seriousness of his violence
when unwell, and his non-co-operation with, indeed opposition
to, psychiatric
treatment in prison mean that Mr Florey must be on a forensic order.
s his history shows, Mr Florey does not require to be kept at The Park High
Secure Unit to manage his illness, although it may be
that he needs to be taken
there from time to time for short periods of treatment. He can generally be
managed in a custodial setting.
He told the reporting psychiatrists that he
prefers to be in a Correctional Centre, rather than at The Park. This Court is
very familiar
with the situation that there is competition for places at The
Park High Security Inpatient program and that, unfortunately, not
all patients
who need treatment at that centre can be accommodated as soon as they need
treatment. Mr Florey will be in prison or
on parole for the rest of his life. It
is likely that my forensic order will last for many years, perhaps, indeed, for
life. However,
it is quite
Dr Bala report, 21 March 2018, p
See transcript of Dr Tie’s oral
evidence on 7 August 2018 as to these matters.
undesirable that Mr Florey be in The Park for the whole time he is on a
forensic order. At present it is better that he be in jail,
and it may one day
be the case that he is in the community on parole.
he reference to this Court is under the
Mental Health Act 2000
Act) and it is the provisions of that Act which govern whether or not I can make
a forensic order which provides that Mr Florey
have LCT in prison.
here are significant factual differences between Mr Florey’s situation
and M’s situation. Mr Florey will be on a forensic
order because I have
found him unsound at the time of the alleged offending. By way of contrast, M
was declared temporarily unfit.
Section 288(4) of the Act meant that because of
that declaration, he had to be the subject of a forensic order. There are some
provisions in the Act about whether or not in those circumstances a
defendant is required to be an inpatient rather than someone
who has LCT.
In particular, s 540(1)(b)(i) of the
Act provides that if a patient is found temporarily unfit for trial, as M was,
the legal custody of the administrator of the patient’s
treating health service”, it appears to the exclusion of the
Executive of the Corrective Services Department – see
Corrective Services Act 2006
As Justice Ann Lyons remarked in M, the Act
does not provide that where forensic orders are made in circumstances where
serving prisoners
are found unsound, or permanently unfit, the prisoners are
taken out of the custody of the Chief Executive of the Corrective Services
Department – [29]. That is, for those prisoners there is no
equivalent of s 540(1)(b)(i).
think it is right to infer a legislative intention that someone found
temporarily unfit will be placed in the custody of an authorised
mental health
service and either be brought to a state of fitness, or demonstrate illness
which shows they are permanently unfit
in relation to the relevant offences.
Either way, their being in the custody of an authorised mental health service is
be of relatively short duration. On the other hand, when someone is
found permanently unfit for trial, or found to be of unsound
mind, and a
forensic order is warranted, it may be that that forensic order lasts for a long
time. Certainly in Mr Florey’s
case, I would anticipate that the forensic
order would most likely last for the remainder of his life.
hile I certainly agree with Justice Ann Lyons’ view that the purpose of
LCT is to (hopefully) facilitate “a graded transition
from being an
inpatient in a mental health service to being a member of the general
community” – [94] – I do not
agree with her conclusion that s
289 of the Act does not allow LCT to be granted so that the subject of the
forensic order is to
live in prison. There is no express provision to that
effect. Justice Lyons drew an inference from the provisions of s 289.
Particularly she thought that s 289(5) envisaged the subject of a forensic
order living somewhere less restricted than the environment
at the High Security
Inpatient Service at The Park – see [95]-[96] of M. Life in prison is
certainly restricted but it is not
necessarily more restricted than life in High
Secure at The Park. The High Secure facility at The Park has very restrictive
facilities designed to manage and confine very dangerous patients.
In the 2016 Act there is a specific
provision making it clear that a forensic order may be made which contemplates
that the subject
of the order will be released to a prison on LCT – s 199
Mental Health Act 2016
s 540(1)(b)(i)
low secure part of a jail is no doubt less restricted than such confinement;
indeed I suspect life in other parts of a jail is also
less restricted.
here will be times, as Mr Florey’s history indicates, when a prisoner
with a mental illness needs more restriction and more
protection than life in
prison can provide. In those circumstances, a patient will be taken from prison
to the High Secure area at
The Park so that their mental illness can be more
intensively and effectively treated.
hile most people subject to a forensic order will not be prisoners, in my
view, s 289 of the Act is not so narrow that it cannot cater
for someone like Mr
Florey who, for most of the time, is not an unacceptable risk on a forensic
order in jail, but who, from time
to time, may need inpatient admissions at The
Park High Secure program. In my view, I have power to make a forensic order with
for LCT which will see Mr Florey living for the most part in prison,
notwithstanding he may from time to time require inpatient admission,
patient living in the suburbs on a forensic order may from time to time require
inpatient admission under the terms of
a forensic order. That forensic order
will no doubt remain in place, and be appropriately modified, to allow Mr Florey
the community, should he receive parole. Indeed it may well be a
protective influence for him which is supportive of his attempts
make a forensic order for Mr Florey with full LCT.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (41.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter