URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRAA/2003/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:50:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sharpe, W. T. v Greyhound Racing Authority [2003] QRAA 6 (27 February 2003)
RACING APPEALS AUTHORITY
[2003] QRAA 06
27 February 2003
Mr William T Sharpe
APPEAL FROM:
A decision of the Greyhound Racing Authority
APPEARANCES:
Mr Sharpe appeared on his own behalf
Mr D Ryan appeared for the Respondent
REASONS FOR AUTHORITY’S DECISION
Mr Leo Williams AO – Chairman
Sir James Killen – Deputy Chairman
Mr Dennis Standfield - Member
This is an appeal by stable hand, William Sharpe, against a conviction by the
Greyhound Racing Authority Stewards for a breach of
Rule 118(a) of the Rules of
Greyhound Racing in that he handled a greyhound at a time when his licence was
Although he had not indicated it in his notice of appeal, Sharpe advised the
Authority that his appeal was against both conviction
and penalty. His arguments
dealt with a number of issues other than the specific facts giving rise to the
charge and most related
to allegations against the Chief Stipendiary Steward, Mr
Danny Ryan, and his conduct of the inquiry giving rise to the charge.
Summarising the arguments, Sharpe alleged
that Mr Ryan was
that Mr Ryan expressed the
view that the hearing was “something of a
As to the allegation of prejudice, this was mostly based on the fact that the
Stewards refused to accept Sharpe’s version of
events. One only has to
read the transcript to gain the impression that Sharpe was not telling the truth
and if the Stewards manifested
some form of incredulity about Sharpe’s
story in the course of the inquiry such was not enough to give rise to any
of bias on their part.
In respect of the joke contention, Sharpe gave two references to the
transcript in which Mr Ryan used the word “joke”.
The first was on
page 7, line 19. This was a statement made in the context of the non-attendance
of a witness at the inquiry.
The Stewards had been expecting the appearance of Mrs Joy Harding who was
apparently ill. The Stewards had spoken to a day prior to
the hearing when they
became aware of her position. Initially they were annoyed at her non-attendance
but when Sharpe explained her
health position to them they accepted it
(transcript page 8, line 1). The second reference was something similar and
related to the
non-appearance of a person whom Sharpe contended was his
principal witness (page 54, line 45). Neither of these references support
allegation that the Stewards treated the inquiry as a joke. Sharpe has used the
word out of context.
The main argument of Sharpe was somewhat convoluted but in effect was that he
was denied the opportunity to put his case and confront
witnesses against him.
The hearing giving rise to the charge took place over three days – 2 and
12 December 2002 and 29 January
2003. It was intended to schedule the final
day’s hearing for a date in early January 2003 but Sharpe produced medical
to say that he had suffered a slight stroke and was unable to
The way in which the Stewards’ inquiry progressed was less than
satisfactory. Sharpe’s version of the facts given to the
Stewards prior to
the charge was that he had driven to the Beenleigh track on 27 November 2002
with a greyhound in the back of his
car in company with Mrs Joy Harding to trial
a greyhound.
Upon arrival Mrs Harding was said to have had an angina attack and sat in the
office in the grandstand some distance from the starting
point at which the
trials were taking place. Sharpe’s story was that he had driven two people
to the track with Mrs Harding
and another person (whom Mr Ryan described as
“the Phantom”). Mrs Harding could not identify the person when she
evidence on the second day of the inquiry. Sharpe had alleged that the
person was in the company of himself and Mrs Harding when
he drove to the track.
Sharpe contended that he drove his car to the edge of the actual running
surface, opened the tailgate and
the third person in their company took the dog
and put it into the box for the trial.
This evidence was directly contradicted by two other people one of whom at
least was present on the track at the same trial namely
Mr Eric Haldane. When Mr
Haldane was ultimately called on the third day of the hearing his evidence
“I was with him (Mr Peter Orpin) to trial a couple of dogs –
myself and Kevin Etchell – when Billy Sharpe drove
up in his van, shouted
out of the window of the van to hang on – that Herb Quinn had said that he
could go with ours because
these two dogs belonged to Herb Quinn.
We waited for Billy Sharpe to get out of his car, get the dog. He came on the
track, came behind the boxes, put the dog in the boxes
and that was it. We
collected the dogs after the end of the trial, and that was all that I knew
– that was all that happened.”
The other direct evidence the Stewards relied upon in their finding was a
statement given by Peter Orpin who was there with Mr Haldane.
It was in the form
of a report to the Chairman of Stewards dated 1 December 2002 which stated:
“I mentioned to Bob (Watkins – a steward) that Billy Sharpe had
been handling dogs during the trials.
I only noticed that Billy (Sharpe) was handling dogs at the 340 metre boxes
because Ken Ashford was driving the lure that morning
to keep in practice for
while I am away. I was doing the clocking of the dogs to supply times and
sectionals for the owners and trainers.”
This is the evidence upon which the Stewards relied in disbelieving
Sharpe’s version of events i.e. the some unidentified third
handled the dog during the trial.
Sharpe contended that he was not afforded the opportunity to present his case
because he was not present on the third day. His stated
reason for not being
present was that on 25 January 2003 he had written a letter of complaint to the
Minister for Tourism and Racing,
the Hon Merri Rose MP, who had acknowledged
receipt of the letter and referred it to the Chairman of the Greyhound Racing
Sharpe stated that he believed that the receipt of a letter “of
acknowledgement of his correspondence” from the Minister
was adequate
reason for him not to turn up at the adjourned Stewards’ hearing. The
letter from the Minister was actually dated
the same day as the date of the
adjourned hearing i.e. 29 January 2003.
Sharpe contended that as of 29 January 2003 he had not been charged with any
breach of the Rules. This contention is not supported
by the transcript which
makes it clear Sharpe was charged on the second day of the hearing, namely 12
December 2002. He was charged
with a breach of Rule 118(a) as appears at Line
41, on page 41 of the transcript.
The Stewards put the matter over until 29 January 2003. At the conclusion of
the second day’s hearing the Stewards made it clear
that they were
adjourning the inquiry to allow Sharpe to produce his witness whom he claimed
had actually put the dog in the box.
This witness was never forthcoming.
Sharpe’s convoluted allegations of prejudice and of unfairness all can
be traced back to the fact that the Stewards did not
accept his version. At the
inquiry and during the appeal Sharpe barely touched on the facts giving rise to
the offence. All his arguments
were directed against the Stewards and the
Stewards’ witnesses who for a variety of reasons he said were entirely
against him.
Having seen Sharpe before the Authority and having read the evidence of the
witnesses, it is the view of the Authority that there
are sufficient grounds for
the Stewards to reach the conclusions that they did on the facts giving rise to
the offence.
Sharpe by his own admission has been in the industry for 40 years and appears
to have no clear understanding of the Rules nor what
it means to be under
suspension. With that history he should also have known of his obligations to
attend a Stewards’ inquiry
until it was complete.
The major issue that needs to be dealt with is non-appearance of Sharpe on
the final day of the Stewards’ hearing.
The requirements of natural justice are that Sharpe be afforded the
opportunity to be heard. He wrote to the Stewards a letter which
was received on
the evening prior to the hearing stating:
“Because I have lodged an appeal with the Racing Minister of this State
regarding this ongoing inquiry it will be most inappropriate
of me to attend
further inquiries without the Minister’s reply. I therefore request an
adjournment.”
Sharpe chose to take the view that the matter was being “
investigated” by the Minister until that investigation had been
he was not prepared to appear before the Stewards. There is nothing in his
letter to the Minister or the Minister’s
reply that provides a proper
basis for this comprehension.
His misapprehension as to his obligations to attend was not such as any
reasonable person could have drawn and from a person with
experience in the greyhound industry it is almost incredible.
The evidence during the whole of the inquiry and the appeal traverses issues
which were not relevant to the charge brought by the
Stewards. The simple
question for the Stewards to decide was did Sharpe handle a dog while he was
under suspension? The weight of
the evidence makes it clear enough that he did.
The rest of the allegations made against the Stewards appear to be based on
refusal to accept what was being said and to accept the process
involved in the inquiry and his obligations in relation thereto.
Although the Stewards could and should have handled the matter without being
distracted from the charge and the facts relating to
it there is nothing to
indicate impropriety or prejudice as alleged by Sharpe.
The Stewards have disqualified Sharpe for a period of three months and fined
him $500. Having reviewed the evidence and having heard
Sharpe the Authority
does not believe that the disqualification is excessive. The Authority would
however waive the $500 fine.
The appeal is dismissed and the deposit is forfeit.
The Stewards’ decision on disqualification was handed down on 29
January 2003 and the three months’ disqualification should
be measured
from that date.
Leo Williams AO
Sir James Killen
Deputy Chairman
Dennis Standfield
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (53 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter