URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2009/66.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Drew v Makita (Australia) P/L [2009] QCA 66 (24 March 2009)
Supreme Court of Queensland - Court of Appeal
Drew v Makita (Australia) P/L [2009] QCA 66 (24 March 2009)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Drew v Makita (Australia) P/L
[2009] QCA 66
(plaintiff/respondent)
(AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD
ACN 001 117 335
(defendant/appellant)
Appeal No 9558 of 2008
DC No 4664 of 2004
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
General Civil Appeal
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
24 March 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
12 March 2009
Holmes and Muir JJA and Daubney J
Separate reasons
for judgment of each member of the court, each concurring as to the orders
1. Appeal allowed.
2. The orders made on 29 August 2008 are set
3. The matter is remitted to the District Court for a new trial on all
issues other than quantum.
4. The respondent’s damages, should he be
successful in establishing liability on the part of the appellant on the new
are as assessed by the primary judge in the reasons dated 29 August
5. The costs of the first trial abide the result of the new
6. The respondent pay the appellant’s costs of the
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL - GENERAL PRINCIPLES – RIGHT OF
APPEAL – WHEN APPEAL LIES – ERROR OF LAW –
PARTICULAR CASES
INVOLVING ERRORS OF LAW – FAILURE TO GIVE REASONS FOR DECISION –
ADEQUACY OF REASONS – where respondent
claimed damages for injuries
sustained by him when his left hand was severed by a circular saw – where
respondent alleged that
appellant manufactured or was deemed to have
manufactured the circular saw and that a defect in it was the cause of his
or alternatively the injuries resulted from the appellant’s
negligence – where primary judge held that both bases of
claim were made
out and awarded damages against the appellant – where primary
judge’s reasons did not discuss any inconsistencies
in the evidence; the
reliability, weaknesses or strengths of the evidence and whether the evidence of
one expert was to be preferred
over the other – whether reasons adequate
Trade Practices Act
(Cth), s 75AC
Ansett Transport Industries (Operations) Pty Ltd v Wraith
[1983] FCA 179
Beale v Government Insurance Office of NSW
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
Cypressvale Pty Ltd v Retail Shop Leases
[1996] 2 Qd R 462
[1995] QCA 187
Fitzgibbon v Waterway Authority
[2003] NSWCA 294
Flannery v Halifax Estate Agencies
[1999] EWCA Civ 811
[2000] 1 All ER
Housing Commission of New South Wales v Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty
[1983] 3 NSWLR 378
Pettitt v Dunkley
[1971] 1 NSWLR
Public Service Board of New South Wales v Osmond
[1986] HCA 7
Res 1 v Medical Board of Queensland
[2008] QCA 152
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
Strbak v Newton
(Unreported, New South Wales Court of
Appeal, Gleeson CJ, Samuels and Priestley JJA, 18 July 1989), cited
Alliance Insurance Ltd v Massoud
[1989] VicRp 2
[1989] VR 8
Authority v Fitzgibbon
[2005] HCA 57
(2005) 79 ALJR 1816
Wiki v Atlantis
Relocations (NSW) Pty Ltd
(2004) 60 NSWLR 127
[2004] NSWCA 174
R A I Myers for the appellant
J W Lee, with M A McLennan, for the
SOLICITORS:
Sparke Helmore for the appellant
Wellner Lawyers for the
[1] HOLMES JA: I agree with the reasons of Muir JA and with the orders his
Honour proposes.
[2] MUIR JA: Introduction
On 29 August 2008, the
plaintiff/respondent was awarded judgment against the defendant/appellant in the
sum of $194,454 after a trial
in the District Court for the respondent's claim
for damages for injuries sustained by him on 19 December 2001 when his left hand
was severed by a circular saw he was using. The respondent alleged that the
appellant manufactured or was deemed to have manufactured
the circular saw and
that a defect in it, within the meaning of s 75AC of the
Trade Practices Act
(Cth), was the cause of his injuries. Alternatively, he alleged the
injuries resulted from negligence of the appellant. The learned
primary judge
held that both bases of the claim had been made out.
[3] The notice of appeal
is against the whole of the judgment and challenges the primary judge's findings
on liability on 19 grounds.
Only a few grounds were relied on by the
appellant's counsel on the hearing of the appeal and there was no challenge to
the primary
judge's findings on quantum.
The grounds of appeal relied on in
the hearing of the appeal
[4] The appellant's counsel concentrated on the
following grounds in his written and oral submissions.
[5] The primary judge
erred in finding that when the accident occurred:
(a) The safety guard of
the circular saw was jammed or stuck in the open position and was therefore not
able to retract to the closed
position when removed from the
(b) Immediately before the respondent sustained his injury, the
Weathertex board he was cutting, fell from the working bench as a
which the respondent instinctively attempted to grab hold of the Weathertex, but
instead grabbed hold of the exposed blade
of the saw, thereby suffering his
(c) In accepting the respondent's evidence as to how the accident
happened; and
(d) In failing to provide adequate reasons for his
The allegations in the pleadings
[6] In his amended statement of
claim, the respondent alleged as follows:
(a) When the respondent was
operating a circular saw, manufactured and supplied by the appellant, to cut a
Weathertex cladding sheet,
the sheet slipped;
(b) The respondent attempted to
prevent the sheet from slipping as the saw was removed from the cut, leaving the
blade exposed;
(c) The respondent suffered severe lacerations to his left
hand as a result of the jamming of the safety guard of the saw, which did
(d) The safety guard
jammed as a result of a defect within the meaning of
Practices Act 1974
[7] The following particulars of the alleged
deficiency were provided:
Particulars
The safety of the Circular Saw was not such as persons generally were
entitled to expect by reason of the following:
safety cover of the Circular Saw did not return to the closed position as and
after the Circular Saw was removed from a cut or
at the end of a cut;
blade of the Circular Saw remained exposed as and after the Circular Saw was
removed from a cut and at the end of a cut;
range of travel of the safety cover of the Circular Saw was limited by contact
with a protruding structure in the guide path formed
by the fixed upper
trailing edge of the safety cover of the Circular Saw became jammed as it was
deflected laterally and partially moved across the
protruding structure."
[8] Alternatively, it was claimed the "accident" was caused by the appellant's
negligence.
[9] The following information was contained in a reply to a
request for particulars dated 2 March 2005:
"1. ... the plaintiff ...
does not know how the sheet of weathertex cladding slipped.
the plaintiff was operating the saw immediately before the weathertex slipped by
his right hand on the handle of the saw, right
index finger pulling the trigger
to activate the switch. His left hand was in front of the right hand on the saw
handle to steady
the plaintiff attempted to prevent the sheet of weathertex cladding from
slipping by taking his left hand off the saw to take
hold of the weathertex but
it had slipped."
The respondent's evidence
[10] In his evidence-in-chief, the respondent gave
evidence that the cutting he was carrying out at the time of the accident was
of a type performed by him on many occasions in the past and that he went
the subject saw on four
or five occasions prior to the accident. He was taught, as an apprentice, to
lift the guard on every occasion
that he started the saw. A number of boards
had been cut by the respondent prior to the accident with Mr Vayro's
assistance.
[11] The respondent's evidence of what took place immediately
before and at the time of his accident was somewhat disjointed, but
possible to reconstruct the following account. The respondent, assisted by a Mr
Vayro, intended to cut a piece of Weathertex
3.6 m long, 300 mm wide and 12 mm
thick, down the middle. Weathertex is a material used to clad the outside walls
of houses. The
respondent positioned two trestles, which were approximately 600
mm high and placed on top of them two hardwood boards which were
200 to 250 mm
wide, 3.6 m long and 50 mm thick. The Weathertex board was then placed on
the stable hardwood platform with a little
more than half of its width
protruding beyond the hardwood so that the saw could be run down the centre of
the Weathertex board.
[12] At the start of the operation Mr Vayro was "at the
end of the first horse, at the end of the 3.6 metres" holding the Weathertex
board down onto the bench. The respondent lifted the guard with his right hand
in order to place the saw on the board. That enabled
the guard to "clear the
commencement of the cut." He then released his left thumb "off the handle of
the guard ... for the guard
to retract ... straight away." He did not
consciously lock the guard open. He did nothing in the course of his cutting
"which might
have caused the guard to move from the position that [he] had put
it in before [he] commenced the cut." In order to cut parallel
to the hardwood
support, the Weathertex had to extend beyond the supporting hardwood by at least
[13] The respondent made the first 150 mm of the cut with the board
placed squarely on hardwood base but overhanging the base sufficiently
accommodate the cut. Leaving the saw in the cut, the board was moved by him
with the assistance of Mr Vayro, who supported the
board. He continued
cutting to halfway, when he stopped again and Mr Vayro came around behind him
and took hold of the board. When
he had cut to within 300 to 400 mm of the end
of the board, it fell. He described what happened then:
tried to grab hold of the board that was falling because that's the natural
instinct ... but the board wasn't there ... consequently
because the guard
didn't retract back around, I grabbed hold of the blade."
[14] Asked if it was the left hand side of the board "that somehow fell off the
horse", the respondent responded, "The whole lot
fell off the horse at the end."
[15] In cross-examination, the respondent admitted that he told staff at the
Princess Alexandra Hospital after his emergency admission
that he "went to catch
a block of wood and [his] left hand caught the saw blade." He admitted also
that he told a Dr James, whom
he saw on 19 August 2002, that he had
sustained a left hand injury, grabbing a hand saw which hadn't stopped. He
admitted that he
didn't notice at the time of his accident that the guard was
jammed, or that the guard didn't close. He had not seen the guard jammed
prior to the time of the accident on any of the occasions on which he had used
[16] The respondent received a letter from the appellant dated 14
November 2002. It, relevantly, stated:
Warranty records indicate that you have purchased one of the Makita power tool
models mentioned above.
It has been brought to our notice that, should any of these models be used in
a manner where the lower guard is forcibly held up in
the open position, there
is a possibility that it may stick and not return to the closed position at the
completion of the cut, thus
leaving the blade exposed.
Use of the tool in this way does not accord with warnings included in the
Makita instruction manual provided with each tool. Nevertheless,
as a potential
hazard has now been identified, we have decided to recall and modify these tools
so that the potential for injury
is eliminated, whether or not the tool is
incorrectly used."
[17] After he received the letter, the respondent took the saw out of its box
and noticed that "the guard was still jammed up in
the cowl." In giving a
demonstration to the cross-examiner of how he had handled the guard, he lifted
the guard up in the way he
said he normally did and it locked in the open
[18] Included in the respondent's instructions recorded in the
report of Mr McDougall, a mechanical engineer, who gave expert evidence
respondent's case, were:
"[The respondent] did
manually open the blade guard at the start of the cut.
[The respondent] was approximately 200 to 400 mm from completing the
cut. He was gripping the saw handle with his right hand and
saw motor with his
At this time, the Weathertex board did move towards [the respondent] and fell
from the saw stool/timber planks.
As the board fell, and prior to it reaching the ground, [the respondent]
removed his left hand from the saw motor and attempted catch
In a letter dated 20 June 2003 to the appellant's solicitors, the respondent's
solicitors argued that "the incident happened when
[the respondent] had cut to
within 250 mm from the end of the Weathertex."
Dr Coleman's evidence
[19] The respondent gave the following account of the
accident to Dr Coleman, a surgeon who gave a report dated 15 February
Mr.Drew's recollections of the circumstances of the alleged incident.
Mr. Drew was at home helping a neighbour cut a piece of Weathertex cladding.
He was ripping the cladding with a 7 1/4 inch Makita
hand held circular saw.
He said the piece of board that was cut off dropped when it was near the
. The board was approximately 3.6m long and another person was holding
the other end of the board. The board was set on stools and
a plank. He was
using his left hand to steady the saw and his right hand on the trigger.
As the board started to fall, he went to grab it, and accidentally grabbed
He said the blade was still in the cut
. He said the guard
had not fully covered the blade. The teeth of the blade lacerated the flexor
aspect of his left palm around
the mid palm aspect, and extended around the
dorsal and ulna aspect of the hand. Because of the severity of the injury, he
was transferred
to the Princess Alexandra Hospital for further treatment."
(emphasis added)
[20] In cross-examination, after referring to his notes, Dr Coleman said that
the respondent had told him:
"I was cutting this length of the saw - length of
the timber and a piece - and
the piece that I cut off started to fall
and, as it started to fall,
I grabbed it with my hand to stop the piece of
timber falling
and, as I did so, my hand went underneath the timber to grab
it and hit the blade of the saw, which was exposed." (emphasis added)
Mr Vayro's evidence
[21] Mr Vayro's oral evidence was to the following
effect. At the commencement of each cutting operation, he stood at the opposite
end of the board to the respondent but moved around to the other end when the
cut got to about halfway. He was behind the respondent
when the accident
happened and unable to see what took place. He realised that something had gone
wrong when the respondent started
shouting. He didn't recall whether any
hardwood had been placed on the trestles to support the Weathertex. His
recollection was
that the Weathertex "definitely didn't fall off a trestle so
far as [he] was aware."
[22] He gave a statement to the appellant's
solicitors dated 7 September 2004, in which he said:
had set up a workspace running from east to west on a flat concrete driveway at
the front of my parent’s house. The
area was very clean. I remember this
because Paul and my stepfather were constantly at me to clean up.
had set up a piece of timber on 2 or 3 trestles. I cannot remember the
dimensions of the timber other than to say that it was
pretty long and around 10
mm thick. The trestles were at each end of the timber. Attached to this
statement and marked with the
letters "MV1" is my diagram of our
started cutting the timber from where I was standing lengthwise from east to
west. I was standing about 1 to 2 metres behind
him holding the timber to keep
it steady so that it wouldn’t bow. I was not trying to hold the pieces of
timber together.
My job was just to keep it steady. I can not remember if we
had clamped the timber as well.
was about halfway through the cut when the accident happened. I do not know
where his hands were.
remember hearing the sound of the saw change just before the accident. It was
only a slight change and it may have been Paul powering
off the saw or it may
have been when the saw actually contacted with Paul’s hand. I do not
16. I did not see or touch the saw before or after the incident."
[23] The diagram accompanying the statement depicts a sheet of Weathertex
resting on three trestles placed at right angles to the
length of the Weathertex
and to the front of a garage. The respondent is located at about the middle of
the Weathertex on the side
away from the garage and a little below the middle
trestle, looking up the diagram. Mr Vayro's position is shown as level with the
bottom end of the Weathertex on the same side as the respondent and the same
distance from it.
Mr O'Shea's evidence
[24] Mr O'Shea, a friend of the respondent and a
registered builder, was nearby at the time of the accident. He heard screaming
was at the scene of the accident in a few seconds. He didn't observe anyone
touch the saw, which was lying on the ground. He noticed
that a piece of
Weathertex had been cut "three-quarters of the way along, and ... was lying on
the ground." He noticed "a score
mark on the face of it ... where the saw must
have cut it ... it went diagonally across the ... face of the ... sheet." The
had not retracted to cover the blade. He and another person manipulated
the guard on the saw and noticed that it was "actually sticking
and jamming ...
in place." Asked what would cause the diagonal score mark, he answered, "...
when the saw comes out – has
come out of the cut ... backwards, or –
it's actually been dragged sideways across the – face of the
[25] In cross-examination, Mr O'Shea accepted that the saw may have
been thrown or dropped in the course of the accident. He conceded
hadn't told the respondent of his observations at the accident and that he
hadn't been asked to recall the events of the
accident scene until the Thursday
prior to his giving evidence, some six years after the accident.
O'Shea wasn't able to say who had put the saw back in the box. He recalled that
it was covered in blood. He accepted that
the reason for raising the guard was
"simply to have the lower guard clear the workpiece at the commencement of the
cut" and that
he wouldn't "pull it out with any force or endeavour to jam it
open or anything of that kind." He accepted also that "the first
thing you do
once you start your cut is to see that the heel of the guard has gone back onto
the workpiece" and that he would "ensure
that that was happening in the course
of the cut." He accepted that if the cut "had advanced as far as 150 to 200
millimetres from
the end ... the piece ... that wasn't being supported would be
likely to fall."
The evidence of Mr McDougall, consulting mechanical engineer
[27] Reports of
Mr McDougall, consulting mechanical engineer, dated respectively 2 December
2004 and 30 October 2007 were put in evidence.
[28] In the first report Mr
McDougall observed:
author was readily able to reproduce jamming by inducing some lateral movement
of the lower moveable guard as it opened and approached
the limit of travel.
Force required to achieve this would be described as slight. This lateral
movement is a combination of clearance
in the lower guard attachment mechanism
and elastic bending of the guard.
The opening of the guard to it’s (sic) range of travel will predictably
occur at the start of a job when the operator is working
quickly. For some
cutting techniques, e.g. plunge cut, this is more likely to occur. In these
situations, the potential for jamming
to occur is high and the jammed condition
of the guard may not be detected by the operator when visual attention is
focussed on the
line of the cut.
This potential for jamming is an undesirable design feature of the saw which
should have been identified and rectified had the product
been subject to an
appropriate risk assessment."
[29] In his October report, Mr McDougall's opinions, included:
(a) Once a decision is made by the operator to hold
open the guard, right hand dominant operators would commonly hold it at its
range of travel;
(b) The holding of the guard by such a person at less than its fully open
position tends to result in "a very awkward posture, restriction
to vision and
reduced control of the saw";
(c) "The guard may be held open until the cut extends beyond the diameter of the
blade. At this point, the workpiece holds the guard
at close to its fully open
position. Therefore, lack of movement of the guard as it is released may not
readily be interpreted as
'the guard has jammed' but rather that the workpiece
is now holding the guard open."
(d) "The problem with the guard jamming is therefore likely to be a combination
of inadequate design, inadequate design specification
provided to the
manufacturer, or lack of quality control by the manufacturer."
[30] The report commenced by accepting the respondent's description of how the
accident happened, including the instruction that
"the automatic guard was found
to be jammed in the fully open position."
[31] At the commencement of his
cross-examination, Mr McDougall said that he had limited expertise in using saws
such as the subject
saw. The respondent's counsel then objected to his being
questioned on the proper method of using the saw on the grounds that his
client's expert lacked relevant expertise. The objection was implicitly upheld.
[32] In notes of a conversation with the respondent in late November or
early December 2004, Mr McDougall recorded "saw in both hands,
second handle
fitted." Mr McDougall made a note "that there was a second handle
fitting." The saw was supplied to Mr McDougall
for examination prior to his
first report with its cover "jammed".
[33] At the conclusion of the
cross-examination of Mr McDougall, the primary judge asked, "But that particular
guard doesn't always
self-close does it?" Mr McDougall replied in the
affirmative. He was then asked how it could be made to remain in the open
His evidence was to the effect that this could be done by pushing the
handle slightly away from the body or away from the saw.
cross-examination it was established that the guard would remain open only if
pushed and moved "sideways to some extent."
Mr McDougall said that it was
"relatively easy to cause it to jam" and he confirmed also that there was "a
need to provide some
lateral force to cause it to jam."
The evidence of Dr
Grigg, consulting mechanical engineer
[34] Dr Grigg, a consultant mechanical
engineer called by the appellant gave the following evidence in report dated 27
October 2005:
made available, the bottom guard of the saw was seen to be jammed with its
control lever in the fully forward position, as shown
in Photo 1 after the blade
was removed. It was found that it was readily possible to release the guard
from the jammed position
by pulling sideways on the guard control lever and,
when released, the guard appeared to function quite normally. That is, it
freely under the action of its spring to the closed position covering
the bottom of the blade and, when positioned on a table in
the manner shown in
, it was able to be rotated against the action of its spring to
the position shown and, when lifted from the table, it swung back
so as to cover
the bottom of the blade.
Since it was found during the inspection that heel contact on the workpiece
does not cause the bottom guard to move to a position
where it becomes stuck on
the rib in the top guard, there is a high probability that the bottom guard was
jammed open by force being
applied to its control lever either prior to or
during the cut.
In the handwritten InterSafe notes, at the third line from the bottom, there
is an entry which appears to read "
saw in both hands
handle fitted)".
Given that the second handle
was still sealed in its plastic bag, it seems improbable that it was fitted to
the saw at the time of
the accident.
If, as appears most probable, the Plaintiff pushed the control lever of the
bottom guard forwards so as to cause it to jam in the
open position, this is
contrary to Item 2 of the Additional Safety Rules listed on Page 4 of the
Instruction Manual where it states:
Keep guards in place and in working order. Never wedge or tie lower
guard open. Check operation of lower guard before each use.
Don’t use if
lower guard does not close briskly over saw blade. Caution: If saw is dropped,
lower guard may be bent, restricting
full return.
Given the free operation of the guard once it was released from its jammed
position, there is nothing to suggest that the guard itself
had been damaged in
the manner suggested in this caution.
CONCLUSIONS
it was found that the bottom guard of the saw could be made to jam on a rib
within the top guard, this would only occur if
the guard was opened beyond its
working range by applying a forward force to the control handle of the
normal cutting following the procedures set out in the Instruction Manual, the
bottom guard would not open to the extent where
jamming would occur.
method used by the Plaintiff to support the workpiece whilst he was undertaking
the cut could best be described as precarious
and not in accordance with either
good practice or the instructions contained within the Instruction Manual
supplied with the saw."
[35] In cross-examination Dr Grigg gave the opinion that "normal use of the saw
wouldn't result in it being in a position where it
jammed" and also that the
saw, as designed, was not unsafe. He said also:
" ... I find it hard to believe that putting it
– moving it to the position where it can jam would not involve a conscious
realisation
that it was jammed."
[36] Pressed by cross-examining counsel, he explained:
"... Anyone who has used a saw of this type would
know that, when you rotate the guard forwards, if there’s a certain
from the spring which gets slightly greater as you move it - move the
control lever to the forward position, there’s no extra
generated other than a progressive increase in the force unless you encounter
the end-stop, which, in this case, happens
to be a rib which could cause - which
can cause the saw - the guard to jam in the open position. But the –
there is extra
force needed, having reached the rib, to cause the bottom guard
to remain open, so that the encountering of the extra force would
warn a user of
the saw that there was no point in going further and, secondly, the - if it
– normally, the - if you take it
to any position prior to reaching the end
of its movement, it will immediately return and, in this case, if it was - if it
was taken to the point where it jammed, then it would clearly not
return if it was jammed - if the force applied to it was sufficient
jamming to occur.
Well, look, I don’t know whether the guard was jammed open. You could
cut your hand off without jamming the guard open, I don’t
know whether
that occurred. We’re dealing with a situation where I’ve been asked
to comment on the fact that that guard
can jam open."
[37] Dr Grigg said that he had owned a saw similar to the one in evidence and
had used it for over 30 years. Later, in cross-examination
he reaffirmed that
the safety guard could not be jammed open "in the normal process of cutting a
piece of timber or a piece of Weathertex
[38] The following exchange
occurred in cross-examination:
"... You’d agree,
wouldn’t you, that, in circumstances where there’s the risk of a
guard being jammed open inadvertently,
as appears to be the case here, that, in
the least, the manufacturer should give warning of that fact, shouldn’t
I believe that’s desirable.
It’s an absolute, isn’t it?-- Yes.
Yes. Further, you would say, as a safety expert, that the engineering
controls are much more important than the operator or human
aren’t they, because the engineering controls can be affirmatively put
into place?-- Yes, that’s basically
correct, yes.
----- let’s not beat about the bush. You’re an expert,
you’re giving unbiased evidence to this Court. It’s
your opinion,
is it not, that a design that allowed for that guard to be jammed open
inadvertently would be a faulty design?-- Yes,
I think I’d agree with
Yes. And, in fact, if there was a risk assessment conducted under your
control of such a device, for the purpose of seeing whether
that device could be
released onto the market, you’d send it back for rectification,
wouldn’t you?-- Yes.
You would never have allowed this saw to get onto the market, would you?--
No objection was taken to any of these questions.
[39] Asked if he agreed
that "the most probable explanation for the injury sustained by the
[respondent], is that the guard jammed
and failed to retract." He said, "...
you can cut your hand off with a guard that is capable of retracting if you put
in the danger zone before it actually can retract. It takes a finite
time for it to retract ... it's only about a second or so."
It was put to him
that it took .3 of a second and he acknowledged that he hadn't timed it but
thought that that timing was "a bit
hopeful". Counsel for the appellant
conceded that the design of the saw was "such that the guard should return to
the closed position
within .3 of a second."
[40] Asked if the most probable
explanation for the injury was that the guard became jammed and failed to
retract, on the assumption
that the retraction would only take .3 of a second,
he answered:
Not at all. There’s many ways it could happen.
There’s - my understanding is that he’s cutting a piece of timber
that fell, he goes to grab the piece of timber. So,
where’s the saw? Is
the saw still in contact with the rest of the piece of timber, so the guard is
open? So that, as he goes
to grab it, he’s grabbed it before the guard
has a chance to do anything?"
[41] In response to the primary judge's question whether the locking or the
jamming of the guard in the open position could be done
subconsciously or
inadvertently in the normal course of working with the saw, Dr Grigg
"I have difficulty in believing it would be totally
inadvertence (sic), because if you don’t go to the point where you can jam
it, you first of all don’t experience any significant noticeable change in
the resistance, it does increase a bit as you bring
the lever over, and normally
you would - if you were actually making a cut - when you let the lever go, as
you - because there is
no need to hold onto it any longer, you would feel it
come back as you were letting it go, because the heel of the guard then rests
the work piece as you were making the cut. There is absolutely no need to
continue to hold it forward, and you would expect it
to come back – you
would need it to come back, if you like – so that it could perform in the
normal way."
[42] This exchange then occurred:
"But isn’t it a fact that sometimes the guard
retracts and sometimes it doesn’t?-- No. It should always retract to
Yes, but sometimes it doesn’t, as we’ve heard, because it can jam
or lock in the open position, can’t it?-- Well,
but - yes, that can
happen with this sort but you have to push it beyond the range where you need to
open it in order to - in order
to do the normal job. You don’t have to
open it that far. The blade is fully exposed. The normal reason for using the
to open the guard is to enable your saw to enter the work piece.
It’s not - there’s no reason to hold it wide open.
What action do you say is required to lock or jam the guard in the open
position?-- You have to push forward on it with a noticeable
increase in the
force that would otherwise be required to simply open it.
I’m asking you really, because you would have examined it. What do you
say is the action required to lock or jam the guard
in the open position?--
Well you have to push the control level which I’ve got illustrations in my
report which explain what
these words mean. You have to push the control lever
in what I think you’re calling the fully clockwise direction and you
to exert additional force when it encounters the rib to get it to jam. And if
you pushed laterally relative to the saw, it
might also assist in causing it to
go to a point where it would jam."
The structure of the reasons
[43] The primary judge's finding of particular
relevance for present purposes are:
"[54] (v) The Weathertex was supported by two lengths of timber board,
each of which was of the dimensions of 3.6 metres long,
by 200 to 250
millimetres in width, by 50 millimetres in thickness, placed on top of two
saw-horses approximately 650 millimetres
high which formed the
working-bench;
(ix) When the plaintiff reached a position in the cutting process between
400mm and 200mm from the end of the cut, the Weathertex
fell from the
working-bench as a result of which the plaintiff instinctively attempted to grab
hold of the Weathertex but instead
grabbed hold of the exposed blade of the saw
thereby suffering serious injuries to his left hand ("the incident");
(x) The safety guard of the circular saw was jammed or stuck in the open
position and was therefore not able to retract to the closed
position when
removed from the cut;
(xi) The saw had a design defect in that it was possible for an operator of
the saw in the normal course of its operation to "jam"
or "stick" the safety
guard, either consciously or unconsciously, in the open position because of "the
trailing edge of the moveable
guard" being capable of becoming wedged "over onto
a protruding structure in the guide path formed by the fixed upper guard" by
a slight lateral movement.
[57] In making the above findings on the saw defect I rely upon the evidence
of both experts McDonnell (sic) and Grieg (sic) who were
essentially
on the point that where there was a "possibility or the potential" for the
safety guard of the saw to jam or stick in the open position
inadvertently, the
design of the saw is faulty and should have been rectified by the manufacturer.
(footnote deleted)
[58] The defendant has pleaded "further or alternatively the incident was
caused solely by a deliberate act, negligence or inadvertence
on the plaintiff's
part", but I am not persuaded that the defendant has discharged its onus of
proof in respect of this pleading,
as I am not satisfied that the plaintiff
deliberately or consciously jammed the guard in the open position before
operating the saw.
On the contrary I am satisfied on the evidence that it was
possible for an operator of the saw either inadvertently or subconsciously
jam or stick the safety guard in the open position because of the inherent
design defect referred to in paragraph [54(xi)] above.
I therefore find the
plaintiff did not contribute to his injury in any way."
Were the reasons adequate?
[44] In the relevant part of his reasons the
primary judge: set out a brief resume of the evidence of each lay witness;
to parts of the experts' oral and written evidence; discussed relevant
principles of law; and summarised the respective submissions
of counsel for the
parties. He then made the findings, including those set out above, which he
introduced with the words, "On a
review of all the evidence and the submissions
made, I make the following findings in this proceeding: ..."
primary judge made no reference to and did not discuss: any inconsistencies in
the evidence of any witness; the reliability,
weaknesses or strengths of the
evidence of any witness; whether the evidence of one expert was to be preferred
over the other and
if so, why.
[46] The primary judge's finding in paragraph
[54](xi) implicitly accepts the evidence of Mr McDougall which is not wholly
with the evidence of Dr Grigg. The thrust of the latter's evidence
was that the safety guard could be jammed if the control lever
forward beyond the point where it was designed to be placed in the course of
normal operations. He accepted that this
was characteristic of the saw and was
a design or manufacturing failure. Mr McDougall was of the opinion that the
safety guard could
become stuck in the off position by using slight force on the
lower guard to induce "some lateral movement ... as it opened and approached
limit of travel".
[47] In his answer to the last question asked in
re-examination, however, Dr Grigg did mention that pushing the control lever
relative to the saw ... might also assist in causing it to go to a
point where it would jam." But Dr Grigg also gave evidence to
the effect that
the safety guard would not jam when used in the normal way and that an operator
moving the guard with sufficient
force to jam it would be conscious that jamming
had occurred, if that was the case.
[48] The existence of a defect in the
saw which enabled the safety guard to stick or jam in the open position does not
lead, necessarily,
to a finding for the respondent on liability. It needed to
be established that the safety guard was stuck in the open position at
of the accident and that the failure of the guard to operate was the cause of
the injury. It was implicit in the finding
in paragraph [54](x), that the
safety guard was stuck and unable to retract when the blade was removed from the
cut and that the
respondent's injury occurred when the saw was free of the
Weathertex.
[49] Whether the respondent took hold of the saw blade when the
saw was in the position in which the safety guard would have protected
respondent had it not been jammed (assuming that it was jammed), as Dr Grigg
pointed out, would depend on whether the saw was
still in contact with the
Weathertex and whether the respondent "grabbed it before the guard has a chance
to do anything." If the
saw was being held on a piece of Weathertex resting on
the hardwood planks the safety guard would be prevented from engaging. The
safety guard may also have been prevented from engaging if the blade was in the
cut in the Weathertex when it fell.
[50] The precise way in which the
accident happened is unknown, apart from the obvious fact that the blade of the
saw was revolving
at the time and unprotected by the safety guard. The account
given to Dr Coleman by the respondent is consistent with the accident
when the severed piece of Weathertex fell. The respondent's account in his oral
evidence was that the whole board, which
had not been completely divided in two,
"slipped off the workplace", i.e. the hardwood on the trestles. But even if
this version
of his evidence is correct, it does not follow, necessarily, that
the saw must have been disengaged from the cut in the Weathertex
at the time the
blade made contact with the respondent's hand. The reasons did not address this
question or explain the basis for
the finding that the safety guard was jammed
or stuck in the open position at the time of the accident.
[51] It is plain
from the respondent's evidence that he had no recollection of whether the safety
guard was jammed or not. He swore
that he would not have deliberately put the
safety guard in the open position so that it would not retract automatically.
The possibility
that the safety guard may have become stuck in the open position
did not occur to him until after he received the recall letter from
appellant. According to him, he then took the saw out of its box and noticed
that the safety guard was in the off position.
But acceptance of his evidence
in this regard does not establish the position that the safety guard was in at
the time of the accident.
Mr O'Shea was called to give that evidence. His
evidence is set out above.
[52] If Mr O'Shea's evidence is accepted, it is
likely that the safety guard, unless damaged by falling to the ground, was stuck
the off position and that the guard had a tendency to jam when placed in the
off position. Curiously, this fault in the safety guard
did not appear to have
excited Mr O'Shea's interest or the interest of anyone else who was present
immediately after the accident.
Neither Mr O'Shea nor, it would seem, anyone
else, drew this matter to the respondent's attention. Mr O'Shea said that
other people with him at the time, including Mr Vayro, the owner of
the house, and a person working with him whose Christian name
was Graham.
Graham, according to Mr O'Shea, also manipulated the safety guard. Neither
Graham, nor the owner of the house, was
called to give evidence. Mr Vayro,
who did give evidence, made no observations about the condition of the saw.
Presumably, any
defect in the safety guard, if there was one, was not drawn to
his attention. None of these matters were discussed by the primary
judge in his
reasons: but in fairness to him, some of them were not drawn to his attention.
[53] Nor did the reasons discuss an obvious difficulty with the evidence
that the whole Weathertex sheet fell. The evidence of the
respondent and Mr
O'Shea was that the Weathertex (for a little under half its width) was supported
by hardwood planks roughly equal
in length to the Weathertex. Both the
respondent and Mr Vayro also swore that Mr Vayro was holding one end of the
Weathertex when
the accident happened. Mr O'Shea's opinion was that the
respondent's setup was "a solid, safe, stable working platform." Yet, according
to Mr Vayro, he realised that something had gone wrong only when the respondent
started shouting. It seems odd that the Weathertex
board could fall without Mr
Vayro noticing it immediately. After all, it was only 3.6 metres long. But he
said that as far as he
was aware, "the Weathertex definitely didn't fall off a
[54] The respondent himself was unable to explain how the
Weathertex could have fallen from its platform. Mr O'Shea accepted that
cut was within 150 to 200 mm from the end of the Weathertex board, the
unsupported length of Weathertex would be likely to
fall, but his evidence was
that the cut was about 900 mm from the end. The respondent's oral evidence was
that the accident happened
when he had cut to 300 to 400 mm from the end but Mr
McDonald's notes of oral instructions received by him from the respondent in
November or December 2004 noted "whilst ripping 150 – 200 mm from the end
of the cut" and his solicitors advised the appellant's
solicitors that the cut
was within 250 mm of the end. This was not the only awkward aspect of the
respondent's evidence. He instructed
his solicitor in 2005 for the purpose of
providing particulars of "the exact manner in which the plaintiff was operating
immediately before the weathertex cladding slipped ...", that his hand
position was "right hand on saw handle left hand on top of
handle of saw in
front of saw." Dr Grigg's report revealed that the front handle of the saw
remained in its sealed plastic bag.
The respondent's oral evidence seems to
have been that he had one hand on the handle grip and the other around the saw's
cylindrical
[55] The primary judge did not attempt to explain, let
alone resolve, these difficulties and inconsistencies in the evidence. Nor
the reasons advert to Dr Coleman's evidence referred to in paragraphs [19] and
[20] above. In re-examination, Dr Coleman said
he had a particular
interest in circular saw injuries and believed that he could remember what was
said to him by the respondent.
He then gave this account:
was cutting this length of the saw – length of the timber and a piece
– and the piece that I cut off started to fall
and, as it started to fall,
I grabbed it with my hand to stop the piece of timber falling and, as I did so,
my hand went underneath
the timber to grab it and hit the blade of the saw,
which was exposed."
[56] After this evidence was given, counsel for the respondent declined the
primary judge's invitation to cross-examine in relation
[57] A court
from which an appeal lies must state adequate reasons for its
The failure to give sufficient
reasons constitutes an error of law.
[58] The rationale for the requirement that courts give reasons for their
decisions provides some guidance as to the extent of the
reasons required. The
requirement has been explained, variously, as necessary: to avoid leaving the
losing party with "a justifiable
through not knowing or
understanding why that party lost;
facilitate or not frustrate a right of appeal;
as an attribute or incident of the judicial
to afford natural justice or
procedural fairness;
to provide "the
foundation for the acceptability of the decision by the parties and the public"
and to further "judicial
accountability".
[59] The extent to which a
trial judge must expose his or her reasoning for the conclusions reached will
depend on the nature of the
issues for determination and "the function to be
served by the giving of reasons."
reason, what is required has been expressed in a variety of ways. For example,
in Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd,
"... And, in my opinion, it will ordinarily be sufficient if – to adapt
the formula used in a different part of the law ...
by his reasons the judge
apprises the parties of the broad outline and constituent facts of the reasoning
on which he has acted."
[60] McHugh JA's view was that reasons sufficient to meet the above requirements
do not need to be lengthy or elaborate but "...
it is necessary that the
essential ground or grounds upon which the decision rests should be
articulated."
[61] In Strbak v
Samuels JA said:
"...What is necessary, it seems to me, is a basic explanation of the
fundamental reasons which led the judge to his conclusion. There
requirement, however, that the reasons must incorporate an extended intellectual
dissertation upon the claim of reasoning which
authorises the judgment which is
[62] Woodward J, in Ansett Transport Industries (Operations) Pty Ltd v
said that the decision
"...should set out his understanding of the relevant law, any findings of
fact on which his conclusions depend (especially if those
facts have been in
dispute), and the reasoning processes which led him to those conclusions."
[63] Meagher JA in Beale v Government Insurance Office of NSW stated these
propositions:
"...there are three fundamental elements of a statement of reasons, which it
is useful to consider. First, a judge should refer to
relevant evidence. There
is no need to refer to the relevant evidence in detail, especially in
circumstances where it is clear that
the evidence has been considered. However,
where certain evidence is important or critical to the proper determination of
and it is not referred to by the trial judge, an appellate court may
infer that the trial judge overlooked the evidence or failed
consideration to it:
North Sydney Council v Ligon 302 Pty Ltd
Where conflicting evidence of a significant nature is given, the
existence of both sets of evidence should be referred to.
Secondly, a judge should set out any material findings of fact and any
conclusions or ultimate findings of fact reached. The obvious
extension of the
principle in
North Sydney Council
is that, where findings of fact are not
referred to, an appellate court may infer that the trial judge considered that
be immaterial. Where one set of evidence is accepted over a
conflicting set of significant evidence, the trial judge should set
findings as to how he comes to accept the one over the other. But that is not
to say that a judge must make explicit findings
on each disputed piece of
evidence, especially if the inference as to what is found is appropriately
Selvanayagam v University of the West Indies
[1983] 1 WLR 585
[1983] 1 All ER 824.
Further, it may not be necessary to make findings on every
argument or destroy every submission, particularly where the arguments
are numerous and of varying significance:
Rajski v Bainton
Appeal, 6 September 1991, unreported).
Thirdly, a judge should provide reasons for making the relevant findings of
fact (and conclusions) and reasons in applying the law
to the facts found.
Those reasons or the process of reasoning should be understandable and
preferably logical as well."
[64] Whilst, in my respectful opinion, it would be inconsistent with authority
to apply the three "fundamental elements" rigidly,
and I do not understand his
Honour to be suggesting otherwise, they provide useful guidance for a
determination of the sufficiency
of reasons in the general run of
[65] The following remarks of Henry LJ in Flannery v Halifax Estate
Agencies Ltd
relating to expert evidence
were referred to with approval in the reasons of Ipp JA in Wiki v Atlantis
Relocations (NSW) Pty Ltd:
"It is not a useful task to attempt to make absolute rules as to the
requirement for the judge to give reasons. This is because issues
infinitely various. For instance, when the court, in a case without documents
depending on eye-witness accounts is faced
with two irreconcilable accounts,
there may be little to say other than that the witnesses for one side were more
credible ... But
with expert evidence, it should usually be possible to be more
explicit in giving reasons: See Bingham LJ in
Eckersley v Binnie
'In resolving conflicts of expert evidence, the judge remains the judge; he
is not obliged to accept evidence simply because it comes
from an illustrious
source; he can take account of demonstrated partisanship and lack of
objectivity. But, save where an expert
is guilty of a deliberate attempt to
mislead (as happens only very rarely), a coherent reasoned opinion expressed by
a suitably qualified
expert should be the subject of a coherent reasoned
rebuttal, unless it can be discounted for other good reasons ...'
'... [w]here the dispute involves something in the nature of an intellectual
exchange, with reasons and analysis advanced on either
side, the judge must
enter into the issues canvassed before him and explain why he prefers one case
over the other ... .' "
These observations are also apposite, particularly in relation to the
appellant's contribution claim.
[66] The reasons in relation to liability,
disclose very little of the primary judge's reasoning processes. As far as one
from the reasons, his Honour's conclusion about how the accident
happened may be derived from intuition as much as from, or in lieu
logical reasoning process.
[67] The appellant argued at first instance that:
the evidence of Dr Coleman should have been treated as more reliable than the
respondent's
oral evidence, which was unreliable; it was now only possible to
speculate about how the accident actually happened and as to the
position of the
saw and safety guard at the time of the accident; there was substantial evidence
that the accident happened when
the respondent was nearing the end of the cut he
was making, increasing the likelihood that the outside piece of Weathertex broke
and fell; and the saw blade was not proved to be out of the cut in the
Weathertex at the time of the accident. These arguments had
substance. It was
incumbent on the primary judge to explain why they were rejected or did not
prevent the respondent's claim from
succeeding. As part of any such
explanation, it was necessary for the primary judge to resolve significant
evidentiary conflicts
or inconsistencies. In that regard, it was desirable that
he make findings on credibility for the benefit of an appellate court
event of an appeal and to obtain the benefit to be gained by submitting himself
to the intellectual discipline thereby imposed.
[68] The consequence of these
findings is that the appellant is entitled to have the judgment set
[69] Counsel for the appellant submitted that the respondent's claim
should be dismissed also but that course is inappropriate in
the circumstances.
There is evidence which, if accepted in preference to other evidence led at
first instance, would enable the
respondent to establish his case on liability.
As resolution of some of the evidentiary difficulties discussed earlier depends
findings of credit, it is not possible for this Court to make all of its own
findings of fact. In that regard, it is relevant to
note that some of the oral
evidence was accompanied by physical demonstrations, which were unexplained in
the record.
[70] Although the appeal was against the whole of the judgment,
there is no good reason why the parties should be put to the trouble
and expense
of re-litigating issues relating to quantum. No ground of the notice of appeal
challenged any of the primary judge's
findings on quantum. The new trial should
be before a different judge: that would remove the risk of the primary judge
being exposed
to allegations of pre-judgment should liability be decided against
the appellant.
[71] I would order that:
1. The appeal be
2. The orders made on 29 August 2008 be set aside.
3. The matter
be remitted to the District Court for a new trial on all issues other than
4. The respondent's damages, should he be successful in establishing
liability on the part of the appellant on the new trial, be as
assessed by the
primary judge in the reasons dated 29 August 2008.
5. The costs of the first
trial abide the result of the new trial.
6. The respondent pay the
appellant's costs of the appeal.
[72] DAUBNEY J: I also agree with the
reasons for judgment of Muir JA and with the orders proposed.
Drew v Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2008] QDC 223
Sun Alliance Insurance Ltd v Massoud
[1989] VicRp 2
[1989] VR 8
[1971] 1 NSWLR 376
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
at 270, 279, 280 per McHugh JA.
Soulemezis v
Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
Res 1 v Medical Board of
[2008] QCA 152
Beale v Government Insurance
Office of NSW
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
at 431; and
Fitzgibbon v Waterway
[2003] NSWCA 294.
Beale v Government Insurance Office of NSW
Government Insurance Office of NSW
Soulemezis v
Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
at 259, 271;
Public Service
Board of New South Wales v Osmond
(1986) 159 CLR 656
at 666 – 667 per
Waterways Authority v Fitzgibbon
[2005] HCA 57
(2005) 79 ALJR 1816
Soulemezis v
Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
at 257, 269, 273, 279.
Soulemezis v
Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
Flannery v Halifax
Estate Agencies
[1999] EWCA Civ 811
[2000] 1 WLR 377
at 381 – 392;
Waterways Authority
Cypressvale Pty Ltd v Retail Shop Leases Tribunal
[1995] QCA 187
[1996] 2 Qd R 462
at 475, 476.
Soulemezis v
Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
Housing Commission of New South Wales v Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty Ltd
[1983] 3 NSWLR 378
v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(Unreported, New South Wales Court of Appeal, Gleeson CJ, Samuels and Priestley
JJA, 18 July 1989).
[1983] FCA 179
(1983) 48 ALR 500
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
at 443 – 444.
[1999] EWCA Civ 811
[2000] 1 WLR 377
at 381 – 382.
[2004] NSWCA 174
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (206 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter