URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
In the matter of ICO [2023] QMHC 1 (24 May 2023)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of ICO
[2023] QMHC 1
PROCEEDING:
MHC No. 0031 of 2023
DELIVERED ON:
10 May 2023
DELIVERED AT:
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr J Sundin
DETERMINATION:
appeal is allowed.
Mental Health Review Tribunal’s decision dated
February 2023 to approve 12 treatments of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) over a
period of 60 days, which was to commence on the
15 February 2023, is set aside
and substituted with the decision that the application for ECT is
CATCHWORDS:
HEALTH LAW – MENTAL HEATLH GENERALLY – GENERAL LAW AFFECTING
PERSONS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS OR IMPAIRED CAPACITY –
where the Mental Health Review Tribunal approved that the appellant have 12
treatments of electroconvulsive therapy over a period
of 60 days – where
the appellant appealed this decision of the Mental Health Review Tribunal
– where a stay was granted
until the full appeal could be heard –
where section 509 of the
Mental Health Court Act 2016
(Qld) is considered
– whether the appellant has capacity to give informed
Attorney-General for the State of Queensland v GLH
[2021] QMHC 4
Adamson v Enever & Anor
[2021] QSC 221
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
[2009] UKHL 42
[2009] 1 WLR 1786
TSC v Department of Health and Wellbeing
[2021] SASCA 93
YLY v Mental Health Tribunal (Human Rights)
[2019] VCAT 1383
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Health and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2021
Other Legislation Amendment Act 2022
Human Rights Act 2019
Mental Health Act 2016
Mental Health Act 2014
(Vic),s 68, cited
Mental Health Act 2009
Public Health Act 2005
(Qld), Chapter 4A, cited
Explanatory notes to the
Health and Other Legislation Amendment Bill
G E Devereaux for the appellant
S J Hamlyn-Harris for the Chief Psychiatrist
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the appellant Office of the Chief
Psychiatrist
NOTE: This judgment is published pursuant to
section 790
Health Act 2016
(Qld). It has been anonymised. Leave is given generally for
the whole part or part of the judgment in this anonymised form to be further
[1] On 15 February 2023, the Mental Health Review Tribunal (
) approved that the appellant have 12 treatments of
electroconvulsive therapy (
) over a period of 60 days, which was to
commence on 15 February 2023.
[2] On 1 March 2023, the appellant filed a notice of appeal in relation to
this decision with her grounds of appeal being:
“I do not feel like I need ECT, nor do I want it. I feel it is draconian
and I am concerned about the memory and cognition
problems associated with the
treatment. I want another opinion.”
[3] The appellant also applied for a stay of the tribunal’s decision on
the basis of:
“I am worried if I have the treatment prior to the appeal hearing I will
be impaired ... the side effects and not able to participate
[4] Pursuant to
section 544
Mental Health Act
), the Mental Health Court may stay the decision of the tribunal
appealed against to secure the effectiveness of the appeal.
[5] I heard the stay application on 7 March 2023 and Dr Harden, who was
assisting me, advised that there was no clinical risk to the
appellant if ECT
was stayed until the appeal could be determined. I granted the stay.
[6] The substantive appeal was then listed for 29 March 2023. However, on
that date the appellant’s legal representatives applied
for an adjournment
to get an independent second opinion. Dr McVie and Dr Sundin advised me that
there was no clinical risk to the
appellant if the adjournment was granted.
[7] Accordingly, I granted the adjournment and ordered an independent
psychiatrist to provide an additional report. Thus, Dr Scott
assessed the
appellant on 6 April 2023 and provided a report having regard to sections 233
and 509 of the Act
[8] This appeal raises two issues:
(a) Whether the appellant can give informed consent in relation to ECT; and
(b) Whether ECT is appropriate in the circumstances.
[9] The appellant submits that:
(a) Evidence demonstrates that the appellant has capacity to provide informed
consent pursuant to section 233 of the Act; and
(b) Alternatively, ECT is not appropriate in the circumstances (as required by
section 509 (4) (a) of the Act) because there remains
an alternative to ECT that
should be explored, being another trial of clozapine.
[10] The appeal was heard on 28 April 2023 where I was assisted by Dr Sundin
and Dr Iqbal. At the hearing Dr Scott gave evidence and
representatives for the appellant and the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist both
provided oral submissions which complimented
their written submissions.
[11] The stay of the tribunal’s decision was extended until my judgment
in this matter.
Appeals from the tribunal to the Mental Health Court
[12] The appeal to the Mental Health Court is brought under section 539 of
[13] Under section 546 (2), the appeal is by way of rehearing, which means
that the Mental Health Court is to hear the matter afresh
on all the evidence
(including any updated material provided since the tribunal’s decision)
before the Court. It is not necessary
for the appellant to show error on the
part of the tribunal.
[14] In deciding the appeal, the Mental Health Court may:
(a) confirm the decision appealed against; or
(b) set aside the decision appealed against and substitute another decision;
(c) set aside the decision and return the matter to the tribunal with the
directions the Court considers appropriate.
[15] Section 639 (2) of the Act provides that, in exercising its
itself in relation to a matter before it in any way it considers
appropriate.
The appellant’s mental health history
[16] From 24 March 2022, the appellant was managed
by a New South Wales mental health service and was medicated with depot
zuclopenthixol
200 mgs fortnightly and depot olanzapine 405 mgs monthly. On 20
April 2022, when the appellant was discharged from the service, the
summary documented:
“... 37-year-old woman with longstanding treatment resistive
schizoaffective disorder currently relocated to emergency accommodation
South Wales] after being asked to leave her parents holiday house where they
were all residing together after evacuation
from their separate homes during the
recent floods.
... managed by a CTO [community treatment order] that expires 2nd May 2022.
She has a history of undiagnosed eating disorders and poor compliance with orals
[medications] ... she can become unwell even when
compliance is monitored. She
has a history of multiple admissions due to relapse in the context of medication
non-compliance and
stressors in the community.
Read with Schedule 2 of the
Mental Health Act 2016
Section 546
Mental Health Act 2016
When unwell symptoms include poor self-care, malnourishment, obvious responding
to internal dialogue, misinterpreting interactions,
rude, argumentative,
irritable, dismissive, threatening, refusal to engage with MH, suspicion and
guardedness, paranoid and delusions
including diabetes and Aboriginality and
increased sexual related themes including public nakedness and accusations of
paedophilia
and sexual abuse/inappropriateness by her father. She has been known
to send 100+ inappropriate and abusive text messages to family
managers. She reports to get cathartic release from sending text messages and
regards it as a form of therapy.
... presentations are highly interchangeable from one fortnight to the next,
ranging from pleasant and engaging to delusional, rude
and abusive.
... limited insight into her mental illness and does not share treating teams
opinion that a CTO is required or necessary.
... vague and evasive when describing her symptoms when she is unwell
[17] The appellant relocated from New South Wales to regional Queensland in
service attempted to
However, at the time the appellant
refused to engage with this service and
declined further contact. The referral was subsequently closed.
[18] On 8 September 2022 the police brought the appellant into hospital under
an Emergency Examination Authority
after she was found walking the
streets in the rain naked, thought disordered and refusing to engage with
[19] The appellant was uncooperative in the emergency department with an
escalation of her behaviour, and she attempted to leave hospital.
intramuscular tranquillizer was administered, and she was transferred to the
High Dependency Unit.
[20] The appellant was placed under a treatment authority. Section 18 of the
Act explains the circumstances of when a person can be
placed under a treatment
“18 Treatment authorities
treatment authority is a lawful authority to provide treatment and care to a
person who has a mental illness who does not have
capacity to consent to be
(2) A treatment
authority may be made for a person if an authorised doctor considers the
treatment criteria apply to the
Pursuant to Chapter 4A of the
Public Health Act 2005
person and there is no less restrictive way for the person to receive treatment
and care for the person’s mental illness, including,
for example, under an
advance health directive.
(3) Key elements
of the treatment criteria are that the person does not have capacity to consent
to be treated and there is a risk
of imminent serious harm to the person or
(4) The category
of a treatment authority is—
(a) community, if the person’s treatment and care needs can be met in the
community; or
(b) inpatient, if the person’s treatment and care needs can be met only by
being an inpatient.
category of a person’s treatment authority is inpatient, the person may
receive limited community treatment, for
a period of not more than 7 consecutive
days, if authorised under this Act.”
[21] On 8 November 2022, Dr G provided a second opinion to the treating team
regarding medication optimisation. In this report it
was noted that:
“On review today, she was hostile, disengaging, angry, and quite paranoid.
She exhibited paranoid delusions that we are illegal
and should not be in this
country. her thoughts showed some of loosening of association; her affect was
hostile, angry; oriented;
poor insight and judgement.”
[22] Dr G’s report sets out the appellant has treatment refractory
psychotic and mood symptoms and that the following medication
options were
discussed with the treating team:
was discussed and could contribute to agitation and hostility
Re challenge was considered but was not appropriate at this stage
Optimisation
of lithium dose to 500mg BD with repeat lithium levels
Optimisation
of olanzapine with additional of oral dose 5mg BD
to increase Zuclopenthixol to 300mg F/N if no improvement
Augmentation with ECT if symptoms persist”
[23] Dr A made an application for ECT to the tribunal on 3 February 2023 and
provided a clinical report which set out the appellant’s
treatment and
response to medication.
[24] It was noted that clozapine treatment, which is recommended for
treatment resistant schizophrenia, had been trialled in the past
discontinued due to severe leucopenia. Dr A stated that ECT would be the
alternative evidence-based treatment option for
the appellant.
[25] Dr A referred to a meeting with the appellant’s family which
confirmed the appellant’s long standing mental health
history, noting
(a) since her first presentation at around age nineteen, the appellant has had
episodic attacks requiring hospital admissions at
(b) her overall functioning over the years have been gradually declining;
(c) the appellant has been having more frequent unwell episodes, with increasing
(d) the appellant probably has never been completely well in last two to three
(e) ECT was proposed as potential treatment option in New South Wales some years
ago but did not eventuate.
[26] The family agreed that ECT should be considered as part of the
appellant’s treatment options and was supportive of her
continuing care in
a tertiary facility.
[27] Dr A’s clinical assessment at the time of the ECT application was
that despite being in a structured and supportive environment,
on two depot
antipsychotics and mood stabiliser with good serum level, the appellant’s
mental state continued to fluctuate
with positive symptoms regularly observed.
Her self-care, social interaction and engagement with treating team remain
[28] At the time of the ECT application, the appellant had been stepped down
from the High Dependency Unit to another ward. A referral
to a tertiary facility
was made and declined in January 2023. There was concern that the appellant
could not be managed in an open
ward with her current level of psychosis.
[29] Dr G provided a second opinion in relation to ECT for the appellant on
10 February 2023. He stated that since his previous opinion
on 8 November 2022
the appellant’s mental state had not changed or improved.
[30] When Dr G reviewed the appellant, he found her lying on her bed,
refusing to talk, showing paranoid themes and formal thought
disorder, with no
[31] Dr G’s impression was that:
“[The appellant] has treatment resistant psychotic illness. ECT is a good
treatment to augment the effects of medications.
I support the team plan for
ECT. My opinion has not changed from previous assessment.”
[32] The application for ECT was allowed by the tribunal on 15 February
[33] Dr C provided an updated report dated 6 March 2023 which stated:
“[The appellant] has been admitted to MHU [X] hospital since October 2022.
[The appellant] is being treated involuntarily under
[The appellant] has been psychotic and disorganised during her admission in the
[The appellant] has had a long history of mental health concerns starting from
around 19 years of age.
[The appellant] has had several admissions in the past while living interstate.
There hasn’t been any period of time when [the
appellant] has responded
adequately, to the treatments provided. This has been confirmed following a
discussion with her mother and
[The appellant] is currently on 2 antipsychotics and Lithium.
[The appellant] hasn’t shown any response to this regime. Second opinion
had been sought which recommended medication changes
and if not responding
[The appellant] has had adverse reaction to Clozapine (Leucopenia) when trialled
previously.
[The appellant] has had significant risks in the past due to her psychosis and
disorganisation.
[The appellant] is not fit enough to be managed in a support independent living
arrangement or other forms of accommodation, outside
of the MHU.
Under these circumstances the ECT is being considered as a last treatment option
which hasn’t been trialled before. The family
doesn’t report any ECT
treatments in the past.
The MHRT application for ECT was approved but on the day of the first treatment,
[the appellant] stated to the ECT team that she
is “appealing” the
decision by MHRT.
The ECT team discussed this with the treating consultant and the treating
consultant (Dr C) decided to put a hold on the ECT till
the appeal process is
[The appellant] is deemed to have low risk while in the inpatient unit.
[The appellant] has been able to make a formal appeal. [The appellant] continues
to be psychotic and disorganised.
[The appellant] hasn’t received any ECT since then as the treating team
doesn’t consider the ECT to be an urgent intervention.
But considering the
non-response to pharmacological treatment options, the treating team continues
to recommend a trial of ECT.”
[34] Dr C provided another report on 27 March 2023. He stated the
appellant’s mental state on 23 March 2023 was:
“Wearing dress, not unkempt
Appeared alert and oriented, detailed cognitive assessment not attempted
Mood elevated, easily agitated
Guarded initially then becoming agitated when discussing ECT Pressure of speech
when discussing her appeal
Thought disordered No AH
No insight”
[35] Dr Scott then provided an independent report dated 14 April 2023. During
Dr Scott’s assessment with the appellant on 6
April 2023, she reported
that in January 2006, she was first diagnosed with what she described as
“textbook paranoid schizophrenia”
and subsequently between 2006 to
2012, she had three inpatient admissions.
[36] When the appellant was asked to describe the features of her
schizophrenia, she stated that: “paranoia, feeling like there
were cameras
everywhere, watching me”.
[37] When the appellant was asked to further describe the features of her
schizophrenia, the appellant stated: “
putting myself out there,
having interpersonal problems, not getting enough sleep, poor concentration
[38] The appellant told Dr Scott that she had become estranged from her
“I needed to get away from them. I’m not sure they are my real
parents. I’d like to access my government records
and find out the
... as a kid I lost weight. I was only 43 kgs. My mother was a nurse and she put
baby oil on my face and cleaned me with methylate
spirits, why would she do that
? ... my father ... is a paedophile ... on 24 October 2005, he molested me, he
touched my left breast.
He used to get close to my older sister too ...
I’m not lying. I never lie. When I
told my mother what my father had done, she just said ‘Well at least he
didn’t rape you ...’ My mother might have
been from the
‘stolen generation.’ I think my ancestry is Irish-Aboriginal. In
2015, it came to me, I realised that [MM]
was actually my real father. He raised
me. He was Irish, he had been recruited when he was only aged four as a sniper
in World War
II. He was the first soldier to shoot Hitler ...”
[39] The appellant told Dr Scott that after she left New South Wales, she
stopped taking her prescribed oral olanzapine and that:
“I think I did well off the medication. I had more energy and I was
thinking clearly. I also understood that my mother had
Munchausen by
[40] The appellant explained:
“I had a ‘sugar fit’ when I was anorexic. My mother told the
psychiatrist I had an epileptic fit. The psychiatrist
put me on anti- epilepsy
medication which I didn’t need to be on ...”
[41] In relation to the incident which predicated her admission into hospital
in September 2022, the appellant told Dr Scott that
she had been living in a
cabin in the caravan park when she was disturbed by the snoring of the woman
living next door:
“I wasn’t getting enough sleep. Her snoring was so loud. It reminded
me of my mother. One night I had had enough and
came out and banged on her door.
I wasn’t wearing any clothes at the time and I accidentally locked myself
out. After I didn’t
get any response, I just walked off. It was raining
but I didn’t care. I was walking in the street naked and the police picked
me up and took me to the hospital. I was provoked and angry because no one would
listen to me. Then there was a teleconference and
I was taken from [X] to the
[X] Hospital ...”
[42] The appellant told Dr Scott that she would prefer to cease all
medication:
“I think I’d do well off all medication. I’d like to have
psychotherapy or psychoanalysis instead of taking medications
which all have
side effects ...”
[43] When the appellant was asked whether any therapies had been shown to be
effective as “stand-alone” treatment for
schizophrenia, the
appellant referred to a book entitled
Psychotherapy of Schizophrenia: The
Treatment of Choice
(which was written by Bertram Karon and Gary van den Bos
and first published in 1977).
Scott explains that Munchausen by proxy is a factitious disorder imposed on
another when someone, usually a parent or carer, falsely
claims that another
person, usually a child, has physical or psychological signs or symptoms of
illness, or causes injury or disease
in another person with the intention of
deceiving others and to procure unnecessary investigations or medical
procedures.
[44] Dr Scott set out the results of his mental
examination of the appellant in his report:
“During the assessment on 6 April 2023, [the appellant] presented as a
slim woman with a pale complexion who looked younger
than her chronological age.
She had long dark hair tied back. She was casually dressed and wore no make-up.
Her self-care was good.
[The appellant] was alert and orientated. She was
pensive and maintained good eye contact and manifested a mostly serious
expression.
She demonstrated no abnormal movements. She was not hypervigilant,
agitated or guarded and a shallow rapport was able to be established.
entirely co-operative historian.
[The appellant’s] soft speech was of normal volume and form and was not
pressured. Her vocabulary was sophisticated and she
gave the impression of above
average intelligence. [The appellant] denied feeling anxious, angry or depressed
and self-rated her
mood “7 out of 10” (10 being the best). Her
affect was only mildly dysphoric, appropriate to her thought content and
normally reactive.
[The appellant] demonstrated no clear disorder of thought form (the
connectedness of her thoughts) during the assessment. Her thought
consisted of paranoid and grandiose themes (as described above) and her comments
were likely to be delusional. [The
appellant] may have been self- censoring her account for the purposes of the
court-ordered assessment.
[The appellant] denied any violent or intentional
self- injury ideation. She specifically denied any abnormal percepts or
phenomena and she did not appear pre-occupied or distracted during the
assessment.
At the time of the assessment on 6 April 2023, [the appellant’s] judgement
was chronically impaired. She demonstrated no insight
into her chronic mental
illness or her need for treatment.”
[45] Dr Scott stated that having regard to the appellant’s longitudinal
history, recent inpatient assessments and the findings
of his mental state
examination on 6 April 2023, the appellant has chronic paranoid schizophrenia.
In Dr Scott’s opinion, it
is less likely that she has schizo-affective
disorder. Her chronic psychotic disorder is marked by an irritable mood and
and grandiose delusions.
[46] At the hearing Dr Scott gave evidence consistent with his report and
(a) At the time of his assessment on 6 April 2023, the appellant’s
agitation and her arousal, her psychomotor activity, was
certainly better than
many of the assessments documented.
(b) Dr Scott noted that the appellant presented better than she had previously
to others, until he inquired about her thought content.
(c) The appellant’s thought content, which is the most important aspect of
her mental state examination, was fairly consistent
with someone who was
(d) The appellant’s judgment is acutely impaired. She cannot make rational
and self-serving decisions and is likely to come
to harm, be homeless and be in
a very vulnerable situation.
(e) Presently the appellant is not well enough to leave the hospital. The
appellant was certainly not well enough to be discharged
into the community. The
appellant is not even allowed to have escorted leave within the hospital grounds
and is locked inside the
Mental Health Unit.
(f) Dr Scott agrees that there has been a clear deterioration in the
appellant’s mental health in the last two years. There
has been an overall
functional gradual decline with more frequent and more severe symptoms over a
two- year period where she has
never had a full remission.
[47] Dr Scott explained at the hearing that schizophrenia is a chronic
relapsing illness. Dr Scott further explained that the more
a person experiences
periods of untreated psychosis or sub-optimally treated psychosis will result in
more cognitive and functional
[48] Further Dr Scott explained that where a patient, who has long periods of
untreated psychosis, becomes immured and more or less
habituated to that lower
functioning, then their ability to imagine an improved mental state is
diminished.
[49] Dr Scott stated that treatments, like ECT, can try and avoid such
deterioration for patients.
The appellant’s views, wishes and preferences
[50] I have taken the appellant’s views,
wishes and preferences into account.
[51] The appellant has been consistently clear that she does not want
[52] Dr A’s clinical report dated 3 February 2023 states that the
appellant does not wish to have ECT:
“She believes she is “fine in the head” and is suitable for
discharge, although she was observed to be actively
responding to unseen stimuli
on the ward and seemed guarded.
Multiple attempts were made by treating team on “better days” to
discuss treatment
[The appellant] maintained that she does not wish to have ECT.”
[53] The tribunal set out the appellant’s view, wishes and preferences
and stated that:
“The patient was very clear in her self-report to the Tribunal that she
acknowledged she has a mental illness but that she
wanted a second opinion. The
tenor of the self-report was that she opposed treatment with ECT. Throughout the
course of the hearing,
she interrupted frequently noting to have pressured and
rapid speech and was tangential. She had difficulty following direction and
generally was highly elevated. She tried to explain how she was Munchausen by
proxy and had early onset Alzheimer’s. She opposed
to ECT saying “I
already have Alzheimer’s and could be problem for me”. Again, in the
course of the hearing, the
patient stated on a number of occasions that she was
the golden-girl, was highly intelligent and did not use drugs or alcohol. She
persisted with her opposition to an approval.
In a discussion regarding an Advanced Health Directive there was no evidence
that the patient had an Advanced Health Directive and
the patient mentioned that
if she did, she wanted it revoked. She was not sure whether she had one but does
not want her family involved.”
[54] The appellant reiterated her strong opposition to having ECT to Dr
Scott. She is concerned that the ECT would affect her memory
and cognition:
“I think ECT is draconian. I don’t want to have that done to my
brain. I look at people here who’ve had it and
they look vacant, catatonic
... I’ve noticed that a lot of patients here in this mental health unit
get ECT which concerns
me. I think there is an over-representation of
psychiatrists who order ECT for patients here. I’m highly intelligent.
appellant referred to her academic achievement] ...”
[55] Dr Scott explained to the appellant that there is considerable research
showing that ECT treatment for her particular mental
illness was effective and
that long-term side effects like memory loss were usually not significant.
However, the appellant reiterated
that she would not consider having ECT.
[56] At the hearing, Dr Scott confirmed that the appellant told him that she
had not been provided a good explanation of ECT by her
treating team. However,
he noted that this was not consistent with the clinical notes which suggest
that, on a number of
occasions, her treating team have discussed ECT with the appellant and tried to
reassure her about the likelihood of complications
What is required before ECT can be performed?
[57] ECT is a regulated treatment that can be
effective for some types of mental illness, including severe depressive illness.
involves the application of a minimal electric current to specific areas of a
patient’s head to produce changes in the brain’s
[58] As ECT is a regulated treatment under the Act
sections 235
to 237 define the circumstances in which it can be performed.
[59] Section 509 of the Act sets out the criteria (
the section 509
) that must be satisfied before the tribunal can give approval for
the performance of ECT:
“509 Decision on application
deciding the application, the tribunal must give, or refuse to give, approval
for electroconvulsive therapy to be performed
on the person.
(2) In deciding
whether to give, or refuse to give, the approval, the tribunal must have regard
(a) if the person is an adult—
(i) whether the adult is able to give informed consent to the therapy; and
(ii) to the greatest extent practicable, any views, wishes and preferences the
adult has expressed about the therapy, whether in
an advance health directive or
otherwise; or
(b) if the person is a minor—
(i) the views of the minor’s parents; and
(ii) the views, wishes and preferences of the minor.
(3) Subject to
subsections (4) to (6), the tribunal may give the approval only if the tribunal
is satisfied the person is—
Explanatory notes to the
Health and Other Legislation
Amendment Bill 2021
, at page 5.
Section 232
Mental Health Act 2016
(a) an adult who is not able to give informed consent to the therapy, whether or
not the adult is subject to a treatment authority,
forensic order or treatment
support order; or
(b) an adult who is—
(i) able to give informed consent to the therapy; and
(ii) subject to a treatment authority, forensic order or treatment support
(c) a minor.
subsection (3)(a) applies, the tribunal must also be satisfied—
(a) the therapy has clinical merit and is appropriate in the circumstances;
(b) evidence supports the effectiveness of the therapy for the adult’s
particular mental illness; and
(c) if the therapy has previously been performed on the adult—of the
effectiveness of the therapy for the adult.
subsection (3)(b) applies, the tribunal must also be satisfied—
(a) the applicant has given the adult the explanation required under
(b) the adult has given informed consent to the therapy under
subsection (3)(c) applies, the tribunal must also be satisfied—
(a) the therapy has clinical merit and is appropriate in the circumstances;
(b) evidence supports the effectiveness of the therapy for—
(i) the minor’s particular mental illness; and
(ii) persons of the minor’s age; and
(c) if the therapy has previously been performed on the minor—of the
effectiveness of the therapy for the minor; and
(d) the performance of the therapy on the minor is in the minor’s best
tribunal gives the approval, the approval—
(a) must state the number of treatments that may be performed in a stated period
under the approval; and
(b) may be made subject to the conditions the tribunal considers
appropriate.”
[60] It follows from
section 509
that if the person is able to give informed
consent, but does not consent, then ECT cannot be approved. That is the position
the appellant advances in this case.
[61] The requirements for informed consent are set out in section 233 of the
233 Requirements for informed consent
(1) A person
informed consent
to the person’s treatment by
regulated treatment only if—
(a) the person has capacity to give consent to the treatment; and
(b) the consent is in writing signed by the person.
subsection (1)(a), the person has capacity to give consent to the treatment if
the person has the ability to—
(a) understand the nature and effect of a decision relating to the treatment;
(b) freely and voluntarily make the decision; and
(c) communicate the decision.
(3) A person can
give informed consent in an advance health directive.”
[62] Importantly, before a person gives informed consent to ECT they must be
given a full explanation about the nature and effect
of the treatment.
“234 Explanation to be given
Before a person gives informed consent to the
person’s treatment by regulated treatment, the doctor proposing to provide
treatment must give the person a full explanation, in a form and language
able to be understood by the person, about—
(a) the purpose, method, likely duration and expected benefit of the treatment;
(b) possible pain, discomfort, risks and side effects associated with the
treatment; and
(c) alternative methods of treatment available to the person; and
(d) the consequences of not receiving treatment.”
[63] Accordingly, this explanation, which must be provided by the doctor,
provides context as to whether the person has the ability
to understand the
nature and effect of a decision relating to ECT treatment as set out in 233 (2)
(a) of the Act.
[64] The section 509 criteria are the result of significant amendment by the
Health and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2022
(No 1 of 2022) and the
explanatory notes set out the position prior to 1 July 2022:
Mental Health Act
provides that a medical practitioner requires the
MHRT’s approval to perform ECT on an adult who is unable to give informed
consent to the treatment. Before approving the performance of ECT, the MHRT
consider the
views, wishes and preferences expressed by the person about the therapy in an
Advance Health Directive, and
therapy is in the person’s best interests;
evidence supporting the effectiveness of the therapy for the person’s
particular mental illness; and
therapy has previously been performed on the person, the therapy has been
effective for the person.
The current test does not require the MHRT to take into account the views,
wishes and preferences of an adult who is unable to give
informed consent to the
treatment unless they are expressed in an Advance Health Directive. It also does
not require the MHRT to
specifically consider the adult’s capacity to
provide informed consent to the therapy. Additionally, the ‘best
test is considered a less rights-based approach which may not
promote a person’s participation in making decisions about their
compared with other approaches that require consideration of the person’s
views, wishes and preferences together
with an ‘appropriateness’
element such as a ‘clinical merit’ test.”
Explanatory notes to the
Health and Other Legislation
Amendment Bill 2021
, at pages 5 – 6.
[65] The explanatory notes then go on to make it clear that the object of the
present statutory scheme is to enhance the protections
for persons with mental
illness who cannot consent to ECT or who may have specific vulnerabilities in
relation to providing consent
which warrants additional
[66] The section 509 criteria now adopt a more rights-based approach,
including by removing the ‘best interests’ test
for adults and
specifically requiring consideration of an adult’s capacity to provide
informed consent, where relevant.
[67] As the explanatory notes explain that this will also better support
decision makers in complying with their obligations under
Human Rights
[68] The section 509 criteria will also better support a person to
participate in decisions and are considered to promote a person’s
recognition and equality before the law.
[69] The appellant is presently an involuntary patient under the Act under a
treatment authority. However, this does not alter the
requirements of informed
consent as provided by section 233 of the Act.
[70] It should be noted that the legislature has purposely distinguished
between the meaning of capacity in relation to receiving
treatment under the
Act, and the capacity to give consent to ECT.
[71] The meaning of capacity to consent to be treated under the Act (for
non-regulated treatments) is not the same as capacity to
give consent to ECT,
and the former is set out in section 14 of the Act:
“14 Meaning of capacity to consent to be
to consent to be treated if the person—
(a) is capable of understanding, in general terms—
(i) that the person has an illness, or symptoms of an illness, that affects the
person’s mental health and wellbeing; and
Explanatory notes to the
Health and Other Legislation
Amendment Bill 2021
, at page 6.
Explanatory notes to the
Health and Other Legislation
Amendment Bill 2021
, at page 6.
Explanatory notes to the
Health and Other Legislation
Amendment Bill 2021
, at page 6.
Human Rights Statement of Compatibility to the
Other Legislation Amendment Act 2022
(Qld), at page 4.
(ii) the nature and purpose of the treatment for the illness; and
(iii) the benefits and risks of the treatment, and alternatives to the
treatment; and
(iv) the consequences of not receiving the treatment; and
(b) is capable of making a decision about the treatment and communicating the
decision in some way.
(2) A person may have capacity to consent to be treated even though the
person decides not to receive treatment.
(3) A person may
be supported by another person in understanding the matters mentioned in
subsection (1)(a) and making a decision
(4) This section
does not affect the common law in relation to—
(a) the capacity of a minor to consent to be treated; or
(b) a parent of a minor consenting to treatment of the minor.”
[72] The Act acknowledges that capacity may fluctuate, which is a factor to
take into account when determining when a treatment authority
“421 Requirement to revoke treatment authority
a review of a treatment authority, the tribunal must revoke the authority if the
tribunal considers—
(a) the treatment criteria no longer apply to the person subject to the
authority; or
(b) there is a less restrictive way for the person to receive treatment and care
for the person’s mental illness.
(2) However,
subsection (1) does not apply if the tribunal considers the person’s
capacity to consent to be treated for the
person’s mental illness is not
Example of when a person’s capacity to consent is
not stable—
the person gains and loses capacity to consent to be treated during a short
time period.”
[73] However, the test for capacity that is applied to regulated treatments,
including ECT, is decision and time specific and is distinct
from the test for
capacity that applies to involuntary treatment provided under a treatment
[74] Therefore, as the explanatory notes make clear, the Act provides that a
person may be placed on a forensic order or treatment
support order by the
Mental Health Court following an unlawful act, on the basis the order is
necessary to protect the safety of
the community. However, a person under a
treatment authority may be assessed as having capacity to consent to ECT even
though they
may be assessed, at the same time, as not having capacity to consent
to other non-regulated treatments, such as psychotropic
medications:
Mental Health Act
provides that a person may be placed on a forensic
order or treatment support order by the Mental Health Court following an
act, on the basis the order is necessary to protect the safety of the
community. A forensic order or treatment support order provides
for, among other
things, the involuntary treatment and care of a person with a mental illness.
While persons on these orders may
lack capacity, this is not a particular
consideration of the Court when making the order.
Although patients on forensic orders or treatment support orders may therefore
have capacity to make treatment decisions, including
decisions about ECT, the
high level of monitoring and specific requirements attached to the treatment
provided under their orders
may make them susceptible to providing consent under
the mistaken belief they are required to undergo ECT as a condition of their
To provide additional protection to people subject to involuntary orders, and
improve safeguards for the rights of individuals under
Human Rights Act
is proposed that for persons subject to a treatment authority, forensic order or
treatment support order, the MHRT should be
satisfied that the person has both
been given appropriate information about ECT and has given informed
[75] As the explanatory notes also make clear, if a person under an
involuntary order has the capacity to provide informed consent
and declines to
undergo ECT, the tribunal will be required to respect their decision. If a
person on an involuntary order does not
have capacity, the test for approving
the performance of ECT will be the same for other adults who do not have
capacity to provide
informed consent.
Explanatory notes to the
Health and Other Legislation
Amendment Bill 2021
, at page 6.
Explanatory notes to the
Health and Other Legislation
Amendment Act
, at page 7.
Explanatory notes to the
Health and Other Legislation
Amendment Act
, at page 7.
Mental Health Act 2016
(Qld) and the
Human Rights Act 2019
[76] Relevantly, in relation to this appeal, one of the main objects of the
Act is to improve and maintain the health and wellbeing
of persons who have a
mental illness who do not have the capacity to consent to be
This to be achieved in a way that:
(a) safeguards the rights of persons; and
(b) is the least restrictive of the rights and liberties of a person who has a
mental illness; and
(c) promotes the recovery of a person who has a mental illness, and the
person’s ability to live in the community, without
the need for
involuntary treatment and care.
[77] The Act recognises the least restrictive practices should always be
adopted in respect of patients. The least restrictive way
is if it adversely
affects the person’s rights and liberties only to the extent required to
protect the person’s safety
and welfare or the safety of
[78] Any person performing a function or exercising a power under the Act
must have regard to
a number of principles which apply in relation
to a person who has, or may have, a mental illness
which relevantly
for this appeal include:
“(a) Same human rights
right of all persons to the same basic human rights must be recognised and taken
into account
right to respect for his or her human worth and dignity as an individual must be
recognised and taken into account
(b) Matters to be considered in making decisions
the greatest extent practicable, a person is to be encouraged to take part in
making decisions affecting the person’s life,
especially decisions about
treatment and care
(1) (a) of the
Mental Health Act 2016
Mental Health Act 2016
Mental Health Act 2016
Mental Health Act 2016
Mental Health Act 2016
to the greatest
extent practicable, in making a decision about a person, the person’s
views, wishes and preferences are to be
taken into account
a person is
presumed to have capacity to make decisions about the person’s treatment
and care and other matters under this Act
(c) Support persons
the greatest extent practicable, family, carers and other support persons of a
person who has a mental illness are to be involved
in decisions about the
person’s treatment and care, subject to the person’s right to
(d) Provision of support and information
the greatest extent practicable, a person is to be provided with necessary
support and information to enable the person to exercise
rights under this Act,
including, for example, providing access to other persons to help the person
express the person’s views,
wishes and preferences
(e) Achievement of maximum potential and self-reliance
the greatest extent practicable, a person is to be helped to achieve maximum
physical, social, psychological and emotional potential,
quality of life and
self-reliance
(f) Acknowledgement of needs
person’s age-related, gender-related, religious, communication and other
special needs must be recognised and taken into account
hearing, visual or speech impairment must be recognised and taken into
(g) Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islanders
unique cultural, communication and other needs of Aboriginal people and Torres
Strait Islanders must be recognised and taken into
people and Torres Strait Islanders should be provided with treatment, care and
support in a way that recognises and is
consistent with Aboriginal tradition or
Island custom, mental health and social and emotional wellbeing, and is
culturally appropriate
and respectful
to the extent
practicable and appropriate in the circumstances, communication with Aboriginal
people and Torres Strait Islanders is
to be assisted by an interpreter
(h) Persons from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds
unique cultural, communication and other needs of persons from culturally and
linguistically diverse backgrounds must be recognised
and taken into
provided to persons from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds must
have regard to the person’s cultural,
religious and spiritual beliefs and
to the extent
practicable and appropriate in the circumstances, communication with persons
from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds is to be assisted by an
interpreter
(j) Maintenance of supportive relationships and community
participation
the greatest extent practicable, the importance of a person’s continued
participation in community life and maintaining existing
relationships are to be taken into account, including, for example, by providing
treatment in the community in which the
person lives.
(k) Importance of recovery-oriented services and reduction of
importance of recovery-oriented services and the reduction of stigma associated
with mental illness must be recognised and taken
into account.
(l) Provision of treatment and care
and care provided under this Act must be provided to a person who has a mental
illness only if it is appropriate for promoting
and maintaining the
person’s health and wellbeing.
(m) Privacy and confidentiality
person’s right to privacy and confidentiality of information about the
person must be recognised and taken into account.”
[79] In my view, the objects and principles of the Act are compatible with
HRA despite being expressed in slightly different terms.
Attorney-General for the State of Queensland v GLH
[2021] QMHC 4.
[80] I note that section 13 of the HRA sets out that a human right “may
be subject under law only to reasonable limits ... in
deciding whether a limit
on a human right is reasonable and justifiable, a number of factors may be
relevant”. One of those
factors is whether there are any less restrictive
and reasonably available ways to achieve that purpose.
position is also built into the how the Act’s objects are to be
[81] In making a decision to approve ECT a number of human rights are engaged
(a) the right to recognition and equality before the law;
(b) the right to privacy;
(c) the right to liberty and security of person;
(d) the right to humane treatment when deprived of liberty;
(e) the right to access health services without discrimination.
[82] Further section 17 (c) of the HRA provides that a person must not be
subjected to medical or scientific experimentation or treatment
without the
person’s full, free and informed consent.
[83] These considerations raised by the HRA are consistent with the
Act’s objects and the principles that must be applied when
performing a
function or power under the Act.
What does the ability to understand the nature and effect of a
decision relating to ECT mean?
[84] This appeal concerns whether the appellant is
able to give informed consent to ECT as required by section 509 (2) (a) (i).
Human Rights Act 2019
Mental Health Act 2016
Human Rights Act 2019
Human Rights Act 2019
Human Rights Act 2019
Human Rights Act 2019
Human Rights Act 2019
[85] Section 233 of the Act sets out the requirements for informed consent
and an issue for this appeal is whether the appellant has
the ability to
understand the nature and effect of a decision relating to ECT.
[86] The Chief Psychiatrist submits that to have the “ability to ...
understand the nature and effect of a decision relating
to the treatment”
in terms of section 233 (2) (a), a person:
(a) must be able to understand that they are making a decision about whether or
not to have ECT as a treatment option (the nature
of the decision); and
(b) must be able to have at least some basic understanding that ECT is being
proposed because the person's doctor considers that
it is a treatment that can
be effective for their particular mental condition and may be beneficial for
them (the effect of the decision).
[87] Section 233 (2) (a) has not been previously considered in a published
judgment in Queensland.
Adamson v Enever & Anor
[2021] QSC 221
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) defines
capacity in almost identical terms as section 233 of the Act:
, for a person for a matter, means the person is capable
(a) understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the matter; and
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
(c) communicating the decisions in some way”
Adamson v Enever & Anor
[2021] QSC 221
Applegarth J explained the meaning of the limb “understand the nature and
effect of decisions” in relation to the
Guardianship and Administration
“[43] The Capacity Guidelines explain that the adult needs to be able to
understand the information that is relevant to the
decision, including the
options and their consequences. It is sufficient for the adult to have a
‘basic understanding of the
key features’ of that information, but
for this criterion to be met, more complex decisions require more
understanding.
[44] The adult must also be able to retain the relevant information. This may
only be for a short period, provided the period is
long enough for the adult to
make a decision. Also, the adult must have the ability to broadly identify the
advantages and disadvantages
of the available options and to understand the
consequences of those options, then weigh those consequences and reach a
decisions.”
[90] Applegarth J drew heavily on the Queensland Capacity Assessment
Guidelines prepared under
section 250
Guardianship and Administration
(Qld) to assist people required to make assessments about the
capacity of adults to make decisions about matters under Queensland's
guardianship legislation. These guidelines do not apply to decisions about
capacity under the Act
However, in my view
is instructive
when considering whether a person has the ability to understand the nature and
effect of a decision relating to ECT
as required by section 233 of the Act.
[91] A number of interstate decision have also considered the issue of
consent in relation to their respective statutory schemes.
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
[92] In the leading Victorian case of
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
PBU and NJE
), Bell J considered the relevance of
lack of insight in deciding whether a person has capacity to consent under the
Mental Health Act 2014
the Victorian Act
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Victorian Charter
PBU and NJE
two patients in separate appeals challenged VCAT
orders that they be subjected to ECT. Bell J conducted a comprehensive review of
the law relating to involuntary treatment including the specific issues of
informed consent, capacity to give consent, the no less
restrictive treatment
principle, the absence of a best interests test, and the application of the
Victorian Charter.
[94] Ultimately, Bell J concluded that the tribunal had misinterpreted and
misapplied the statutory test, and upheld the appeals.
[95] The critical issue in
PBU and NJE
was the construction of the
statutory test for “capacity to give informed consent” in section
68(1) of the Victorian Act
which is a differently worded test to section 233 of
the Queensland Act.
[96] Section 68 (1) of the Victorian Act is as follows:
“68 Capacity to give informed consent under this
person has the capacity to give informed consent under this Act if the person-
(a) understands the information he or she is given that is relevant to the
decision; and
(b) is able to remember the information that is relevant to the decision; and
(c) is able to use or weigh information that is relevant to the decision;
(d) is able to communicate the decision he or she makes by speech, gestures or
any other means.”
[97] Unlike the Queensland Act, this provision is not specific to ECT.
However, it is broadly to the same effect. Further the Queensland
modelled on the Victorian Charter and operates in a similar way.
[98] As to the level of understanding required in the test for capacity to
consent in Victoria, it is relevant to note that in
PBU and NJE,
said in paragraph [160]:
“[160] ... under the
Mental Health Act
, the test in
the person 'understands the information he or she is given that is relevant to
the decision'. The ordinary and natural
meaning of the word 'understand' is
'perceive the meaning of, 'grasp the idea of or 'comprehend'. In that provision,
I think the
level of understanding intended is only a general kind of
understanding that relates to the nature, purpose and effect of the treatment
[99] In paragraph [280], Bell J said:
“[280] It is enough that the person, like most people, is able to make
and communicate a decision in broad terms as to the
general nature, purpose and
effect of the treatment.”
[100] I note that this approach appears to be consistent with the way in
considered the statutory test for capacity to make
decisions in the Queensland
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
PBU and NJE
, Bell J made a number of observations
specifically about PBU’s circumstances:
“[9] ... Extensive medical evidence was given, including by PBU's
treating psychiatrist and the clinical director of the Mental
Health Service for
the Northern Area. This evidence, which was carefully reviewed by VCAT, was that
ECT was the only currently available
appropriate treatment for PBU, that his
mental state was slowly deteriorating, that he had refused to take Clozapine,
and that only
ECT would allow him to become well enough to engage in his
treatment and improve sufficiently to leave hospital.
[13] VCAT ... accepted the contention of the clinical director that PBU did not
have capacity because he did not accept the diagnosis
of schizophrenia in
relation to him:
I find that, as at the hearing date, he did not have capacity to give informed
consent to whether ECT should be performed in circumstances
where he did not
accept the diagnosis for which the treatment was intended to be given. PBU has
consistently disputed the diagnosis
and the suggestion that ECT might be
beneficial for him.
VCAT expressed its conclusion at this level of generality. There is no
discussion in the reasons for decision of how PBU's refusal
to accept the
diagnosis of schizophrenia related to his ability to remember and weigh and use
information and communicate his decision.
[279] In the case of PBU, the central error of law was that VCAT determined
that he did not have the capacity to give informed consent
because he did not
accept or believe, or have insight into, the diagnosis of his mental illness.
For various personal, social and
medical reasons, it is not uncommon for persons
having mental illness and persons not having mental illness to deny or diminish
illness and the need for treatment. In both cases, lack of acceptance,
belief or insight may be relevant when determining whether
a person has the
capacity to give informed consent, but it is only one consideration. It would be
discriminatory to treat this consideration
as determinative in relation to
people having mental illness when it is not determinative in relation to people
not having mental
illness. In fact, PBU did accept that he had a mental illness
for which he needed non-ECT treatment, but VCAT gave this little
PBU & NJE v Mental Health Tribunal and Others
, at [9], [13], and [29].
[102] As to the level of understanding required in the test for capacity to
consent in Victoria, it is relevant to note that in
PBU and NJE,
“[23] VCAT found that NJE met the criteria in paras 68(1)(a), (b) and
I was satisfied that NJE had an understanding about ECT treatment as described
of the MHA in that she could understand the information, could
remember it and could communicate her wishes and her anxieties.
It is reasonable to infer that VCAT accepted that, in doing so, NJE understood
that ECT was a procedure that would result in her
having seizures and that she
was concerned that it may cause her to have memory problems, as her legal
representative submitted.
It is reasonable to infer that, in doing so, VCAT also
accepted the submission made for NJE that her preferred alternative to ECT
remaining in hospital for an extended period and the trialling of alternative
medications, possibly Clozapine.
[24] However, VCAT found under
that NJE could not use and weigh
information relevant to the decision:
[25] VCAT ... accepted the evidence of Dr A that additional attempts to
discuss, or provide more written information about, ECT only
aggravated NJE.
VCAT found that '[i]t was not that NJE did not understand but rather that she
could not be persuaded that the information
was relevant to her’.
[27] NJE’s strongly and consistently expressed view and preference, of
which VCAT made note, was to remain in hospital and
continue to receive depot
and oral medication. VCAT said that it gave weight to the medical evidence that
'ECT was the only treatment
that has a chance to address both positive and
negative symptoms' of NJE's schizophrenia.
[280] In the case of NJE, the central error of law was that VCAT determined
that she did not have the capacity to give informed
consent because she had not
actually given careful consideration to the advantages and disadvantages of ECT.
To have the capacity
to give informed consent, it is not required of persons
having mental illness, nor of persons not having mental illness, that they
or are able to give, careful consideration to the advantages and disadvantages
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
at [23] – [27], and [280].
the treatment. It is not required that they make, or are able to make, a
rational and balanced decision in relation to the decision.
It is enough that
the person, like most people, is able to make and communicate a decision in
broad terms as to the general nature,
purpose and effect of the treatment.
Personal autonomy and the dignity of the individual are at stake. A person does
not lack the
capacity to give informed consent simply by making a decision that
others consider to be unwise according to their individual values
and situation.
To impose upon persons having mental illness a higher threshold of capacity, and
to afford them less respect for personal
autonomy and individual dignity, than
people not having that illness, would be discriminatory.”
[103] In relation to the relevance of a person having a lack of insight into
their mental illness, Bell J considered this issue and
“[194] Insight into one's diagnosis and need for treatment varies
significantly between different persons and between the same
different situations. Insight is potentially affected in nature and degree by
various non-capacity influences, including
educational background, language
proficiency, familiarity with medical issues and family and social relationships
(negative and positive)
and (often critically) the availability of appropriate
support. For these reasons, it is but one of the factual considerations that
be relevant when assessing capacity to give informed consent. As disability law
scholars have written:
A lack of insight may impact a person's ability to understand [or use or weigh]
relevant information, but the presence or absence
of insight is not a proxy for
the presence or absence of decision-making capacity. Insight is an extremely
complicated phenomenon
that is rarely either simply present or absent. Various
aspects of insight - such as insight into diagnosis, insight into the presence
or veracity of phenomenology and insight into the need for treatment
- may all vary independently. This, in combination with the requirement that a
person only needs to understand information that is
relevant to the decision
being made, means that while a lack of insight may suggest a lack of decision
making capacity, this deficit
alone will rarely be determinative.”
(citations omitted)
[104] His Honour concluded:
At pages 198-203, [183] - [198].
“[198] In conclusion, it may be accepted that the presence of delusional
thinking and irrational fears is ‘capable of
depriving a person of
capacity. The question is whether it does’. So may it be accepted that
lack of belief or insight in respect
of a mental illness or need for treatment
may be capable of suppo1iing a finding of incapacity. The question is whether it
This means giving due consideration to a relevant fact, not (in effect)
applying a determinative normative criterion.”
(citations omitted)
[105] Bell J said that the test for capacity to consent in the Victorian Act
reflects the “functional approach”
“whether, at the time the decision had to be made, the person could
understand its nature and effects”, rather
than the “status
or the “outcome
[106] Bell J made it clear that in determining whether a person has the
capacity to give informed consent to have ECT there is no
paternalistic or beneficial approach:
“[167] ... One can understand the natural human tendency of health
professionals and judicial officers, among others, to make
decisions in the best
interests of vulnerable persons, especially where treatment for grievous
ill-health, or even the person's life,
is at stake. It has been described as the
‘protection imperative’.
[168] However well intentioned, such a paternal or beneficial approach is not
part of the common law test of capacity and was rejected
when the functional
approach was adopted ... as now reflected in s 68(1) of our
Mental Health
(citations omitted)
[107] Bell J concluded
in relation to the two appeals that VCAT
misinterpreted and misapplied the statutory test in the Victorian Act “in
undermined PBU and NJE's human right to self-determination, to be free
of non-consensual medical treatment and to personal inviolability
protected by the
Charter of Human
As explained by Baroness Hale in the House of Lords in
[2009] UKHL 42
[2009] 1 WLR 1786.
‘status approach’: excluded all people with a particular
characteristic from a particular decision, irrespective of
their actual capacity
to make it at the time.
[2009] I WLR 1786 per Baroness Hale at
The ‘outcome approach’: focused on
the final content of the decision: a decision which is inconsistent with
conventional
values or with which the assessor disagreed might be classified as
incompetent.
[2009] UKHL 42
[2009] 1 WLR 1786
per Baroness Hale at 1789.
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
at [167] – 168].
At 225 [276].
Rights and Responsibilities Act
explained the basis of that conclusion:
“[279] In the case of PBU, the central error of law was that VCAT
determined that he did not have the capacity to give informed
consent because he
did not accept or believe, or have insight into, the diagnosis of his mental
illness ...
[280] In the case of NJE, the central error of law was that VCAT determined that
she did not have the capacity to give informed consent
because she had not
actually given careful consideration to the advantages and disadvantages of ECT.
To have the capacity to give
informed consent, it is not required of persons
having mental illness, nor of persons not having mental illness, that they give,
or are able to give, careful consideration to the advantages and disadvantages
of the treatment. It is not required that they make,
or are able to make, a
rational and balanced decision in relation to the decision. It is enough that
the person, like most people,
is able to make and communicate a decision in
broad terms as to the general nature, purpose and effect of the
treatment.”
[108] The decision in
PBU and NJE
has been applied in VCAT decisions
and been the subject of commentary.
Clearly each case depends on
its own facts.
TSC v Department of Health and Wellbeing
[2021] SASCA 93
TSC v Department of Health and Wellbeing
[2021] SASCA
) the Court of Appeal of South Australia gave careful
consideration to
PBU and NJE,
noting the differences in the applicable
statutory tests.
[110] In South Australia,
Mental Health Act 2009
(SA) provides: “
5A-Decision-making capacity
(2) For the
purposes of this Act, a person will be taken to have impaired decision-making
capacity in respect of a particular decision
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal and Others
, at 225 [276].
At 226 [279]-[280].
Ian Freckelton QC, “Electroconvulsive Therapy, law and
human rights”, 2019
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law,
Vol 20(l), pp
Bernadette McSherry, “Electroconvulsive Therapy without Consent; The
Influence of Human Rights Law”, 2019
Journal of Law and Medicine
Vol 26(4), pp 732-736.
YLY v Mental Health Tribunal (Human Rights)
(the Tribunal set aside the decision to approve ECT);
XJY v Mental
Health Tribunal (Human Rights)
[2021] VCAT 83 (The
Tribunal confirmed the
decision to approve ECT).
At [22] – [41].
(a) the person is not capable of-
(i) understanding any information that may be relevant to the decision
(including information relating to the consequences of making
a particular
decision); or
(ii) retaining such information; or
(iii) using such information in the course of making the decision; or
(iv) communicating his or her decision in any manner.”
[111] Once again, like the Victorian legislation, this provision is not
specific to ECT.
[112] The Court of Appeal noted that a question of capacity will be fact and
context specific:
“[40] A question of capacity for the purpose of s 16(1)(c) will be
fact-and context specific. While the capacity test does
not admit of extraneous
considerations, such as the 'best interests' of the person, that does not mean
that incapacity cannot be
proved, on the evidence, by reference to various
considerations depending on the circumstances. Different factors may contribute
to the conclusion, one way or the other. We endorse the observation by the
Tribunal in
GKK v Department of Health and Ageing
‘Insight or acceptance of the fact of a mental illness is clearly a
significant factor in assessing whether a person has impaired
decision making
capacity as to the need for treatment for a mental illness. A failure by a
person to accept that they are suffering
from a mental illness may consequently
lead to a conclusion that the person has impaired decision-making capacity as to
the appropriate
treatment for their mental illness.’
[41] On the other hand, depending on all of the circumstances, it may
[113] The Court of Appeal concluded that it was open on the facts of that
case to conclude that TSC lacked the capacity to consent
to treatment for his
mental illness. The case was not concerned with ECT.
[114] The Court of Appeal endorsed the principles stated by Bell J in
although it noted that “the absence of legislation in South
Australia containing the interpretive commands of the Victorian
TSC v Department of Health and Wellbeing
[2021] SASCA
, at [40] – [41].
TSC v Department of Health and Wellbeing
[2021] SASCA
[115] The tribunal’s decision appears to have been largely based on the
fact that TSC did not accept his diagnosis of schizophrenia
or the need for
treatment, but the Court of Appeal noted
that the tribunal had
taken into account the totality of the evidence and concluded
TSC's “psychotic condition has clouded his judgment”.
Summary of principles in relation to informed consent and
section 233 (2) (a) of the Act
[116] One of the main objects of the Act is to
improve the health and wellbeing of persons who have a mental illness who do not
the capacity to consent to be treated. This must be achieved in a way that:
(a) safeguards the rights of persons; and
(b) is the least restrictive of the rights and liberties of a person who has a
mental illness; and
(c) promotes the recovery of a person who has a mental illness, and the
person’s ability to live in the community, without
the need for
involuntary treatment and care.
[117] Persons who have, or may have, a mental illness have the same human
rights as persons who do not have a mental illness and this
must be recognised
and taken into account. A person’s right to respect for his or her human
worth and dignity as an individual
must be also recognised and taken into
[118] To the greatest extent practicable:
(a) a person is to be encouraged to take part in making decisions affecting the
person’s life, especially decisions about treatment
and care; and
(b) in making a decision about a person, the person’s views, wishes and
preferences are to be taken into account.
[119] The Act rejects the best interest paradigm in relation to decisions
person’s views, wishes and
TSC v Department of Health and Wellbeing
[2021] SASCA
, at [48] and [59]-[63].
TSC v Department of Health and Wellbeing
[2021] SASCA
Section 233
(2) (a) of the
Mental Health Act 2016
Mental Health Act 2016
Mental Health Act 2016
preferences together with an ‘appropriateness’ element such as a
‘clinical merit’ test. This is a fundamental
change which must be
acknowledged by those considering whether the
section 509
criteria apply to a
person. For example, I note that Dr C’s latest report on 27 March 2023,
still considers whether the performance
of ECT is in the person’s best
interest. This is wrong.
[120] In relation to determining whether a person can understand the nature
and effect of a decision relating to ECT the following
matters are relevant:
(a) Capacity to give consent to ECT must be established on the balance of
probabilities. No party bears the onus of proof of any
(b) A person has capacity to give informed consent to ECT if they have the
ability to:
(i) understand the nature and effect of a decision relating to the treatment;
(ii) freely and voluntarily make the decision; and
(iii) communicate the decision.
(c) The starting point is that a person is presumed to have capacity to make
decisions about the person’s treatment and care.
(d) The test for capacity applied to regulated treatments, including ECT, is
decision and time specific and is distinct from the
test for capacity that
applies to involuntary treatment provided under a treatment authority.
(e) Therefore, a person under a treatment authority may be assessed as having
capacity to consent to ECT even though they may be
assessed, at the same time,
as not having capacity to consent to other non-regulated treatments, such as
psychotropic medications.
(f) If a person under an involuntary order has the capacity to provide informed
consent and declines to undergo ECT, then this decision
must be respected.
Section 685
Mental Health Act 2016
Section 233
Mental Health Act 2016
Mental Health Act 2016
(g) In order to have the capacity to provide informed consent a person needs to
be able to understand the information that is relevant
to the decision,
including the options and their consequences. This information must be provided
to the person before a person gives
informed consent to ECT.
(h) Accordingly, section 234 of the Act requires that before a person gives
informed consent to ECT, they must be given a full explanation
(in a form and
language able to be understood by the person) about:
(i) the purpose, method, likely duration and expected benefit of the treatment;
(ii) possible pain, discomfort, risks and side effects associated with the
treatment; and
(iii) alternative methods of treatment available to the person; and
(iv) the consequences of not receiving treatment.
(i) This explanation informs the context of whether the person has the ability
to understand the nature and effect of a decision
relating to ECT.
(j) Accordingly, the doctors’ explanations about these matters, the
circumstances in which they were given, and the person’s
response should
be recorded in the material so that they can be considered and assessed.
(k) Based on this information, the person in general terms must have the ability
to identify the advantages and disadvantages of
the available options and to
understand the consequences of those options, then weigh those consequences and
reach a decision.
(l) A person must be able to:
(i) understand that they are making a decision about whether or not to have ECT
as a treatment option (the nature of the decision);
(ii) have at least some basic understanding that ECT is being proposed because
the person's doctor considers that it is a treatment
that can be
Section 234
Mental Health Act 2016
effective for their particular mental condition and may be beneficial for them
(the effect of the decision).
(m) To have the capacity to give informed consent to ECT, it is not required of
persons having mental illness, nor of persons not
having mental illness, that
they give, or are able to give, careful consideration to the advantages and
disadvantages of the treatment.
(n) It is not required that a person makes a rational and balanced decision in
relation to their decision. It is enough that the
person, like most people, be
able to make and communicate a decision in broad terms as to the general nature
and effect of the treatment.
(o) The capacity test must be applied in a non-discriminatory manner so as to
ensure that people with mental illness are not deprived
of their equal rights to
exercise legal capacity upon the basis of contestable value judgments relating
to their illness, decisions
of behaviour, rather than upon the basis of the
neutral application of the statutory criteria as set out in section 233 of the
(p) In short, the test is not to be applied so as to produce social conformity
at the expense of personal autonomy.
(q) A person’s right to make decisions includes the right to take risks
and make bad decisions.
(r) Those assessing capacity under section 233 of the Act must not assume that
because the person is not accepting ECT, in circumstances
when they objectively
should, then they do not have the ability to understand the nature and effect of
a decision relating to ECT.
(s) Those assessing capacity under section 233 of the Act must “vigilantly
ensure that the assessment is evidence based, patient-centred,
criteria focused
and non-judgemental, and not made to depend, implicitly or explicitly, upon
identification of a so called objectively
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
at [279] – [280].
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
at [279] – [280].
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
at [206 (4)].
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
at [206 (7)].
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
at [206 (6)].
(t) Section 233 of the Act does not require an assessment of whether a person is
capable of understanding that they have an illness,
or symptoms of an illness,
that affects their mental health and wellbeing.
However, such an
assessment may be relevant in considering whether the person has the ability to
understand the nature and effect
of a decision relating to ECT treatment.
(u) Acceptance of, belief in and insight into the diagnosis of illness and need
for treatment varies significantly depending upon
the person and the
(v) A lack of insight may impact a person's ability to understand relevant
information, but the presence or absence of insight is
not a proxy for the
presence or absence of decision-making capacity.
(w) A lack of insight into a person’s metal illness may be capable of
supporting that a person does not have the ability to
understand the nature and
effect of a decision relating to ECT. The question is whether it does. This
means giving due consideration
to a relevant fact, not (in effect) applying a
determinative normative criterion.
(x) Depending upon the facts of the case, a person with mental illness may lack
insight or otherwise not accept or believe that they
have a mental illness or
needs ECT treatment yet may have the capacity to give informed consent when
assessed under section 233 of
the Act. The opposite may also be so.
(y) Accordingly, those assessing capacity under section 233 of the Act should
not assume that because a person lacks insight into
their mental illness they
therefore lack capacity to provide informed consent. Further explanation is
required as to how this lack
of insight affects the person’s ability to
understand the nature and effect of a decision relating to ECT.
(z) Accordingly, thus assessing capacity under section 233 of the Act must set
out the reasons why any lack of insight affects the
person’s ability to
understand the nature and effect of a decision relating to ECT.
section 14 (1) (a) of the
Mental Health Court Act 2016
(Qld) – The
meaning of capacity to consent to be treated.
and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
at [207 (8)]
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR 141
PBU and NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
(2018) 56 VR
(aa) The presence of thought disorder
or psychotic thinking
clouding the person's judgment
or delusions about treatment, may
lead to the conclusion that the person does not have the capacity to consent.
(bb) However, there is a not a one size fit all approach. A question of capacity
for the purpose of section 233 of the Act will be
fact and context specific.
The appellant’s submissions
[121] The appellant’s counsel submits that the
appellant has been engaging with the process as required by the Act and weighing
up information given to her about the treatment. The appellant’s counsel
highlights the following matters:
(a) The appellant accepts that she has a mental illness and she told Dr Scott
she was first diagnosed with what she described as
“textbook paranoid
schizophrenia”.
(b) The appellant does not want ECT because she is concerned that it will cause
memory and cognition problems. The appellant has
observed what ECT has done to
other people in the Mental Health Unit and that they look vacant and
(c) The appellant would prefer to have psychotherapy or psychoanalysis instead
of taking medications which all have side effects.
(d) In terms of therapies that have been shown to be effective as
“stand-alone” treatment for schizophrenia, the appellant
referred to
a book entitled
Psychotherapy of Schizophrenia: The Treatment of Choice
(which was written by Bertram Karon and Gary van den Bos and first published
(e) The appellant’s plan is to not have ECT and wait to eventually get
discharged.
[122] The appellant’s counsel states that that these matters indicate
that the appellant has been weighing up information about
ECT treatment and that
her reasoning has some form of logic, or connection, to real life and is not
delusional.
For example,
XJY v Mental Health Tribunal (Human Rights)
[2021] VCAT 83.
For example,
TSC v Department of Health and Wellbeing
[2021] SASCA 93.
[123] To this end, reference was made to the Administration of
Electroconvulsive Therapy Guideline which acknowledges that cognitive
a “major source of concern for persons undergoing treatment”, and
that cognitive effects, including effects
on memory, are risks of ECT.
[124] Accordingly, the appellant’s counsel submits that it cannot be
said that the appellant does not understand the nature
and effect of the
decision, even in circumstances where she does have disordered thought. Whilst
others may not think the appellant’s
decision is not rational – that
is not the test.
[125] The appellant’s counsel emphasises that a person is not found to
be lacking the capacity to give informed consent simply
by making an unwise
decision. Further, lack of insight does not mean that the appellant cannot
provide informed consent per se. Although,
the appellant’s counsel
acknowledges that lack of insight is a relevant factor to take into account.
[126] Accordingly, the appellant’s counsel submit that the appellant
understands the nature and effect of a decision relating
to ECT treatment.
Consideration
[127] In this case, the appellant did not at the
time of the tribunal hearing have the ability to understand the nature and
of a decision relating to the treatment of ECT.
[128] Dr A in his clinical report, accompanying the ECT application dated 3
February 2023, set out that that the appellant continued
to display psychotic
symptoms with poor insight into her mental illness despite admission since
September 2022 and had been prescribed
with two depot antipsychotics for a
sustained period of time.
[129] Relevantly, Dr A noted that the treating team had not been able to
engage in meaningful discussion regarding ECT, including
its risk and benefit,
on her better days.
[130] Dr G’s second opinion performed on 10 February 2023 stated that
he found the appellant lying on her bed, refusing to talk,
showing paranoid
themes and formal thought disorder with no insight.
[131] I note that the appellant informed Dr Scott that the treating team had
not provided her with any information about ECT. However,
Dr Scott states that
the clinical notes show otherwise.
[132] The appellant’s belief. as to the lack of information provided to
her, is consistent with the reports of Dr A where he
states that the treating
team has not been able to engage in meaningful discussion with the appellant
regarding ECT on her better
[133] In my view the tribunal could not conclude that appellant had the
ability to understand the nature and effect of a decision
relating to the
[134] The tribunal found that she was not able to give informed consent:
“The presenting consultant was of the view that given that the patient had
continuing psychotic symptoms, persecutory delusions
and mood symptoms including
being elevated at times and disorganised in the context of a long-standing
psychotic and affective disorder.
Additionally, that she did not property have
the capacity to consider the benefit of the treatment or the consequences of not
Overall, having regard to the opinion of the presenting psychiatrist and the
patient’s presentation at the hearing the Tribunal
were satisfied that the
person did not have capacity to give consent.”
[135] Dr Scott’s independent assessment then found that the appellant
had no intellectual insight into the complexity of her
chronic relapsing mental
illness and its effects on her mood, thoughts and behaviours.
[136] Dr Scott was of the view that as the appellant demonstrates no insight
into her chronic mental illness or her need for treatment,
the appellant did not
have capacity to consent to treatment for her chronic mental illness.
[137] At the hearing, Dr Scott strongly reiterated that the appellant does
not understand the effect of her decision to not have ECT,
because she
doesn’t have insight into her illness at all:
“[The appellant] doesn’t recognise the symptoms of her mental
illness. She doesn’t understand that her particular
symptoms relate to
having a psychotic illness. She doesn’t understand that she has a need for
treatment for her specific mental
illness. She also doesn’t understand
that she’s had treatment trials of medication which have not been
effective. And,
therefore, the treatment – the optimal treatment for her
mental illness is to have ECT treatment. So there is a number of –
number of aspects to her lack of insight, but she has a profound lack of insight
because she doesn’t recognise any of those
features of what we call
insight into illness.
[The appellant] doesn’t have an understanding of her mental illness and
doesn’t understand that her particular mental
illness is characterised by
the symptoms that she exhibits. She doesn’t understand that, having had a
number of trials of oral
antipsychotic medication which have not been effective,
that the optimal treatment for her is ECT. She has no insight into the fact
without treatment and without recovery, she’s not likely to be discharged
from the Mental Health Unit.”
[138] In his evidence at the hearing, Dr Scott posed this rhetorical
question: “How can you refuse to have a treatment for an
illness that you
don’t recognise you have?”
[139] Dr Scott’s point was that if a patient does not have insight into
their illness and does not recognise they have an illness,
then they do not have
capacity to either accept or refuse treatment for that illness.
[140] In my view, at times, Dr Scott’s evidence had a flavour of the
best interest approach; although he disavowed such an approach:
“I mean, I suppose it’s semantics, but do you recognise that there
are rights recognised– sorry – there are
rights that are set out in
Human Rights Act
that, on one view, are engaged, but is it your opinion that
her fundamental right – what you called her fundamental right to
overrides those?---Not – not overrides them. So there are – are
certainly a number of rights that ought to
be observed, and I’ve listed
those, and I agree that patient autonomy now is seen to be a fundamental right.
But that right
is in equal status to a number of other rights, and the most
significant right that we should be considering in this case is her
have evidence-based treatment so that she can recover from her illness and enjoy
all the other rights that she currently
is denied, that is, the right to
autonomy, the right to privacy, all the things that we – we often pay lip
service to, but
we don’t – we don’t actually acknowledge in a
patient who’s detained, suboptimally treated on a mental health
many months.
Okay. Thank you. So is this a correct way of summarising it? Is it your opinion
that her best interests from a medical and psychiatric
point of view is the
overriding factor in – when it comes to the question of whether has
– she has the capacity to consent?---No.
Well, I – I wouldn’t
use that term, best interest. I’m sure I’ll be admonished if I use
that legal term.
But what I’m saying is that there are a number of rights,
and patient autonomy is – is a fundamental right. It has equal
other rights, and one of those rights is to have evidence-based
treatment for an illness so that you can recover and enjoy all the other rights.
So it’s not a matter, necessarily, of best
interests. It’s about
which rights ought be recognised in this particular case of a – a mentally
unwell woman who is
confined to a mental health unit.”
[141] Those assessing capacity under section 233 of the Act must not assume
that because the person is not accepting ECT in circumstances
objectively should, then they do not have the ability to understand the nature
and effect of a decision relating to ECT.
[142] It cannot be the case that because the appellant refuses the best
treatment available then she is taken to not have the ability
to understand the
nature and effect of her decision relating to ECT; even if such a decision
condemns her to being locked in a mental
health unit with a prognosis of
deteriorating mental health.
[143] However, in my view, the appellant does not have the ability to
understand the nature and effect of a decision relating to the
[144] The appellant suffers from chronic paranoid schizophrenia. I note that
at the time of Dr Scott’s assessment, the appellant
demonstrated no clear
disorder of thought form (the connectedness of her thoughts). Her thought
content consisted of paranoid and
grandiose themes and her comments about her
parents particularly her father was likely to be delusional. Dr Scott noted that
appellant may have been self-censoring her account for the purposes of the
court-ordered assessment.
[145] The appellant denied any violent or intentional self-injury ideation to
Dr Scott. The appellant specifically denied any abnormal
percepts or passivity
phenomena and she did not appear pre-occupied or distracted during the
assessment.
[146] However, all of the reports assessing the appellant’s mental
state note her lack of insight. Dr Scott states that the
appellant’s
judgement was chronically impaired. She demonstrated no insight into her chronic
mental illness or her need for
[147] Whilst the appellant acknowledges that she has paranoid schizophrenia,
Dr Scott states that that the appellant cannot give an
explanation about the
actual features and implications of her illness:
“I’m sure that the appellant has had many discussions with many
treating psychiatrists over the short period of her life
where she would
acknowledge or say that, “I have paranoid schizophrenia.” But that
that is a very easy and glib thing to say. When you inquire of the actual
features of her illness and what the implications of her
illness are,
that’s where [the appellant] can’t give you that explanation.
So one of the things that she believed was that her father was a paedophile,
that her parents were not her real parents, she was
Anglo- Irish, indigenous,
that she was raised by a man who, at the age of four, was recruited as a sniper
during World War II. Those
are indications of her psychotic thought content. So
even though she says, “I have paranoid schizophrenia.” She also
believes that the things that she describes as her thoughts are not psychotic
thoughts. So clearly, that there’s a disconnect.
Although she says she has
paranoid schizophrenia, she doesn’t actually recognise that she has
paranoid schizophrenia.”
[148] In my view this lack of insight fundamentally affects her ability to
understand the nature and effect of a decision relating
to the treatment.
[149] Further her refusal to have ECT is in circumstances where the treating
team, due to her illness, have not been able to have
meaningful discussions with
the appellant regarding ECT including its risk and benefit. This was the
position as at the tribunal
[150] The appellant states that she has not been provided any information
show otherwise. In
my view, the appellant’s lack of knowledge of being provided an
explanation about ECT is due to her mental
[151] Dr Scott confirmed the appellant is an intelligent woman and at an
academic level the appellant can understand the information
provided to her.
However, he reiterated that:
“She can listen to the information but she’s not receptive to that
information because she doesn’t believe that
ECT will be good for her
because she doesn’t believe she has a mental illness.”
[152] Accordingly, I accept that the appellant has no insight into the
complexity of her chronic relapsing mental illness and its
effects on her mood,
thoughts and behaviours. This lack of insight into her chronic mental illness or
her need for treatment affects
her ability to understand the nature and effect
of a decision to give consent to the treatment of ECT.
[153] The appellant does not have the ability (in general terms) to identify
the advantages and disadvantages of the available options
and to understand the
consequences of those options, then weigh those consequences and reach a
The appropriateness of ECT
[154] Once I am satisfied that the appellant is not
able to provide informed consent to ECT, I then need to consider the matters set
out in section 509 (4):
(a) the therapy has clinical merit and is appropriate in the circumstances; and
(b) evidence supports the effectiveness of the therapy for the adult’s
particular mental illness; and
(c) if the therapy has previously been performed on the adult—of the
effectiveness of the therapy for the adult.
[155] Section 509 of the Act sets out the criteria that must be satisfied
before the tribunal can give approval for the performance
of ECT. Accordingly,
the Mental Health Court on an appeal may approve the performance of ECT only if
satisfied of the same matters,
and may give approval on the same basis.
[156] In this case the appellant states that section 509 (4) (a) is not
satisfied as ECT is not appropriate in the circumstances because
there remains
an alternative to ECT that should be explored, being another trial of
[157] The appellant’s counsel instructs that she would consider
treatment by clozapine. She is aware that she has had a previous,
unsuccessful
trial of clozapine, as she reported to Dr Scott.
[158] Clozapine has previously been trialled on the appellant. However, she
had an adverse reaction, namely severe leucopenia.
[159] In his progress notes dated 8 November 2022, Dr G noted that a
clozapine rechallenge could be considered “as a last option”.
[160] No emergency ECT has been performed on the appellant. On 6 March 2023,
Dr C recorded that “the treating team doesn’t
consider the ECT to be
an urgent intervention”.
[161] Dr Scott gave evidence about commencing another trial of clozapine at
the hearing:
“And just finally, Dr Scott, she’s previously been – had a
trial on clozapine but she suffered adverse side effects.
Would you consider it
appropriate for another effort be – that another effort be made to treat
her with clozapine?---Well,
every treatment has risks and benefits and
it’s almost a matter of weighing up the risks and benefits. Certainly, the
of a retrial or a rechallenge with clozapine is one option. It is not
without risks and there are side effects to clozapine. It requires
patient cooperation because when you begin someone on clozapine, you have got to
take weekly investigations, you have got
to do blood tests. But also, you have
to have a patient accept the medication, so take the medication. And the risk is
appellant] could very easily disrupt the trial of clozapine by just
refusing to either take her medication or agree to have the investigation
blood test, the ECG. So it can be very problematic when you’re dealing
with a patient who has poor insight in a trial
of clozapine because it very
quickly can be aborted and you’re back to square one.
And sorry, there was just one other question. When clozapine is administered,
is it correct that it’s closely monitored for
side effects?---Yes. So it
has a number of quite serious side effects. They’re uncommon side effects.
But because they’re
– they’re quite serious side effects,
particularly, in the early phase where a trial of clozapine patients are very
monitored. But, as I say, the difficulty is that you require the
patients’ cooperation, firstly, to take the medication and
cooperate with the investigations. And if the patient either stops taking the
medication or refuses to cooperate with the
investigations and the trial is
[162] Assisting Clinician Dr Iqbal asked Dr Scott at the hearing about other
alternative treatment lines that could be pursued, rather
“Certainly there’s – there are other – other
antipsychotics that [the appellant] hasn’t been trialled
theoretically, she – she could be tried on all the alternatives – a
combination of the alternatives, yes.”
[163] In relation to commencing clozapine treatment again, Dr Scott
re-iterated that:
“And just repeating, perhaps, one of the questions which have been asked,
but retrial with clozapine, as you’ve mentioned,
yes, there are risks. She
was having neutropenia. She’s on lithium now, and your views around that
– that – like,
is a retrial a consideration of that reasonable
approach?---So the treating team obviously have considered that as an option.
are concerned that not only are there considerable serious side effects to
clozapine, but it requires the patient’s cooperation.
And as I say, the
fact that [the appellant] on two depot antipsychotic medications suggests that
the – the treating team would
not be confident that [the appellant] would
persist with a trial of clozapine. And as we know, it’s a major effort to,
start a trial of clozapine, the – to work up the investigations
that are required to be done and then the monitoring, and then
that also relies
on the patient actually taking the medication. At any stage in a retrial of
clozapine, [the appellant] could just
say, “Well, I’m not going to
take it anymore,” and, therefore, the trial would be aborted.”
[164] Assisting Clinician Dr Sundin, does not favour a retrial of clozapine
or alternative anti psychotics:
“HER HONOUR: But if it’s available and she does not want ECT, should
it not be considered?
DR SUNDIN: Well, normally - - -
HER HONOUR: And there is going to be negative consequences - - -
DR SUNDIN: Well, not if the negative consequences outweigh the potential
positive benefits and the doctors have gone through the
decision-making pathway
and decided that the negative consequences do outweigh the potential benefits. I
would say, for example,
someone who’s on two neuroleptics plus lithium is
at high risk for neuroleptic [indistinct] syndrome. That’s a real risk
someone in this situation. So then to add in a third anti-psychotic or some
other form of psychotropic only further increases
the risk to her physical
health and wellbeing. And doctors are always driven by the golden rule first, do
no harm. So I know it was
[indistinct] about this idea of let’s try
another anti-psychotic. No, I’m sorry, that’s – that’s
this court’s remit. That’s up to the treating team.”
[165] Assisting Clinician Dr Iqbal disagrees with this position:
“DR IQBAL: ... I fully appreciate, very respectfully, what Doctor Sundin
has said about – that the guidelines have been
followed. The reports
don’t actually substantiate that. There have been – she’s been
given [indistinct] and [indistinct]
I don’t know for what duration. And
the guidelines also would suggest that if a treatment isn’t effective then
you discontinue
that. You go to another one. The numerous second generation
anti-psychotics which haven’t been tried either. So there’s
over there – I’m not saying that they haven’t been tried. What
I’m saying is that the evidence presented
– in some ways, I was
thinking that if we had perhaps taken evidence from Doctor [C], and perhaps even
from the patient as
well, some of those issues could have been clarified. But
the evidence before us, in my mind, doesn’t fully substantiate that.
My hunch is that that would have been tried, but it’s a hunch. It’s
not evidence, and I think that, going back to the
reports of Doctor [A] and in
fact, my question to Doctor Scott was, 600 milligrams of [indistinct]
that’s not the peak dose
of it. [indistinct] milligrams of zuclopenthixol,
even Doctor [G] in his second opinion mentions, increase it to 300 milligrams
then if there is no improvement – and 300 milligrams, I might be
corrected but I trained in the UK where 600 milligrams up
to a week has been
prescribed. Not fortnightly, 600 a week. So duration and dosing seems to me
lacking – at least in the evidence
provided. Six months duration would
like to see a lot more activity and consideration in that regard.
I think that there are a couple of things which I’m speculating now,
completely. It’s this notion that when people –
improved to the extent that she can go on to [indistinct] and having worked in
[X], that’s the less troubled
ward. She spent a good chunk of time sitting
over here without being agitated or whatever. So there’s evidence of
improvement,
and you feel that you might be playing Jenga if you start pulling
out something and everything comes tumbling down, and I get that.
not substantiated, is my point. Now, going to the second, sort of chunk. So
I’ve put down - - -
HER HONOUR: What do you say – what do you say is not substantiated?
DR IQBAL: That enough has been done in terms of the treatment. So if
they’re put down with [indistinct] had been tried, 120
milligrams for
three weeks, no effect. We went onto this, to this. Just a few. At least three
or four, it would have been good. Or
even an increase in the zuclopenthixol,
despite the sort of NMS possibility. Absolutely agreed. But there was a second
opinion, there
was a recommendation. Do this and then go onto the next step and
then it would be supported. Saying that, I’m also putting
my clinical hat
completely separate, which says, I completely understand why we would want to
– totally agree with that. There
are a couple of other things ---
So I’ve made the argument around what I think the – and I think that
clozapine would be a way forward. I think having
a retrial, and from a clinical
point of view, you go through that – so you go through the company who
usually have their own
haematologist who can advise you. That provides a degree
of safety, but consideration of it – and if it turns out not to be
case, then maybe it gets referred to the tribunal again. And then they said,
“Well, all avenues have been exhausted.”
Well, that bit that
it’s the last resorted treatment, I’m just not satisfied. It may
very well have been the case. I’m
not convinced from the evidence that has
been provided.
Just, probably what I wanted to say, was these are contentious areas where there
are finely balanced arguments on both sides. At
this point in time, I would have
loved that if Dr [C] could say, “Look, we’ve tried [indistinct] at a
higher dose, we’ve
written to the clozapine people and they’re
saying definitely not, this is going to kill her.”
The reason why I asked about the lithium was that sometimes with leukopenia on a
second trial people with lithium can boost up the
blood cell counts and
that’s, at least in England, was a common practice to do that. But whether
there were alternatives that
could be considered. And if they had said all of
that, I probably would have been saying, “Look, if the evidence is very
that everything has been considered, this is the last resort treatment and
a final [indistinct] that they did refer this lady to
the extended inpatient
And there would be quite a few people of very similar symptomatology as perhaps
any institution would who stay there for a lot longer
and maybe this relapsing
and remitting cause of illness takes its course to the point where they become
partially improved where
they can be discharged or they just get fed up with
being here and think that maybe a new epoch in my life should begin. I
know if any of my thoughts have been helpful, your Honour.”
[166] Taking into account the advice given to me by Assisting Clinician Dr
Iqbal, I am not satisfied that there are no other alternative
available except for ECT.
[167] Dr Iqbal’s advice in relation to this matter has materially
contributed to my decision.
[168] As Dr Iqbal states there is a lack of evidence about this point. ECT
applications should provide comprehensive material as to
what medications have
been considered and used or not used and the reasons for doing so.
[169] On 29 March 2023, when this matter was adjourned, Assisting Clinician
Dr McVie stated that:
“The written documentation indicates that there’s no urgent need for
ECT. It’s merely the fact that she has this
severe treatment resistance
psychotic illness that may benefit from ECT, but there’s no guarantee that
ECT will actually benefit
in this case. Secondly, I’d probably like to
have more information on when her previous trial of clozapine actually was and
whether or not she’s been reviewed by a haematologist in relation to the
likelihood of recurrence of the leukopenia and neutropenia
that she had at that
[170] Dr McVie also wanted to know what the appellant’s levels of
lithium have been over the last few months.
[171] Dr Sundin also noted that at the adjournment application that:
“I agree with Dr McVie that the opinion of a haematologist would be
worthwhile. I have had patients who’ve had bad side-effects
with clozapine
on the first instance, but on re-exposure, actually been able to tolerate it. So
a haematologist being involved in
her care would be very wise.”
[172] Dr C stated that he could facilitate these matters. However, no such
evidence was placed before the Court.
[173] Accordingly, I am not satisfied that ECT is appropriate in the
circumstances.
[174] The Act recognises the least restrictive practices should always be
adopted in respect of patients. The least restrictive way
is if it adversely
affects the person’s rights and liberties only to the extent required to
protect the person’s safety
and welfare or the safety of
[175] Further investigation needs to be done to investigate to see if
clozapine is appropriate or other anti-psychotic medications.
It may be that
once these investigations are undertaken, and there is evidence that these
alternatives are not appropriate, then
another application for ECT to be
performed on the appellant may be made to the tribunal.
[176] In the circumstances I am not satisfied that section 509 (4) (a) has
been satisfied. Accordingly, the application for ECT should
be refused.
appeal is allowed.
tribunal’s decision dated 15 February 2023 to approve 12 treatments of
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) over a period of
60 days, which was to commence
on the 15 February 2023, is set aside and substituted with the decision that the
application for ECT
is refused.
Mental Health Act 2016
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter