URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2002/47.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sams on Sutton [2002] QLAT 47 (20 August 2002)
Diane Ryley
Chief Executive of the Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading
APPEAL NUMBER
47 of 2001/02
PROPOSED PREMISES
Sams on Suttons, situated at Suttons Beach, Redcliffe
HEARING DATE
23rd April 2002 and 13 June 2002
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST
Grant of an application to change the licensed area
Mr J Rolls (Presiding Member)
Ms A Lindon
Mrs G Spender
DECISION DATE
20 AUGUST 2002
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. Nicholas Spiro Nautsatos, Tina Marie Nautsatos, Shirley Isabelle Nautsatos
and Kristina Georgs hold an “on premises (meals)”
licence of certain
premises known as “Sams on Suttons” situated at Marine Parade,
Suttons Beach, Redcliffe. On the 30th
of July 2001 the licensees made
application to the Chief Executive to change, by enlarging, the licensed area.
Specifically, the
change envisaged a new reception room built adjacent to the
existing licensed premises and joined by a walkway. This new structure
substantially increased the licensed area. The original licence, granted on the
19th of June 2001, encompassed a first level restaurant,
ground level
café and seafood restaurant to the extent of an outside awning from the
building measuring approximately 3.5
metres as delineated by roped partitions.
The licence enabled trade to be conducted between 10.00 am and midnight from
2. The Chief Executive on becoming aware that this application may be a matter
of some controversy in the locality determined that
the application ought be
advertised. Pursuant to
Liquor Act 1992
(the Act), the
application, prima facie, did not need to be advertised but the Chief Executive
does have a discretion to require that
undertaken.
The period specified
by the Chief Executive during which the application was to be advertised
days. By the closing date for objections on 10 September 2001, eight objections
and one petition had been lodged. An objectors’
conference was unable to
assuage the objectors’ concerns. On the 19th of November 2001, the Chief
Executive approved the change
in licensed area. On the 26th of November 2001,
Diane Ryley, an objector, appealed against that
determination.
COURSE OF APPEAL
3. A directions conference was held on the 20th of February 2002 and the
question as to whether or not this matter would be dealt
with as a “minor
appeal” under the Act was considered. Pursuant to s.22 of the Act, for a
“minor appeal”,
the Tribunal may be constituted by one legally
qualified member as opposed to three
This mechanism gives to
the Tribunal a valuable power to speedily and more cheaply dispose of some
matters. It is the Tribunal’s
view, that this provision is to be used in
appeals where the issues raised in the appeal are clearly defined and are not
new or novel.
In this case, appeals against determinations made under
the Act are infrequent, as a result it was considered by the Tribunal that this
is an appeal which warranted a determination by
THE INTERPRETATION OF
4. The applicant applied to increase the area of the licensed premises pursuant
of the Act. This provision is as follows:
“(1) The owner, licensee or other person in control of licensed
premises must not, without the chief executive’s approval,
alter, rebuild,
change or increase the area of the licensed
Maximum penalty - 25 penalty units.
(2) For subsection (1)-
(a) in giving an approval, the
chief executive must have regard to the business that is the primary purpose
conducted under the licence;
(b) a change in the area includes not using a part of the licensed
premises as if the part were not licensed premises.
(3) The licensee of licensed premises must keep the premises clean and in
good repair.
Maximum penalty - 25 penalty units.”
5. “Licensed premises” is the premises to which the licence
“Premises” is
also defined under the Act as including land, buildings or structures on or in
land and a vehicle, boat,
aircraft, train or other means of
not a term which is defined.
6. This is the first appeal which considers this provision in its amended from.
was amended in
In particular, these
amendments deleted
sub-section (1) and (2) and inserted the provisions
appearing above.
The amendments
came into effect on the 1st of July 2001 some 30 days prior to the licensees
lodging this application.
7. The former provision had been construed narrowly such that it did not enable
substitution of new premises for premises which had
been formerly approved. The
former provision only permitted a change of area brought about by means of
physical addition to or subtraction
from premises which were already the subject
of existing licence. The provision was held not to contemplate a variation of a
by varying its area or otherwise. The former
was concerned with
permission to use an area not comprehended within a licence but for which a
licence in respect of those premises
It would appear that the
may have been, to some
extent removed by, in
which now allows the Chief Executive to, inter
alia, approve an increase in the area of the licensed premises. It ought be
that at the hearing this issue was not the subject of argument. However,
the Tribunal proceeds on the basis that the amendments
expanded the scope of this provision to enable an increase in area to enable the
licensing of premises not previously licensed.
For, if the limitations as noted
Ecovale Pty
continue to subsist then,
this application was misconceived by endeavouring to use
Notwithstanding
these reservations in the absence of a full argument on the matter, the Tribunal
is prepared to proceed on the basis
is capable of founding the
application as made. However, we would observe that the definition of
“licensed premises”
may provide a limitation to what area may be
altered so as to suggest that the amendments to the Act may not have the
expansive operation
necessary to support this
application.
There is in our
view considerable advantage in continuing to read this provision narrowly. It
does not appear that the reasons
articulated in
in support of
that approach have diminished.
Section 154
of the Act is not in our view to be
used as an alternative procedure to the licensing of premises. If such an
alternative procedure
is adopted then, the inquiry, public advertising and
objection regime prescribed by the Act would be frustrated. In our view, such
an interpretation does little to further the objects of the Act contained in
It appears to us that
is a provision which is designed to maintain
the integrity of the licensing system such that premises which are licensed have
be maintained in that condition and cannot, without the consent of the Chief
Executive, be altered. Further, one can readily envisage
a situation occurring
where buildings are rebuilt which has a consequence that the area to which the
licence relates is, as a consequence
of reconstruction work, altered. Such a
situation could clearly fall within
of the Act in its amended form. The
Tribunal would be reluctant to expand the scope of this provision to enable it
to be used as
an alternative means by which premises not previously licensed are
licensed. Further, if the increase in licensed area was to operate
large”, to expand the existing licensed premises then the use of the
definite article when reference is made to licensed
premises is curious.
However, having regard to the view that we have subsequently formed as to the
applicability of this provision,
it is not necessary for the Tribunal to
definitively resolve the conflict to which we have alluded.
8. In determining whether to grant an approval under
of the Act the Chief
Executive must have regard, inter alia, to the business that is the
“primary purpose” conducted
In this case, the
licence held by the applicants is an “on-premises (meals) licence”.
This licence is governed by the
provisions contained in sub-division 4 of
of the Act. The “primary purpose” of a business conducted pursuant
to an “on premises (meals) licence”
is, the provision of meals
prepared and served to be eaten on the licensed
means food that is eaten by persons sitting at a table, with cutlery provided
for the purpose of eating food
and is of sufficient substance as to be
ordinarily accepted as meal.
9. Perusal of the material in the Appeal Book reveals that the area encompassed
by the extension is not to be used as a restaurant
which, colloquially, would be
the type of business which would be operated under the auspices of an
on-premises (meals) licence.
Instead, the applicants intend to operate the
extended area as a function centre, not as a restaurant. The applicants do not
from this description of their operation. The question then arises,
having regard to the matters set out in
and (2) of the Act, whether or
not the use of extended area as a function centre is consistent with the primary
purpose of the business
conducted under the principal licence.
10. The authority conferred on a licensee by an on-premises (meals) licence is
restricted to the sale and supply of liquor for consumption
on licensed premises
in association with a consumer eating a meal on premises and to persons on the
premises other than with association
persons eating the meal. There is another
conferral of authority with is not
11. It was submitted by Mr Leask on behalf of the Chief Executive that
s.73A(a)(ii) which refers to consumption by persons on premises
other than in
association with eating a meal was wide enough to encompass persons attending a
function. We disagree. Section 73B
of the Act provides:
“The Chief Executive may state in an on-premises (meals) licence that
the licensee may, subject to the conditions the Chief
Executive states in the
licence, sell and supply liquor to or for persons generally attending a function
held on the licensed premises.”
12. “Function” is defined in
of the Act as an event or occasion
to which persons are invited by, or for, the organiser of the event or function.
13. A function is an event which is regulated by invitation. It is that
characteristic which legislatively defines a function.
The notion of a person
attending licensed premises other than in association with meals contemplated by
s.73A(a)(ii) of the Act extends,
to some degree, the ambit of the authority
conferred by an on premises (meals) licence. But, it does not, in our view,
the holding of a “function” under that licence. Section
73B is a separate provision in the Act which extends the authority
to sell and
supply liquor to the holder of an “on premises (meals) licence” to
sell and supply liquor at a “function”
if the relevant approval is
given. If s.73A(a)(ii) of the Act was able to achieve this purpose (without any
control being able to
be exercised by the Chief Executive) s.73B would serve no
purpose. On the interpretation we prefer, this latter provision still
role to play.
Section 70A
of the Act identifies that the “primary purpose” of
a business conducted under an on-premises (function) licence which
provision of premises and catering facilities for use by persons genuinely
attending a function held on the licensed premises.
Pursuant to such a licence,
liquor sold or supplied as ancillary to a function must be sold or supplied only
to persons genuinely
attending the function for consumption by those persons at
the function.
15. The presence of these two provisions, being
and s.73B, and the fact
that the Act makes reference elsewhere to the power to the Chief Executive under
licences to extend the authority
of that licence to include attendance at a
strongly suggests that
the legislature intended a distinction to be made between
“functions” on the one hand and the
authority granted by other types
of licences on the other. Accordingly, if a function is to be conducted by a
then, an endorsement
can be obtained in respect of that licence already held. It is not sufficient
to say that a person who holds
an on-premises (meals) licence has by dint of the
authority of that licence the power to conduct or hold functions on the
In fact, we are of the view that the holding of an “on premises
(meals) licence” does not confer any such authority.
In order to conduct
a “function” lawfully, it is our view that the relevant endorsement
under s.73B must be obtained
by the holder of an “on premises (meals)
licence” or, alternatively, perhaps a specific permit obtained.
16. It follows, in our view, therefore, the Chief Executive ought not have
granted the application to extend the licensed area in
this instance in the form
in which the application was made. The purpose for which the extension was
obtained was to conduct functions.
This is incompatible with the “primary
purpose” of the business conducted under the licence already held by the
which is the operation of restaurant and cafe. In order to conduct
their operation in accordance with the Act, another type of application
have been made.
17. It would appear that if the application was made to extend licensed premises
and the licensee intended to operate this additional
area as part of the
on-premises (meals) licence but, with an intention that from time to time
functions will be conducted then, in
our view, the application ought to have
been for an extension coupled with an application for an endorsement under s.73B
or for an on-premises (function) licence.
18. During further submissions made on the 13th of June 2002, Mr Cochrane for
the applicants, sought to have an endorsement under
s.73B of the Act added as
part of his client’s application. In our view, having regard to s.25 of
the Act, this application
ought be considered as part of this appeal.
19. Licences are issued for specific purposes and give specific authority to
those that hold them. That authority is not interchangeable.
Primary purpose
means the “principal
The primary
purpose of an on-premises (meals) licence is that of the “business
conducted” under the said licence. Thus,
the business conducted under the
relevant licence may have more than one purpose but the primary purpose must be
the provision of
meals prepared and served to be eaten on the licensed premises.
That does not mean, in our view, that the conferral of the authority
licence can be merged or mixed with the authority granted by another licence, in
the absence of some permission granted
under the Act. In fact, the use of the
phrase “primary purpose” suggests that subsidiary or secondary
purposes may exist
concurrently with that primary purpose, but, as we have
endeavoured to show, the business may have multiple purposes but the licence
only confers one authority. Accordingly, only those activities specifically
authorised by the Act can be lawfully performed by the
licensee under the Act
pursuant to the licence held.
20. As we have noted, permission can be given under the Act so that functions
can be held in conjunction with other activities under
a licence but, in order
to do so lawfully, the Chief Executive must endorse the relevant licence to that
effect. Therefore this
was not an appropriate case where
could be applied
due to the different primary purposes being considered between the licensed
premises and those sought to be licensed.
The licence already held was in
respect of a business primarily directed to the provision and service of meals.
On the other hand,
the area to which the extension relates is, so it would
appear, to form part of a business providing premises and catering facilities
for persons genuinely attending a function held on the premises. In order for
to be applied the extended area must be in furtherance of the primary
purpose business already licensed and not for another “primary
21. Accordingly, it appears inappropriate, having regard to the fact that the
applicant sought to licence “a new reception
room” which the
applicants do not purport to represent would operate as a restaurant, to grant
an on premises (meals) licence
with a s.73B endorsement. The advertising
material which forms part of the Appeal Book identifies this area as a banquet
and conference
centre. In those circumstances, it is difficult for the Tribunal
to identify that the primary purpose of the business conducted
under the licence
would be the provision of meals. Rather, it appears that the primary purpose of
the business conducted is the
provision of premises and catering facilities for
persons attending a function. In those circumstances, it does not appear
appropriate
that there ought be an extension of the on premises (meals) licence
to the new conference centre. Rather, it appears that these
premises ought be
separately licensed under
of the Act.
DETERMINATION
22. The advertising of the application confers rights on those persons who
respond pursuant to that advertising process by objecting
Act. In order to ascertain whether or not any objection is validly made out it
is necessary to determine what is the relevant
locality which may be affected,
if the application were granted. Perusal of the material in the Appeal Book
does not disclose precisely
what locality was identified by the Chief Executive
in determining this application. As has been noted, shortly before this
application
was made, the original licence was granted and, presumably, as part
of this determination the issue of locality would have been considered.
assessment may have been transposed onto this application for the purposes of
considering the objections to the application
which has spawned this appeal.
That material was not placed before the Tribunal. It is the application for the
extension which
must be considered when determining the relevant locality.
Consideration must be given to the area impacted upon by this facility
to be used for functions such as weddings, work functions, engagement parties,
conferences and the like. It is necessary
in undertaking such a process to have
regard to the nature of the proposed premises, the services which are to be
offered, the geographical
or man made boundaries which will affect the influence
any premises will have in a region.
23. The nature of the facility offered by the applicant in this case would draw
people not only from the Redcliffe Peninsula but
also from the surrounding
districts. The attraction of the premises offered by the applicant which the
Tribunal had the benefit
of observing first hand, would provide an eminently
desirable location for those conducting functions where guests would enjoy a
panorama of Moreton Bay. However, in considering issues of amenity and impact
of this application, whilst the locality might be
quite large, a smaller area
within that locality would clearly be directly affected by the operations
conducted by the applicant,
if this application is granted. In this context,
having regard to the limited nature of the enquiry under
s.119(3)(a)
the Act now required to be undertaken, the focus ought really upon those persons
who may be adversely affected in the
sense contemplated by
s.119(3)(a)
of the Act. Mr Leask, on behalf of the Executive Director, submitted that
relevant area for these purposes ought be confined
to those streets adjacent to
the premises. We would agree with this submission.
24. In order for an objection to succeed it must be demonstrated that if the
application were granted “undue” offence,
annoyance, disturbance or
inconvenience would be suffered by those persons who reside or work in the
locality or the amenity quiet
or good order of the locality would be lessened in
some way. The use of the word “undue” in
s.119(3)(a)
imports, in
our view, a balancing process. It must be shown by an objector, in order to
successfully invoke this particular provision,
that the burden or disturbance
identified is out of proportion to any benefit that the granting of the
application would bring in
the form of the satisfaction of the previously
identified public interest. It is at this point that, in our view, the
application
meets an insurmountable obstacle. The fact that an on-premises
(meals) licence had been originally granted meant that “public
as required under the
Liquor Act 1992
had been established. Such a
finding may have been of some, albeit limited, assistance in determining whether
or not public need
existed in respect of a licence under
of the Act.
However, as has been noted, the Act was amended substantially and the amended
Act governs this application. Those amendments
commenced on the 1st of July
2000. The amendments, inter alia, altered the “public need” test
which is shorthand for
that the reasonable requirements for the public for
liquor and related services would be satisfied by the application to one of
Section 116
of the Act now provides that the
applicant must satisfy the Chief Executive that it is in the public interest for
the application
to be granted. An application under
is one to which
25. In this application, no evidence is directed to the issue of public
interest. There is no basis upon which this issue can be
assessed. It follows
that the balancing process to which we have referred is unable to be undertaken.
If it cannot be established
that the granting of the licence is in the public
interest then the application ought fail. Even if it can be demonstrated by the
applicant that the granting of the licence is in the public interest the
application may still fail, if there is undue annoyance,
inconvenience caused to those who live in the locality. In short, in the
absence of material to demonstrate that the
granting of the application in the
public interest this application cannot be assessed. It follows that the appeal
must succeed.
26. The Tribunal does not take any joy from the conclusion that it has reached.
However, this conclusion has been made as a consequence
of the process adopted
by the applicant and the Chief Executive. A process which was, in our view,
inappropriate. Accordingly,
the Act provides us with no alternative other than
to require the applicant to make a proper application for the type of licence
that is most appropriate in all the circumstances. In this case, if a licence
was the appropriate licence then, the advertising which has been
conducted, arguably, may have been misleading. Therefore, it does
appropriate that the application should simply be remitted to the Chief
Executive to enable the Chief Executive to consider
any further material the
applicant may wish to place before him in respect of the issues of public
interest. It appears that there
ought be a fresh and appropriate application
made so that the processes contemplated of the Act can be fully and correctly
ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL
27. Pursuant to s.36(1)(b) of the Act the Tribunal sets aside the determination
of the Chief Executive made on the 19th of November
2001 which allowed the
applicant’s application for a change in licensed area.
28. The Tribunal orders that the applicant’s application made on 30th July
2001 be refused.
Subject to limitations on
Christmas Day, New Years Eve, Good Friday and Anzac
s.118(1)(e)
See s.15 of the
Amendment Act 2001
Amendment Act 2001, Number 39 s.91(2).
Davy v. Chief Executive of
the Liquor Licensing Division
(1998) 1 QdR 586
Ecovale Pty Ltd v. The
Chief Executive, Liquor Licensing Division, Department of Tourism Spot rand
Racing & Anor
(unreported, Supreme Court of Queensland, No. 10,172 of
1999, 14 January 2000 per Muir
that noted by Muir J in
at paras 49 and
No assistance in the
interpretation in this matter is to be found in the Explanatory Notes to the
Amending Bill.
See s.154(2) of the
See s.4 of the
See s.73A(b) of the
Holding a licence
other than an on premises (functions)
Services League of Australia Inc v. Liquor Licensing Commission
s.116(1)(a).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (68.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter