URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2025/286.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
York Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Tomkins Commercial & Industrial Builders Pty Ltd & Ors [2025] QSC 286 (4 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
York Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Tomkins Commercial & Industrial
Builders Pty Ltd & Others
[2025] QSC 286
YORK PROPERTY HOLDINGS PTY LTD
(Applicant)
TOMKINS COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL
BUILDERS PTY LTD
ABN 98 061 732 778
(First Respondent)
(Second Respondent)
HWL EBSWORTH LAWYERS
246 549 189
(Third Respondent)
Trial Division
PROCEEDING:
Originating Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
4 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
30 May 2025; 4 August 2025; 8 August 2025
applicant and the first respondent must submit a draft order within 14 days that
reflects these reasons.
14 days, the applicant and the first respondent are to agree on a timetable for
the exchange of written submissions in relation
to costs and provide this
timetable to the Court.
question of costs is adjourned to a date to be fixed.
CATCHWORDS:
BUILDING, ENGINEERING AND RELATED CONTRACTS – ADJUDICATION DECISION
– where the applicant is the principal under a contract
– where the
first respondent is a contractor who undertook to carry out works for a building
development – where the
first respondent terminated the contract –
where the first respondent lodged an adjudication application with an
adjudicator
– whether the existence of a reference date is an objective or
subjective jurisdictional fact – whether the applicant
procedural fairness – whether the adjudicator’s decision was
affected by jurisdictional error and void
Building Industry Fairness (Security of Payment) Act 2017
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 483(1)
ABC Glass & Aluminium Pty Ltd v Nik Nominees Pty Ltd
A-Civil Aust Pty Ltd v Ceerose Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 7
Acciona Agua Australia Pty Ltd v Monadelphous Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] QSC 133
(2020) 4 QR 410
Allianz Australia Limited v Delor Vue Apartments CTS 39788
[2022] HCA 38
277 CLR 445
Bhusal v Catholic Health Care
[2017] NSWSC 838
Brolton Group Pty Ltd v Hanson Construction Materials Pty Ltd
Chase Oyster Bar Pty Ltd v Hamo Industries Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWCA 190
(2010) 78 NSWLR
Chevron Park Pty Ltd v Groupline Constructions Pty Ltd
City of Enfield v Development Assessment Commission
[2000] HCA 5
(2000) 199 CLR
Coordinated Construction Co Pty Ltd v JM Hargreaves (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 228
Demex Pty Ltd v McNab Building Services Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 261
(2023) 113 NSWLR
Dura (Australia) Constructions Pty Ltd v Hue Boutique Living Pty Ltd (No
[2012] VSC 99
EQ Constructions Pty Ltd v A-Civil Aust Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWSC
Forme Two Pty Ltd v McNab Developments (Qld) Pty Ltd
Icon Co (NSW) Pty Ltd v Australia Avenue Developments Pty Ltd
JKC Australia LNG Pty Ltd v Inpex Operations Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] NTCA 6
(2018) 334 FLR 314
John Goss Projects Pty Ltd v Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd
John Holland Pty Ltd v TAC Pacific Pty Ltd
[2009] QSC 205
[2010] 1 Qd R 302
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
Lendlease Building Pty Ltd v BCF Airport Systems Pty Ltd
Low v MCC Pty Ltd
[2018] QSC 6s
LPDT v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services, and
Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
(2024) 418 ALR 152
Martinus Rail Pty Ltd v Qube RE Services (No 2) Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCA
Multiplex Constructions Pty Ltd v Luikens
[2003] NSWSC 1140
Musico v Davenport
[2003] NSWSC 977
National Management Group Pty Ltd v Biriel Industries Pty Ltd (t/a
Master Steel)
[2019] QSC 219
Patrick Stevedores Operations (No 2) Pty Ltd v McConnell Dowell
Constructors (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC 1413
Procon Developments (Australia) Pty Ltd v Hi-Cal Bricklaying
Rhomberg Rail Australia Pty Ltd v Concrete Evidence Pty Ltd
Saville (T/as China Sourcing Services) v Hallmarc Construction Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 318
(2015) 47 VR 177
SHA Premier Constructions Pty Ltd v Niclin Constructions Pty Ltd
[2020] QSC 307
Southern Han Breakfast Point Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v Lewence
Construction Pty Ltd
[2016] HCA 52
(2016) 260 CLR 340
TWT Property Group Pty Ltd v Cenric Group Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWSC
Watkins Contracting Pty Ltd v Hyatt Ground Engineering Pty Ltd
[2018] QSC 065
Westbourne Grammar School v Gemcan Constructions Pty Ltd
York Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Tomkins
[2025] QSC 44
M Steele KC, and T Ambrose, for the Applicant
D Piggott KC, and J
Menzies, for the First Respondent
SOLICITORS:
Holding Redlich for the Applicant
Thomson Geer for the First
The application
applicant, York Property Holdings Pty Ltd (“York”), is the principal
under a contract whereby the first respondent,
Tomkins Commercial &
Industrial Builders Pty Ltd & Ors
(“Tomkins”),
contractor, undertook to carry out works for the development of
“Midwater”, a 40-storey residential apartment building
Beach, Queensland.
[2] This dispute
centres around Tomkins’ termination of the Contract on 10 September 2024
following a breach by York. Tomkins’
position is that the termination was
valid and, therefore, that there was a reference date under
Building Industry Fairness (Security of Payment)
position is that Tomkins’ termination was invalid, and the Contract
remained on foot. Accordingly, on this
basis, York served on Tomkins a notice
under cl 39.4 of the Contract on 12 September 2024 purporting to take the work
out of Tomkins’
hands. The effect of this was Tomkins’ right to
payment was suspended, meaning that there was no reference date for a payment
October 2024, Tomkins submitted “Payment Claim 36”, based on the
date of termination (12 September 2024), being
a reference date under s 67(2) of
[5] Tomkins
claimed $57,547,356.41 (including GST) in respect of work up to the reference
date of 10 September 2024. The claim was
styled as the “Final Payment
Claim” and served both as a progress claim made under cl 37.1 of the
General Conditions
of Contract and a payment claim made under the
[6] In response,
York served a payment schedule on 30 October 2024 stating that no amount was
payable to Tomkins.
[7] Tomkins’
adjudication application was lodged with the adjudicator, on or about 11
December 2024, with York’s adjudication
response being lodged on 17
February 2025.
[8] On 28 April
2025, the second respondent (the adjudicator) provided reasons which required
York to pay Tomkins $10 million.
Originating Application, York seeks declarations that the Adjudication Decision
is affected by jurisdictional error and void
with consequential injunctive
relief. Tomkins’ position is that York’s application should be
[10] The issues
in dispute in the Originating Application are:
(a) whether the existence of a reference date is an objective or subjective
(i) objective, the Court must decide whether the reference date of 10 September
2024 existed. This question is determined by the
Court upon the evidence before
it, without being limited to the probative material before the adjudicator; or
(ii) subjective, the Court must decide whether the adjudicator arrived at the
required state of mind in the way contemplated by the
legislature.
(b) in relation to the adjudicator’s finding about waiver, whether York
was denied procedural fairness in respect of the adjudicator's
alleged reliance
Australia Insurance Limited v Delor Vue Apartments CTS
[2022] HCA 38
(2022) 277 CLR 445
(c) in relation to Tomkins' entitlement to claim for unfixed materials, whether
York was denied procedural fairness in relation to
a so-called finding that its
letter of 30 August 2024 was a variation under the Contract.
(d) in relation to termination costs, whether the adjudicator made a
certain termination
An adjourned hearing
[11] The hearing
commenced on 30 May 2025, and York’s counsel completed their oral
submissions just prior to lunch. Then, matters
took a different turn.
[12] Despite
these proceedings being on foot for some time, and with written submissions
being exchanged as to the issues to be determined,
over the lunch break,
Tomkins’ counsel appreciated the practical consequences of a finding
(being sought by York) that the
existence of a reference date was an objective
[13] If the
Tomkins validly terminated the contract on 10 September 2024 which would require
the Court to resolve various questions of
fact and law. Tomkins states that, in
such circumstances, they would raise further matters that were not canvassed by
their existing
written submissions.
[14] Accordingly,
when Court resumed after lunch, Tomkins sought an adjournment for the parties to
consider how, and in what form,
the proceedings should continue. Ultimately, the
parties consented to the adjournment.
Separate questions
[15] On 4 August
2025, I determined that the most efficient approach, in the circumstances, was
for the Court to make an order under
r 483(1) of the
Uniform Civil Procedure
(Qld) (“UCPR”) that separate questions be decided
before the remaining questions in the proceeding.
[16] The parties
agreed on the terms of the following separate questions to be considered by the
(a) Separate question 1
: Is the applicant entitled to the relief claimed
in paragraph 2 of the Originating Application?
(b) Separate question 2
: Was the existence of a reference date for
Payment Claim 36 by reason of the operation of s 67(2) of the
a “subjective jurisdictional fact” or an “objective
(c) Separate question 3
: If the answer to separate question 2 is a
“subjective jurisdictional fact”, is the applicant entitled to the
claimed in paragraph 1 of the Originating Application?
(d) Separate question 4
: Did the adjudicator’s reference to
deny the applicant procedural fairness?
(e) Separate question 5
: If the answer to separate question 4 is
“yes”, was it a material denial of procedural fairness?
remaining questions, which were adjourned, are those which would only arise if
the Court were to decide that the validity
of the termination is an objective
[18] On 8 August
2025, I heard submissions from the parties addressing each of the five separate
questions and it became apparent
that the questions should be considered in the
following order:
(a) Separate Question 4
(b) Separate Question 5
(c) Separate Question 1
(d) Separate Question 2
(e) Separate Question 3.
[19] I consider
each of the questions in turn below.
Separate Question 4: Did the adjudicator’s reference to
deny the applicant procedural fairness?
submissions before the adjudicator, the parties addressed whether York had
waived any rights in a notice to show cause (“Tomkins’
Notice”) that Tomkins gave York on 21 August 2024.
[21] In his
reasons, the adjudicator, when considering this issue, referred to the case of
neither party had referred to this case in their
submissions to the adjudicator. Accordingly, York submits that they have been
procedural fairness.
Contract prescribes the following in relation to relation to show cause
39.7 Principal’s default
If the Principal commits a substantial breach of the Contract, the
Contractor may, by hand or by certified post, give the Principal
notice to show cause....
39.8 Contractor’s notice to show cause
A notice given under subclause 39.7 will state:
the Principal is required to show cause in writing why the Contractor should not
exercise a right referred to in subclause 39.9;
d) the date and time by which the Principal must show cause (which will not
be less than 7 day clear days after the notice is received
by the Principal);
39.9 Contractor’s rights
If the Principal fails to show reasonable cause by the stated date and
time, the Contractor may, by written notice to the Principal
suspend the whole
or any part of the WUC.
The Contractor may, by written notice to the Principal, terminate the
Contract, if within 7 days of the date of suspension under
this subclause, the
Principal fails to:
a) to remedy the breach; or
b) if the breach is not capable of remedy, to make other arrangements to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Contractor.
Damages suffered by the Contractor by reason of the suspension will be
assessed by the Superintendent, who will certify them as moneys
due and payable
to the Contractor
(emphasis added).”
[23] In relation
to the Tomkins notice, the earliest that Tomkins could have required York to
show cause (to comply with the 7 clear
day requirement in cl 39.8(d)) was
sometime on 29 August 2024.
[24] However,
York was only given until 28 August 2024 to show cause.
[25] York’s
position is that Tomkins’ notice did not comply with cl 39.8(d) and
therefore was invalid and consequently:
(a) any subsequent suspension by Tomkins based on the invalid show cause notice
would be a wrongful suspension; and
(b) in turn, any subsequent termination would be unlawful.
[26] Whilst York
responded within the stated date and time as set out in the Notice, York made it
clear in their response that any
suspension based on the Notice would constitute
a wrongful suspension (which itself would amount to a substantial breach of the
[27] Tomkins
subsequently suspended the works under contract (“WUC”) and, later,
purported to terminate the Contract pursuant
to cl. 39.9.
response, York gave Tomkins a notice to show cause (“the York
Notice”) on the basis that it had wrongfully suspended
the WUC. When
Tomkins failed to show cause, York took the remaining WUC out of Tomkins’
hands and suspended payment in accordance
with cl 39.4.
[29] Tomkins
submitted to the adjudicator that, as York had responded to their Notice, York
had waived any right it may have had (“the
waiver issue”). Tomkins
Dura (Australia) Constructions Pty Ltd v Hue Boutique Living Pty
Ltd (No. 3)
[2012] VSC 99
”) and submitted
(a) if York had objected to the allegedly incorrect specified time frame before
responding, then Tomkins could have re-served the
notice; and
(b) York’s failure to do so amounted to a waiver of the same type in
responded to these submissions and stated that
was not relevant to
the circumstances of this case, as it did not provide any authority for the
position that the requirement for
strict compliance with the Contract for a
valid notice to show cause can be waived. York also referred the adjudicator to
Westbourne Grammar School v Gemcan Constructions Pty Ltd
[2017] VSC 645
had been considered.
considering the matter, the adjudicator referred to the parties’
submissions as to the application of
to the circumstances and
concluded that:
“119. It is clear that the Show Cause Notice
must satisfy clause 39.8(d) of the Contract.
Claimant’s Show Cause Notice dated 21 August 2024 did not satisfy clause
39.8(d) because it specified a time that was less
than 7 clear days.
Grammar School v Gemcan Constructions Pty Ltd
[2017] VSC 645
however does
not deal with a situation where a respondent waives its contractual right to
assert the notice sent is invalid because
it elects to answer the notice
including within the time specified in the notice to show cause,
Respondent could have informed the Claimant that its Show Cause Notice was
invalid and done nothing more. The Claimant would
then have had no contractual
basis for terminating the Contract and would have had to re-issue its amended
Notice to Show Cause to
commence the process of termination.
Respondent, however, responded to the Show Cause Notice within the time
specified by the Claimant in the 21 August 2024 Notice
to Show Cause and waived
its right to do nothing as it was contractually entitled to do.
which supports my conclusion to how to regard the Notice to
Show Cause as follows;
388. Hudson's Building and Engineering Contracts, state the
rule concerning modern contractual determination clauses
that require
written notice in one form or another at the time of
determination of the
contract in these terms:
Express notice requirements are often in ‘two tier’ form ...
In every case the clause must be carefully considered and
closely followed in
all respects, both as to the contents and timing of the notices, but the courts
will usually regard the notices
as commercial documents, and the modern approach
is to interpret notice clauses with regard to their commercial purpose [Mannai
Investments
Co Ltd v Eagle Star Assurance
[1997] UKHL 19
[1997] AC 749].
390. The Court of Appeal of this court, in MLW Technology Pty Ltd v May,
in the context of a licensing agreement, considered the principles
relevant to
interpreting the effect of contractual notices. Gillard AJA emphasised that in
construing commercial contracts, and the
actions of businessmen, a common sense
non-technical approach should be adopted. Gillard AJA approved of the
observations of the
House of Lords in Mannai Investment Co Ltd v Eagle Star Life
Assurance Co Ltd finding them to accord with authority in this court.
reasonable recipient, in the circumstances of the parties is aware of the terms
of the contract, of the correspondence that has
passed between the parties, and
of the history of the building project. A builder would have had extensive
knowledge of the works.
The purpose of the Show Cause Notice dated 21 August 2024, was to make it clear
to the Respondent that the Claimant considered
the numerous identified failures
to provide design information within the period agreed by the parties that is
set out in part H
of the Annexure to the Contract substantial breaches of
Contract and demanded the Respondent to show cause as to why it should not
terminate the Contract.
answering the Notice to Show Cause, the Respondent indicated it did not wish to
rely on its contractual right to do nothing and
provided a full response on 28
August 2024. In other words, the Respondent waived its right to insist upon the
Claimant’s strict
compliance with 39.8 of the
[32] Up to this
point, York has no complaint.
[33] However,
the adjudicator then went on to refer to
in this way:
“127. In further support of that conclusion, I refer to
Australia Insurance Limited v Delor Vue Apartments CTS 39788
judgment, Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Edelman, Stewart [sic] and Gleeson JJ described a
similar form of waiver in the following
has been repeatedly said that "waiver" is a term that is used in many different
Perhaps the most common usage of waiver is to describe an
unequivocal decision by a party, communicated to the other party, not
upon a right or not to exercise a power.
itself, a waiver of a right is rarely irrevocable. For that reason, it has
sometimes been said that the general rule concerning
a waiver of a right, "in
the sense of an intimation of an intention not to enforce it", is that the mere
act of representing that
a right has been waived is "of itself
inoperative”. Similarly, it has been said that "the mere statement of an
intention not
to insist on a right is not effectual unless made for
consideration ... A mere waiver signifies nothing more than an expression of
intention not to insist upon the right". Perhaps more accurately, the legal
position is that although a waiver does have legal effect
in that "the waiver is
binding on the waiving party, unless the waiver is effectively retracted", the
waiver can generally be revoked
at any time with reasonable
Nevertheless,
exceptions or "special cases" exist where a unilateral waiver cannot be revoked.
One exception is where the strength
of the interest of finality in litigation
can sometimes mean that a waiver of particular rights related to litigation is
irrevocable.
For instance, the waiver of legal professional privilege will be
irrevocable "where the actions of a party are plainly inconsistent
maintenance of the confidentiality which the privilege is intended to protect".
A similar approach, which also "depended
upon considerations founded in the
nature of the adversarial litigious process” that are “not relevant
to the identification
of the rights and obligations of parties to
contracts”, was taken in The Commonwealth v Verwayen by Toohey J and
Their Honours concluded that an undertaking not to plead a
limitations defence had become irrevocable. But, even then, that view
command the support of a majority of the Court. Brennan J, by contrast,
considered that the “ordinary principles of
estoppel” applied to the
waiver in that case so that it could be revoked at any time before it had been
relied upon to the
detriment of the other party, or otherwise until judgment was
entered so that no amendment to the pleading was possible
[citations omitted]
128. The Respondent replied to the Claimant’s Notice to Show Cause,
within the prescribed time, and made clear its position.
By that act, the
Respondent expressly made clear to the Claimant its position and implicitly
invited the Claimant to accept its reply
or take the next steps.
129. The Claimant considered the Respondent’s reply to the
Claimant’s Show Cause Notice of 21 August 2024 and determined
Respondent’s reply did explain (show cause) as to what the Respondent
proposed to do to rectify the breaches in relation
to failure to provide design
in a timely manner.
130. The Claimant relied and acted on the Respondent’s reply of 28
August 2024 and issued its notice of full suspension under
clause 39.9 on 29
August 2024.
131. Clause 39.9 of the Contract provides;
Contractor’s rights
If the Principal fails to show reasonable cause by the stated date and
the Contractor may, by written notice to the Principal, suspend the
whole or any part of
The Contractor will remove the suspension if the Principal remedies the
The Contractor may, by written notice to the Principal,
terminate the
Contract if, within 7 days of the date of suspension under this subclause the
Principal fails:
a) to remedy the breach: or
b) if the breach is not capable of remedy, to make other arrangements to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Contractor.
Damages suffered by the Contractor by reason of the suspension will be
assessed by the Superintendent, who will certify them as moneys
due and payable
to the Contractor
132. The Respondent had a further 7 days from the date of the Notice of
full suspension of works under Contract to explain how the
Respondent would
remedy the breaches. The Respondent did not take any such steps in the period
following the Claimant’s notice
of full suspension.
133. On 10 September 2025, 12 days after it had issued its Notice of full
suspension of works under Contract to remedy the breaches,
the Claimant send
[sic] a further written notice terminating the Contract.
134. Notwithstanding the issue of whether the Respondent had committed the
notified substantial breaches of Contract, I am satisfied
that the Claimant
followed the requirements of the Contract, as amended by the conduct of the
parties and lawfully terminated contract.”
submits that the adjudicator’s consideration of
denied them
procedural fairness as no party referred the adjudicator to
was York given an opportunity to address the adjudicator on the relevance of
[35] In summary
York’s position is that the adjudicator:
(a) determined the issue of waiver in reliance on
when, in fact,
the reasoning in
supported the opposite proposition to that found
by the adjudicator; and
(b) relied on
to justify his conclusion that, as a matter of law,
York’s mere act of replying to Tomkins’ Notice within the prescribed
time was an act of waiver.
described a common usage of waiver as an “unequivocal decision by a party,
communicated to the other party, not to insist upon
a right or not to exercise a
However, in this
case, York states that the opposite occurred as York’s response adopted an
unequivocal position that strict
compliance with the requirements in cl 39.8 was
submits that procedural fairness required the parties to be given notice of the
adjudicator’s intention to rely on
, in circumstances where
neither party had made submissions about
and, critically, its
application to the facts in the present case. York states that it is not to the
point that the result was consistent
with Tomkins’ submissions to the
adjudicator.
[38] York states
that the result was reached by a view of the law for which neither of the
parties had contended and at the hearing
summarised their position in this
“.. But we say the problem about it is that had we been
alerted to the fact – had the adjudicator said to us, “Look,
I’m concerned about the Allianz. I’ve heard all about
and I’ve got some views about that, but I’m concerned about Allianz
because I think that supports Tomkins’ position.”
That’s what
he should have done to give us natural justice. But he didn’t do that. Had
he done that, we would have said,
“Well, Mr Adjudicator, in fact, that
decision is squarely against Tomkins because of the part that’s extracted
reasons which says that it must be an unequivocal rejection of
Separate Question 4 – Consideration
[39] The duty to
afford procedural fairness does not have a fixed content. Procedural fairness
“conveys the notion of a flexible
obligation to adopt fair procedures
which are appropriate and adapted to the circumstances of the particular
[40] The purpose
and the nature of an adjudication confine what the duty to
act fairly requires.
[41] The fact
that an adjudicator’s decision is interim only and not “the final
word on the dispute ... reduces the imperative
for rigorous standards of
procedural fairness to
Acciona Agua Australia Pty Ltd v Monadelphous Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] QSC 133
, Bond J (as his Honour then was) provided a detailed consideration of
“[41] ... the valid exercise of an
adjudicator’s jurisdiction is conditioned on the adjudicator having
accorded to the
parties what White JA described in
Northbuild Construction
Pty Ltd v Central Interior Linings Pty Ltd
as “the necessary level of
procedural fairness”. The juridical basis for this proposition is the same
as the preceding
propositions. The legislature must be taken to have
contemplated that an adjudicator would have accorded the parties the necessary
level of procedural fairness, such that failure to do so would be regarded as
breach of a condition of the valid exercise of the
[Citations omitted]
[43] Generally,
the parties must anticipate possible findings and make submissions on them.
[44] The test is
objective, i.e., “whether the party asserting the breach of procedural
fairness received express notice, or
should reasonably have anticipated, that
either the adjudicator or the other party would rely upon the issue or principle
concerned”.
[45] I note that
the arguments involving high degrees of specificity about the relevant issues
should be viewed sceptically. In
A-Civil Aust Pty Ltd v Ceerose Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 7
, Leeming JA observed that:
issues in most disputes are familiar, and only rarely will there be scope for
an adjudicator to determine them
in a way which could not be anticipated thereby
amounting to procedural unfairness”.
Musico v Davenport
[2003] NSWSC 977
, McDougall J acknowledged the fast
rough and ready way of assessing a builder’s entitlement to progress
claims. However, even
in this context, if an adjudicator comes to a particular
determination on a particular ground, for which neither party has contended,
then the requirements of natural justice require the adjudicator to give the
parties notice of that intention:
“[107] ... It may
readily be accepted that the Act provides for a somewhat rough and ready way of
assessing a builder’s
entitlement to progress claims. It may also be
accepted that the procedure is intended not only to be swift, but also to be
out with the minimum amount of formality and expense. Nonetheless, what
an adjudicator is required to do is to decide the dispute
between the parties.
Under the scheme of the Act, that dispute is advanced by the parties through
their adjudication application
and adjudication response (which, no doubt,
will usually incorporate the antecedent payment claim and payment schedule). If
an adjudicator
is minded to come to a particular determination on a particular
ground for which neither party has contended then, in my opinion,
requirements of natural justice require the adjudicator to give the parties
notice of that intention so that they may put submissions
this case, the adjudicator did not come to determination on a ground that
neither party had contended for.
[48] The dispute
between the parties was waiver and both parties engaged with this issue in their
submissions to the adjudicator.
The adjudicator determined the issue in favour
of Tomkins and, in doing so, referred to a case that neither party had referred
nor had been given an opportunity to make submissions upon.
Holland Pty Ltd v TAC Pacific Pty Ltd
[2010] 1 Qd R
Applegarth J considered the
requirements of a denial of procedural fairness when a decision turns on a point
of law not contended
by any party:
“[50] In determining
whether there has been a substantial denial of natural justice it is not
sufficient to simply identify
the issue in dispute between the parties, and to
determine whether they had an opportunity to make submissions with respect to
issue... The subject of a decision is entitled to have his or her mind
directed to “the critical issues or factors on which
the decision is
likely to turn in order to have an opportunity of dealing with it”. In a
case such as the present, if the decision
is likely to turn on a point of law
not contended for by one of the parties, and about which the parties have not
been given an opportunity
to address, then the requirements of natural justice
will not have been observed. It is the issue of law, and not the general issue
in dispute, upon which the decision is likely to turn.”
, the adjudicator failed to provide the parties an opportunity to
address a recent authority that the adjudicator considered overruled
relied on by one of the parties on a crucial issue. This is distinguishable from
the circumstances of this case, where the
decision did not “turn on a
point of law not contended for by one of the
critical issue in this case was whether York’s conduct in responding to
Tomkins’ notice amounted to waiver.
parties were alive to the issue and addressed the waiver issue in their
submissions before the adjudicator, with specific
reference to
[53] Tomkins’
submission before the adjudicator was that York’s conduct amounted to
waiver by responding to the Notice
within the time specified in the notice; this
was the same conduct identified by the adjudicator as constituting waiver.
adjudicator, after considering
, determined that, by answering the
Notice, the respondent indicated that it did not wish to rely on its contractual
right to do nothing
and provided a full response.
adjudicator then went on to refer to
which he regarded as dealing
with a similar form of waiver. If, as York contends, he misapplied
then that does not amount to a denial of procedural fairness. York had an
opportunity to address the adjudicator about waiver and
did so, as it saw fit.
[56] York was
aware of the argument put by Tomkins about waiver and had a choice about how it
responded: address the authority of
or look at the concept, or the
doctrine, of waiver more broadly. York chose the former and limited its
submissions.
[57] In my view,
the adjudicator’s reference to
does not amount to a denial
of procedural fairness.
[58] The answer
to Separate Question 4 is “No”.
Separate question 5:
If the answer to separate question 4 is “yes”, was it a material
denial of procedural fairness?
[59] I have
determined that York was not denied procedural fairness by the
adjudicator’s reference to
. Accordingly, Separate Question
5 does not arise.
[60] However, I
will briefly address this question.
[61] If there
was any denial of procedural fairness (which I have not found) then the next
question is whether this denial of procedural
fairness was material to the
adjudicator’s decision.
principles of natural justice do not extend to requiring adjudicators to give
the parties an opportunity to put submissions
on matters that were not germane
to their decision. The concept of materiality is inextricably linked to the
measure of natural justice
that the Payment Act requires parties to be given in
any particular case.
materiality, Applegarth J in
John Holland
“[40] The adjective “substantial” has been
used in the relevant authorities to capture the principle that
the opportunity
denied was material, namely that the matter about which the adjudicator did not
provide an opportunity to be heard
was a point upon which the adjudicator based
his or her decision and was significant to the Payment Actual determination. In
the Court’s concern is with the practical effect of the alleged
denial of natural justice. Reference to the High Court’s
decisions in
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission and Ex parte Aala
the proposition that even if the Court is satisfied that there has been a denial
of natural justice, relief may be denied
if it can be shown that compliance with
the requirements of natural justice could have made no difference to the
outcome. It is probably
sufficient in this regard for the applicant for relief
to show that there were substantial submissions that, as a matter of reality
not mere speculation, might have persuaded the adjudicator to change his or her
[Citations omitted]
“concept of materiality is inextricably linked to the measure of natural
justice that the Act requires parties to be
given in a particular
[65] Only a
“substantial” denial of procedural fairness may invalidate an
adjudicator’s decision.
adjudicator need not give the parties an opportunity to make submissions about
matters that are not germane to the
opportunity to be heard must have been denied in a “real and material
sense”, which directs attention to the
way the adjudicator reached his or
her decision.
[68] Even where
there has been a denial of procedural fairness, relief may be denied if
compliance with the duty could have made no
difference to the outcome.
[69] It may be
sufficient for the moving party to show that “substantial
submissions” might have changed the adjudicator’s
submits that the denial of procedural fairness was material for the following
(a) had they been given an opportunity to address the conduct that the
adjudicator found constituted a waiver, they could have submitted
conduct could not ground such a finding because it was not an unequivocal
acceptance of the show cause notice;
(b) contrary to the adjudicator’s view,
did not support the
waiver finding;
(c) had submissions been made, there was a realistic possibility of a different
outcome, including that Tomkins’ termination
was unlawful, no reference
date had arisen, and the adjudicator had no jurisdiction;
(d) no other basis was identified by the adjudicator for his finding as to the
reference date;
(e) the parties did not advance any other basis for the existence of the
reference date and were not given an opportunity to be heard
in relation to any
other basis;
(f) further, to the extent that any other basis might hypothetically exist, it
was not determined by the adjudicator in a way contemplated
by the Act (that is
rationally and having regard to the Contract).
the New South
Wales Court of Appeal addressed materiality in this
Consistently with the effect of what was said in
the arguments put by the appellant in this case, it should be understood that
only if there has been a substantial denial
of procedural fairness by an
adjudicator in determining an adjudication application will there be
Act. Put another way, the content of the
requisite procedural fairness is reduced: note
[60]. What this means in practice will turn on the particular circumstances of
cases. But generally a conclusion of invalidity
would only be reached if there
was a significant departure from what would ordinarily be the requirements of
procedural fairness
for a person exercising a statutory power, and where that
departure could be characterised as leading to substantial practical injustice
in all the circumstances. This approach reflects the fact that the Act provides
for a “rough and ready” process (
Chase Oyster Bar
[208]), not intended readily to be held invalid on judicial review.
[33] McNab referred the court to the decision of Doyle J in
Operations Pty Ltd v Ferretti International Ottoway Pty Ltd
. As his Honour
noted at [61] in that decision, “it is not always clear whether an
adjudicator has determined a matter on a
basis which was not contended for by
the parties, or which had not otherwise been put in issue”, saying that
this is so will often depend upon the level of abstraction or
specificity at which one articulates the issues in dispute”.
He added at
[62] that beyond the extremes, “it is difficult to generalise as to the
level of abstraction or specificity at
which the obligation to afford procedural
fairness must be addressed in a particular case”. Even so, consistently
approach just stated, a reviewing court should view sceptically
arguments involving high degrees of specificity in this regard.
[34] The primary judge stated at [9] that it “was common ground
between the parties that a denial of procedural fairness in
an adjudication, if
material or substantial, would require an adjudication determination to be set
aside” (citation omitted).
Insofar as what is set out above is different
from the standard the primary judge applied, it is first one of emphasis in
to what is meant by substantial. That notion has practical
significance. Further, there is a difference between considering whether
has been a departure (substantial or otherwise) from the standard of procedural
fairness required and whether or not any such
departure is material in the sense
recently emphasised by the High Court. Whilst both involve issues of relative
significance, which
may overlap, conceptually the former looks to whether or not
there has been a departure from the type of fairness that the Act requires.
latter involves asking a (hypothetical) factual question, looking to what would
have occurred but for that departure in the sense
of asking whether it deprived
the challenger of a realistic possibility of a different outcome:
v Minister for Immigration and Border
at [2], [85]”.
[Citations omitted]
[72] Even if I
had found that there was a denial of natural justice, I am not satisfied that it
was a material denial of procedural
[73] As the
adjudicator’s reasons set out,
was referred to as
“further supporting” a decision already reached on other grounds. It
was an additional supplement
to the decision he had already made.
[74] Even if the
adjudicator invited and accepted submissions that
relevant (as York contends), at best – for York’s position –
that would have removed mere “further
support” for a decision
already made. Further submissions about
would not have addressed
the primary basis of the adjudicator’s decision.
[75] In all the
circumstances, York cannot demonstrate that the adjudicator’s failure to
seek submissions about
was a substantial denial of procedural
[76] The answer
to Question 5 (if required) is “No”.
Question 1: Is the Applicant entitled to the relief claimed in paragraph 2 of
the Originating Application?
paragraph 2 of the Originating Application, York seeks declarations that the
following parts of the Adjudication Decision
are void for jurisdictional error:
(a) the adjudicator’s decision that Tomkins was entitled to be paid for
“unfixed materials”; and
(b) the adjudicator’s decision that Tomkins was entitled to be paid for
certain “termination costs”, namely, demobilisation
costs, staff
costs, items left on site, and overheads on each of those costs.
Separation Question (1)(a): unfixed materials
August 2024, Tomkins purported to suspend the WUC.
[79] The next
day, Tomkins was observed removing materials from the site and the
Superintendent wrote to them advising that they were
not permitted to do so and
directed Tomkins to provide particulars of the materials (and other items) that
had been removed. (“the
Superintendent’s instruction”).
[80] This letter
was styled as an “Instruction” made pursuant to the following three
clauses of the Contract:
(a) cl 20 provided (relevantly) that the “Superintendent may give a
direction orally but will as soon as practicable confirm
(b) cl 24 was headed “Site” and addressed a range of matters
including possession of, and access to, the site;
(c) cl 28 provided (relevantly) that the “Superintendent may give the
Contractor a written direction not to remove materials
or construction plant
from the site. Thereafter the Contractor will not remove them without the
Superintendent’s prior written
approval (which will not be unreasonably
withheld).”
[81] Later that
day, York wrote to Tomkins (“York’s letter”) in relation to
the removal of the materials and relevantly
Contractor is not entitled to suspend the whole or any part of the WUC under the
Contract. The notified suspension of
the whole of the WUC is a substantial
breach of the Contract. We intend to write to you further on this subject
any case, it has come to the Principal’s attention that, despite having
purported to suspend the WUC, the Contractor has
been removing materials from
the site today.
Contractor’s possession of the site only confers on the Contractor a right
to such use and control as is necessary to enable
the Contractor to carry out
WUC. The removal of materials to be used for the WUC is the antithesis of
carrying out WUC.
Principal notes that the Superintendent has directed the Contractor to cease
removing material from the site. We trust that the
Contractor will comply with
this direction.”
Tomkins continued to remove materials from the site, York applied to the Court
for, and was granted, an injunction restraining
Tomkins from doing
However, Tomkins’
entitlement to payment for these materials remained in dispute, as:
(a) Tomkins maintained its entitlement to payment for unfixed material in the
payment claim; and,
(b) York opposed such a claim based on cl 37.3 of the contract. (the cl. 37.3
clause 37.3 of the Contract, it relevantly provides:
Principal will not be liable to pay for unfixed plant and materials unless they
are listed in Item 29 and the Contractor:
a) Provides the additional security in Item 13(e); and
b) Satisfies the Superintendent that the subject plant and materials have
been paid for, properly stored and protected, and labelled
the property of
the Principal.”
parties made submissions to the adjudicator about the cl. 37.3 issue.
[85] Tomkins
submitted that there were three bases as to why cl 37.3 did not apply to the
circumstances of this case:
“307. Read in isolation, clause
37.3 prima facie disqualifies claims for unfixed plant and materials. However,
when clause
37.3 is considered in the broader context of the Contract and
against the mandatory provisions of the BIF Act, it becomes apparent
York’s reliance on clause 37.3 as a means for withholding payment is
unsustainable in the particular factual matrix that
applies to the subject
Payment Claim and to this Adjudication Application.
Tomkins’ position in this regard is founded upon three bases, only one of
which the Adjudicator need accept in order to
dispense with this reason for
withholding payment.
clause 3 of the Formal Instrument of Agreement (FIA) entitles Tomkins to payment
’. The definition of WUC expressly includes the
provision of materials
’. The parties have agreed that the
FIA takes precedence over clause 37.3 of the Amended General Conditions (GCS),
result, Tomkins is entitled to be paid for the unfixed materials (as
part of the WUC).
, the contractual
exclusion of Tomkins’ entitlement to be paid for unfixed materials under
clause 37.3 directly contradicts,
and has the effect of excluding,
Tomkins’ statutory right to payment for ‘
related goods’
under section 70 of the BIF Act. Accordingly, by operation of section 200(2)
of the BIF Act, clause 37.3 is of no effect.
in circumstances where the Contract is terminated under clause 39.9,
Tomkins’ contractual entitlement to recover damages under
the terms of
clause 39.10 trumps the operation of clause 37.3. Tomkins is entitled to recover
the cost of unfixed materials effectively
as a contractual debt under clause
[86] Without
going into the detail, York then addressed each of these matters in their
submissions to the adjudicator.
[87] York’s
position was that, pursuant to clause 37.3, York would not be liable to pay for
such materials, except in certain
circumstances which were not applicable.
adjudicator, in his reasons, addressed the three bases Tomkins raised in
relation to the cl 37.3 issue. In relation to the
first basis, the adjudicator
“263. In the normal course of events, the Respondent
had no claim over the unfixed materials because nothing in the Contract
the Respondent any possessory or ownership rights over the unfixed materials nor
did it have any obligation to pay for the
unfixed materials pursuant to Item 29
of Part A of the Annexure and clause 37.3 of the Contract. Similarly, the
Claimant had no entitlement
to claim payment for unfixed materials pursuant to
clause 37.3 of the Contract.
acknowledge that if the Respondent had given its direction under clause 39.4 of
the Contract to take the work out of the hands
of the Claimant before it gave
the 30 August 2024 instruction, the Respondent would have accrued the right to
demand that those materials
be left on site until the WUC had been completed
pursuant to clause 39.5. If that had happened, the Superintendent would have
required to undertake a final assessment pursuant to clause 39.6 of the
Contract considering the value of the unfixed materials and
Respondent’s costs (including additional costs) required to complete the
WUC and paid any money owing to the Claimant at
completion of the WUC.
Claimant terminated the Contract on 10 September 2024 before the Respondent
issued its instruction under clause 39.5 on 12 September
2024. Furthermore, up
until 10 September 2024, the Claimant was bound to follow the instructions given
by the Superintendent.
those circumstances, the Respondent had accrued no right over the unfixed
materials prior to 30 August 2024 and there was nothing
preventing the Claimant
from removing its unfixed materials from the site before the Respondent directed
Respondent’s instruction the Claimant [sic] to leave the unfixed material
on site was in effect was [sic] an instruction
to vary the Contract by providing
to the Respondent the unfixed materials including the unfixed reinforcement. The
30 August 2024
instruction was a variation under clause 36.1 of the Contract.
issuing the instruction to leave all unfixed materials on site, the unfixed
reinforcement became the property of the Respondent,
and the Respondent accrued
an obligation to the Claimant for the payment of the unfixed material it had
direction to leave the unfixed materials on site was a direction to perform a
variation under clause 36.1 of the Contract, which
36.1 Directing variations
Contractor will not vary WUC except as directed in writing under
this clause 36.
The Superintendent, before the date of practical completion, may direct
the Contractor to vary WUC by any one or more of the following
nevertheless of a character and extent
contemplated by, and capable of
being carried out under, the provisions
of the Contract (including being
within the warranties in clause 2A):
(a) increase, decrease or omit any part:
(b) change the character or quality:
(c) change the levels, lines, positions or dimensions
(d) carry out additional work:
If the Contractor considers that a direction constitutes a
variation, it must, as a condition precedent to any entitlement, give the
superintendent notice within 10 business days of the direction,
and in any event
before commencing any work, the subject of the direction.
[89] I note that
these paragraphs (or some of them) are repeated by the adjudicator when
addressing the second and third bases of
Tomkins’ argument. Importantly,
in relation to the second and third bases of Tomkins claim, the adjudicator
repeated that:
“(T)he 30 August 2024 instruction was a variation under
clause 36.1 of the
[90] Clearly,
the adjudicator considered and found that there was a variation of the
[91] Ultimately,
the adjudicator found that Tomkins was entitled to $7,217,486.65 for unfixed
submits that, in the circumstances, it was denied procedural fairness, as neatly
summarised by the following submissions
at the hearing:
fairness. This arose from the adjudicator’s
failure to put York on notice
of his intention to find that a letter that had been sent by York to Tomkins
was, in fact, a variation
direction under clause 36 of the contract.
A point that’s made by Tomkins is that it was not, in fact, a letter
from York, but rather an instruction from the superintendent
on the same day
that was the focus of the adjudicator’s decision. The reasons do refer to
both correspondence, but it really
makes no difference, your Honour. The finding
that either letter amounted to a variation direction under 36 was a decision on
that no-one had advanced, and with respect, could not have been
anticipated by the parties or, for that matter, York. In reality,
adjudicator, off his own bat, made the variation finding, and his
characterisation of the correspondence in that respect was
incorrect.”
[93] Tomkins
states that York was not denied procedural fairness as:
(a) York was aware of the issue in dispute;
(b) the adjudicator did not determine the issue in a way that could not be
anticipated by York; and
(c) the adjudicator’s finding is consistent with submissions made by the
parties to the adjudicator.
[94] Tomkins’
submissions to the adjudicator were:
(a) York had a contractual obligation to pay Tomkins for any unfixed materials
that had become part of the works under Contract;
(b) ss 66 and 70 of the
entitled Tomkins to a progress payment
for supplying to York unfixed materials in connection with the works under
(c) York had “refused to allow Tomkins to retake possession of the unfixed
material”, the corollary of which is that
York had possession of the
unfixed material.
[95] York’s
case was a simple one: that Tomkins had no entitlement to payment for unfixed
materials because, as by clause 37.3,
the parties had agreed that York would not
be liable to pay for such materials, except in certain circumstances that did
[96] Tomkins
submits that the adjudicator’s finding that the Superintendent’s
Instruction had increased the works under
Contract was within the issues that
the parties had put “in play” and refers to the following parts of
Yorks submission
to the adjudicator:
“583. The existence of
the two provisions—the FIA’s general entitlement to payment for
materials and the specific
exclusion in clause 37.3 for unfixed
materials—does not create an ambiguity or inconsistency. Rather, it
reflects the ordinary
practice in construction contracts. Clause 37.3 acts as a
specific restriction on the broader entitlement in the FIA, clarifying
Contractor is not entitled to payment for materials that have not been fixed to
unless agreed otherwise
clause 3 of the FIA says no more than what clause 2.1 of the General Conditions
already says (requiring the Respondent to pay
the Claimant for the work, which
includes the provision of materials). Clauses 2.1 and clause 37.3, as they
appear in the Contract
are included in the unamended Australian Standard
template of the AS4000-1997 contract. If one were to follow the Claimant’s
rationale, clause 37.3 of the Australian Standard template would always be at
risk of being ineffective pursuant to clause 8.1 of
the template due to an
inconsistency with clause 2.1. This demonstrates the illogicality of the
Claimant’s submission.”
[97] Accordingly,
Tomkins states that the parties’ submissions on the adjudication
application had invited the adjudicator to
consider whether Tomkins’ works
had been varied as:
(a) Tomkins reproduced York’s letter, which had referred to the
Superintendent’s Instruction and identified its consequence
that Tomkins
was not allowed to retake possession of unfixed materials;
(b) Tomkins argued that, by leaving unfixed materials on site, it had supplied
materials for which Tomkins had a statutory right
to a progress payment;
(c) York had argued that cl 37.3 of the Contract would apply to restrict
Tomkins’ entitlement to payment for unfixed materials
“unless agreed
otherwise”;
(d) York identified that cl 2.1 of the General Conditions of Contract required
York to pay Tomkins for the work, including provision
of materials, thus
directing attention to cl 2.1, which provided that York would pay Tomkins
“for work ... adjusted by any
additions or deductions made pursuant to the
(e) York submitted that the adjudicator would be required to value the unfixed
materials under ss 72(2)(b) and 72(3) of the
if certain other
findings were made. A matter identified by York as relevant to that valuation
process was any variation agreed to
by the parties.
[98] Tomkins’
focus on York’s reference to “unless agreed otherwise” and
clause 2.1 in their submissions to
the adjudicator.
[99] Accordingly,
Tomkins states that, by doing so, York acknowledged that the parties could agree
to change the default position
under cl 37.3, and that York chose not to address
the possibility that the parties had “otherwise agreed” to alter
default position.
[100] However,
Tomkins submits that it was, nonetheless, open to the adjudicator to consider
that issue.
Separate Question 1(a) –
Consideration
[101] In all of
the circumstances, I am satisfied that there was a material denial of procedural
fairness by the adjudicator.
[102] Tomkins
raised three bases before the adjudicator as to why they were entitled to their
claim for unfixed materials.
adjudicator addressed Tomkins’ first argument in the reasons and found
that York was liable to pay for unfixed materials
but not for the reasons
advanced by Tomkins.
reasons, read as a whole, reveal that the adjudicator only found that Tomkins
was entitled to be paid for unfixed materials
under cl 3(b) of the FIA because
he had decided that:
(a) York’s letter involved a variation to the WUC; and
(b) the Variation direction had the effect of increasing the WUC to include the
unfixed materials which put the materials within
the scope of cl 3(b), namely
“completed WUC”.
adjudicator’s reasons dealt with how a variation was to be priced under
the Contract:
“280. ... In other words, the Respondent was required to value the
unfixed materials at the time it directed the Claimant to
leave the unfixed
reinforcement on site.”
[106] It is
evident from the reasons that the variation finding was critical to the decision
that Tomkins was entitled to any payment
under cl 3(b). It was not by operation
of the order of precedence.
[107] The second
basis raised by Tomkins turned on the no-contracting provisions in s 200 of the
which the adjudicator addressed in the reasons. In doing so, the
adjudicator referred to
Patrick Stevedores Operations No 2 Pty Ltd v
McConnell Dowell Constructors (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC 1413
, (a case that
had been cited by York) which was distinguished as it tuned on different facts.
The adjudicator continued as follows:
“287. ...The distinguishing fact that leads to a different
conclusion is that on 30 August 2024, the Respondent instructed
the Claimant to
leave all unfixed materials on site.”
[108] Then, the
adjudicator went to set out the same analysis from the reasons in relation to
the first argument in support of his
finding that Tomkins had been directed to
vary the WUC.
adjudicator did not find that cl 37.3 was of no effect by virtue of s 200.
Rather, he found that York’s variation
direction had the effect that
Tomkins was entitled to include unfixed materials in a payment claim, under the
Act, and be paid for
those materials.
[110] The third
basis raised by Tomkins was that it was entitled to recover damages in the
amount of the costs of the unfixed material
under cl 39.10. The adjudicator
addressed Tomkins’ third argument in the reasons and ultimately did not
accept Tomkins’
construction of cl 39.10.
[111] As was
done with the second argument, the adjudicator set out the same analysis in
relation to the first argument in support
of his finding that Tomkins had been
directed to vary the WUC.
adjudicator then found that:
“341. On 30 August 2024, the Respondent instructed to leave the
unfixed materials on the site, which was a variation to increase
the WUC under
clause 36.1. The Superintendent should have, as soon as possible, valued that
variation pursuant to clause 36.4 of
the Contract.
The Claimant terminated the Contract on 10 September 2024 and as at that time,
the Superintendent had not, in breach of its obligations
under clause 36.1
valued the variation to leave the unfixed materials on site under clause
In those circumstances, the Superintendent’s failure to value the unfixed
materials became a loss or damage arising from
the suspension and clause 39.9 of
the Contract required the Superintendent to value that loss or damage and adjust
the Contract sum
after termination...”
[113] It was
only on that basis of a variation direction where the Superintendent failed to
value the unfixed materials, that the
adjudicator found that Tomkins was
entitled to payment under cl 39.9 (not cl. 39.10).
[114] Generally,
the parties must anticipate possible findings and make submissions on them.
[115] Under the
scheme of the Act, disputes between the parties are advanced through their
adjudication application and adjudication
response (which, no doubt, will
usually incorporate the antecedent payment claim and payment schedule).
[116] In this
case, as the case was framed by the parties, York did not receive notice of the
variation finding, nor in the circumstances
should it “reasonably have
anticipated”
adjudicator would go down the path of finding a variation to the contract to
resolve the cl 37.3 issue.
[117] York’s
submission to the adjudicator was not an invitation for him to decide the cl.
37.3 issue as he did. Yorks’
counsel at the hearing appropriately
characterised the effect of Tomkins’ submission to the
“Now, the effect of Tomkins’ submission seems
to be that the mere mention of this clause would have directed the
adjudicator’s
attention to the terms of the provision which included,
amongst other things, an acknowledgment that York would pay Tomkins a lump
contract price that could be adjusted by additions or deductions made pursuant
to the contract. That, it says, is the invitation
or the gateway by which the
adjudicator was then entitled to make the finding that York’s letter
amounted to a variation direction
under clause 36. That submission is incorrect,
your Honour.
The mere reference to the general payment clause in contract, in the context
of responding to a particular submission, did not give
the adjudicator licence
to make a finding that York’s letter was a variation direction, that no
one had made that submission
to me. Not wishing to use too many metaphors, but
if he did that, your Honour, the adjudicator would have gone off on a frolic of
[118] York’s
reference in their submissions to the adjudicator to “unless agreed
otherwise” in the context of cl.
37.3 was fairly setting out the
parameters of the clause.
[119] It did not
open the door to find an agreement between the parties that was not contemplated
by either party in their submissions.
The mention of clause 2.1 in York’s
submissions did not give the adjudicator an invitation to embark on finding a
[120] In my
view, for the adjudicator to consider the issue of variation, the parties should
have been given an opportunity to make
submissions.
consideration of the submissions made to the adjudicator, as compared to his
reasons, demonstrates that the adjudicator embarked
upon the variation issue
without any encouragement from the parties.
[122] No party
addressed the adjudicator on this issue, and, in my view, a sensible reading of
the submissions makes it clear that
it was not an issue engaged with by the
[123] The issues
raised by the parties in relation to the cl 37.9 issue were confined. Neither
party contended that York’s conduct
resulted in a variation of the
contract which would thus be determinative of the cl 37.9 issue. Tomkins’
position at this hearing,
by reference to piecemeal fragments of York’s
submissions, is artificial.
[124] In this
case, on this issue, the adjudicator went beyond the dispute between the
requirements of natural justice required the adjudicator to give the parties
notice of his intention to decide the issue
in the way he did and allow them to
make submissions about whether there was variation. He did not. There has been a
denial of procedural
[126] The next
question is whether the denial of procedural fairness was material to the
adjudicator’s decision. The threshold
of materiality is not demanding or
[127] This Court
may readily infer that, if the adjudicator had invited submissions on the
variation finding, he would have approached
York’s submissions with an
satisfied that there is more than a realistic possibility that the outcome could
have been different if submissions on
the definition of variation and the
characterisation of York’s letter had been received.
[129] If given
notice by the adjudicator, York could have made submissions addressing the
following relevant issues:
(a) whether York’s letter involved a variation, i.e.,
‘relinquishing’ unfixed materials did not vary the WUC;
(b) that neither York’s letter nor the instruction from the Superintendent
identified the subject as relating to a variation;
(c) whether Tomkins’ conduct in seeking to remove unfixed materials from
the site involved it doing more work than what was
otherwise required under the
Contract; and
(d) the way in which the notice requirement in cl 36.1 operated pursuant to the
[130] In all of
the circumstances, I am satisfied that York could have made substantial
submissions, as a matter of reality and not
mere speculation, that might have
persuaded the adjudicator to change his mind.
[131] In my
view, in relation to Tomkins’ claim for unfixed materials, there has been
a substantial denial of procedural fairness.
Question 1(b) – the termination claim
[132] Tomkins
claimed $11,462,264.72 in termination costs on the basis that cl 39.10 created
an “express
contractual
right ... to recover all damages which
would otherwise have been available in circumstances where a common law claim
for repudiation
existed” (emphasis in original).
[133] Clause
39.10 of the Contract relevantly provides:
is terminated pursuant to subclause 39.4(b) or 39.9, the parties’
remedies, rights and liabilities will be the same as they
would have been under
the law governing the
had the defaulting party repudiated the
and the other party elected to treat the
end and recover damages.”
disputed Tomkins’ reliance on, and construction of, cl 39.10 and stated
that this clause is simply a boilerplate
provision which acknowledged that, at
termination, each party’s common law rights to damages for breach of the
Contract were
submitted that the claim was for damages and “it is beyond the scope of
the Act to secure such a payment and scheduled
$0.00 for payment of these
adjudicator awarded Tomkins some of the claimed costs and found that Tomkins was
entitled to $1,213,843.30, comprising:
(a) $313,609.89 for demobilisation costs;
(b) $615,084.86 for staff costs;
(c) $174,799 for items that Tomkins left on site; and
(d) $110,349.49 for the cost of overheads on the items above.
[137] All of
these costs were incurred after Tomkins stated that the contract was terminated.
[138] In their
submissions to the adjudicator, Tomkins set out a summary of York’s
position that Tomkins had no right to a progress
payment post
termination:
“1597 York asserts that clause 39.10 bars Tomkins
from recovering any amount by way of progress payment. York argues that the
remedy available to Tomkins post termination is a claim for damages which, it
asserts, cannot be brought under the BIF Act.
On page 206 of the Payment
Schedule York states that:
Clause 39.10 of the Contract provides that if the Contractor terminates
the Contract pursuant to clause 39.9 (which is denied), the
parties remedies,
rights and liabilities will be the same as they would have been under the law
governing the Contract had the defaulting
party repudiated the Contract and the
other party elected to treat the Contract as at an end and recover damages. As
the Contractor
is claiming costs due to its unlawful termination, clause 39.9
confirms under the Contract this is a claim for damages for repudiation
therefore not claimable under the Act.
[139] Tomkins
then went on and made submissions as to why cl. 39.10 entitled them to recover
under the Contract for repudiation damages:
“1603 Emphasis is
placed upon the fact that clause 39.10 provides a
contractual
entitlement
to a party who terminates under clause 39.4(b) or 39.9 (as the case may be).
That entitlement is equal to, and derived
from, the amount of damages the party
would have been entitled to had it accepted the defaulting party's repudiation.
It is not a
claim for damages in the true sense - because damages are a remedy
awarded by operation of law for breach of contract. Rather, it
contractual mechanism that incorporates the measure of damages as determined
under the governing law, treating the entitlement
as a contractual right rather
than a purely legal remedy (emphasis in original).
Adjudicator is authorised (and indeed required) to award Tomkins a claim to
which it is entitled under the terms of the Contract.
Thus, if the Adjudicator
accepts Tomkins submission that it validly terminated the Contract under clause
39.9 (refer to Part C of
this Adjudication Application above), then Tomkins
submits that the Adjudicator ought to find that Tomkins is entitled to the
would have been
[entitled to had York]
repudiated the
Contract and
elected to treat the Contract as at an end and
recover damages
Elaborating
on this further, clause 37.4 permits Tomkins to make a final payment claim which
includes a "progress claim" for works
performed under the Contract (in the
ordinary sense of the matters set out in Clause 37.1) " ...
together with all
other claims whatsoever in connection with the subject matter of the
... " (emphasis in original).
the subject matter of the Contract, through the inclusion of clause 39.10,
expressly includes damages in the nature of that
which would be available
following repudiation, it follows that clause 37.4 allows for the inclusion of
"repudiatory" damages in
a final payment claim. The inescapable corollary of
this is that such matters are also subject to adjudication proceedings under
elaborated on in further detail in Section G.4 below, in similar circumstances
to the present dispute, the Court in
Parkview Constructions Pty Limited v
Sydney Civil Excavations Pty Limited & Anor
[2009] NSWSC 61
the conclusion that a claim for loss of profit following termination was capable
of being supported under the NSW equivalent
of the BIF Act.
of profit is a clear example of a claim which could, in ordinary circumstances,
not be brought under the security of payment
regime; however,
stands as authority for the proposition that this general principle does not
apply universally, and that the Courts are willing to
uphold a claimant's
entitlement to pursue such claims following termination.
evident consideration is that a claimant who is wronged by a principal, should
not, as a result of the Principal's wrongdoing
(which leads to termination), be
prevented from the expeditious recovery of amounts which the claimant is
entitled to receive in
accordance with the express terms of the construction
the Court is willing to accept that this is true for a loss of profit claim
(which is perhaps the furthest removed category of
claim from what is typically
known to be available under the security of payment regime) it follows that
other claims in the nature
of "damages" including those repudiatory damages
which clause 39.10 of the Contract expressly entitles Tomkins to recover, should
also reasonably be supported by the Act.
construction is necessary, where pursuant to clause 37.4 of the Contract, a
claim which is brought under clause 39.10 is evidently
a claim that is (to use
the wording of clause 37.4) within the category of "other claims whatsoever in
connection with the subject
matter of the Contract" and is therefore something
which may be included within a
final payment claim
the Adjudicator were to accept that a claim under clause 39.10 could not be the
subject of adjudication, in doing so they would
have arrived at the untenable
position that:
(a) the Contract allows for a particular type of
claim to be included within a final payment claim; and
(b) the Act requires the Adjudicator to make a determination on the claimant's
entitlement in respect to that claim; but
(c) the Act also precludes the Adjudicator from performing that function,
because the assessment of the very claim which the
Act requires the
Adjudicator to assess is (on York's construction) beyond the Adjudicator's
This simply cannot be true.
1613 The natural interpretation of the express wording of the Contract, when
read in conjunction with the Act is that following termination,
any claim in the
nature of repudiatory damages which would fall within the scope of clause 39.10
may be brought in a final payment
claims, and may subsequently also be subject
to adjudication procedures under the BIF Act.”
[140] Tomkins
stated that the effect of clause 39.10 is that Tomkins has an express
contractual right to “be made whole following
termination”. Tomkins
explained that this meant that they were entitled to recover whatever financial
sum is necessary to
place them into the position which it would have held if the
Contract had not been terminated and had instead run its course to completion.
[141] Tomkins
then made submissions in relation to a number of items, all of which were
referenced back to clause 39.10. The only
item that did not refer to clause
39.10 was the claim for overheads and margin. However, it was made clear by
Tomkins that this claim
was in relation to Tomkins’ overhead costs
following termination. Accordingly, this claim was also reliant on the clause
argument made by Tomkins.
adjudicator did not accept Tomkins’ construction of cl 39.10 as permitting
the recovery of ‘all’ common
law damages:
“989 I accept the Respondent’s argument that
where the Contract has been terminated, all subsequent claims are claims
damages for the purposes of contract law.
it does not follow that all claims for damages cannot be claimed under the
Contract or in a final payment claim made under
the Act because the Contract
expressly provides otherwise as does the Act.
Ordinarily,
a Claimant cannot claim for damages arising from breach of contract unless the
Contract expressly provides for claiming
for the types of damages. Clauses 14,
32, 34.9 and 39.9 are examples of such clauses.
992 Furthermore,
some claims for damages may be made pursuant to the provisions of the Contract
that survive termination. For example;
clause 39.9 requires the Superintendent
and or the Respondent to assess certain damages after termination. Clearly, that
is assessment
and liability of the Respondent is [sic] an amount for which the
Claimant can claim payment.
operation of the Act permits claims for damages to be made in a final payment
claim under the Act if those claims for damages
are referable to the
construction work. In other words, anything that was claimable under the
Contract during the course of the Contract
may be claimed in the final payment
claim under the Act after termination of the Contract.
permitted contents of a final payment claim following termination was explained
S.H.A. Premier Constructions Pty Ltd v Niclin Constructions Pty Ltd
75. A similar proposition applies in relation to the final payment claim,
which the Act authorises to be made when a contract has
been terminated, and
even though the fact of the
termination means that there can never be a final
payment claim advanced pursuant to the contract.
In the present case, it does not matter that the amount which
represents the retentions withheld under the contract cannot be said
amount which has yet accrued due and payable under the contract.
The contractor has a statutory entitlement to a final payment claim,
calculated under s 71(b) and valued under s 72(1)(b).
If the adjudicator values that claim in accordance with the provisions of
the Act, the effect of that valuation may well be to enable
the claimant to be
paid an amount of money which includes the value of cash retentions withheld
from work already done (and even
though under the contract there was no accrued
right to the return of cash retentions), but that seems to me to be made
permissible
by the terms of the Act.
the event of termination under the clause 39.9, common law rights are expressly
preserved by subclause 39.1, which states;
39.1 Preservation of other rights
If a party breaches (including repudiates), the Contract, nothing in this
clause will prejudice the right of the other party to recover
exercise any other right or remedy
39.10 preserves each party's common law rights in respect to damages for breach
of the Contract. It provides that if the Contract
is terminated, each party's
rights, remedies and liabilities are the same as they would have been under the
law governing the Contract
had the defaulting party repudiated the Contract and
the other party had elected to treat the Contract as at an end and to recover
39.10 is necessary otherwise a party terminating the Contract pursuant to clause
39 may not be able to recover damages because
of such breach. Clause 39.1 makes
it clear that a party terminating the Contract under subclause 39.4(b) or 39.9,
as the case may
be, may also at the same time exercise its common law rights to
recover damages or exercise any other legal right or remedy.
39.10 ensures the preservation of the terminating party’s rights to
payment for work completed and the Contract and
for damages referable to the
Contract including for damages arising from the suspension.
do not, however, accept the Claimant’s assertion that all common law
rights the Claimant may have in relation to the Contract
can be applied in
determining the Claimant’s final entitlements under the Adjudication
Application. The express words of clause
39.10 of the Contract only indicates
that the parties’ common law rights are not displaced by the Contract in
the event of
termination of the Contract.
the extent any provision of the Contract conflicts with any section of the Act,
section 200 of the Act provides that contractual
provision will be void and have
no effect in the determination of the parties’ rights and liabilities. The
provisions of the
Act will prevail.
1001 The Contract provides for
the assessment of certain types of damages by the Superintendent and payment of
those assessed damages
by the Respondent. For example, clauses 14, 32, 34.9 and
39.9 identify certain types of damages, which form part of the construction
in certain cases and may be the subject of a payment claim. This conclusion was
confirmed in
Coordinated Construction Co. Pty. Ltd. v. J.M. Hargreaves (NSW)
Pty. Ltd. & Ors.
[2005] NSWCA 228.
The relevant extract from that case
appears at paragraph 1010) below.
1002 The Claimant may similarly claim payment for damages under clauses 14,
32, 34.9 and 39.9 incurred during the course of the Contract
after termination.
1003 I decided above at paragraphs 978) to 987), that the Act provides that
upon termination of the Contract, the Claimant accrues
a reference date being
the date of termination and the Claimant is entitled to make a final payment
claim under the Act.
1004 In other words, the Claimant was entitled to make the Payment Claim for
completed work which includes damages incurred that
were referred to in the
1005 The Claimant was entitled to claim for the damages suffered that were
envisaged by the Contract, which were described in
a part of the construction work. The Claimant is not, however, entitled to claim
for the types of damages that are not
expressly permitted to be claimed by the
1006 Accordingly, I do not accept the Respondent’s argument that the
Payment Claim is invalid because it is a claim for damages.
1007 I also do not accept the Claimant’s argument about the operation
of clause 39.10.”
(Citations omitted)
adjudicator then set out damages envisaged by the Contract by cl. 14, 15.1,
26.4, 32, 34.9 and 39.9 and considered the different
that Tomkins had claimed.
relevance the adjudicator found that:
“1016 If damages
referred to in the Contract
form part of the increased costs or price of
construction work actually carried out
, those damages are clearly for
construction work carried out”.
(emphasis added)
submits that the adjudicator dealt with the grounds raised by Tomkins in this
“....One is lack of procedural fairness, so the
adjudicator just decided it on a basis which wasn’t contended for by the
parties. Clause 39.10 was what was suggested. He didn’t decide on that. We
further say, well, there’s a lack of reasoning
in the adjudicator’s
decision, because if your Honour looks at each of the four items for which he
made awards, it’s
impossible to tell, we say, what really is the basis
upon which he – the contractual or any other basis that he decides that
the – that Tomkins is entitled to the amounts claimed, and we also say
that in fact, it didn’t apply the contract because
you can’t do that
if you apply clause 39.10, because that’s only a common law right. That
just preserves common law damages
Separate Question 1(b) – Consideration
[146] In all of
the circumstances, I am satisfied that there was a material denial of procedural
[147] In their
submissions to the adjudicator, Tomkins stated they were entitled to costs post
termination in accordance with cl.
39.10, as this clause created an express
contractual right for the claimant to recover all damages which would otherwise
available in circumstances where a common-law claim for repudiation
[148] This was
the issue that the parties engaged with and made submissions to the adjudicator
is required to decide the dispute between
the parties as framed by them.
[149] However,
the adjudicator found that cl 39.10 only preserved each party’s common law
rights to damages, not that it created,
in itself, an entitlement to recover
damages under the Contract.
[150] In coming
to this view, the adjudicator:
(a) accepted York’s argument that, where the Contract has been terminated,
all subsequent claims are claims for damages for
the purposes of contract law;
(b) did not accept the claimant’s argument about the operation of cl
[151] Tomkins
states that the adjudicator did not consider that cl 39.10 allowed Tomkins to
termination cost. Instead, the adjudicator limited
Tomkins’ claims to “damages suffered that were envisaged by the
which were described in
Co-ordinated Construction Co Pty Ltd v JM
Hargreaves (NSW) Pty Ltd
forming part of the construction work”.
[152] Tomkins
states that the adjudicator then considered the different types of termination
costs that Tomkins had claimed within
the parameters allowed by clause 39.10,
i.e., damages suffered that were envisaged by the Contract, as forming part of
the construction
work. Considered through this lens, Tomkins states that the
items allowed were within the scope of cl 39.10.
[153] Accordingly,
Tomkins states that there was no procedural fairness as the adjudicator’s
reasons demonstrate that the claim
was allowed under clause 39.10. However, I do
not accept this position.
adjudicator allowed the claim on a basis not contended for by Tomkins and did
not give York the opportunity to address this
McDougall J stated in
Musico v Davenport
[2003] NSWSC
“[107] ...If an adjudicator is minded to come to a
particular determination on a particular ground for which neither party has
contended then, in my opinion, the requirements of natural justice require the
adjudicator to give the parties notice of that intention
so that they may put
submissions on it...”
adjudicator did not do this.
[157] Counsel
for York states that, in doing so, the adjudicator denied York procedural
“because whatever the reason that’s lurking in
the mind of the adjudicator – it’s not been told to us, but
whatever’s lurking there, it’s not what the parties have argued
[158] I accept
this characterisation.
[159] York was
denied procedural fairness and, in my view, that denial was material. To come to
such a conclusion does not require
analysing the adjudication decision in a high
level of specificity and in too narrow a way. What occurred, in my view, was a
example of a material denial of procedural fairness.
parties framed their submission to the adjudicator as to whether cl. 39.10 of
the Contract entitled Tomkins to recover whatever
financial sum was necessary to
place Tomkins into the position which it would have held if the Contract had not
been terminated and
had instead run its course to completion.
adjudicator did not accept Tomkins’ submission as to its entitlement to
termination costs pursuant to clause 39.10.
That should have been the end of the
matter, unless the adjudicator gave the parties notice of the basis upon which
the adjudicator
determined the matter.
[162] This, I
note, in parts is difficult to ascertain.
example, in relation to demobilisation costs, the adjudicator stated that these
were costs that that Tomkins was entitled
to claim pursuant to s 71(b) of the
“1045 I am persuaded that the costs of demobilisation
were costs that formed a part of the total costs of the construction
under the Contract, that the Claimant is entitled to claim in the Payment
Claim pursuant to section 71(b) of the Act.”
[164] No party
addressed the adjudicator in relation to any of these claims being determined
pursuant to s 71(b) of the
adjudicator then
the claim for demobilisation costs and decided
that Tomkins was entitled to payment for costs of demobilisation in the amount
$313,609.89.00.
adjudicator had earlier referred to
SHA Premier Constructions Pty Ltd v
Niclin Constructions Pty Ltd
[2020] QSC 307
, in which Bond J (as his Honour
then was) had observed that, when a contract is terminated, the
“contractor has a statutory
entitlement to a final payment claim,
calculated under s 71(b) and valued under s
adjudicator assessed Tomkins’ claim for staff costs in a similar way.
[168] Section 71
71 Amount of progress
The amount of a progress payment to which a person is entitled under a
construction contract is—
(a) if the contract provides for the matter—the amount calculated in
accordance with the contract; or
(b) if the contract does not provide for the matter—the amount
calculated on the basis of the value of construction work
carried out, or
related goods and services supplied, by the person in accordance with the
[169] Section
71(b) of the Act does not, by itself, identify a contractual basis for the
claims awarded by the adjudicator.
[170] Whatever
was lurking in the adjudicator’s mind outside of the parties’
submissions should have been exposed to the
[171] I accept
that, had the adjudicator raised a contractual basis for the claim (which York
asserts there was not) with the parties,
it cannot be said that York’s
submissions, if given the opportunity to be heard on the matter, would not have
resulted in a
different outcome.
[172] In the
circumstances of this case, there was substantial denial of procedural fairness.
Separate question 2:
was the existence of a reference
date for Payment Claim 36 by reason of the operation of
section 67(2)
Building Industry Fairness (Security of Payment) Act 2017
“subjective jurisdictional fact” or an “objective
[173] Section 67
sets out the meaning of a reference date:
67 Meaning of a Reference Date
(1) A reference date, for a construction contract, means—
(a) a date stated in, or worked out under, the contract as the date on which a
claim for a progress payment may be made for construction
work carried out, or
related goods and services supplied, under the contract; or
(b) if the contract does not provide for the matter—
(i) the last day of the month in which the construction work was first carried
out, or the related goods and services were first
supplied, under the contract;
(ii) the last day of each later month.
(2) However, if a construction contract is terminated and the contract does
not provide for, or purports to prevent, a reference
date surviving beyond
termination, the final reference date for the contract is the date the contract
is terminated.”
[174] Tomkins’
position before the adjudicator, and, in this application, is that its
termination of the Contract on 10 September
2024 was valid, and therefore that
there was a reference date under s 67(2) of the
[175] York’s
position before the adjudicator, and in this application, is that Tomkins’
termination on 10 September 2024
was not valid, and therefore that there was no
reference date under s 67(2) of the
[176] Section 84
sets out what the adjudicator must
84 Adjudication Procedures
(1) Subject to the time requirements under section 85, an adjudicator must
decide the following as quickly as possible—
(a) an adjudication application;
(b) applications for extensions of time under section 83.
(2) For a proceeding conducted to decide an adjudication application, an
adjudicator—
(a) must decide—
(i) whether he or she has jurisdiction to adjudicate the application; and
(ii) whether the application is frivolous or vexatious; and
(b) may ask for further written submissions from either party and must give
the other party an opportunity to comment on the submissions;
(c) may set deadlines for further submissions and comments by the parties;
(d) may call a conference of the parties; and
(e) may carry out an inspection of any matter to which the claim relates.
(3) If a conference is called, it must be conducted informally, and the
parties are not entitled to any legal representation unless
allowed by the
adjudicator.
(4) The adjudicator’s power to decide an adjudication application is
not affected by the failure of either or both of the parties
submission or comment within time or to comply with the adjudicator’s call
for a conference of the parties.”
deciding that he had jurisdiction for the purposes of s 84(2)(a)(i) of the
, the adjudicator determined that Tomkins had validly terminated
the Contract:
(a) as York was in substantial breach of the Contract in at least one of the
respects alleged by Tomkins in the Show Cause Notice;
(b) as the Contract required compliance with the time requirements for a Show
Cause Notice in clause 39.8(d) of the General Conditions
of Contract;
(c) as the reference to “not less than 7 clear days” in clause
39.8(d) of the General Conditions of Contract meant that
the calendar day on
which a show cause notice was served cannot be included in the day count, and
therefore Tomkins’ Show Cause
Notice did not strictly comply with the
requirements of the Contract;
(d) however, by its conduct, York waived the requirement for strict compliance,
such that Tomkins had validly terminated the Contract
using the show cause
contends that the decision of the adjudicator is affected by jurisdictional
error and void because the adjudicator’s
finding of waiver was in
adjudicator’s finding on waiver is relevant to whether a reference date
existed. Only if the Contract had been terminated
validly would a reference date
arise under s 67(2) of the
existence of a reference date under a construction contract is a precondition to
the making of a valid payment
It is common ground
between the parties that the existence of a reference date is a jurisdictional
[181] However,
where the parties differ is whether the existence of a reference date (by reason
of s 67(2) of the
) is a “subjective jurisdictional
fact” or an “objective jurisdictional fact”.
contends that it is an objective jurisdictional fact, meaning the task for the
Court on York’s application is to
whether the
Contract was terminated based on the evidence put before the
On such a hearing, York
will have the burden of proving that the Contract was not validly
terminated.
[183] Tomkins
contends that it is a “subjective jurisdictional fact”, meaning the
task for the Court in the application
is to decide if the adjudicator arrived at
the state of mind of having determined that the Contract was terminated in the
way contemplated
legislature.
[184] I note
that the terms “objective jurisdictional facts” or “category 1
matters” are interchangeable,
as are “subjective jurisdictional
facts” or “category 2 matters”.
Forme Two Pty Ltd v McNab Developments (Qld) Pty Ltd
[2025] QSC 96
Hindman J succinctly explained the distinction between the two
categories:
“[19] The terminology of category 1 and category 2
matters comes from the New South Wales Court of Appeal decision in
(NSW) Pty Ltd v Australia Avenue Developments Pty Ltd
and particularly at [13]-[15] of that decision. In that decision the Court
stated (in effect, relevantly for present purposes) that
either on an "identified state of affairs" (the first category) or a "state of
satisfaction of the decision
maker as to an identified state of affairs" (the
second category). The first category jurisdiction depends on a finding of a
as to whether or not the required state of affairs existed, for the
second, the Court is only concerned with whether the relevant
opinion has been
lawfully formed.”
(citations omitted)
[186] Brown J
(as her Honour then was) in
Watkins Contracting Pty Ltd v Hyatt Ground
Engineering Pty Ltd
[2018] QSC 065
put it this way:
The Court will not always make a determination as to the existence of a
is authorised to decide
authoritatively the existence of the jurisdictional fact, the Court enquires
into the process adopted by
the primary decision-maker's decision in determining
that a jurisdictional fact exists, but does not enquire itself into the
of that jurisdictional fact.”
Chase Oyster Bar Pty Ltd v Hamo Industries Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWCA 190
(2010) 78 NSWLR 393
McDougall J made the following observations:
of affairs. For simplicity, I will talk
only in terms of a jurisdictional fact
as the existence of a specified state of affairs. The legislature may specify
that the existence
of that state of affairs - the jurisdictional fact - is
essential to the exercise of statutory power. Or it may go further, and specify
as well that the donee of the power is authorised to decide, authoritatively,
the existence of the jurisdictional fact.
[168] In the former case, if the exercise of power is challenged on the
basis that the jurisdictional fact does not exist, the court
must itself inquire
into the existence of that fact. It may grant relief against the exercise of
[169] In the latter case, the court inquires into the primary
decision-maker's decision that the jurisdictional fact exists, but
itself inquire into the existence of that jurisdictional fact.”
[188] The terms
of s 67(2) are neutral on the issue of whether the requirement is an objective
[189] It is a
question of statutory interpretation whether the existence of a reference date
is either required as a matter of objective
distinction is significant because, as Bond J (as his Honour then was) explained
Niclin Constructions
, the nature of the court’s task changes
depending on the relevant categorisation:
“[25] If the
precondition to an exercise of power is the existence of an objective
is brought to the existence of the
whether the objective fact existed. The Court determines the
question upon the evidence before it, without being limited to the probative
material before the repository of power. ...
“[26] On the other hand, if the precondition to the exercise of the
power is that the repository of power has formed a particular
state of mind,
then, if a challenge is brought to the existence of the subjective
to determining whether the
repository of power arrived at the state of mind in the way contemplated by the
legislature. In
for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
, the High Court acknowledged that
“the principles applicable where the jurisdictional fact is a state of
satisfaction or opinion
are traced back to the use by Latham CJ in
Connell; Ex parte Hetton Bellbird Collieries Ltd
of the terms
‘arbitrary, capricious, irrational’ as well as ‘not bona
fide’ to stigmatise the formation of
an opinion upon which a statutory
power was enlivened”.
[Citations omitted]
[191] Bond J (as
his Honour then was) in
Niclin Constructions
set out that the party
challenging the existence of the subjective jurisdictional fact, will
usually have to persuade the Court that
the state of mind did not exist
because it was not reached in the way contemplated by the legislature:
“[32] In the event of a challenge to the existence of that
subjective jurisdictional fact, the party advancing the challenge
usually have to persuade the Court that the state of mind did not exist
because it was not reached in the way contemplated by
the legislature. In
approaching that question, it is necessary to have at the forefront of
one’s mind the observations made
by White JA in
Construction Pty Ltd v Central Interior Linings Pty Ltd
... (emphasis
... the enquiry should focus more on whether the adjudicator has performed
the function demanded by [the Act] and less on pursuing
synonyms, keeping always in mind that the legislative intent dictates a
person with recognised expertise in the area be selected
for the task by an
informed body and this, necessarily, facilitates the rapid decision making
[Citations omitted]
[192] Tomkins
makes three submissions in support of their position that the existence of the
reference date is a subjective jurisdictional
(a) the object and policy of the
(b) the resolution of complex factual and legal issues; and
(c) consistency between the interpretation of s 84(2)(a)(i) and (ii).
[193] Tomkins
submits that the object of the
is best achieved if the
requirement in s 67(2) of the
, that the contract has been
terminated, is a subjective jurisdictional fact.
[194] If the
existence of a reference date is a subjective jurisdictional fact, then the
Court’s task does not involve disturbing
the adjudicator’s decision,
but instead focuses on the process of the adjudicator's reasoning. Such a
process, Tomkins submits,
is consistent with the object of the
[195] Tomkins
refers to the
policy of the
to support its view that the
existence of a reference date (relying as it does in this case on a valid
termination of the Contract
to which the waiver finding was relevant) is to be
treated as a subjective jurisdictional fact as:
(a) the object of the
is to provide a quick procedure for interim
progress payments so as to avoid cashflow interruptions to the business of
construction
contractors, whilst preserving parties’ rights under the
construction contract.
provides for a “quick and inexpensive”
interim procedure for builders to be paid,
it is an important consideration for construing whether provisions of the Act
give rise to jurisdictional
(c) it would undermine that object if s 67(2) were construed as rendering an
adjudicator’s decision open to challenge on the
grounds of alleged
the validity of the termination
of the contract.
[196] Accordingly,
Tomkins submits that it serves the object of the Act if an adjudicator’s
decision as to the validity of termination,
provided it is lawfully made, is not
reviewable by the Court considering the issue de
[197] Tomkins
notes that the question of whether a reference date existed involves the
adjudicator resolving complicated factual and
legal issues bearing upon whether
Tomkins’ termination of the Contract was
Such complexity is a
relevant consideration and Tomkins submits, militates against it being an
objective jurisdictional fact. To
this end, Tomkins refers to
where Hindman J observed:
“[41] ... it is generally accepted
that a requirement stipulated in the Act is more amenable to being construed as
1 matter if it ‘is readily determined and little inconvenience
is generally caused by identifying it as an essential precondition
exercise of the relevant
[198] Tomkins
notes that York challenges the adjudicator’s decision under s
84(2)(a)(i):
“84 Adjudication Procedures
(2) For a proceeding conducted to decide an adjudication application, an
adjudicator—
(a) must decide—
(i) whether he or she has jurisdiction to adjudicate the application; and
(ii) whether the application is frivolous or vexatious.”
Niclin Constructions
, it was determined that an adjudicator’s
decision under s 84(2)(a)(ii) (as to whether an adjudication is frivolous
or vexatious)
was a subjective jurisdictional
[200] Tomkins
states that there is no distinction between s 84(2)(a)(i) and (ii) and that
there is nothing in the statutory language
that would justify interpreting one
sub-section of s 84(2)(a) as involving only objective jurisdictional facts and
the other only
subjective jurisdictional facts.
[201] Therefore,
just as an adjudicator is required to have “a particular state of mind,
namely, the state of mind of having
decided that the application is not
frivolous or vexatious” under s 84(2)(a)(ii), Tomkins submits that s
84(2)(a)(i) likewise
requires an adjudicator to “have the state of mind of
having decided that” he or she has jurisdiction to adjudicate the
application.
Consideration
[202] The text
and structure of the
supports the conclusion that the existence
of a reference date is an objective jurisdictional fact.
requirement in s 84(2)(a)(i) of the
, that the adjudicator is
required to determine his or her jurisdiction, does not mean that the existence
of a reference date becomes
a matter for subjective determination. The
adjudicator is required, before deciding an application, to determine that
erroneous determination by an adjudicator that there is a reference date does
not give the adjudicator a power he or she
otherwise does not have.
Southern Han Breakfast Point Pty Ltd (in liq) v Lewence Construction Pty
[2016] HCA 52
(2016) 260 CLR 340
, the majority (Kiefel, Bell, Gageler, Keane and
Gordon JJ) noted that:
“[41] There is no dispute between the
parties that service of a payment claim under s 13(1) of the
is an essential precondition
to taking subsequent steps in the procedure set out in Pt 3 of the Act. There is
accordingly no dispute
that, unless a payment claim answering that description
is served, there can be no adjudication application and hence no adjudication
within the jurisdiction conferred by s 22 of the
That shared understanding
of the relationship between ss 13(1) and 22 is undoubtedly correct.”
[206] Sections
70 and 75 in the
(the equivalent being ss
and 13 in the NSW Act), state
that the right to a progress payment arises from “each reference
date” under the contract,
and that a payment claim may be made by each
person who is or claims to be entitled to a progress payment.
majority in
Southern Han
, in considering the equivalent New South Wales
sections of ss 70 and 75 of the
, considered the existence of a
reference date is a precondition to the making of a valid payment claim:
construction of s 13(1) consonant with the structure of the Act is accordingly
that advanced by Southern Han. The
description in s 13(1) of a person
referred to in s 8(1) is of a person whom s 8(1) makes entitled to a progress
payment. Section
8(1) makes a person who has undertaken to carry out
construction work or supply related goods and services under a construction
entitled to a progress payment only on and from each reference date
under the construction contract. In that way, the existence of
a reference date
under a construction contract within the meaning of s 8(1) is a precondition to
the making of a valid payment claim
under s 13(1).
[62] Section 13(1) correspondingly produces the result that a document
purporting to be a payment claim that is not in respect of
a reference date is
not a payment claim under the Act. The document is ineffective in either case to
trigger the procedure established
[208] Accordingly,
there can be no application without a valid reference date, and therefore a
valid payment claim. To put it another
way, a valid payment claim cannot arise
without a valid reference date.
Group Pty Ltd v Hanson Construction Materials Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWCA 63
addressed the proposition (which was accepted) that the existence of an
available reference date is an objective fact to be found
by a court, where
necessary, rather than an opinion or finding that can be made erroneously by the
adjudicator:
“[43] The first part of proposition 1 can
be accepted; the existence of a valid reference date is an objective fact to be
by the Court where necessary: Southern Han at [44]. The balance
of the propositions should be rejected. The difficulty with these
propositions
is that they ignore the difference between the task the adjudicator was
authorised and required by s 22(1) to undertake,
and the task which the
adjudicator in fact undertook and performed in this case.
[48] In summary, Southern Han establishes that a payment claim with
an available reference date answering the description in s 13(1)
of the Act is a
precondition which enlivens the exercise of the
adjudicator’s
statutory power to embark upon the adjudication. The available reference date
under the construction contract
serves to define the payment claim which is the
subject of the adjudication application referred. If the adjudicator addresses a
differently defined or described payment claim, the adjudicator is not
exercising the jurisdiction in s 22(1) to determine the payment
claim in respect
of which the statutory power of adjudication is conferred on the adjudicator.
That is what occurred in the present
case. Hence, there was no error by the
primary judge in finding that the determination is void on the ground of
[210] I note
Tomkins’ reliance on
Constructions
requirement in s 84(2)(a)(ii) of the
(namely that the adjudicator
determine whether an application was frivolous or vexatious) was held to be a
subjective jurisdictional
and consistency thus requires for s 84(2)(a)(ii) to also be a subjective
[211] However,
determining whether an application is vexatious or frivolous is very different
to determining whether a reference date
exists. The former requires that an
adjudicator form a view about those matters; it does not properly require an
objective determination
of whether the application is in fact vexatious.
[212] Such a
distinction is important. The difference between a subjective jurisdictional
fact and an objective jurisdictional fact
was explained in
Constructions
by Bond J (as his Honour then was) in this way:
“[25] If the precondition to an exercise of power is the
existence of an objective jurisdictional fact, then, if a challenge
to the existence of the jurisdictional fact, the Court’s function is to
whether the objective fact existed. The
Court determines the question upon the evidence before it, without being limited
to the probative
material before the repository of power. This is the
course which SHA invited me to take.
[26] On the other hand, if the precondition to the exercise of the
power is that the repository of power has formed a particular
state of mind,
then, if a challenge is brought to the existence of the subjective
is limited to determining
whether the repository of power arrived at the state of mind in the way
contemplated by the legislature.
Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v SZMDS
, the High Court acknowledged that “the
principles applicable where the jurisdictional fact is a state of satisfaction
are traced back to the use by Latham CJ in
R v Connell; Ex
parte Hetton Bellbird Collieries Ltd
of the terms ‘arbitrary,
capricious, irrational’ as well as ‘not bona fide’ to
stigmatise the formation of
an opinion upon which a statutory power was
enlivened.”
[213] The right
to apply for adjudication only arises where there is a valid payment claim, by
reason of ss 79 and 88 of the Act.
Southern Han
, the court noted
that a document purporting to be a
payment claim that is not in respect of a reference date is not a payment claim
under the Act.
[215] That is
not a question of a state of mind or state of satisfaction. It is a question of
the facts necessary to found jurisdiction.
Watkins Contracting
, Brown J (as her Honour then was) considered the
consequence of when no reference date existed:
“[97] Watkins
did not seek to have the Court determine whether as matter of fact the contract
had been terminated and therefore
that no reference date existed. In the case of
a jurisdictional fact, that is one of the rare cases where the Court may
whether the decision maker is correct in finding that a precondition
of its jurisdiction was satisfied. In this regard, although
I do not need to
determine the matter, I do not consider that the effect of s 25(3)(a) of the Act
changes the nature of the Court’s
power of review in relation to a
Saville (T/as China Sourcing Services) v Hallmarc Construction Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 318
(2015) 47 VR 177
, the Victorian Court of Appeal noted the consequences of an
objective jurisdictional fact:
“[59] If an issue amounts to a
decision maker
was correct in finding that the pre-condition of its jurisdiction
was satisfied and thus that its statutory power was enlivened.
Moreover, it
is reviewable, in effect, de novo, that is, by reference to the evidence
available to the reviewing court. This was
where the question is whether the decision-maker has erred as to the
the court in which
it is litigated upon the evidence before that court.
[60] Where the jurisdictional fact is the existence of a fact, the reviewing
court can determine on the balance of probabilities whether
the fact exists.
[61] An assumption of jurisdiction when the statutory conditions precedent
for the exercise of that jurisdiction are not satisfied
nullity as ‘a decision involving jurisdictional error
has no legal
foundation and is properly to be regarded, in law, as no decision at
acknowledge Tomkins’ submissions about the object and policy of the
that a requirement stipulated in the Act:
(a) is more amenable to being construed as an “objective jurisdictional
fact” if it “is readily determined and
little inconvenience is
generally caused by identifying it as an essential precondition to the exercise
of the relevant powers”;
(b) is more amenable to being construed as a “subjective jurisdictional
fact” if it involves consideration of a factual
question which might be
quite complex; and
(c) is more amenable to being construed as a “subjective jurisdictional
fact” if its determination benefits from the
specialised knowledge or
expertise of an adjudicator.
determination of whether a contract has been terminated may be inherently
complex and, in some cases, may:
(a) not easily meet the description of a requirement which “is readily
determined and little inconvenience is generally caused
by identifying it as an
essential precondition to the exercise of the relevant powers”; and
(b) involve consideration of a factual question which might be quite complex,
such as whether there has been a breach of the obligations
in a building
contract (e.g., here, whether there were breaches of the design obligations).
[220] However,
as Hindman J noted in
, “that in some cases the issue
might be factually complex is not
determinative”.
importance of a reference date in the adjudication procedure established under
overemphasised.
precondition to the making of a valid payment
[222] As to
whether the determination of whether a contract has been terminated would
benefit from the specialised knowledge or expertise
of an adjudicator, I note
the following observations of Palmer J in
Multiplex Constructions Pty Ltd v
[2003] NSWSC 1140:
“[76] A payment claim and a
payment schedule are, in many cases, given and received by parties who are
experienced in the building
industry and are familiar with the particular
building contract, the history of construction of the project and the broad
which have produced the dispute as to the claimant’s payment claim.
a payment claim and a payment schedule must be produced
quickly; much that is
contained therein in an abbreviated form which would be meaningless to the
uninformed reader will be understood
readily by the parties themselves. A
payment claim and a payment schedule should not, therefore, be required to be as
precise and
as particularised as a pleading in the Supreme Court. Nevertheless,
precision and particularity must be required to a degree reasonably
to apprise the parties of the real issues in the
Constructions Pty ltd v A-Civil Aust Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWSC 1604
, Williams J
noted that “(A)dditional areas of potential complexity include that
matters of specialist judgment may be involved
in assessing the nature or
character of the work and that assessment may in turn affect the determination
construction work to which the payment claim relates was
last carried out”.
[224] On some
occasions the determination of whether a contract has been terminated may be
assisted by the adjudicator’s specialised
knowledge. However, it will
often require consideration of several factors, including the terms of the
contract and the acts of the
parties within a legal framework, matters that may
be beyond the adjudicator’s specialised knowledge.
[225] I do not
consider that the determination of the termination of the contract is within the
scope and nature of a payment claim
that benefits from an adjudicator’s
specialised knowledge to the extent that it favours the existence of the
reference date
to be a subjective jurisdictional fact.
adjudicator cannot subjectively bestow jurisdiction on themselves, and an
adjudicator does not have jurisdiction at all,
unless there is a reference date.
[227] The fact
that, by s 67(2) a reference date might arise by operation of termination of the
contract does not change that fact.
The adjudicator still does not have
occasion (such
as this one) the question of termination might be contested.
[228] Section 70
is the central provision of the
insofar as it relates to the
adjudication procedure as it:
(a) grants the entitlement to progress payments, this being one of the primary
ways that the main purpose of the
is sought to be
(b) provides that it is ‘from’ a reference date that a person is
entitled to a progress payment.
language in s 70 is expressed objectively; it is not expressed by reference to
the ‘opinion’ of, for example,
the adjudicator appointed to
adjudicate the relevant adjudication application.
(as his Honour then was) held that the valid exercise of an adjudicator’s
having complied with the
“basic and essential” statutory
requirements.
Whilst his Honour
did not expressly refer to the existence of a reference date as one of these
“basic and essential”
requirements, the service by the claimant on
the respondent of a payment claim was held to be a
requirement.
This has the same
result. A document purporting to be a payment claim that is not made from a
reference date is not a ‘payment
claim’ under the
[231] It follows
from the remarks in
Southern Han
that the valid
exercise of an adjudicator’s jurisdiction is conditioned on the decision
having been made in relation to a valid
payment claim, which, in turn, requires
the claim to have been made from a reference date.
question of whether a reference date exists is not a question that the
adjudicator is entitled to get wrong.
adjudicator’s jurisdiction was conditioned on Payment Claim 36 having been
made from a reference date, not just one
that existed in the opinion of the
adjudicator.
[234] On the
proper construction of the
, the existence of a reference date for
Payment Claim 36 (or, for that matter, any payment claim under the
) is an objective jurisdictional fact.
Separate question 3: If the answer to separate question 2 is a
“subjective jurisdictional fact”, is the Applicant entitled
relief claimed in paragraph 1 of the Originating Application?
question does not arise because I have found that the answer to separate
question 2 is an “objective jurisdictional
foreshadowed at the hearing with the parties, the parties will have 14 days to
provide a form of orders to reflect these
[237] I will
also give the parties an opportunity to consider these reasons before they are
required to file and serve short written
submissions on the question of costs.
Within 14 days the parties are to agree on a timetable for the exchange of
written submissions
and provide this timetable to the Court.
[238] If it is
appropriate, then I will deal with the question of costs on the papers, unless
either party requests a hearing.
facilitate this process, I will adjourn the question of costs to a date to be
applicant and the first respondent must submit a draft order within 14 days that
reflects these reasons.
[241] Within 14
days, the applicant and the first respondent are to agree on a timetable for the
exchange of written submissions and
provide this timetable to the Court.
question of costs is adjourned to a date to be fixed.
Tomkins is the first
respondent. The second and third respondents did not participate in the
proceedings.
Underlining as contained in
the adjudication decision.
[2022] HCA 38
(2022) 277 CLR
, 467 at [28] (Kiefel CJ, Edelman, Steward, and Gleeson JJ).
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
, at 585 (Mason J).
Demex Pty Ltd v McNab
Building Services Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 261
(2023) 113 NSWLR 282
, 288 at [22] (Kirk JA,
Mitchelmore and Adamson JJA agreeing).
JKC Australia LNG Pty Ltd v
Inpex Operations Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] NTCA 6
(2018) 334 FLR 314
, at [41], approved by
Rhomberg Rail Australia Pty Ltd v Concrete Evidence Pty Limited
[2019] NSWSC 755
Contracting Pty Ltd v Hyatt Ground Engineering Pty Ltd
[2018] QSC 065
[64] (Brown J, as her Honour then was).
John Holland
[2009] QSC 205
, at 320 [50].
John Goss Projects Pty Ltd
v Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd
(2006) 66 NSWLR 707, at [42] (McDougall J)
“John Goss”)
, approved by Applegarth J in
John Holland
[2009] QSC 205
[2010] 1 Qd R 302
ABC Glass &
Aluminium Pty Ltd v Nik Nominees Pty Ltd
[2019] QSC 171
, at [16] (Mullins J,
as her Honour then was);
Watkins Contracting
[2018] QSC 065
(Brown J, as her Honour then was).
NSWLR 707, at [42] (McDougall J), approved by Applegarth J in
John Holland
[2009] QSC 205
[2010] 1 Qd R 302
John Holland
[2009] QSC 205
John Holland
[2009] QSC 205
At [9]-[34] (Kirk JA,
Mitchelmore and Adamson JJA agreeing).
Pursuant to the
and Construction Industry Security of Payment Act 1999
Paragraph [32] in
[2023] NSWCA 261
(2023) 113 NSWLR 282
(a) referred to, and applied, by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in the
recent decisions of
A-Civil Aust Pty Ltd v Ceerose Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA
, at [2] and [4] (Leeming JA) and [36] (Mitchelmore JA, Leeming and White JJA
agreeing) and
Martinus Rail Pty Ltd v Qube RE Services (No 2) Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCA 49
, at [74] and [117] (Payne JA, Gleeson JA and Griffiths AJA
agreeing); and
(b) extracted in part and applied by this Court in the context of the
Chevron Park Pty Ltd v Groupline Constructions Pty Ltd
at [85] (Treston J).
, at [24] (Mullins J, as her Honour then was).
Supreme Court Proceeding
BS11674/24. The injunction was granted by Justice Treston on 4 September 2024
(Court doc 6).
See paragraph 294 and 322
of the adjudicator’s decision.
JKC Australia
[2018] NTCA 6
334 FLR 314
, at [41], approved by Ball J in
Rhomberg Rail Australia
[2019] NSWSC 755
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
418 ALR 152
, at [14] (Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Jagot
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
418 ALR 152
, at [15] (Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Jagot
[2005] NSWCA 228
Southern Han Breakfast
Point Pty Ltd (in liq) v Lewence Construction Pty Ltd
[2016] HCA 52
(2016) 260 CLR 340
[61]. See also
Low v MCC Pty Ltd
[2018] QSC 6
, at [11] (Jackson J);
Watkins Contracting
[2018] QSC 65
, at [54] (Brown J);
Management Group Pty Ltd v Biriel Industries Pty Ltd (t/as Master Steel)
[2019] QSC 219
, at [47] (Wilson J).
Constructions
[2020] QSC 307
, at [25], citing
City of Enfield v
Development Assessment Commission
[2000] HCA 5
(2000) 199 CLR 135
, at [38], [50]-[51] and
Bhusal v Catholic Health Care
[2017] NSWSC 838
, at [53]).
Watkins Contracting
[2018] QSC 065
, at [62] (Brown J).
Niclin Constructions
[2020] QSC 307
Niclin Constructions
[2020] QSC 307
Lendlease Building Pty
Ltd v BCF Airport Systems Pty Ltd
[2024] QSC 164
, at [103] (Sullivan J).
York Property Holdings
Pty Ltd v Tomkins
[2025] QSC 44
, at [20] (Treston J).
This submission has been
adapted from
EQ Constructions Pty Ltd v A-Civil Aust Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWSC
, at [51] per Williams J.
, at [41], citing
Icon Co (NSW) Pty Ltd v Australia Avenue Developments Pty
[2018] NSWCA 339
, at [14] (Basten JA, Meagher and Leeming JJA
Niclin Constructions
[2020] QSC 307
Section 13(1) of the NSW
Act in that case is the equivalent of s 75(1) in the
providing for the right to make a payment claim.
Section 22 of the NSW Act
is the equivalent of s 88 in the
, providing that the
adjudicator is to determine the amount of the payment claim.
Section 8(1) of the NSW
Act, which is referred to in s 13(1), provides that “on and from each
reference date under a construction
contract” a person undertaking to
carry out construction work is entitled to a progress payment. The equivalent
provision in
is s 70, which provides that, from
“each reference date under a construction contract”, a person is
entitled to a progress
payment if the person has carried out construction work
or supplied related goods or services.
Southern Han
[2016] HCA 52
260 CLR 340
, at [61]-[62].
Niclin Constructions
[2020] QSC 307.
Niclin Constructions
[2020] QSC 307
, at [41] (Hindman J);
EQ Constructions
[2021] NSWSC 1604
(Williams J).
, at [41]-[42] (Hindman J);
EQ Constructions
[2021] NSWSC 1604
and [47] (Williams J), citing
TWT Property Group Pty Ltd v Cenric Group Pty
[2020] NSWSC 72
, at [104]-[106] (Stevenson J)
, at [43] (Hindman J);
EQ Constructions
[2021] NSWSC 1604
, at [47]-[48]
(Williams J), citing
Multiplex Constructions Pty Ltd v Luikens
, at [76] (Palmer J).
See, for example,
Developments (Australia) Pty Ltd v Hi-Cal Bricklaying
[2025] QSC 67
which the reference date was described by Bowskill CJ at [8] as “an
important element of the adjudication procedure”.
Southern Han
[2016] HCA 52
260 CLR 340
, at [2] and [61] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane and Gordon
Multiplex Constructions
Pty Ltd v Luikens
[2003] NSWSC 1140
Building Industry Fairness
(Security of Payment) Act 2017
Building Industry Fairness
(Security of Payment) Act 2017
[2020] QSC 133
(2020) 4 QR
[2020] QSC 133
(2020) 4 QR
[2020] QSC 133
(2020) 4 QR
, at [34(b)].
Southern Han
[2016] HCA 52
260 CLR 340
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (627 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter