URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rogers v State of Queensland (Queensland Health) [2025] ICQ 6 (6 June 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Rogers v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
Rogers, Gareth
(Appellant)
State of Queensland (Queensland
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
6 June 2025
HEARING DATE:
22 August 2024
Hartigan DP
The appeal is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – QUEENSLAND – APPEALS – APPEAL TO
INDUSTRIAL COURT – WHEN APPEAL LIES – where the Appellant
appeal against a decision of the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission
– where the Appellant was an agent in
the proceedings in the Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission – where the Appellant on behalf of the
Applicant in the Commission
proceedings discontinued the proceedings two days
before the hearing – where the Respondent sought costs – where the
Commission granted the costs application against the agent – where the
Appellant appeals the costs application decision –
Relations Act 2016
(Qld) abrogates the usual rule that costs follow the
event – whether the Commission has power to award costs – whether
the Commission made an error of law – whether the primary decision was
infected by apprehended bias – whether the appeal
should be granted
– appeal dismissed
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE
AND TERRITORY COURTS – COSTS – PARTIES AND NON-PARTIES – LEGAL
PRACTITIONER
– where the Appellant was acting as an agent in proceedings
in the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission – where
the Commissioner
found that that Appellant was liable to pay the Respondent's costs in the
proceedings below – whether the
Commission made an error of law –
whether the appeal should be granted – appeal dismissed
LEGISLATION:
Fair Work Act 2009
Industrial Relations Act
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corp
[1947] EWCA Civ 1
Dorman v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Kelsey v Logan City Council & Ors
[2021] ICQ 11
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v
(2004) 78 ALJR 992
Moreton Bay Regional Council v Moorhead
[2014] ICQ 13
Queensland Teachers Union of Employees v State of
Queensland (Department of Education (No 2)
[2021] ICQ 3
Robertson v
McDonald's Australia Limited
[2023] ICQ 27
APPEARANCES:
Mr G. Rogers appeared on his own behalf
Mr C. Murdoch KC with Mr L.
Grant of Counsel instructed by Crown Law for the Respondent
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
Appellant, Gareth Rogers, appeals a decision of the Queensland Industrial
Relations Commission.
[2] The decision
appealed against is a decision that Mr Rogers, as the agent of the Applicant in
matter TD/2022/197,
Respondent's costs in the amount of $9,062.00 within 14 days of the date of the
order ('Decision').
[3] Mr Rogers
acted, for most of the proceedings, as an agent for the Applicant, Ms Delma
Dorman, in an application for reinstatement
wherein it was contended, on Ms
Dorman's behalf, that she had been unfairly dismissed pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld) ('IR Act').
The Appeal to this Court
confers on a person aggrieved by a decision of the
Commission a right of appeal to this Court on the grounds of error of law, or
excess or want of jurisdiction.
Section 557(2)
provides that a
person aggrieved by a decision of the Commission may appeal, with the Court's
leave, on a ground other than those
grounds referred to in
[5] Mr Rogers
has not sought leave to appeal on a ground other than those referred to in
[6] Mr Rogers
relies on the following two grounds of appeal, set out as follows:
(a) no Court acting reasonably could have found that the Appellant had caused
costs to be incurred from 4 November 2022 to 30 January
2023 as a result of an
unreasonable act or omission of the Appellant ('ground one'); and
(b) contrary to the rules of natural justice, the following findings indicate
the Commission's order requiring the Appellant to pay
the Respondent's costs in
the amount of $9,062.00 was coloured by bias or might reasonably be apprehended
as being coloured by bias
('ground two').
considering the grounds of appeal it is necessary to consider the chronology of
the proceedings below, including the costs
application and the conduct of the
parties during the course of the proceedings, in order to provide some context
to the decision
subject of the appeal.
Chronology of the Proceedings before the Commission
[8] On 25 August
2022, an application for reinstatement was filed on behalf of Ms Dorman, whose
employment at the Caboolture Hospital
was terminated because of her failure to
comply with the
Health Employment Directive No. 12/21 – Employee
COVID-19 vaccination requirements
[9] Ms Dorman's
employment was terminated on 20 July 2022 and the application for reinstatement
was filed on 25 August 2022 which
was 15 days out of time.
application for reinstatement was filed on behalf of Ms Dorman by Ms Natasha
Misko, a senior human rights advocate of Human
Rights Advocates
preliminary stage of the proceedings, a jurisdictional objection was raised by
the Respondent on the basis that the application
for reinstatement was filed
outside of the time prescribed by
s 317(2)(a)
('the jurisdictional
objection').
mention of the matter on 27 September 2022, the Commission issued directions for
the parties to file submissions addressing
the jurisdictional objection and
matters relevant to
s 541(b)(ii)
Section 541(b)(ii)
provides, relevantly, that the Commission may dismiss the industrial cause, or
refrain from hearing, further hearing, or deciding
the cause if the Commission
considers further proceedings are not necessary or desirable in the public
September 2022, Mr Rogers filed a Form 36 – Notice of change of lawyer or
agent indicating that he, from that time,
acted for Ms Dorman. Mr Rogers acted
as an agent in the course of performing his role as in-house counsel for an
entity known as
"Reignite Democracy Australia".
[14] A copy of
the Directions Order issued following the mention on 27 September 2022 was
provided to Mr Rogers.
[15] Submissions
were filed by Mr Rogers, on behalf of Ms Dorman, on 28 October 2022. Those
submissions did not address, amongst other
things, the jurisdictional objection
[16] Consequently,
the matter was listed for further mention on 4 November 2022. On that occasion
the Commission brought to Ms Dorman's
representative's attention (Mr Rogers was
absent from this mention and had arranged for someone else to appear for
Dorman) that the submissions filed on her behalf did not address relevant
matters including matters relevant to the jurisdictional
objection and to the
consideration of
Commission indicated that it was considered necessary to raise these matters in
a mention prior to the Respondent being put
to the expense of preparing
submissions in reply. No further directions were issued.
[18] Following
the mention on 4 November 2022, Mr Rogers, on behalf of Ms Dorman, filed further
written submissions. Mr Rogers had
not sought leave of the Commission to vary
the directions to permit the filing of further submissions on behalf of Ms
[19] The matter
was again listed for mention on 15 November 2022.
[20] During the
course of the mention the following exchange occurred between the Commission and
MR RODGERS: - - - if that – if you think that could be a defect, then -
COMMISSIONER: I'm not – I'm – Mr Rodgers, I'm not asking for your
arguments about the merits of Ms Dorman's case as you
see it now.
MR RODGERS: Well, you are.
COMMISSIONER: I'm not asking you for that. Mr Rodgers, I'm just simply
putting you on notice that if the Crown is required to respond
to all of this
and if I determine that the matter ought not be dealt with in accordance with
the discretion that I have under
section 541
, then if the Crown makes an
application for costs and that you pay those costs, I will be giving serious - -
MR RODGERS: Well, that's never going to happen.
COMMISSIONER: - - - consideration to making such an order.
MR RODGERS: That's never going to happen. I won't be paying those costs, and
we'll simply appeal the matter, Commissioner. If you
don't want to do your job,
we'll get someone else to do it.
[21] It is of no
surprise that the Commission subsequently cautioned Mr Rogers with respect to
the tone and language adopted by him
and directed to the Commission during the
course of the mention.
hearing from the Respondent, the Commission determined that, as the Respondent
was yet to file its' submissions, leave
would be granted for Mr Rogers to file
the additional submissions and the Respondent was provided with an extension of
time to file
its' submissions in reply. The Respondent's submissions were filed
on 28 November 2022.
December 2022, the matter was listed for further mention. On that occasion,
Mr Rogers indicated that he intended to file reply submissions later that
day. Mr Rogers also, relevantly, indicated that it was his
preference that the
matter proceed by way of an oral hearing rather than on the papers. The oral
hearing was subsequently listed
to be heard on Monday, 30 January 2023.
[24] On Friday,
27 January 2023 at 10.54 am, Mr Rogers sent an email to the Industrial Registry
confirming that he would attend the
hearing on 30 January 2023 and also sought
leave for Ms Dorman's appearance to be excused.
[25] On Friday,
27 January 2023 at 3.36 pm, the Industrial Registry wrote to the parties
responding that Ms Dorman was required to
attend the hearing on 30 January 2023.
Saturday, 28 January 2023, Mr Rogers sent an email to the Industrial Registry
attaching a Form 35 – Notice of withdrawal
of appointment of lawyer or
agent. Later that morning, Mr Rogers also sent an email attaching a Notice of
Discontinuance seeking
to discontinue the proceedings.
[27] On Sunday,
29 January 2023, the Respondent indicated that it objected to any discontinuance
of the proceedings without an order
for costs and a costs application was
subsequently filed by the Respondent.
The Power to Award Costs
[28] The power
to award costs is found in
Section 545
relevantly states:
545 General power to award costs
(1) A person must bear the person's own costs in relation to a proceeding
before the court or commission.
(2) However, the court or commission may, on application by a party to the
proceeding, order—
(a) a party to the proceeding to pay costs incurred by another party if the
court or commission is satisfied—
(i) the party made the application or responded to the application vexatiously
or without reasonable cause; or
(ii) it would have been reasonably apparent to the party that the application or
response to the application had no reasonable prospect
of success; or
(b) a representative of a party (the
represented party
) to pay costs
incurred by another party to the proceeding if the court or commission is
satisfied the representative caused the costs
to be incurred—
(i) because the representative encouraged the represented party to start,
continue or respond to the proceeding and it should have
been reasonably
apparent to the representative that the person had no reasonable prospect of
success in the proceeding; or
(ii) because of an unreasonable act or omission of the representative in
connection with the conduct or continuation of the proceeding.
(3) The court or commission may order a party to pay another party an amount
reasonably payable to a person who is not a lawyer, for
representing the other
Section 545
was considered by the Industrial Court of Queensland in
v Logan City Council & Ors
his Honour, Davis J distilled the following principles in the analysis of the
provision as follows:
Section 545
and provisions like it have been the subject of analysis in various decisions.
The following principles can be identified:
(a) The starting point is that each party bears their own costs.
(b) A discretion to depart from that point only arises, relevantly here, if one
of the jurisdictional facts identified in
s 545(2)(a)(i)
s 545(2)(a)(ii)
established.
(c) The assessment of 'reasonable cause' in
s 545(2)(a)(i)
(i) an objective assessment; and
(ii) made considering the facts existing as at the time of the institution of
the proceedings, here the appeal.
Section 545(2)(a)(ii)
prescribes a separate and distinct jurisdictional fact
giving rise to a discretion to award costs. In consideration of whether
545(2)(a)(ii)
is engaged, facts which arise after the commencement of the
proceedings may be relevant.
[30] As noted
above, the starting point with respect to the question of costs is that each
party bears their own costs.
[31] Discretion
to depart from that point only arises if one of the jurisdictional facts
identified in
ss 545(2)(a)(i)
(2)(a)(ii),
(2)(b)(i) or
(2)(b)(ii) of
are established.
[32] Relevantly,
in consideration of whether
s 545(2)(a)(ii)
is engaged, there will need to be
identification of the relevant act and/or omission by the representative. Acts
and omissions taken
after the commencement of the proceedings may also be
determination of whether the relevant act or omission is unreasonable is an
objective assessment.
Commission below considered the application of similar provisions in the federal
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) ('FW Act')
and its predecessor s 170CJ of the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Relevantly, the authorities referred to consider the types of conduct that
amounted to an "unreasonable act or omission" in
the context of a costs
application. It is convenient to reproduce the following extracts of the
authorities referred to by the
Commission:
[168] The phrase
'unreasonable act or omission' in the context of the costs discretion found in s
170CJ(3) of the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth) was extensively
discussed by the Full Bench in
and it is useful to reproduce that
consideration here:
[17] The concept
of an unreasonable act or omission in s.170CJ(3) was considered in
Recruitment National Pty Ltd
relative to a failure to attend conciliation
proceedings. In that matter the Full Bench stated:
"[35] In the absence of medical evidence of Ms Goncalves and an opportunity
for the Appellant to be heard on the point no weight should
attach to the
affidavit of Ms Goncalves claim that she was ill on the day of the conciliation
on 5 November 2008. The notice of listing
for the 5 November 2008 conciliation
was sent to the Respondent by fax on 20 October 2008. The matter was listed for
11.30am. The
Respondent only notified the Commission that it would not be
attending the conciliation when the Commissioner's associate telephoned
Respondent to inquire of its whereabouts at the time of the conciliation.
Assuming Ms Goncalves was ill, as it is submitted that
she was, no explanation
appears to be given for the failure of the Respondent to inform the Appellant or
the Commission of the fact
prior to the scheduled commencement time of the
conciliation or at all at the initiative of the Respondent. That represents
in our view, which caused the Appellant and her representative an
unnecessary attendance at the Commission for which we think she
should have her
costs. The failure to initiate contact with the Commission and/or the Appellant
prior to the scheduled start time
for the conciliation to inform it or them of
the non-attendance of the Respondent was unreasonable. If the act was
intentional it
would be an unreasonable act. If unintentional it would be an
unreasonable omission. There is no evidence that the Respondent's conduct
this regard was an intentional act. We are satisfied that the Respondent's
conduct in respect of the conciliation on 5 November
2009 was an unreasonable
omission which caused the Appellant to incur costs."
[18] In terms of
subsequent behaviour of a party to an unfair dismissal application, the Full
Bench continued:
"[47] The Respondent's failure to take steps to inform the Appellant of its
intentions immediately after the issue of the notice of
listing was either a
deliberate or reckless act that could not be regarded as anything other than
unreasonable. Alternatively, to
the extent that the failure might be regarded as
an omission, it was equally unreasonable. That those unreasonable acts or
caused the Appellant to incur the costs in connection with the conduct
of the proceeding is unquestionable. We are satisfied that
the Respondent must
be ordered to pay the Appellant's costs of and incidental to the submissions and
preparation for arbitration.
We allow also the costs on an indemnity basis in
respect of the costs application."
[19] A Full
Bench considered the former s.170CJ(2) and (3) in
Brazilian Butterfly Pty Ltd
and Charalambous.
It addressed the pre-existing authorities relevant to
these provisions before stating:
[20] The Full
Bench continued:
[45] In many, if not most, cases there will be contested facts or contested
interpretations of particular facts. What knowledge in
this regard is to be
attributed to the reasonable person considering whether, and if so, how to
respond to an offer of settlement?
The passage in
, upon which the
Commissioner relied was, clearly enough, an attempt to grapple with that
problem. However, there is a tension between
the way in which that passage is
expressed and the apparent acceptance by the majority in
a party can act reasonably in responding to an offer of settlement by reference
to that party's "genuine perception or recollection
of events". The Full Court's
formulation is to be preferred although, even then, it is not to be seen as a
substitute for the words
of the Act. Of course, there is an issue as to what
constitutes a "genuine" perception.
The Full Bench in
Kangan Batman
observed, we think correctly, that:
A party cannot simply disregard matters that should have been
reasonably apparent and then claim that such matters were not apparent
additional guidance about the concept of an unreasonable act may be found in the
Full Bench decision in
Stagno v Frews Wholesale Meats
in the following
"This last extract introduces a point of distinction between s.170CJ(1) and
s.170CJ(2). The former refers to 'without reasonable cause',
the latter to
'acted unreasonably'. This anomaly, as it was described, is noted by a full
K.M. Lloyd v. International Health and Beauty Aids Pty Ltd t/as Elly
Lukas Beauty College
[Print Q5446] and, by inference, the bench is of the
view that the tests are different in s.170CJ(1) and (2). That there is a
formula is clear but we are of the view that the formulations are
based on the stage of proceedings at which they occur. Section
170CJ(1) relates
to the initiation of proceedings. Section 170CJ(2) relates to the failure to
discontinue or the discontinuance of
the matter. In each case what attracts the
discretion to award costs is unreasonable action or the absence of sufficient
the action taken. What is considered to be without reason is
determined by reference to the stage that the proceeding has reached.
that this leaves open the possibility that proceedings may commence which are
with reasonable cause but may, in particular
circumstances at a later stage, be
further prosecuted unreasonably.
We are of the view that a party to a proceeding commenced under s.170CE
of the Act in which the Commission has begun arbitrating has
acted unreasonably
in failing to discontinue the matter if when, at the relevant time, upon the
facts apparent to the applicant there
was not substantial prospect of
discussion in
reveals that a consideration of the facts in each
matter is required to determine what is or is not an unreasonable act or
In the Commission's view, the phrase 'unreasonable act or omission'
connotes something more than mere incompetence, although incompetence
be an ingredient. It suggests
a deliberate or reckless action
(or inaction) by a representative that is objectively unreasonable by reference
to the circumstances
in which it occurs.
Sharkey v Life Without Barriers
, the Full Bench of the Fair Work
Commission concluded:
[92] As noted by
the Federal Court in
power to make a costs order
against a lawyer must be exercised with care and discretion and only in clear
The element of acting unreasonably involves some deliberate or
conscious decision taken by reference to circumstances unrelated to
prospects of success
, with either a recognition that there is no chance of
success, or an intention to use the proceeding for an ulterior purpose, or
abuse the processes of the court, or
with a disregard of any proper
consideration of the prospects of success
. However, an ulterior purpose or
an abuse of process cannot be assumed simply because the case does not succeed
or even because it
is hopeless.
following principles may be derived from the authorities referred to above:
(a) whether an act or omission is objectively unreasonable will turn on the
particular facts of the matter and requires:
(i) identification of the impugned act or omission;
(ii) consideration of whether the act or omission was unreasonable in the
circumstances of the matter including,
, consideration of the
timing of the act or omission; and
(iii) whether the act or omission caused the other party to incur costs.
determining whether an act or omission was an objectively unreasonable act or
omission the courts have considered whether,
on the facts of the matter, the act
or omission was intentional or unintentional, whether it was deliberate or
reckless and whether
there was an absence of a sufficient reason for the action
taken or not taken.
The Costs Application Hearing
[37] Following a
mention of the matter on 30 January 2023, a costs hearing was subsequently
listed on 17 March 2023. Ms Dorman and
Mr Rogers appeared, respectively, in
their own right at the costs hearing.
[38] During the
course of the costs hearing, and following a brief adjournment, the parties
indicated that an in-principle agreement
had been reached with respect to the
Respondent's costs application.
[39] The parties
were directed to provide the Commission with an update as to the status of the
matter by 24 March 2023.
[40] On 24 March
2023, the Respondent's representative emailed the Industrial Registry and
advised that it had provided a settlement
agreement to Mr Rogers but had
received no response from Mr Rogers to that communication.
[41] On 27 March
2023, Mr Rogers emailed the Industrial Registry and the Respondent's
representative. After apologising for the delay
in responding, Mr Rogers stated:
Agreeing to settle would be an admission of wrongdoing in circumstances where
no such wrongdoing took place therefore I am unable
to settle this matter.
consulting with the parties regarding a suitable date to relist the costs
application, the Industrial Registry relisted
the resumed costs hearing on 23
[43] Whilst the
representatives for the Respondent and Ms Dorman appeared at the resumed hearing
on 23 May 2023, Mr Rogers failed
[44] In the
absence of Mr Rogers and noting that the only evidence left to be adduced in the
costs proceeding was that of Mr Rogers,
the Commission determined to adjourn the
hearing with the remainder of the matter to be heard on the papers.
[45] Following
the adjournment, correspondence was sent to the parties and Mr Rogers advising
that the remainder of the proceedings
would be dealt with on the papers. It was
also advised that the statement of Mr Rogers filed on 15 March 2023 would become
3 in the proceedings.
[46] Later that
same day, Mr Rogers replied to the email correspondence stating that an
administrative error had been made by him
wherein the hearing date had been
incorrectly entered into his diary. Mr Rogers confirmed that he did not object
to the matter proceeding
on the papers.
[47] On 2 June
2023, the Respondent's representatives responded to the Commission's
correspondence indicating that there was no objection
to the matter proceeding
on the papers, however, it was noted that should Mr Rogers statement be admitted
into evidence then the
Respondent should not be taken to have accepted the truth
of its contents.
[48] On 4 July
2023, the Respondent's representatives filed an affidavit setting out the
particulars of the costs incurred by the
Respondent in the proceedings. The
affidavit also addressed matters relating to Mr Rogers' status as holding a
practicing certificate
as a legal practitioner.
[49] On 5 July
2023, Mr Rogers emailed the Industrial Registry seeking leave to reply to
matters contained in the affidavit filed
on 4 July 2023. The Commission granted
leave for Mr Rogers to file written submissions addressing the quantum of costs
and details
[50] Mr Rogers
did not file any further written submissions by 4.00 pm on 14 July 2023.
[51] However, on
Saturday, 15 July 2023 at 10.22 am, Mr Rogers sent an email to the Industrial
Registry which purported to respond
to the affidavit of 4 July 2023 in which Mr
Rogers stated the email "should be properly considered as submissions to the
Commission...".
The Costs Decision
stating the relevant factual background and identifying the relevant statutory
provisions and legal principles to be applied,
the Commission below
appropriately identified the following three questions when considering whether
to award costs in favour of
the Respondent in the following terms:
(a) should the party applying for costs have their costs paid; and, if so,
(b) who should pay those costs; and
(c) what amount should be paid?
Commission considered the first question and determined that a costs order in
favour of the Respondent was appropriate in
the circumstances of the matter.
[54] In making
such a determination, the Commission
It is difficult to imagine a set of circumstances more deserving of a costs
order. As in
, multiple efforts were made by the Commission to
appraise Ms Dorman (or more particularly, her representatives) of the futility
the application, but all were rebuffed. Ms Misko was informed. Ms Kuth was
informed. Mr Rogers was informed. None of these persons
who were purporting to
represent Ms Dorman's interests appear to have had any serious regard to the
multiple concerns raised by the
Commission. It was only after the Respondent had
been put to the expense of preparing submissions and preparing for hearing that
Ms Dorman sought to discontinue the application, on a Saturday, with less than
48 hours until the hearing was due to commence.
Commission then turned its attention to the second question. That is, who should
pay the costs. In considering that question,
the Commission considered whether
Ms Dorman, pursuant to
s 545(2)(a)
, should bear the costs or if Mr
Rogers, as Ms Dorman's representative, pursuant to
should bear the costs.
respect to Ms Dorman, the Commission had regard to the fact that,
Ms Dorman was represented throughout the whole
proceedings.
In this regard, the
Commission observed that:
Throughout this entire matter, Ms Dorman was deprived of competent
representation. Worse still, as will be discussed further below,
it appears to
the Commission that Ms Dorman's distress and confusion at losing her job was
exploited by Ms Misko and later by Mr
Rogers purely to press their personal
(misconceived) views about vaccines and mandates.
Ms Dorman was barely
consulted by Mr Rogers once the proceedings were filed and certainly not at all
at the critical junctures.
[57] For the
reasons set out in the Decision,
the Commission concluded that Ms Dorman bared no responsibility to pay the
Respondent's costs.
Commission then considered whether Mr Rogers should be liable for the
Respondent's
considering the relevant legal principles and further considering Mr Rogers
conduct, the Commission concluded that Mr Rogers
was liable to pay the
Respondent's costs for the period between 4 November 2022 to 30 January 2023
pursuant to
s 545(2)(b)
[60] In forming
that view, the Commission did not find that Mr Rogers encouraged
in the manner contemplated by
s 545(2)(b)(i)
. However, the
Commission did conclude that there was a compelling case for costs against Mr
Rogers pursuant to
s 545(2)(b)(ii)
on the basis of his
unreasonable acts or omissions.
[61] In forming
its decision, the Commission also concluded, in summary, that:
(a) Mr Rogers was on notice of the Commission's concerns regarding the merits of
the application and the fact that the application
was filed out of time as early
27 September 2022;
(b) The submissions filed on 10 November 2022 were
incompetent;
(c) in the circumstances, the unsolicited filing of amended submissions on
November 2022, without leave or notice to anyone, was an unreasonable act and it
was that act that ultimately necessitated the
second mention on 15 November
(d) it was not satisfied, on the evidence available, that Mr Rogers communicated
the issues raised by the Commission with respect
to Ms Dorman's application to
(e) Mr Rogers asserted that the sudden request to discontinue was because he did
not begin his preparation for the hearing he requested
until the Friday
afternoon before the hearing which was listed to be heard on the following
Monday; and
(f) the failure to adequately prepare for a hearing in a timely manner by any
representative, let alone a legal practitioner, is
inexcusable and plainly an
unreasonable act or omission.
Commission determined that it was appropriate for the costs order to be awarded
against Mr Rogers in circumstances where
the Commission found that the actions
and omissions of Mr Rogers on and after 4 November 2022 constituted unreasonable
acts or omissions
for the purpose of
s 545(b)(ii)
In this regard, the
Commission found that:
[171] The many
failings of Mr Rogers as a representative are set out above and do not require
repeating. Mr Rogers failed on almost
every occasion to comply with directions
issued by the Commission. There were repeated listings necessitated to address
his delinquency.
But even when confronted with his transgressions,
made no efforts to rectify his conduct. To the extent that Mr Rogers might have
uttered anything resembling an apology at
any point, the Commission never had
the impression it was genuine.
frequent was Mr Rogers' non-compliance with directions orders that the
Commission has been left in no doubt that his conduct
was not merely a feature
of incompetence. The dismissive and casual tones routinely adopted by Mr Rogers
gave a clear impression
of disdain for the Commission. It was plainly and
exclusively the conduct of Mr Rogers that caused the Respondent to incur costs
unnecessarily in responding to Ms Dorman's application.
[173] Not only
did Mr Rogers consistently misconduct himself throughout the life of the
proceedings, but he continued to do so during
the proceedings in respect of
costs. In the circumstances it is prudent to consider Mr Rogers' conduct in
those two phases of the
proceedings, namely:
(a) From commencement to the request to discontinue proceedings; and
(b) The costs proceedings.
Ground One – Error in Law
[63] Ground one,
as submitted by Mr Rogers, is comprised of two components, namely, that the
Commission erred in law on the basis
(a) legal unreasonableness; and
(b) consideration of relevant and irrelevant matters.
Legal Unreasonableness
[64] In his
written submissions, Mr Rogers refers to the
and the following
extract from
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
Affairs v SGLB
is set out as follows:
The satisfaction of the criterion that the applicant is a non-citizen to whom
Australia has the relevant protection obligations may
include consideration of
factual matters but the critical question is whether the determination was
irrational, illogical and not
based on findings or inferences of fact supported
by logical grounds. If the decision did display these defects, it will be no
that the determination was reached in good faith.
[65] Unfortunately,
however, Mr Rogers does not identify the finding on any other relevant passage
of the Decision that he contends
was unreasonable so as to amount to an error of
Moreton Bay Regional Council v
considered an appeal that concerned a ground of legal unreasonableness as
appellant submits that the Commission's finding that the appellant's decision to
dismiss the respondent was harsh and that
reinstatement was not impracticable
was unreasonable, so as to amount to an error of law. The approach that a court
should take in
considering matters of this nature was discussed by a joint
majority of the High Court in
Minister for Immigration v Li
Unreasonableness is a conclusion which may be applied to a decision which lacks
an evident and intelligible justification. But,
this analysis cannot be used as
a cloak to hide what is, in truth, a merits review. In that case, Hayne, Kiefel
and Bell JJ noted
[66] ... there
is an area within which a decision-maker has a genuinely free discretion. That
area resides within the bounds of legal
reasonableness. The courts are conscious
of not exceeding their supervisory role by undertaking a review of the merits of
an exercise
of discretionary power. Properly applied, a standard of legal
reasonableness does not involve substituting a court's view as to how
discretion should be exercised for that of a decision-maker. Accepting that the
standard of reasonableness is not applied in this
way does not, however, explain
how it is to be applied and how it is to be tested.
v Domus Pty Ltd
, Dixon CJ said that where discretions are ill-defined (as
commonly they are) it is necessary to look to the scope and purpose of
statute conferring the discretionary power and its real object. The ordinary
approach to statutory construction, reiterated in
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
, requires nothing less. The legal standard
of reasonableness must be the standard indicated by the true construction of the
It is necessary to construe the statute because the question to
which the standard of reasonableness is addressed is whether the statutory
has been abused.
[67] Rather than
identifying the relevant parts of the Commission's findings that are said to be
in error, Mr Rogers, instead, lists
the following particulars as a basis upon
which he asserts that the Decision is
unreasonable:
(a) Mr Rogers provided submissions to the Commission (and the Respondent) on
10 November 2022 setting out the instructions that
had been provided to the
Appellant by both Ms Dorman and Ms Misko (Ms Dorman's previous representative)
with respect to the filing
of the application for reinstatement. Namely, that
the application was filed with the Industrial Registry via email from Ms Misko
"on Monday, 8 August 2022" (being within the 21-day timeframe required by
('s 317 Submissions');
(b) after the Respondent responded to the
Submissions in its submissions
filed on 25 November 2022, Mr Rogers required further instructions from Ms
Dorman to prepare reply
submissions which were due on 8 December 2022;
(c) Ms Dorman gave evidence, which was accepted by the Commission, that she was
not able to be contacted by any means by Mr Rogers
from 25 November 2022 until
she contacted him on 22 January 2023 via telephone;
(d) at the mention on 8 December 2022, Mr Rogers was not aware, and could not
have been aware, that Ms Dorman would not respond to
his request sent via email
25 November 2022, to read the Respondent's submission filed on 25 November
2022 and then contact him "when free";
(e) at the mention on 8 December 2022, Mr Rogers was not aware, and could not
have been aware, that Ms Dorman would not respond to
his attempts to make
(f) at the mention on 8 December 2022, Mr Rogers had not "actively sought to
have the matter listed for a
but only expressed a
preference "for the opportunity to answer questions" from the Commissioner when
asked for his views on the choice
put to him by the Commission to either have
the matter determined on the papers or have a hearing in
(g) on the morning of 28 January 2023, being six days after Ms Dorman made
instructions from Ms
Dorman with respect to the matters raised by the Respondent in its submissions
of 25 November 2022 relating
to the filing of the application for reinstatement
within the statutory timeframe; and
(h) after Ms Dorman provided further instructions confirming that a second
application was submitted by Ms Misko on 25 August 2022,
which contradicted the
previous instructions provided to Mr Rogers that only a single application had
been filed on 8 August 2022
(as set out in the
Submissions), Mr Rogers
took the steps to discontinue the proceedings within a few hours.
[68] In the
absence of clear and cogent submissions with respect to why Mr Rogers says those
particulars amount to the Decision being
legally unreasonable, it can only be
inferred that Mr Rogers seeks to argue that the Commission did not have regard
to the particulars
he lists and consequently the Decision is unreasonable.
[69] In relying
on the particulars above, Mr Rogers seeks to relitigate the factual matters he
sought to rely on in the proceedings
below which were not accepted by the
Commission. In doing so, it is apparent that what Mr Rogers really seeks in
initiating this
appeal is a merits review.
[70] Mr Rogers
continues, as he did below, to contend that he could not have sought to have the
proceedings discontinued any earlier
than Saturday, 28 January 2023 because of
the submissions he makes at (a) – (h) of the particulars.
[71] Mr Rogers'
submissions fail to have regard to the whole of the admissible evidence that was
before the Commission and, further,
fails to display any understanding of what
Mr Rogers' obligations were when acting as an agent on behalf of Ms Dorman.
[72] It was
incumbent on Mr Rogers, as Ms Dorman's agent, to act in her best interests
before the Commission. Failure to file written
submissions meaningfully
addressing the jurisdictional objection and the exercise of the Commission's
discretion pursuant to
when directed to do so, was not
acting in Ms Doman's interest. Additionally, failure to have regard to, let
alone read, the Respondent's
written submissions of
25 November 2022 until
28 January 2023 was not acting in Ms Dorman's interests. It was appropriate for
the Commission to have regard
to such matters in the context of a costs
application and the test to be applied.
[73] Further, at
no point during the relevant period did Mr Rogers identify and bring to the
Commission's attention that he was unable
to receive instructions from Ms Dorman
and, consequently, was not in position to proceed with the hearing. A prudent
agent would
have raised such a serious matter with the Commission well in
advance of any hearing and sought, at the very least, an adjournment
hearing until instructions were received. That again was a matter relevant to
the costs application and the test to be applied.
[74] Further, Mr
Rogers attempts to re-characterise his submissions made before the Commission at
the mention on 8 December 2022 as
doing no more than merely expressing a
preference for the opportunity to answer questions from the Commission rather
than actually
seeking an oral hearing. The transcript identifies the following
COMMISSIONER: Yes. All right. That's fine. The next thing I was going to ask
the parties is whether they had a desire for me to list
the matter for oral
submissions. I'm in the parties' hands, although I'll make some comments about
it once I've heard the parties'
Mr Rogers, did you have a preference
with respect to whether we have oral submissions in this matter? So what's
anticipated is that
the party would speak to the submissions that have been
filed and would be in a position to answer questions directed at them from
MR ROGERS: Yes. My preference would be that – well, sorry. I would be
in a position to - - -
COMMISSIONER: Or the – I should say the alternative – sorry to
cut across you, Mr Rogers, but I should say the alternative
MR ROGERS: No, not a problem.
COMMISSIONER: The alternative is I just – can decide the matter on the
papers based on the written submissions from the parties.
My preference would be for the opportunity to answer questions
from yourself, Commissioner.
COMMISSIONER: Yes.
That is my preference
[75] It was
certainly open for the Commission to determine that Mr Rogers, acting on behalf
of Ms Dorman, sought an oral hearing rather
than for the matter to be heard on
the papers.
apparent from the above, and from the reasons provided in the Decision, that
there was a factual basis and, consequently,
plausible justification for the
findings made by the Commission. The matters raised by Mr Rogers in this appeal
were raised before
the Commission and rejected.
[77] Consequently,
Mr Rogers has not established that the Decision was one which no reasonable
person could come to, or that the manner
in which the Commission made the
decision was devoid of plausible justification so that no reasonable person
could have made it.
For these reasons, Mr Rogers argument that the Decision was
legally unreasonable must fail.
Relevant and Irrelevant Considerations
[78] Mr Rogers
further contends that the Commission failed to take into account relevant
considerations and took into account irrelevant
considerations in determining
the matter.
Queensland Teachers Union of Employees v State of Queensland (Department of
Education (No 2)
Davis J considered the concept of relevant and irrelevant
considerations in the following
The 'something more' requires reference to the dual concepts of 'relevant
considerations' and 'taking into account'. The term 'relevant
considerations' is
widely misunderstood: as used in leading authorities, such as
Minister for
Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
(Mason J) it refers to a matter which the decision-maker is bound to take into
account. The obligation may derive from the
express terms of the
power-conferring statute or may be implied from its subject matter, scope and
purpose. A preferable term would
be 'mandatory consideration'. Further, a matter
traditionally described as an 'irrelevant consideration' is one which is
because, having regard to the subject matter, scope and purpose of
the power being exercised, it can be seen to reflect an extraneous
or improper
purpose or to render the decision arbitrary or capricious. Between these two
categories is usually a wide range of permissible
considerations which the
decision-maker may weigh or disregard without committing an error of law.
[80] In order to
be successful, Mr Rogers is required to establish that the Commission failed to
take into account matters it was
obliged to pursuant to
s 545(2)(b)(ii)
or, in the alternative, the Commission had regard to prohibited matters
having regard to the subject matter, scope and purpose of
the power in
545(2)(b)(ii)
being exercised.
Relevant Considerations
[81] Mr Rogers
contends that the Commission failed to take into account the following relevant
considerations:
Respondent filed its submissions on 25 November 2022 which directly addressed
the Appellant's
Section 317
Submissions.
paragraph 97 of the Decision:
"Ms Dorman sets out that she commenced new employment from 12 October
2022. From that time on, Ms Dorman contends that she was unable
mentions before the Commission. She also contends that her new role was busy and
this left her with no time to check emails.
The inference in her submission
(which was born out in her evidence) is that she had little meaningful contact
with Mr Rogers from
12 October 2022 onwards."
paragraph 98 of the Decision, the Commission finds that on or about
November 2022 until on or about 15 January 2023,
Ms. Dorman had no contact
with the Appellant "as she was heavily preoccupied".
paragraph 99 of the Decision the Commission appears to accept Ms Dorman's
evidence that "
on 15 January 2023 she checked her emails and noticed an email
from Mr Rogers".
paragraph 150 of the Decision the commission found, "having secured new
employment in October 2022, Ms Dorman appears to have left
the conduct of her
application with her representatives."
paragraph 147 of the Decision the commission found, "Her work obligations became
her priority and she largely stopped reading emails
from about 12 October 2022.
Subsequently Ms Dorman experienced a loss in her family and became even more
removed from the process."
paragraph 251 of the Decision the commission found, "Ms Dorman was wholly
incommunicado throughout the majority of the matter,
and that Mr Rogers was
pursuing the proceedings almost entirely without instructions."
paragraph 210 of the Decision, the Commission refers to an email sent by the
Appellant on
Thursday, 19 January 2023
to Ms Dorman requesting that she
hearing on 30 January
Appellant gave evidence that Ms. Dorman contacted the Appellant on Sunday, 22
January 2023, being:
"weekend" referenced in the Appellant's email of Thursday, 19 January 2023;
(7) clear days from the date on which Ms. Dorman had "checked her emails and
noticed an email from Mr Rogers' (see paragraph
99 of the Decision).
the morning of 28 January 2023, being 6 days after Ms. Dorman made contact with
the Appellant after she became non-contactable
since 25 November 2022, the
Appellant sought further instructions from Ms Dorman with respect to the matters
raised by the Respondent
in its submissions of 25 November 2022 relating to the
filing of the Application within the statutory timeframe.
[82] Mr Rogers
contends that the Commission failed to have regard to the above matters, whilst,
curiously, doing so by referencing
the paragraphs from the Decision where the
Commission has considered the matters.
[83] Further, Mr
Rogers does not identify the basis upon which he contends the Commission failed
to take into account matters it was
obliged to pursuant to
s 545(2)(b)(ii)
[84] Mr Rogers
does not identify any error arising out of the Commission's alleged failure to
consider the identified particulars.
In these respects, the appeal ground must
[85] Separately,
Mr Rogers refers to paragraph 208 of the Decision which he described as
containing a "pivotal" finding upon which
the costs order was founded. Paragraph
208 relevantly states:
For completeness, it ought to be noted that, to the extent Mr Rogers seeks to
lay blame on Ms Misko for not adequately instructing
him about the late filing,
he could easily have overcome that alleged disadvantage if he had made proper
enquires when he first had
the opportunity to became aware of the Respondent's
objection i.e. on or around 4 November 2022, or by 25 November 2022 at the
[86] Mr Rogers
appears to argue that in making the finding in paragraph 208 the Commission
failed to have regard to the following
considerations:
Appellant provided the
Section 317
Submissions to the Commission (and the
Respondent) on 10 November 2022. These submissions set out the instructions that
provided to the Appellant (by both Ms. Dorman and Ms. Misko) with
respect to the filing of the Application for reinstatement. Namely,
application was filed with the Registry via an email from Ms. Misko "on Monday,
8 August 2022" (being within the 21 day
timeframe required by
Section 317
Industrial Relations Act
Respondent filed its submissions on 25 November 2022 which addressed the
Appellant's
Section 317
Submissions.
at paragraph 97 of the Decision:
"Ms Dorman sets out that she commenced new employment from 12 October
2022. From that time on, Ms Dorman contends that she was unable
mentions before the Commission. She also contends that her new role was busy and
this left her with no time to check emails.
The inference in her submission
(which was born out in her evidence) is that she had little meaningful contact
with Mr Rogers from
12 October 2022 onwards."
at paragraph 98 of the Decision, that on or about 25 November 2022 until on or
with the Appellant "as she was
heavily preoccupied".
concerning Ms Dorman's evidence at paragraph 99 of the Decision that "
January 2023 she checked her emails and noticed an email from Mr
at paragraph 210 of the Decision, that Appellant sent a further email on
Thursday, 19 January 2023
to Ms Dorman requesting that she contact him
"over the weekend" to discuss the Application and the upcoming hearing on 30
Appellant gave evidence that Ms. Dorman contacted the Appellant on Sunday, 22
January 2023, being:
"weekend" referenced in the Appellant's email of Thursday, 19 January 2023;
(7) clear days from the date on which Ms. Dorman had "checked her emails and
noticed an email from Mr Rogers" (see paragraph
the morning of 28 January 2023, being 6 days after Ms. Dorman made contact with
the Appellant after she had been non-contactable
since 25 November 2022, the
Appellant sought further instructions from Ms Dorman with respect to the matters
raised by the Respondent
in its submissions of 25 November 2022 relating to the
filing of her Application within the statutory timeframe.
apparent that several of the relevant considerations referred to in paragraph 81
above are also repeated in subparagraph
(a)-(h) above.
[88] Similarly,
as above, the matters that Mr Rogers particularises as "relevant considerations"
that he contends were not considered
by the Commission are identified by Mr
Rogers by reference to the paragraph numbers in the Decision where those matters
were considered.
[89] Further, it
is apparent that Mr Rogers again attempts to relitigate the matter below,
specifically with respect to the matters
he contends he was not instructed on in
the proceedings below. The Commission considered the evidence and to the extent
was a contest between the evidence of Ms Dorman and Mr Rogers, the
Commission accepted Ms Dorman's
The Commission's
factual findings in this regard cannot be challenged in the context of this
[90] Mr Rogers
has failed to establish that the Commission failed to take into account a
relevant consideration that amounted to an
error of law.
Irrelevant Considerations
[91] Mr Rogers
further argues that the Commission had regard to irrelevant considerations which
were stated in his submissions as
Commission relied on the following findings set out in paragraph(s) 199 to 201
of the Decision which are irrelevant to whether
he caused the Respondent to
incur costs:
"[199] In his own words, without a hint of contrition or embarrassment, Mr
Rogers casually asserts that the sudden request to discontinue
was because he
did not begin his preparation until Friday afternoon before the hearing which,
by coincidence, was immediately after
he received an email from the Industrial
Registry advising, contrary to his proposal, that Ms Dorman would be required to
the hearing.
[200] One can only presume Mr Rogers 'preparation' involved reading the
Respondent's submissions filed 25 November 2022 for the first
afternoon on the last business day before hearing. At the absolute best, it can
be inferred that if Mr Rogers had read
those submissions earlier, he did not
read them properly.
paragraphs 243 to 252 of the Decision (under the heading "Other Matters")
indicate the Commission took into account considerations
that are not relevant
in determining whether an order for costs should be made pursuant to
545(2)(b)(ii)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld), including at
paragraph 251 of the Decision:
... "Mr Rogers appears to be closely associated with RDA. RDA was
apparently founded on activism opposing lockdowns and vaccine mandates."
paragraph 161 of the Decision:
"Throughout this entire matter, Ms Dorman was deprived of competent
representation. Worse still, as will be discussed further below,
it appears to
the Commission that Ms Dorman's distress and confusion at losing her job was
exploited by Ms Misko and later by Mr
Rogers purely to press their personal
(misconceived) views about vaccines and mandates."
[92] Relevantly,
Mr Rogers does not articulate the basis upon which he asserts the matters
referred to above amount to irrelevant
considerations in the exercise of the
Commission's discretion with respect to
s 545(2)(b)(ii)
apparent that the Commissioner relevantly had regard to the conduct of Mr Rogers
during the relevant period. Such a consideration
is clearly relevant to the
exercise of the Commission's discretion to award costs and when considering the
application of
s 545(2)(b)(ii)
findings at paragraphs 199 to 201 of the Decision are relevant to the
consideration of Mr Rogers' conduct in the exercise
of the relevant discretion.
Here, the identified conduct was relevant to the consideration as to why Mr
Rogers sought to withdraw
as Ms Dorman's agent and then discontinue the matter
on Saturday, 28 January 2023, in circumstances where the jurisdictional hearing
has been listed to commence on Monday, 30 January 2023.
[95] Mr Rogers
further asserts that the Commission took into account irrelevant considerations
at paragraph 161 of the Decision. Paragraph
161 relevantly states:
Throughout this entire matter, Ms Dorman was deprived of competent
representation. Worse still, as will be discussed further below,
it appears to
the Commission that Ms Dorman's distress and confusion at losing her job was
exploited by Ms Misko and later by Mr
Rogers purely to press their personal
(misconceived) views about vaccines and mandates. Ms Dorman was barely consulted
by Mr Rogers
once the proceedings were filed and certainly not at all at the
critical junctures.
[96] It is not
apparent the basis upon which Mr Rogers asserts that an irrelevant consideration
was taken into account in the exercise
of the discretion. Paragraph 161 of the
Decision falls under the Commission's consideration as to whether Ms Dorman
should be liable
to pay the Respondent's costs pursuant to
s 545(2)(a)
. In this regard, the Commission was considering the type and competency of
the agents who acted on behalf of Ms Dorman. That was
a relevant consideration
with respect to the exercise of discretion with respect to Ms Dorman. Paragraph
161 clearly does not relate
to the Commission's considerations of the exercise
of the discretion with respect to Mr Rogers.
determining that the Commission would exercise its discretion and order that
Mr Rogers pay the Respondent's costs in the amount of $9,062.00, the
Commission then turned to other matters that had arisen during
the course of the
proceedings. Paragraphs 243 to 252 of the Decision relevantly stated as follows:
Other matters
[243] Mr Rogers
was first admitted to the legal profession in or around October 2012. He held a
practicing certificate until June
2022. At the time Ms Dorman came to be
represented by Mr Rogers in September 2022, Mr Rogers was admitted to the legal
but he did not hold a practicing certificate.
[244] Mr Rogers
appeared in the Commission as representative for Ms Dorman while employed by an
entity named 'Reignite Democracy Australia'
('RDA') which is a quasi-political
organisation of the type spawned from the various anti-lockdown and anti-vaccine
groups that emerged
during the pandemic.
[245] In his
email response to the affidavit, Mr Rogers describes his role with RDA as having
variously been 'in-house counsel' (during
the period he previously held a
practicing certificate) and 'a commercial role' during the first part of the
period he represented
December 2022, Mr Rogers had been issued with a principle practicing certificate
and had successfully registered an incorporated
legal practice called 'Reignite
Legal'. It is not clear whether Reignite Legal and RDA are related entities. The
RDA website includes
a link titled 'Legal' which redirects to Reignite Legal.
[247] Mr Rogers
states he did not commence legal work in his practice until 16 January 2023.
Presumably Mr Rogers makes this submission
because he somehow considers this
means his conduct prior to 16 January 2023 was not regulated by the
Profession Act 2007
(Qld) ('LP Act').
[248] Whether Mr
Rogers held a practicing certificate or was operating his law firm at the
relevant times between September 2022 and
May 2023 is largely irrelevant. At all
times during the proceedings Mr Rogers was either an 'Australian lawyer' or an
'Australian
legal practitioner' within the meaning of the
. Therefore, Mr
Rogers' conduct throughout these proceedings was all relevant to the question of
his suitability to practice. Further,
from 5 December 2022 Mr Rogers' conduct
was regulated by the
Australian Solicitors' Conduct Rules
Solicitors' Rules').
foregoing reasons catalogue a range of conduct by Mr Rogers that, in the view of
the Commission, raise serious questions
Unlike the Industrial Court of Queensland, the Commission does not have powers
to punish for contempt.
But it is worth noting that there is at least one
incident of explicitly contemptuous conduct by Mr Rogers in addition to his
display of disrespectful behaviour towards the Commission both in his
demeanour and his repeated non-compliance with directions
Commission is a court of record in Queensland. While non-legally qualified
representatives and self-represented litigants
will be allowed a degree of
tolerance with respect to their conduct before the Commission, persons who meet
definitions of Australian lawyer or Australian legal practitioner can
expect to be held to the same standard of conduct applied in
any other court.
This is so, regardless of whether they purport to appear as an 'agent'.
Professional duties and the regulatory powers
cannot be avoided by
a practitioner simply 'rebadging' themselves under some other title.
[251] Mr Rogers
appears to be closely associated with RDA. RDA was apparently founded on
activism opposing lockdowns and vaccine mandates.
Throughout the proceedings the
Commission had the impression that Mr Rogers' personal views were at the
forefront of his representation,
and his professional duties to the Commission
and his client were secondary. More significantly, the Commission noted with
concern the consistent absence of Ms Dorman from the various mentions
held throughout the latter part of 2022. It came as no surprise
Commission to later learn that Ms Dorman was wholly incommunicado throughout the
majority of the matter, and that Mr Rogers
was pursuing the proceedings almost
entirely uninstructed.
[252] It ought
to be made clear that Mr Rogers is entirely free to hold and exercise his social
and political views. But such freedom
does not extend to Mr Rogers using clients
as a mere vehicle to promote those views before a court or tribunal under the
legal proceedings. It was immediately apparent that the extensive (but
incompetent) submissions Mr Rogers filed early in these proceedings
familiar 'anti-vax template' appearance. They made no material reference to Ms
Dorman or the circumstances of her dismissal
at all. When one then considers the
complete absence of meaningful communication between Mr Rogers and Ms Dorman
throughout the relevant
period, Mr Rogers' conduct as a legal practitioner
pressing his misconceived arguments is more than a little concerning.
[98] Whilst Mr
Rogers does not complain of paragraphs 253 and 254 of the Decision, they are
relevant to note on the basis that they
provide context for the reason why the
Commissioner considered it necessary to refer to the matters under the heading
"Other matters".
Paragraphs 253 and 254 of the Decision relevantly state:
[253] It is not
within the Commission's powers to sanction Mr Rogers for his conduct in these
proceedings. However, if Mr Rogers continues
to conduct himself in the same
manner before other courts or tribunals, then in the Commission's view, he will
inevitably bring the
profession into disrepute. More concerningly, his conduct
may adversely impact a member or members of the public.
[254] Accordingly,
the Commission intends to direct that the Registrar forward a copy of these
reasons to the Legal Services Commissioner
for her consideration.
[99] Paragraphs
243 to 252 are matters referred to by the Commission following the Commission's
determination that Mr Rogers be ordered
to pay the Respondent's costs. The clear
intent of the Commission in identifying the matters referred to under the
heading "Other
matters" is to highlight the conduct of Mr Rogers that became
apparent during the course of the proceedings which formed a basis
Commission to issue a direction to the Registrar that a copy of the Commission's
reasons be provided to the Legal Services
Commissioner for her consideration.
These matters clearly follow the relevant finding
and are ancillary to
the Decision with respect to costs. Mr Rogers has not established that the
Commission had regard to irrelevant
considerations in exercising the discretion
pursuant to
s 545(2)(b)(ii)
so as to amount to an error of law.
[100] Consequently,
ground one of the appeal fails.
Ground Two – Apprehended Bias
[101] The second
ground Mr Rogers relies on is that the Decision was infected by apprehended
Relevant Legal Principles – Apprehended Bias
relevant legal principles with respect to apprehended bias have previously been
considered by this Court,
Robertson v McDonald's Australia
v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
the High Court held that apprehended bias
will disqualify a judge from a case "if a fair minded lay observer might
reasonably apprehend
that the judge might not bring an impartial mind to the
resolution of the question the judge is required to decide".
[26] The test to
be applied for determining whether a judge should be disqualified for
apprehended bias, the High Court held, requires
the adoption of a two-step
"First, it requires the identification of what is said might lead a judge (or
juror) to decide a case other than on its legal and
factual merits. The second
step is no less important. There must be an articulation of the logical
connection between the matter
and the feared deviation from the course of
deciding the case on its merits."
Parbery & Ors v QNI Metals Pty Ltd & Ors
Bond J set out the
following principles relevant to the consideration of the test:
application of the test uses the touchstone of the "fair-minded lay observer"
and that person's reasonable apprehension.
The law contemplates the following in
the application of that test:
(a) The fair-minded lay observer has attributed to him or her awareness of and a
fair understanding of the nature of the decision,
the context in which it was
made, and the circumstances leading up to the decision.
(b) The fair-minded lay observer has attributed to him or her knowledge that the
judge is a professional lawyer, whose training,
tradition and oath or
affirmation require him or her to discard the irrelevant, the immaterial and the
prejudicial, with the result
that a conclusion that there is a reasonable
apprehension that the judge might be biased should not be drawn lightly. The
does not have attributed to him or her knowledge of the character or
the ability of the particular judge concerned.
(c) The fair-minded lay observer does not have attributed to him or her a
detailed knowledge of the law, but the reasonableness of
any suggested
apprehension of bias is to be considered in the context of ordinary judicial
practice, taking into account the exigencies
of modern litigation.
[32] What is
required for justice to be seen to be done is that it must be apparent to the
fair-minded lay observer that the judge
will bring to the resolution of the
issues an impartial and unprejudiced mind which will decide the issues according
to their factual
and legal merits. If such an observer might reasonably
apprehend that the judge might not do that, then a case of apprehended bias
established. But if the possibility of such a reasonable apprehension does not
exist, it will not suffice that there might be
a reasonable apprehension that
the judge will decide an issue or issues adversely to one
[33] Although
the test is expressed in terms of a reasonable apprehension that the judge might
not bring an impartial and unprejudiced
mind, it is also clear that the law
requires that proposition to be "firmly established" before the judge should
disqualify himself
or herself. In
British American Tobacco Australia Services
Ltd v Laurie
(2011) 242 CLR 283
, Gummow J14 at [71] to [72] made this
observation (footnotes omitted):
[71] To that
perception of the role of the hypothetical observer must be added the
consideration that "the ground of disqualification
is a reasonable apprehension
that the judicial officer will not decide the case impartially or without
prejudice, rather than that
he will decide the case adversely to one party". The
words are those of Mason J in Re JRL; Ex parte CJL, in a passage adopted by
Callinan J in Johnson v Johnson. Mason J also said in that passage, using words
later said by the English Court of Appeal to have
"great persuasive force", and
adopted by the New Zealand Court of Appeal:
"In cases of this kind, disqualification is only made out by showing that
there is a reasonable apprehension of bias by reason of
prejudgment and this
must be 'firmly established': R v Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission; Ex parte Angliss Group;
Watson; Re Lusink; Ex parte Shaw. Although
it is important that justice must be seen to be done, it is equally important
that judicial
officers discharge their duty to sit and do not, by acceding too
readily to suggestions of appearance of bias, encourage parties
to believe that
by seeking the disqualification of a judge, they will have their case tried by
someone thought to be more likely
to decide the case in their favour."
references in JRL to the phrase "firmly established" in the joint reasons of all
seven Justices of this Court in Angliss
and to the subsequent authorities is
important. ...
[34] The judge's
ordinary duty to sit unless convinced otherwise was also discussed in the
earlier decision of
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR
per Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ at [19] to
[19] Judges have
a duty to exercise their judicial functions when their jurisdiction is regularly
invoked and they are assigned to
cases in accordance with the practice which
prevails in the court to which they belong. They do not select the cases they
and they are not at liberty to decline to hear cases without good
cause. Judges do not choose their cases; and litigants do not choose
judges. If one party to a case objects to a particular judge sitting, or
continuing to sit, then that objection should not
prevail unless it is based
upon a substantial ground for contending that the judge is disqualified from
hearing and deciding the
[20] This is not
to say that it is improper for a judge to decline to sit unless the judge has
affirmatively concluded that he or
she is disqualified. In a case of real doubt,
it will often be prudent for a judge to decide not to sit in order to avoid the
inconvenience
that could result if an appellate court were to take a different
view on the matter of disqualification. However, if the mere making
insubstantial objection were sufficient to lead a judge to decline to hear or
decide a case, the system would soon reach a
stage where, for practical
purposes, individual parties could influence the composition of the bench. That
would be intolerable.
[21] It is not
possible to state in a categorical form the circumstances in which a judge,
although personally convinced that he or
she is not disqualified, may properly
decline to sit. Circumstances vary, and may include such factors as the stage at
which an objection
is raised, the practical possibility of arranging for another
judge to hear the case, and the public or constitutional role of the
before which the proceedings are being conducted. These problems usually arise
in a context in which a judge has no particular
personal desire to hear a case.
If a judge were anxious to sit in a particular case, and took pains to arrange
that he or she would
do so, questions of actual bias may arise.
Consideration
[103] Mr Rogers
relied on the following submissions in support of his contention that the
Decision was infected by apprehended
to the rules of Natural Justice, the following findings indicate the
Commission's order requiring the Appellant to pay the
Respondent's costs in the
amount of $9,062 was coloured by bias or might reasonably be apprehended as
being coloured by bias:
paragraph 142 of the Decision the Appellant (with his predecessor) is accused of
being motivated
"by a desire to promote their own quasi-political
paragraph 156 of the Decision (where the reference to
incompetent
representation
is directed to the Appellant):
"The relevant circumstance of this matter include the representation of Ms
Dorman by Mr Rogers. In the Commission's view
, where it is apparent that
incompetent representation serves to impede a party from acquiring an
understanding that their application
has no reasonable prospect of success,
s 545(2)(a)(ii)
cannot be engaged."
paragraph 158 of the Decision:
"The submission filed by Mr Rogers were utterly unresponsive to the
matters raised by the Commission and the Respondent. Even if they
were sent to
Ms Dorman, nothing about those submissions would give her any cause to
understand the peril her matter was in, especially
in the absence of some
explanation from Mr Rogers
paragraph 161 of the Decision:
"it appears to the Commission that Ms Dorman's
distress and
confusion at losing her job was exploited by Ms Misko and later by Mr Rogers
purely to press their personal (misconceived)
views about vaccines and
paragraph 181 of the Decision:
"Following the mention on 15 November 2022 where Mr Rogers was directly
informed by the Commission that the submissions filed were
incompetent and that
he was at risk of a personal costs order, the bare minimum one would expect of
Mr Rogers as a representative
is that he would consult Ms Dorman about these and
obtain her instructions about the progress of the matter. Mr Rogers did nothing
of the sort."
paragraph 182 of the Decision:
best effort Mr Rogers made was to send Ms Dorman a copy of his incompetent and
nonsensical submission, without any explanation
as to what it purported (but
failed) to address. A more unreasonable omission by a representative would be
hard to imagine."
Appellant's submissions are described as "incompetent and nonsensical" and as
"purported to (but failed) to address"
without any explanation
being given as to why they were incompetent and nonsensical, nor what the
submissions "failed to address".
paragraph 251 of the Decision:
"Mr Rogers appears to be closely associated with RDA. RDA was
apparently founded on activism opposing lockdowns and vaccine mandates."
paragraph 252 of the Decision:
Appellant is accused of using Ms. Dorman as
"a mere vehicle to promote
his social and political views before a court or tribunal.
Appellant's submissions are described as having "had the familiar 'anti-vax
template' appearance" and having made "no material
reference to Ms Dorman or the
circumstances of her dismissal at all".
Appellant is accused of "pressing his misconceived arguments".
above findings were not supported by evidence put before the
Commission.
[104] Paragraph
252 of the Decision is in the following
It ought to be made clear that Mr Rogers is entirely free to hold and
exercise his social and political views. But such freedom does
not extend to Mr
Rogers using clients as a mere vehicle to promote those views before a court or
tribunal under the guise of legal
proceedings. It was immediately apparent that
the extensive (but incompetent) submissions Mr Rogers filed early in these
proceedings
had the familiar 'anti-vax template' appearance. They made no
material reference to Ms Dorman or the circumstances of her dismissal
When one then considers the complete absence of meaningful communication between
Mr Rogers and Ms Dorman throughout the relevant
period, Mr Rogers' conduct as a
legal practitioner pressing his misconceived arguments is more than a little
concerning.
[105] Mr Rogers
submits that he relies on two categories in respect to the apprehended bias
claim: the first is that the Commission
seems to infer his political and/or
personal beliefs and his political and/or personal beliefs were the driving
force behind his
involvement in
Ms Dorman's matter, and the second is that
the Commission had regard to irrelevant comments made at a mention of the below
which Mr Rogers says infected how he was dealt with during the course of
the costs application.
[106] Mr Rogers
argues that the test is that a "fair-minded lay person would believe there was a
reason for apprehended bias".
[107] Mr Rogers
argues that the submissions filed in the proceedings below, objectively, have no
reference to political
[108] Mr Rogers
submits that there was apprehended bias because of the comments made by him at
the mention on 15 November 2022 and,
consequently, the Commission formed a view
and has informed a bias in terms of how the Commission ultimately dealt with the
Mr Rogers argues that
the comments at the mention were irrelevant and that the Commissioner was
personally aggrieved by those comments.
[109] Relevantly,
Mr Rogers does not engage with or make submissions with respect to the two-step
process as first stated in
Ebner v Official Trustee in
In that regard,
Mr Rogers fails to identify what is said that might lead the judge to decide the
case other than on its legal and
factual merits and to articulate the logical
connection between the matter and the factual deviation from the course of
the case on its merits. On this basis alone, ground two of the appeal
[110] Further,
and in any event, the matters raised by Mr Rogers are matters that were relevant
to the test the Commission had to
apply in the context of the costs application
because they relate to the conduct of Mr Rogers. Relevantly, the Commission had
to matters including the conduct of Ms Dorman and her representative when
determining if, pursuant to
s 545(2)(a)
, Ms Dorman was liable for
the costs, or
Mr Rogers, as the representative, was liable pursuant to
determining these matters the Commission had before it the filed documents, the
evidence of Ms Dorman at the costs hearing
and the Commission's own observations
of the conduct of the parties. Whilst Mr Rogers' statement was tendered as an
exhibit in the
costs proceedings it appears that little weight was placed on its
contents on the basis that Mr Rogers failed to attend the costs
hearing and,
consequently, the Respondent was unable to cross-examine Mr Rogers to test the
evidence. The Respondent did not object
to the admission of Mr Rogers' statement
on the condition that it was not relied on for the truth of its contents.
Commission ultimately rejected the assertions made by Mr
respect to the paragraphs of the Decision identified by Mr Rogers as being
infected by apprehended bias, paragraphs 142,
152, 158 and 161 relate to the
parts of the Decision wherein the Commission was considering if Ms Dorman should
be liable to pay
the costs order pursuant to
s 545(2)(a)
Commission concluded that Ms Dorman should not be liable at paragraph 162 as
For all of these reasons, the Commission concludes that Ms Dorman bears no
responsibility to pay the Respondent's costs.
[115] In the
circumstances of the matter and, given that Ms Dorman was represented by agents
throughout the proceedings, the conduct
of those agents in the course of Ms
Dorman relying on them for her advice and representation was relevant when
considering the test
to be applied.
[116] Paragraphs
181 and 182 of the Decision relate to the Commission's reasons with respect to
whether Mr Rogers should be liable
to pay the costs order pursuant to
[117] Paragraphs
251 and 252 of the Decision fall under the hearing "Other matters".
[118] Mr Rogers'
conduct both in written and oral form together with his conduct when appearing
(and failing to appear) before the
Commission were relevant matters for the
Commission to have regard to in the determination of the matter.
matters referred to in paragraphs 181, 182 and 251 are matters that arise out of
the information contained in the filed
documents, transcripts of mentions and
the evidence of Ms Dorman at the costs hearing. The conclusions made by the
Commission were
open and available to be made by the Commission on the evidence
[120] Whilst it
may be difficult to imagine what other view the Commission may have taken from
the evidence, the fact that Mr Rogers
now disagrees with those conclusions is
besides the point. As already noted, this appeal is not a merits review.
[121] Mr Rogers
appears to be concerned that the Commission considered that he was expressing
his political and/or personal views
with respect to vaccines and mandates.
[122] In this
regard, the Commission did describe Mr Rogers as pressing his personal and/or
"quasi-political" views about vaccines
and mandates.
ordinary meaning of the word political applies in the context of the Decision.
The Macquarie Dictionary defines "political"
in the following
1. relating to or dealing with the science or art of
political writers
or relating to the governing of a nation, state, municipality, etc.:
political measures
or seeking power in the governmental or public affairs of a nation, state,
municipality, or the like:
a political party
to or connected with a political party, or its principles, aims, activities,
a political campaign
or involving the state of government:
a political
in or connected with civil administration:
a definite policy or system of government:
a political
or relating to citizens:
political rights
interested in politics:
Sheila is not political
–politically,
Commission observed that the material filed in this matter including the
application for reinstatement and the submissions
filed by Mr Rogers objected to
the relevant Directive which required employees to be administered a COVID-19
vaccine and to establish
proof of that to their employer. This reflected a
public health policy position taken by the then Queensland State Government
was reflected by directives issued by some Departments within the State
which required certain employees, including frontline workers,
to comply with
the Directive.
[125] Mr Rogers
expressed a view with respect to this matter in a mention on 15 November 2023 as
MR RODGERS: - - - can be discarded. Yes, those can be discarded, because the
primary contention is reasonable. The information that
the Crown or the
department used to make the decision was false. It was false. Absolutely false.
If you think that is a defect in our argument, that’s fine. I disagree
with you. So does most of the country
. If a government department is going
to make decisions on false information, that is the role of the Commission to
objectively, fairly
review that matter and give the appropriate orders. That is
our [indistinct] proposition. The publicly available information supports
position. And the respondent has not provided any information to the contrary or
evidence to support their position. So ...
position was more fulsomely put in the Applicant's Outline of Argument. This
outline of argument seemingly was filed on
10 November 2022 in the Commission
Paragraphs one to six of
the Outline of Argument make specific and brief references to Ms Dorman. Each of
those paragraphs consist
of only one sentence. Whereas paragraphs seven to 44
provide detailed submissions regarding why it is contended the Directive issued
by the State was unlawful. Mr Rogers summarised the submissions in the final two
paragraphs as
Summary – the Vaccination Directive was not a lawful and reasonable
poses little to no risk to those in the Applicant's demographic (or QLD Health's
employees age demographic);
vaccines" do not prevent the transmission of "Covid-19" regardless of the number
of doses a person receives, therefore remaining
unvaccinated does not "adversely
affect the health and safety of other persons";
have personal duties under s 28 of the Work Health and Safety Act to "take
reasonable care for their own health and safety"
vaccines" pose a serious risk of injury and death to individuals that would
otherwise not be at risk of serious illness
or death from "Covid-19"; and
Respondent has not provided any evidence that "Covid-19" poses a risk to the
workplace to any greater degree than other common
respiratory illnesses;
Respondent has not provided any evidence that "Covid-19 vaccines" reduce the
transmission of "Covid-19" or reduce the likelihood
of contracting
"Covid-19";
the Vaccination Directive is not a "lawful and reasonable direction" or a
"reasonable policy or procedure relating to health or safety
at the workplace".
it is on this basis that the Applicant submits that the termination of the
Applicant's employment was "harsh, unreasonable and
[127] It is
apparent that the statements made by Mr Rogers concerned public health policies
implemented by the State and the impact
of those policies on individual citizens
including employees of the Respondent. Mr Rogers stated a particular view in
that regard
which could be said to be a political or as the Commission
identified it as a "quasi-political" view as they related to the governing
state, the use of power by the State, and the implementation of matters of
policy by the State.
[128] Given the
statements contained in the outline of argument drafted by Mr Rogers, the
observations made by the Commission with
respect to Mr Rogers' view was
available to be made on the material before the Commission.
[129] Mr Rogers'
conduct at the mention on 8 December 2022, which includes Mr Rogers appearing
before the Commission and adopting
disrespectful language and tone was a
relevant consideration when considering the act or omissions of an agent or
legal representative
in a costs application. Mr Rogers appears to contend that
the Commission took a "set against" him because of his conduct at the mention.
[130] There is
no evidence of this. The Commission provided Mr Rogers a number of opportunities
to be heard and, as is apparent from
the Decision, considered the matter in
depth. Indeed, following Mr Rogers' conduct during the mention, the Commission
exercised its
discretion to grant an indulgence to Mr Rogers by permitting him
to file further submissions and amending directions to permit this
Commission's adverse findings with respect to Mr Rogers' conduct do not equate
to apprehended bias. Rather, the Commission
has provided lengthy reasons setting
out the legal and factual basis on which it ultimately concluded that Mr Rogers
was liable to
pay the Respondent's costs on the basis of Mr Rogers' unreasonable
acts and omissions in the course of the proceedings which caused
the Respondent
to incur costs.
[132] For these
reasons, ground two of the appeal fails.
[133] Consequently,
no errors have been established and the appeal should be dismissed.
[134] Accordingly,
I make the following order:
appeal is dismissed.
Mr Rogers acted as the
Applicant's agent for most of the proceedings in TD/2022/197.
Dorman v State of
Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC 335
, 1 ('Decision').
Transcript of Proceedings,
Dorman v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
(Queensland Industrial
Relations Commission, TD/2022/197, Dwyer IC, 15 November 2022) 4 ('Transcript of
Mention on 15 November 2022').
Please note, the references to Mr Rodgers refer
to the Appellant in this matter.
[2021] ICQ 11.
Ibid [25] (citations
Decision (n 2) [168]-[170]
(emphasis in the original) (citations omitted).
Decision (n 2) [134]
(citations omitted).
Or until 28 January 2023 when
Mr Rogers filed the Form 35 – Notice of withdrawal of appointment of
lawyer or agent.
Decision (n 2) [161].
Ibid [134]-[161].
Ibid [163]-[242].
Decision (n 2) [174]
Ibid [179].
Ibid [202].
Ibid [163]-[173].
Associated Provincial
Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corp
[1947] EWCA Civ 1
[1948] 1 KB 223.
(2004) 78 ALJR 992.
Ibid [38] (citations
[2014] ICQ 13.
Ibid [28] (emphasis in
original) (citations omitted).
Gareth Rogers,
'Appellant's Outline of Submissions', Submission in
Rogers v State of
Queensland (Queensland Health
), C/2023/48, 23 April 2024, [9] ('Appellant's
Outline of Submissions').
Decision (n 2) [132].
Transcript of Proceedings,
Dorman v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
(Queensland Industrial
Relations Commission, TD/2022/197, Dwyer IC, 8 December 2022) 2 (emphasis
[2021] ICQ 3.
Ibid [95], citing
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2013] NSWCA 180.
Appellant's Outline of
Submissions (n 21) [14] (emphasis in original).
Appellant's Outline of
Submissions (n 21) [16] (emphasis in original).
Decision (n 2)
[180]-[187].
Appellant's Outline of
Submissions (n 21) [13].
Whilst Mr Rogers' written
submissions sought to rely on grounds relating to actual bias as well as
apprehended bias, Mr Rogers
confirmed at the hearing that he only relied on
apprehended bias. See Transcript of Proceedings,
Rogers v State of Queensland
(Queensland Health
) (Industrial Court of Queensland, C/2023/48, Hartigan DP,
22 August 2024) 8 (G Rogers) ('Transcript of Hearing on 22 August 2024').
As presently constituted.
[2023] ICQ 27.
Ibid [25]-[34] (citations
Appellant's Outline of
Submissions (n 21) [21] (emphasis in original).
Decision (n 2) [252]
(citations omitted).
Transcript of Hearing on 22
August 2024 (n 31) 11 (G Rogers).
Ibid 19 (Hartigan DP).
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337.
Decision (n 2) [185].
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 5 June 2025) 'political' (emphasis in original).
Transcript of Mention on
15 November 2022 (n 3) 4 (G Rogers) (emphasis added).
State of Queensland
(Queensland Health), 'Outline of Argument (Amended 9 November 2022)', Document
10 of the Appeal Book in
Rogers v State of Queensland (Queensland
), C/2023/48, 10 November 2022, 161-88.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (783 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter