URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2002/33.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:48:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Benning, Sidney & Hayes, Christine v National Asset Planning Corporation Pty Ltd & Hellyer, Patrick & Others [2002] QPAMDT 33 (27 June 2002)
PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR DEALERS TRIBUNAL
[2002] QPAMDT 33
27 JUNE 2002
APPLICATION NO:
BENNING SIDNEY JAMES & HAYES CHRISTINE
FIRST RESPONDENT:
NATIONAL ASSET PLANNING CORPORATION PTY LTD
SECOND RESPONDENT:
HELLYER STRONE
THIRD RESPONDENT:
DOHERTY NITA
FOURTH RESPONDENT:
BILBOROUGH CHRISTOPHER R
DATE OF HEARING:
3 APRIL 2002
[2002] QPAMDT 33
REASONS FOR
1. This is an
application by Sidney James Benning and Christine Hayes (“Benning and
Hayes”) under section 119 of the
Auctioneers and Agents Act
("the repealed Act") claiming against the former fund on the basis of an alleged
contravention of the repealed Act by the respondents
listed above.
2. The claim arises in relation to two properties known as Unit 2 Sierra
Vista, Stormbird Place Carrara and Unit 5 Chevron Palm Waters,
Chevron Island
Queensland, (“the Units”) which Benning and Hayes purchased from
Koromiko Pty Ltd (“the vendors”)
through NAPC on 16 February 1998.
The purchase price for the Sierra Vista property was $149,900 and for the
Chevron Palm Waters property
was $161,900. Benning and Hayes claim that the
properties were sold by the NAPC at an overvalue and that they only purchased
properties due to false and misleading misrepresentations made by NAPC and
its agents upon whom they relied.
The claimants allege that at all material
The first respondent, NAPC, carried on
business as property marketers and provided a complete investment services to
investors in
residential and commercial real estate and in particular, assessing
the requirements of individual investors, identifying the most
appropriate
properties for their specific gearing qualities and providing sound financial
analysis to make informed decisions
NAPC was a Real Estate Agent for the
purposes of s 119 of repealed Act and pursuant to s 2 of that
The second respondent Hellyer was the
servant or agent of the first respondent authorised by the first respondent to
act in manner
referred to in the evidence
The third respondent Doherty was the
servant or agent of NAPC authorised by NAPC to act in the manner referred to in
the evidence
Doherty was a real estate person
pursuant to s 2 of the repealed Act
NAPC, Hellyer and Doherty were
prescribed persons within the meaning of the repealed
4. The fourth respondent Bilborough was the sole
director of the first respondent at the relevant time and was joined as a
by the Tribunal at a directions hearing on 8 October 2001.
5. Benning and Hayes claim, in their amended revised claim dated 3 April
2002, the sum of $ 248,143.17 as the pecuniary loss under
s 119 of the repealed
act. However, at the hearing the claimants withdrew their claims for interest in
the amounts of $7,591 and
$11,881 and the final written submissions of Ms
Skennar for the claimants claimed $93,356 and $113, 642 as their losses on the
properties. This makes a total claim of $206,998 from the fund
arising from the alleged breach of the repealed Act by the
respondents.
The transfer of the claim to the
6. The claim has become a claim against the claim fund
Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act
Act”) by virtue of section 604 of the Act which provides:
The rights and liabilities of the former fund are
taken to be the rights and liabilities of the claim fund.
that has been made against the former fund, and not finished before the
commencement, continues as if it were a claim against
the claim fund.
application was transferred to this Tribunal, from the Auctioneers and Agents
Committee by the Chief Executive under section
476 of the Act. The claim had
not been finished by 30 June 2001, when the Committee ceased to exist. In this
regard the Tribunal
was satisfied that sections 474 and 475 of the Act had been
8. Mr Bilborough is a party to the application by virtue of
sub-section 475(3) of the Act. Neither he nor NAPC were parties before
claim was transferred to the tribunal and for that reason the tribunal forwarded
them copies of all of the material transferred
to the tribunal by the Chief
Some Preliminary Matters
The Tribunal conducted a series of
directions hearings. The Tribunal directed:
On 8 October 2001, that the Chief
Executive be removed as a party and that Mr Bilborough be joined as a respondent
by virtue of s
475(3) of the PAMD Act 2000 and that each party provide copies of
their material to the Tribunal and the other parties by nominated
on 4 February 2002, that the matter
be set down for hearing at 9.30 am 3 April 2002
A further amended claim was received by
the Tribunal on 2 April 2002 and at the hearing on 3 April 2002 the claimants
a further amended revised claim.
11. Prior to the
hearing, the Tribunal members had read the claim, including the material
transferred to the Tribunal, and the evidence
filed by the parties.
At the Hearing
12. At the hearing on 3 April, the claimants were represented by Ms
Skennar of counsel. There was no appearance by or on behalf of
respondent, NAPC. NAPC’s liquidator, Mr M Sheehy, had advised the
Registrar by letter dated 19 December 2001 that
NAPC was in liquidation and
that, as liquidator, he would not be making representations to the tribunal on
behalf of the company.
The second respondent failed to appear
and the correspondence from the Tribunal addressed to the second respondent
dated 8 October
2001, 1 November 2001, 8 January 2002 and 4 February 2002 was
returned to the tribunal marked “:return to sender”.
There was no appearance by the third
respondent and a letter on the file dated 14 January 2002 from the third
respondent stated that
she had no intention of appearing at the hearing.
Mr Bradley of counsel appeared for the
fourth respondent.
At the hearing Ms Skennar sought to
amend the claim under s 486 PAMD Act 2000 which provides as follows:
486 Amendment of claim
The tribunal may
at any stage of the proceeding amend the particulars of the claim in the way it
considers appropriate—
(a) on application, if the tribunal is satisfied
the amendment is of a formal or minor nature and no party is unfairly prejudiced
by the amendment; or
(b) on its own initiative, if all the parties
The amended claim is taken to be the claim.
amendment was not opposed by Mr Bradley for the fourth respondent and a further
amended revised claim dated 3 April 2002,
with handwritten amendments made
during the hearing was accepted by the Tribunal.
18. Benning and Hayes filed statements dated 18 October
2001. In addition, Ms Skennar detailed to the tribunal the particular documents
from the material filed and the Departmental files relied upon by the
Letter dated 23 August 1999 to the
Department of Equity and Fair Trading from the claimants
Extract from the Marketplace
Intelligence Register dated 25 August 1999
Printout of the complaint made on
the Website 20 August 1999
Letter dated 6 September 1999 from
Mr Paul Entriken to Ms Hayes
Letter dated 19 September 1999 from
claimants to Mr Entriken
Joint Venture agreement between
Coral Reef Group Pty Ltd and Koromiko Pty Ltd
Settlement statements dated 22 April
1998 and 24 April 1998
Company extract for National Asset
Planning Corporation Pty Ltd
Company Extract for Coral Reel Group
Results of a Salesman Licence
Enquiry in the name of Nita Doherty
Auctioneers and Agents Fidelity
Guarantee Fund Claim Form dated 15 April 2000
Finance Application completed by the
claimants and dated 16 February 1998 (
Letter from the Epic Group dated 12
July 1999 to the claimants.
At the hearing, Ms Skennar tendered two
further documents:
An Australian Securities &
Investments Commission Historical Extract for Organisation Number 065 542 761
relating to Markfair
A Queensland Business Names Extract
for Organisation number BN5373992 relating to Investlend
20. Both of these documents were admitted as evidence
without objection from Mr Bradley.
21. In addition, both Mr Hayes and Ms
Benning gave brief oral evidence at the hearing and were not cross examined.
No evidence was produced by or on behalf
of the second or third respondent
The fourth respondent, Mr Bilborough,
provided a statement dated 27 November 2001 and a supplementary statement dated
3 April 2002
which amended the earlier statement. The effect was that paragraphs
1 to 5 of the 27 November 2001 and paragraphs 6 to 9 of the 3
statement constituted the evidence of Mr Bilborough for the purpose of these
proceedings. This material was also accepted
by the Tribunal with no objection
by Ms Skennar.
24. Counsel for the parties requested an
opportunity to file and serve written submissions which the Tribunal granted.
All parties
agreed to the Tribunal closing the hearing and considering the case
on the material before it.
25. Benning and Hayes claim that:
NAPC and/or
Hellyer and/or Doherty engaged in false and misleading conduct in contravention
of s 72 of the Repealed Act
NAPC and/or Doherty made
representations as to the availability of finance in contravention of the
requirements of s 73 of the Repealed
NAPC and/or Doherty sold land in
which they had an interest in option to purchase the land , in contravention of
s 70 of the Repealed
NAPC and/or Doherty sold land in
which they had a beneficial interest, in contravention of s 69 of the Repealed
26. The process for
deciding a claim against the fund is set-out in section 488 of the Act which
provides as follows:
Deciding claims other than minor
The tribunal may allow the claim, wholly or partly,
or reject the claim.
However, the tribunal may allow the claim
only if satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that—
(a) an event
mentioned in section 470(1) happened; and
(b) the claimant suffered financial
loss because of the happening of the event.
If the tribunal allows
the claim, wholly or partly, the tribunal must—
(a) take into account
any amount the claimant might reasonably have received or recovered if not for
the claimant’s neglect
or default;
(b) decide the amount of the
claimant’s financial loss; and
(c) name the person who is liable for
the claimant’s financial loss.
27. Because this is a claim against
the former fund, sub-section 119(1) of the repealed Act rather than sub-section
470(1) of the
Act applies. The relevant provisions of Section 119 are set-out
Application of fund
A&A Act 119.(1)
to this Act, the fund shall be held and applied for the purpose of reimbursing
persons who may suffer pecuniary loss because
(a) the contravention
of any provision of section ... 69, 70, 72, 73 ... by a prescribed person;
“prescribed person”
means a licensee, the
licensee’s partner, employee, agent or any person having the apparent
charge or control for the time being
of the office or business of the
licensee.(s.119)
For the purposes of this section
and sections 120, 121 and 123 to 126
person who carries on the business of an ... a real estate agent, ... and is not
the holder of a licence.
28. The relevant sub-section of section 69 is
subsection (2) which provided as follows:
Restriction on agents
purchasing or selling property
estate agent, ... or an employee of any such person, who has for sale any
property that is owned by such person or in which
such person is beneficially
interested shall, before making any agreement in respect of the sale of the
property, notify the prospective
purchaser in the approved form of the interest
in the property and obtain
from the purchaser an acknowledgement of receipt
of the notice.
29. The relevant parts of section 70 provided as
When agent prohibited from having interest in option to
purchase land
An ... real estate agent shall not, in
respect of land had by the ... real estate agent for sale, obtain or be in any
way concerned
in obtaining from the seller an option to purchase in which that
... real estate agent is beneficially interested.
Maximum penalty—100
penalty units.
... a real estate agent shall not as such sell land
at any time when, in respect of that land, there is subsisting an option to
in which that ... real estate agent is beneficially
interested.
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units.
purposes of this section—
(a) an option to purchase includes any
transaction granting or purporting to grant a right not immediately exercisable
to purchase
or to be given an option to purchase;
, in relation to ... a real estate agent acting as
such, means sell, agree to sell, attempt to sell, have for sale, negotiate for
sale, or be in any way concerned in selling.
Where an offence
against subsection (1) or (2) has been committed, the ... real estate agent
shall, upon conviction, and in addition
to any other penalty the court may
impose, be ordered by the court to pay over to the convicted person’s
principal such amount
in respect of profits resulting from the person obtaining
the option in respect of which the
offence was committed as is determined by
Where a court makes a determination under subsection
(4), it may order that the person convicted pay such costs of and incidental
the making of the determination as it thinks fit.
For the purposes
of making a determination and enforcing an order under subsection (4) or (5),
section 69(4), (5) and (8) to (10)
shall apply with all necessary
modifications.
Where a court makes or refuses to make an order
under subsection (4), an appeal shall lie in all respects and in the same manner
if the court had imposed a penalty or a punishment.
30. Section 71
provided a definition of “beneficial interest” for the purposes of
sections 69 and 70 as follows:
Beneficial interest
For the purposes of—
(a) section 69—... a
real estate agent ... is taken to be beneficially interested in the purchase or
sale of property; and
(b) section 70—... real estate agent is taken to
be beneficially interested in an option to purchase land;
if the purchase or
sale is made or the option is obtained, as the case may be, on behalf
(d) if the ..., real estate agent ... is a
corporation—
(i) the corporation or an executive officer or a
prescribed relative of an executive officer of the corporation; or
the corporation has not more than 100 members, any member or a prescribed
relative of a member of that corporation; or
(iii) another corporation that
has at least 1 executive officer in common with the corporation; or
another corporation, having not more than 100 members, of which the corporation
is a member or having at least 1 member in common
with the corporation;
(e) if the ..., real estate agent ... carries on business as a member
of a firm or partnership—a person who is a member of the
partnership or a prescribed relative of a member; or
(f) a person carrying on
for profit or gain a business if the ..., real estate agent ..., or a prescribed
relative of the ..., real
estate agent ..., has, directly or indirectly, a right
to participate in the income or profits of the business of the
To allay any doubt it is declared that any
reference in—
(a) section 69 and this section to ..., real estate agent
(b) section 70 to ... real estate agent;
includes reference to a
corporation that acts as or carries on the business of
an ..., real estate
agent ..., as the case may be.
Sections 72 and 73 provided as
False representations as to
No ... real estate agent, ... or employee of ...
a real estate agent, ...shall make to any purchaser or prospective purchaser or
publish or cause to be published any
statement or representation that is
false or misleading (whether to the person’s knowledge or not) concerning
any real or personal
property which the person, or as the case may be, the
person’s employer, has for sale ... as a real estate agent ....
penalty—100 penalty units.
Without limiting
the generality of subsection (1) or (2), a statement or representation shall,
for the purposes of that subsection,
be deemed to be false or misleading if it
is of such a nature that it would reasonably tend to lead to a belief in the
of a state of affairs that does not in fact exist, whether or not the
statement or representation indicates that that state of affairs
A statement shall be deemed to be published within the
meaning of this section if it is—
(a) inserted in any newspaper
(including any periodical) or any other publication circulated in Queensland;
(b) publicly exhibited—
(i) in, on, over, or under any building,
vehicle, or place (whether or not a public place and whether on land or water);
(ii) in the air in view of persons being or passing in or on any street or
public place; or
(c) contained in any document gratuitously sent or delivered
to any person or thrown or left upon premises in the occupation of any
(d) broadcast by wireless transmission or television.
person is charged with an offence against subsection (1) or (2)—
shall be a sufficient defence if the person charged proves that, in relation to
a false statement or representation, the person
had reasonable grounds for
believing and did in fact believe that the statement or representation was true,
or that, in relation
misleading statement or representation, that the
person had reasonable grounds for believing and did in fact believe that the
or representation was not misleading; and
(b) it shall not be a
defence to prove that the sale to the purchaser was rescinded or that the
prospective purchaser did not buy
or, in the case of an offence against
subsection (2), that the property was not let because of the statement or
representation.
Despite any proceedings against any person for an
offence against this section (whether resulting in a conviction or otherwise)
person shall remain liable in all civil proceedings in like manner as if
the proceedings for an offence had not been taken.
This section
shall be read and construed as in aid of and not in derogation from any other
Act or law relating to false or misleading
advertisements or other
statements.
Representations as to availability of
... a real estate agent who as such or as a
principal sells any land, whether improved or unimproved, shall give to the
a statement in writing in compliance in every respect with the
requirements of this section.
A statement in writing under this
section shall—
(a) clearly identify the land to which the statement
relates; and
(b) state the names and addresses respectively of the seller and
purchaser; and
(c) state clearly whether or not the ... real estate agent has
(by the ... real estate agent or by an employee) made or offered to
purchaser any representation, promise or term with respect to the availability
of finance for defraying wholly or in part the
purchase price; and
such representation, promise, or term has been so made or offered, in addition
to stating clearly that fact, state clearly
the particulars of that
representation, promise or term; and
(e) state the date on which the
statement is given; and
(f) be signed by the ... real estate agent or by a
person authorised in writing (prior notice of which, accompanied by a copy of
authority, has been delivered to the registrar) by the ...real estate
and shall not contain any other written, typewritten, or printed
matter except the letterhead (if any) of the ... real estate agent.
A statement in writing under this section shall be given by the ... real
estate agent to the purchaser before the purchaser signs
any contract,
agreement, or document legally binding or intended to bind the purchaser legally
in respect of the sale.
If, in respect of the sale of any land,
whether improved or unimproved—
(b) by a real estate agent
whether as such or as a principal;
finance for defraying in whole or in part
the purchase price, or any amount or instalment of that finance, is not made
available to
the purchaser in compliance in every respect with any
representation, promise, or term made or offered to the purchaser by, or by
employee of, that ... real estate agent, then, if the purchaser has been
materially affected, the purchaser may at the purchaser’s
option avoid the
contract made by the
purchaser in respect of the sale by notice in writing
given either to the seller or to the auctioneer or real estate agent concerned
at any time before the time at which the purchaser is required by the contract
to pay all of the outstanding purchase price or immediately
Upon the avoidance (whether by the purchaser under this
section or by the seller for that the purchaser has failed to pay in terms
the contract the purchase price or any amount of the purchase price) of a
contract to which subsection (4) applies, the seller
and the ... real estate
agent concerned shall be liable at law, jointly and severally, for the repayment
to the purchaser of all
money paid by the purchaser under the contract
such money shall be recoverable, by action as for a debt, by the
purchaser accordingly.
Judgment recovered against either person
liable under subsection (5) in respect of money repayable under that subsection
be a bar to an action against the other person so liable, but if
separate actions are brought against those persons the sums recoverable
the judgments given in those actions shall not in the aggregate exceed the
amount of money repayable to the purchaser concerned
and in the one of those
actions in which judgment is secondly given the plaintiff shall not be entitled
unless the court is of opinion that there was reasonable ground for
bringing the action.
Where a representation, promise, or term to
which this section applies shall have been given, made or offered without the
connivance, or consent of the seller, the seller may recover from the
... real estate agent concerned any money paid under the contract
received by the seller which the seller has repaid to the purchaser, and
additionally any damage suffered by the seller consequent
on the voidance by
purchaser of the contract.
Any covenant, agreement, or
condition expressed or implied in any contract, agreement, or document legally
binding, or intended legally
to bind, the purchaser in respect of the sale to
the purchaser of any land, or in a separate document, under which it is agreed
the seller or the ... real estate agent concerned of the one part and
the purchaser of the other part that any representation, promise,
or term made
or offered to the purchaser for which the seller or the ... real estate agent is
legally liable under this section,
shall not be legally binding as against that
seller and auctioneer or real estate agent, or either of them, shall be
absolutely void
and of no legal effect.
An auctioneer or a real
estate agent who—
(a) being required by subsection (1) fails to give to
a purchaser of land a statement in writing in compliance in every respect with
the requirements of subsections (2) and (3); or
(b) being liable at law under
this section for repayment to a purchaser of land of any money paid by that
purchaser under the contract
entered into by the purchaser, fails to make such
repayment in full within 14 days after becoming so liable;
shall be guilty of
an offence against this Act
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units or 12
months imprisonment.
Liability to punishment under this section
shall be in addition to other liabilities at law imposed by this section, and
that ... a real estate agent has not been prosecuted or, if prosecuted,
has or has not been convicted for an offence against this
section shall not bar
or prejudice any proceedings for enforcing against the auctioneer or real
agent any such other liability.
Subject to subsection
(4), this section applies so as not to render illegal or void any contract or to
empower any party to void the
In any civil proceedings
arising out of or connected with a contract or agreement or document to which
this section relates the onus
of proving that the statement referred to in
subsection (2) was duly given shall lie upon the party so alleging.
In this section—
(a) a promise that a seller of land will transfer
the land to the purchaser conditionally upon the purchaser at the same time
a proper mortgage in favour of the seller to receive payment of all or
any part of the money payable or that would afterwards but
for the execution of
the mortgage become payable by the purchase under the contract of sale;
(b) a promise that the terms of the sale will be or will include a
provision that the purchase price or any part shall be or may be
instalments;
shall not be taken to be a representation, promise or term as
respects the availability of finance for defraying wholly or in part
purchase price.
32. The orders the Tribunal may make on a claim
hearing are set out in section 530 of the Act which provides as
Orders tribunal may make on claim hearing
The tribunal may make the following orders in relation to a claim against
(a) an order allowing the claim, wholly or partly, or
rejecting the claim;
(b) an order stating that a named person is liable for a
claimant’s financial loss and the amount of the loss;
(c) an order
(d) an order that
no amount is recoverable in relation to a claim.
33. Section 530 of the
Act is a departure from the procedures under the repealed Act, in that it
provides for the Tribunal to make
an order stating that a named person is liable
for a claimant’s financial loss and the amount of the loss and an order
recovery of an amount payable in relation to a claim. Under the repealed
Act an amount payable from the former fund was recovered
from the licensee found
to have been guilty of a breach of the repealed Act in an independent recovery
proceeding which followed
the decision about the claim on the
34. Section 125 of the Repealed Act will be relevant to Mr
Bilborough if NAPC is ordered to compensate the fund in respect of any
the Tribunal may order to be made from the fund to Benning and Hayes. It
provided as follows:
Directors to compensate fund
Where payment is made out of the fund in settlement in whole or in part of
any claim relating to the business of ... a real estate
agent, ...carried on by
a corporation, the
directors of the corporation, at the time when the act or
omission (that gave rise to the claim) occurred, shall be jointly and severally
liable to compensate the fund in respect of that payment.
person occupying or acting in the position of director of the corporation, by
whatever name called and whether or not validly
appointed to occupy or duly
authorised to act in the position; and
(b) any person in accordance with
whose directions or instructions the directors of the corporation are accustomed
The Events giving rise to
35. The events giving rise to the claim are summarised as
In January 1998 Benning and Hayes,
who reside in Canberra, responded to an invitation by NAPC to attend a seminar
in Canberra on the
benefits of negative gearing, in particular, on the Gold
Following the seminar, an NAPC
representative, Mr Hellyer, attended at their home to provide further
information on negative gearing,
including information on capital growth on the
Gold Coast. Mr Hellyer arranged for the claimants to travel to the Gold Coast to
properties.
On 16 February 1998 the claimants
travelled to the Gold Coast and were met at the airport by Ms Doherty, who said
she was an employee
of NAPC, and who drove them to the offices of Investlend.
During the drive, Ms Doherty gave the claimants a persuasive sales talk
property on the Gold Coast. According to the statements of the claimants, Ms
Doherty also threatened to take them straight
to the airport if they were not
prepared to purchase property that day.
At the offices of Investlend, the
claimants met Mr Grant Beech who analysed their financial position and provided
a presentation on
their ability to afford investment in particular properties.
Ms Doherty was present throughout this session. She and Beech both continued
promote the healthy state of real estate in Queensland and advised the claimants
which properties would best suit them.
The claimants were advised, inter
alia, that they were in a financial position to purchase two properties, that
the best deal in finance
would be found for them, that the bank would value the
properties and that no more than 20 per cent of their home would be committed
the venture. Details of the financial analysis were attached to the statement of
Ms Benning.
Doherty and Beech identified the
properties at Chevron Palm Waters and Sierra Vista and advised the claimants
that they had to move
fast because they were not the only people looking at
these properties in the next few hours.
Ms Doherty then took the claimants
to inspect the Chevron Palm Waters unit and told them others were interested in
the unit so they
had to make a quick decision. She also told them that they
would be taken to only one other unit that day. The claimants agreed to
the unit and were immediately taken to the Sierra Vista unit. They also agreed
to buy this unit.
Ms Doherty took the claimants back
to Mr Beech who presented them with finance application forms which they signed
and were then taken
to see Mr Yarwood, a solicitor. They were not given any
choice of solicitor. At Mr Yarwood’s office they were handed partially
completed contracts and they were given some advice by Mr Yarwood before signing
the contracts. This was the only time throughout
the day that Ms Doherty was
not with the claimants. The claimants were then rushed back to the airport to
fly home to Canberra.
When the claimants went to refinance
the loan in June 1999, they obtained an independent valuation of the properties
which revealed
that they had paid more than market value for the properties. As
a result, they complained in writing to the Department by letter
dated 23.08.99
and completed a complaint form on the Department’s web site on
The claim of false and misleading conduct in
contravention of s 72:
36. Dealing with the first ground of the
claim, namely that NAPC and/or Hellyer and/or Doherty engaged in false and
misleading conduct
in contravention of section 72 of the Repealed Act. The first
question to be addressed is whether NAPC, Hellyer or Doherty were prescribed
persons within the terms of section 19 of the repealed Act.
37. Section
Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971
defines “real estate
agent” as follows:
“real estate agent”
person who, as an agent for others, and
whether on commission or for or in
expectation of any fee, gain, or
reward, and either alone or in connection
with any other business, and
either generally or in respect of any 1
transaction, exercises or carries
on or advertises or notifies or states that
the person exercises or carries
on or that the person is willing to exercise
or carry on or in any way
holds the person out as ready to undertake the
business of buying,
selling, exchanging, or letting houses, land, or estates,
or negotiating
for such buying, selling, exchanging, or letting, or buying,
exchanging, or letting hotel businesses, residential
businesses,
boarding house businesses, storekeeping businesses,
manufacturing
businesses, or businesses of any kind, or any interest in any
businesses, or buying, selling, or exchanging livestock but, does
include a person who—
(a) undertakes any such function as a
representative of Her Majesty;
(b) is employed merely as a clerk or
servant; or
(c) is a registered life assurance company or friendly society,
financial institution or trustee company.
38. According to Mr
Bilborough, NAPC was “arranging telemarketing and in-home consultations
with prospective purchasers of real
estate properties”.
of the contracts between the vendors and the claimants refer to NAPC as the
vendors agent and Mr Bilborough refers to this
agency arrangement in paragraph 4
of his statement dated 27 November 2001. Clearly this “agency
arrangement” related
to a “real estate agency” although NAPC
was not licensed for this purpose.
40. The Tribunal finds that NAPC was
acting as a real estate agent in relation to the sale of the units to the
claimants. (See
Kedcorp Pty Ltd v Peter David Jenkins
[1999] QCA 452)
41. Although NAPC was not licensed as a real estate agent, the
Tribunal finds that NAPC was a “prescribed person” for
the purpose
of section 119 of the repealed Act.
Sub-section 119(7) provides
For the purposes of section 119 and sections 120, 121
and 123 to 126
includes a person who carries
on the business of an ... a real estate agent, ... and is not the holder of a
The tribunal finds that by virtue of
sub-section 119(7) NAPC was a “prescribed person” under sub-sections
119(1) and (2)
of the Repealed Act.
44. The Tribunal finds
that the third respondent, Nita Doherty, was an employee of NAPC and is
therefore also a prescribed person
under section 119.
45. The claimants
made no submissions in respect of Mr Hellyer. There is evidence of the claimants
that Mr Hellyer said he was a representative
of NAPC but there was no evidence
that Mr Hellyer acted as a real estate agent. His role appears to have been
limited to providing
information and advice on negative gearing and arranging
for the claimants to travel to the Gold Coast to inspect properties.
46. Did NAPC through its representatives, make false and misleading
representations about real property?
47. The claimants were led to
believe that the units they purchased were a good investment and that they were
paying market value
for them as a result of the following representations:
That the capital growth rate on the
Gold Coast was 11.2% (representation by Hellyer)
Expressly or impliedly representing
that the spreadsheets were an accurate representation of the benefits to be
derived from the investment
(representation by Beech)
The claimants had to make a decision
them (representation
by Doherty)
The real estate values on the Gold
Coast had increased at 13% per year over the last 15 years and this showed no
signs of decreasing
(representation by Beech)
They would lose a great deal if they
did not purchase the unit at Chevron Palms quickly (representation by
The property at Sierra Vista,
Stormbird Place, Carrara, represented very good value and was a good deal
(representation by Doherty).
48. The claimants rely on the
silence of the respondents as also amounting to false and misleading
representations (see
Demagogue Pty Ltd v Ramensky
[1992] FCA 557
(1992) 39 FCR 31
in support of this proposition) - in particular, the failure of the first and/or
third respondents to advise the claimants that Coral
Reef Group Pty Ltd was
receiving a commission of approximately $30,000 from each of the sales to the
claimants. Mr Bilborough, in
his statement, acknowledges that Coral Reef Pty Ltd
was to receive these payments pursuant to joint venture agreements entered into
with the developers of the units.
49. Further, the claimants argue that
the failure to qualify the representations about the rate of capital growth on
the Gold Coast
by advice such as, inter alia, that there is no benefit to be
derived from an investment if more than the market price is paid in
instance, constitutes false and misleading representations.
Wheeler Grace and
Peirucci v Wright
[1989] FCA 127
(1989) ATPR 40-940
“A positive unqualified prediction by a corporation may
be misleading conduct in trade or commerce if relevant circumstances
need for some qualification to be attached to that statement or the possibility
of its non-fulfilment to be disclosed as
a requirement of fair trading....The
misleading or deceptive conduct may be found in the failure to qualify the
statement or disclose
the risk of non-fulfilment”
claimants also rely on
Tenji v Henneberry & Associates Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 550
172 ALR 679
where the Full Court of the Federal Court held that a representation
that a particular rental represented excellent and reliable
return on capital is
synonymous with saying that the rent being paid under the lease was at least a
market rent on which the value
of the property could be calculated.
52. This matter was considered by the Full Court of the Federal Court
(Davies, Heerey and Whitlam JJ) in
John G. Glass Real Estate Pty Limited v.
Constructions Pty Limited; Bonefind Pty
Limited; Gymea Developments Pty Limited and Albert Edward John Davey
[1993] FCA 295
ATPR 41-265
(1993) ATPR 41-249
where after citing what was said by Mason ACJ,
Wilson, Deane and Dawson
Yorke v Lucas
[1985] HCA 65
(1985) 158 CLR 661
666 they said:
17. In our opinion an estate agent which holds itself out as, amongst
other things, "consultants to institutional investors and
to developers of major
properties" would not be regarded by potential purchasers of properties as
merely passing on information about
the property "for what it is worth and
without any belief in its truth or falsity".
18.... a purchaser like
would ordinarily expect ... that the agent had no reason to doubt
the completeness or accuracy of the information provided.
19. ...There was
certainly no express disclaimer of the appellant's belief in the truth of the
information in the brochure –
indeed there was an express assertion of
such belief. As part of its ordinary business the agent was providing
information in a
persuasive form with a view to achieving a sale of its
principal's property and of course earning commission. It was this conduct
which the learned trial judge, correctly in our opinion, held to be misleading
and deceptive. Once the falsity of the figure was
demonstrated, it seems to us
that no other conclusion could follow.
53. The Tribunal accepts that NAPC
would not be regarded by potential purchasers of properties, such as the
claimants, as merely passing
on the price information about the property "for
what it is worth and without any belief in its truth or falsity". The Tribunal
also accepts that the structure of NAPC’s marketing program conducted with
the claimants was designed to give the claimants
the impression that NAPC, with
whom they were dealing, were professional real estate agents and were intending
to sell them an investment
property which would be beneficial to them.
54. The Tribunal further accepts that the list price of $149,900 for
Sierra Vista was substantially higher than the market value of
$105,000 (see
valuation of Taylor Byrne) and the list price of $161,900 for Chevron Palms was
substantially higher than the market
value of $110,000 (see valuation of Taylor
55. The representations relied upon by the claimants were made by a
number of people. It is therefore necessary to determine whether
representations were made on behalf of NAPC.
56. The claimants dealt
firstly with Hellyer and Doherty who the Tribunal accepts were agents of NAPC.
Then Doherty introduced them
to Mr Grant Beech (Mr Beech) who referred them to
Mr Michael Yarwood of Bells Solicitors (Mr Yarwood). If they dealt with anyone
acting on behalf of Coral Reef, from their evidence, they do not appear to have
been aware of this.
57. According to Mr Bilborough, NAPC was
“arranging telemarketing and in-home consultations with prospective
purchasers of real
estate properties” and was “receiving their
monies from real estate developers”. How much and from whom NAPC
specifically
received monies in relation to the sale to the claimants is not
clear on the evidence.
58. From the statement of Mr Bilborough it is
clear that NAPC referred the claimants to Mr Beech of Markfair Pty Ltd which
was trading
as Investlend (Aust.) (Investlend) who initially provided the
claimants with investment advice prior to them purchasing the units.
basis of the claimants evidence the Tribunal finds that Investlend, in providing
the claimants with investment advice, was
acting as an agent for NAPC in
relation to the sale and/or marketing of the subject property.
In this regard the Tribunal accepts the
evidence of the claimants, which is not denied by Mr Bilborough, that NAPC
arranged for the
claimants to bring financial documents with them for the
purpose of providing these to Investlend for investment advice. The Tribunal
accepts the evidence of the claimants, that Mr Beech of Investlend was the only
person who NAPC arranged to assess their financial
position and provide advice
on their ability to afford the purchase of an investment property prior to
their inspection and subsequent
purchase of the units.
Further, the Tribunal accepts the
evidence of the claimants that Ms Doherty was present throughout the meeting
with Mr Beech and participated
in the meeting. On the claimant’s
evidence, Doherty would advise Beech of appropriate properties to enter into the
spreadsheet
and Beech would conduct the analysis on those properties. Doherty
and Beech were both stressing strongly the need for the claimants
61. According to the claimants’ statements,
the claimants arranged for Investlend to organise finance on their behalf to
the claimants to purchase the units. The Tribunal finds that this
arrangement between the claimants and Investlend did not alter
the fact that
Investlend was acting as an agent of NAPC at the time it gave the claimants
investment advice.
62. The claimants each state that, had they known
that NAPC were not licensed real estate agents or that $30,000 from the sale of
each property was going a marketing company, they would not have entered into
the contracts. Furthermore, had they known the true
market value of the
properties at the time of signing the contracts, they would not have entered
into the contracts.
63. On the whole of the evidence, the Tribunal
finds that by both its statements and its silence, NAPC through its agents, made
and misleading representations as to the value of the units upon which the
claimants relied, in contravention of section 72 of the
repealed Act.
The claim of representations as the availability of finance in
breach of s 73 of the repealed Act
It is now necessary to examine the claim
of a breach of section 73 of the repealed Act. Section 73 requires a real estate
as such, sells any land, whether improved or unimproved, to give to
the purchaser a statement in writing in compliance in every respect
requirements of the section before the purchaser signs any contract, agreement
or document legally binding in respect of
The Tribunal accepts on the evidence of
Mr Benning and Ms Hayes that they were not provided with any such written
statement by NAPC
or its agent prior to signing the contract. Mr Bradley, in his
submission concedes that on the basis of the claimants’ evidence,
open to the Tribunal to find NAPC in breach of section 73 and the Tribunal so
The Alleged Breaches of section 69 and 70 (the
Beneficial interest provisions)
The claimants claim that the NAPC and/or
Doherty were in breach of the beneficial interest provisions of the repealed
Dealing firstly with the claim that NAPC
and/or Doherty sold land in which they had a beneficial interest, in
contravention of section
69. Section 69, subsection (2) provided that:
(2) An auctioneer, a real estate agent, motor dealer or an
employee of any such person, who has for sale any property that is owned
such person or in which such person is beneficially interested shall, before any
agreement in respect of the sale of the property
notify the prospective
purchaser in the approved form of the interest on the property and obtain from
the purchaser an acknowledgment
of receipt of the notice.
68. Section 71
of the repealed act defines beneficial interest for the purposes of section 69
in the following terms:
(2)... a real estate agent ... is taken to be
beneficially interested in the purchase or sale of property.....if the purchase
is made ...... on behalf of—
(d) if the ..., real estate
agent ... is a corporation—
(i) the corporation or an executive officer
or a prescribed relative of an executive officer of the corporation; or
if the corporation has not more than 100 members, any member or a prescribed
relative of a member of that corporation; or
(iii) another corporation that
has at least 1 executive officer in common with the corporation; or
another corporation, having not more than 100 members, of which the corporation
is a member or having at least 1 member in common
with the corporation;
Although Ms Skennar did not specify the
particular part of the beneficial interest definition she relies upon, the
Tribunal assumes
that the claim is based upon a beneficial interest in the
terms of s 71(2)(d)(iii).
The evidence shows that
a real estate agent and a corporation who were making a sale on behalf of Coral
Reef Group Pty Ltd. Coral Reef Pty Ltd had
entered into a joint venture
agreement with the developers Koromiko Pty Ltd for the marketing and sale of
Sierra Vista and Coral
Reef were to appoint an agent for the sale. Although
there is no copy of the joint venture agreement relating to the sale of Chevron
Palms, Mr Bilborough admits the existence of joint venture agreements in respect
of each of the subject properties. The Tribunal
is satisfied, in the absence of
any evidence to the contrary that the terms of the joint venture in respect of
the developers of
Chevron Palms was in substantially the same terms as that
entered into with Koromiko Pty Ltd.
evidence also shows that Mr Bilborough was a director of both NAPC and of Coral
Reef Group Pty Ltd. Accordingly, the Tribunal
finds that the each of the sales
by NAPC was made on behalf of a corporation (Coral Reef Group Pty Ltd) that has
at least 1 executive
member in common with the corporation (NAPC) and therefore
NAPC had a beneficial interest in the sales.
Section 69 requires a real estate agent
of an employee of such a person who has for sale any property in which that
person is beneficially
interested to notify the prospective purchaser of the
interest in the property (in the approved form) and obtain from the purchaser
acknowledgement of receipt of the notice. The Tribunal is satisfied on the
evidence that neither NAPC, nor its agent Doherty,
notified the claimants of the
beneficial interest and were in breach of s 69 of the repealed
Dealing finally with the claim under s
70, that NAPC and/or Doherty sold land in which they had an interest in option
to purchase
the land, in contravention of s 70 of the repealed Act. Ms Skennar
relies in her submissions upon evidence that “the joint
venture agreement
contained an option to purchase (clause 8) in favour of Coral Reef “ and
submits that “ by reason of
s 71 of the (repealed act), NAPC was
beneficially interested in the property”.
Section 70 (2) provided
An auctioneer or a real estate agent shall not as such
sell land at any time when, in respect of that land there is subsisting an
option to purchase in which the auctioneer or real estate agent in beneficially
interested.
With respect to Sierra Vista, NAPC the
real estate agent was selling land in respect of which there existed an option
to purchase
by Coral Reef Group Pty Ltd. NAPC was beneficially interested in the
option under section 71(2)(d)(iii) because NAPC had an executive
common with Coral Reef Group Pty Ltd – namely, Mr Bilborough.
76. The Tribunal is satisfied that NAPC was in breach of
section 70 in respect of the sale of Sierra Vista.
77. However, in the
absence of any evidence as to whether an option existed in the joint venture
agreement between Coral Reef Group
and Redwind Pty Ltd as developers of Chevron
Palm Waters, the Tribunal is not satisfied as to a breach of section 70 in the
of Chevron Palms.
Other Matters
Tribunal noted in Gordon, this Tribunal notes that it is clear from the evidence
that NAPC and Coral Reef were part of
an elaborate marketing network where
lucrative undisclosed commissions were being obtained by the marketeers at the
expense of people
such as the claimants.
79. Mr Bilborough, as a
director of both NAPC and Coral Reef, was part of this network and should have
known what was happening.
Furthermore, the Tribunal is satisfied
that had the claimants been informed of NAPC’s beneficial interests in
the properties,
and the full details of the arrangements between Coral Reef
Group Pty Ltd and the developers, they would not have entered into the
Has a breach of the repealed Act been
81. The tribunal is satisfied on the balance of
probabilities, for the reasons set-out above, that NAPC was in breach of
69, 70, 72 and 73 of the repealed Act.
The amount of the
financial loss
82. The claim fund established under both the Act
and the repealed Act provide compensation for loss arising from false and
representations by prescribed persons. The measure of damages for
deceit or misleading and deceptive conduct, in the opinion of
the Tribunal, is
the appropriate measure to be applied to calculating loss under these Acts.
(See Gould v Vaggelas
(1984) 58 ALJR 560
Gibbs CJ at 561).
final written submissions, Ms Skennar claims the amount of $206,998, based on
the Report of Geoffrey Gunn and Co made up
as follows:
Sierra Vista
Chevron Palms
Capital Loss
Incidental Costs
Income Losses
Future Disposal Costs
84. Ms Skennar submitted that in addition to the capital losses ( on
authority of
Gould v Vaggelas
(1983) 157 CLR 220
), the claimants are
entitled to claim their holding costs to date as determined in the report by
Geoff Gunn (excluding the claim
for interest which they concede they cannot
recover). The claims for interest in the amounts of $7,591 and $11,881 were
by Ms Skennar at the hearing.
85. The capital losses were
calculated as the difference between the price paid and the market value at the
time at the time of purchase,
as per the Taylor Byrne valuations.
Incidental costs include the differences
between what was paid and what should have been paid in the fees paid to
solicitors, brokers
and valuers and fees paid for items such as stamp duty.
Income losses were determined by taking
the income received and adjusted expenses claimed since the purchase of the
properties. This
amount was adjusted to take account of some taxation benefits
to the claimants for each financial year.
Total future disposal costs were
calculated by estimating the real estate agent’s commission payable upon
sale and the anticipated
advertising, auction and legal costs.
89. The claimants rely on the High Court decision in
Henville v Walker
[2001] HCA 52
(2001) 182 ALR 37
to support their claim for losses beyond the capital
losses. That case involved section 82 of the Trade Practices Act which provides
as follows:
82 Actions for damages
(1) A person who
suffers loss or damage by conduct of another person that was done in
contravention of a provision of Part IV, IVB
section 51AC
may recover the amount of the loss or damage by action against that other person
or against any person involved
in the contravention.
(2) An action under
subsection (1) may be commenced at any time within 3 years after the date
on which the cause of action accrued.
90. McHugh J said that section 82
should be construed in a manner that promotes competition and fair trading and
protects consumers.
His Honour said at p 68:
‘In this case the
most appropriate approach is to identify what Mr Henville has suffered by way of
prejudice of disadvantage
in consequence of altering his position by reason of
the breach of the Act.’
91. His Honour went on to say at p
‘Mr Henville’s loss was not confined to the difference
between what was represented as the selling prices of the units
and their sale
price. Mr Walker’s contravention of the Act induced Mr Henville to enter
upon a course of conduct that resulted
in a greater loss than that difference.
To fail to compensate him for that loss does not accord with the purposes of the
92. The court in that cases held that the measure of loss
was the entire cost of the purchase of the land, the acquisition costs,
development costs, interest less the amount achieved on the sale of the unit.
93. Ms Skennar submits on behalf of the claimants that the same
principles should apply under the repealed Act, other than the claim
94. Mr Bradley made no submissions in relation to the amount
of the pecuniary loss.
95. The Act and the repealed Act entitle the
claimants to recover the amount of any pecuniary loss from the fund. The New
Court of Criminal Appeal in
Florence v New Zealand Law Society
considered the meaning of “pecuniary loss” in s 169
of the Law Practitioners Act 1982 which provided:-
(1) ... the fund
shall be held and applied for the purpose of reimbursing
persons who may
suffer pecuniary loss by reason of the theft by a solicitor
to whom this
Part applies, or by his employee or agent, of any money or
valuable property entrusted to him, or to his employee or agent, in
course of his practice as a solicitor, including any money or other
valuable property entrusted to him as a solicitor-trustee.
96. Cooke P,
at page 135 said:-
" In the end one has to come back to the
words of the New Zealand section,
considered in their context in
the light of the purpose of the Part of the
Act. The crucial
words are 'for the purpose of reimbursing persons who may
pecuniary loss by reason of the theft by a solicitor ... of any money
... entrusted to him ... in the course of his practice as a
solicitor'. ....... In
the natural and ordinary meaning of the
words the right of reimbursement
extends to anything which may
fairly be described as pecuniary loss suffered
by reason of theft
of money entrusted to a solicitor in the course of his
Claims for mental distress and the like are clearly excluded, but
once a pecuniary loss is established and a real or substantial causal
connection with the theft, there is nothing in the language of
the section
or the public safeguard aim of the statute which
seems to me adequate to cut
down what is in effect a statutory
indemnity."
97. In light of the above, the Tribunal is satisfied that
the amounts claimed as capital losses, incidental costs and losses relating
income, as calculated by the Geoffrey Gunn Report are pecuniary losses which
have a real or substantial causal connection with
the fraudulent
misrepresentations and therefore the claimants are entitled to be reimbursed
from the fund for those losses. As noted
earlier, the claim for interest was
98. The Tribunal does not accept that future disposal costs
are claimable from the fund. Future disposal costs are anticipatory and
represent part of the “holding costs to date” as claimed.
99. Accordingly, the Tribunal assesses the amount of the
claimants’ pecuniary loss as $88,781 in respect of the purchase of
Vista and $108,942 in respect of the purchase of Chevron Palms, making a total
of $197,723.
100. The Tribunal agrees with Ms
Skennar’s submission that this is an appropriate case for costs as the
matter was a complex
one involving difficult legal issues and a significant sum
of money and in which the claimants have incurred substantial costs.
Furthermore,
the claimants have been successful in their claim because of the
established contraventions of the Act.
101. Accordingly the Tribunal
awards costs under section 537 of the Act. Due to the fact that the claim
exceeds $50,000, the Tribunal
considers that the amount should be the costs
allowed in the District Court where the amount recovered exceeds $50,000. The
does not have before it evidence of the actual amount of these costs as
determined by the certification of a qualified cost assessor.
Accordingly, the
claimants are requested to provide that certification to the Tribunal and to the
Chief Executive to establish the
actual amount payable under this
First Order
102. On the basis of the
evidence, the Tribunal orders that the Chief Executive of the Department of
Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading
pay from the claim fund to the applicant the
sum of $ 197,723 and the amount of costs to be determined in accordance with
99 by the certification of a qualified cost assessor.
Reimbursement of the Fund
103. The Tribunal
finds that NAPC through its agents Hellyer, Doherty and Investlend, was
responsible for the claimants financial
104. The Tribunal must
also consider the liability of the other respondents, if any, and in this regard
it must consider section 125
of the repealed Act.
105. On the basis of
the evidence, and applying section125 of the repealed Act, the Tribunal finds
that the first and fourth respondents
are jointly and severally liable to
compensate the claim fund in the amount of $197,723 plus the amount of costs to
be determined
in accordance with paragraph 99 by the certification of a
qualified cost assessor.
106. The Tribunal orders that the Respondents reimburse the
claim fund in the amount of $197,723 plus the amount of costs to be determined
in accordance with paragraph 99 by the certification of a qualified cost
assessor, in accordance with sections 490 and 491 of the
......................................................
B COTTERELL - CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents and Motor Dealers
Sue Johnson Molly Robson Brett
Member Member Member
mE:\Case Management Files\2001\W-
Claim\W004-01\Decision\W004-01D27-06-02.DOC
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (261 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter