URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2025/290.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zhao & Ors v CN-AU Capital Pty Ltd & Ors; In the matter of CN-AU Capital Pty Ltd [2025] QSC 290 (6 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Zhao & ors v CN-AU Capital Pty Ltd & ors; In the matter of CN-AU
Capital Pty Ltd ACN 625 191 246
[2025] QSC 290
In File No 11276/22:
YONGMAN ZHAO
PENGHONG ZHANG
(second plaintiff)
(third plaintiff)
CN-AU CAPITAL PTY LTD
625 191 246
(first defendant)
WENMING CHE
(third defendant)
CN-AU CAPITAL PTY LTD
ACN 625 191
(plaintiff)
(defendant)
11276 of 2022
14509 of 2024
Trial Division
PROCEEDING:
Application
DELIVERED ON:
6 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
16 October 2025
further amended application filed 9 September 2025 in BS 11276/22 is
application filed 9 September 2025 in BS 14509/24 is dismissed;
defendant, Mr Lu, pay the costs of both applications.
CATCHWORDS:
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
SECURITY FOR COSTS – POWER TO ORDER – where
a group of non-English
speaking Chinese nationals (the
Chinese parties
) were involved in
business dealings in Australia with two Australian Chinese citizens, including
Mr Junyan Lu – where the relevant
dealings between the parties surround
the purchase of two lots of real property at Carbrook (the
) – where CN-AU Investment Group Pty Ltd (the
) as corporate trustee of the CN-AU Investment Trust acquired
mortgages held by other financiers over the Carbrook Properties –
Lu was one of the directors of the Company – where the Chinese parties
allege that Mr Lu distributed the net proceeds
of the sale of Lot 2 of the
Carbrook Properties to himself without the consent of the directors of the
Company – where the
Chinese parties also allege that Mr Lu caused Lot 2 to
be transferred to an associate-controlled entity and secured a mortgage over
in his own favour – where the Chinese parties have commenced two
proceedings, one concerning a dispute about the proper
officers of the Company
directorship proceeding
) and the other concerning whether Mr Lu
misappropriated the Company’s property (the
derivative proceeding
– where Mr Lu applied for security for costs in the directorship
proceeding and the derivative proceeding – whether
the Court’s
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) is enlivened in the directorship and derivative
proceedings
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
SECURITY FOR COSTS – PLAINTIFF OR APPLICANT SUBSTANTIALLY
IN POSITION OF
DEFENDANT – where Mr Lu’s applications for security for costs are
opposed on the discretionary grounds
– whether the Chinese parties’
claims in the directorship and derivative proceedings are defensive in nature
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
SECURITY FOR COSTS – PLAINTIFF OR APPLICANT RESIDENT
OUTSIDE JURISDICTION
– WHERE ONE OR MORE CO-PLAINTIFF OUTSIDE JURISDICTION – where the
Chinese parties have no assets
in this jurisdiction – where there is no
evidence of any reciprocal agreement in terms of registering judgments in China
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
SECURITY FOR COSTS – FACTORS RELEVANT TO EXERCISE
OF DISCRETION –
DELAY – where Mr Lu delayed pursuing the application for security for
costs in the directorship proceeding
for over two years – where there is
no explanation for the delay in bringing the application – whether the
delay in pursuing
the application has caused prejudice to the Chinese parties
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
SECURITY FOR COSTS – FACTORS RELEVANT TO EXERCISE
OF DISCRETION –
PROSPECTS OF SUCCESS – whether the Chinese parties’ claims in the
directorship and derivative proceedings
have merit and prospects of success
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
SECURITY FOR COSTS – FACTORS RELEVANT TO EXERCISE
OF DISCRETION –
BONA FIDE CLAIM – whether the Chinese parties’ claims in the
directorship and derivative proceeding
are genuine
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
SECURITY FOR COSTS – FACTORS RELEVANT TO EXERCISE
OF DISCRETION –
PLAINTIFF’S OR APPLICANT’S IMPECUNIOSITY –where, in terms of
the derivative proceeding, the
Chinese parties allege that the Company is
impecunious and that this was caused by Mr Lu – whether the Company is
impecunious
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS
– SECURITY FOR COSTS – FACTORS RELEVANT TO EXERCISE
OF DISCRETION
– JUSTICE OF CASE – whether the justice of this case warrants orders
for security for costs in the directorship
and/or derivative
proceedings
Corporations Act 2001
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld), r 5, r 670, r 671,
ACN 006 577 162 Pty Ltd (formerly Harrop Engineering Australia Pty
Ltd) & Ors v Beauville Pty Ltd & Ors
[2014] VSC 298
Base 1 Projects Pty Ltd v Islamic College of Brisbane Ltd
Commonwealth v Cable Water Skiing (Australia) Ltd
116 FLR 153
Covecorp Constructions Pty Ltd v Indigo Projects Pty
[2007] QSC 262
, considered
Denjim Pty Ltd v National Gold Pty
Ltd; Denjim Pty Ltd v AU Gold Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2023] QSC 54
DGR Global v P.T. Limited
[2025] QCA 122
Global Access Ltd v Educationdynamics, LLC
[2009] QSC 373
[2010] 1 Qd R 525
In Energy Drilling Inc v Petroz NL
(1989) ATPR 40-954,
Interwest Ltd
Tricontinental Corporation
(1991) 5 ACSR 621
KP Cable Investments Pty Ltd v Meltglow
[1995] FCA 76
(1995) 56 FCR 189
Mecrus Pty Ltd v Industrial Energy
[2015] FCA 103
(2015) 327 ALR 523
Mio Art Pty Ltd v Mango Boulevard
Pty Ltd & Ors
[2018] QSC 31
, considered
Monto Coal 2 Pty Ltd v
Sanrus Pty Ltd
[2018] QCA 309
[2019] 3 Qd R 143
Olbers Co Ltd v
Commonwealth
of Australia
[2002] FCA 1269
ING Bank (Australia) Ltd
[2023] QSC 86
(2023) 14 QR 170
PS Chellaram &
China Ocean Shipping Co
[1991] HCA 36
(1991) 102 ALR 321
[2008] QCA 36
, considered
Lindsay Parkinson & Co Ltd v Triplan Ltd
[1973] QB 609
Southern Cross Exploration NL
v Fire & All Risks
Insurance Co Ltd
(1985) 1 NSWLR 114
, considered
Suncare Constructions
Australia Pty Ltd & Anor v Gainspace (Mackay) Pty Ltd
[2016] QSC 67
Weily’s Quarries v Devine Shipping Pty Ltd
[1994] TASSC 76
, considered
Willey v Synan
[1935] HCA 76
(1935) 54 CLR 175
Woolworths Ltd v About Life Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2018] NSWSC 1340
G Handran KC with J Hughes for the plaintiffs/respondents
S-J Tan for
the defendants/applicants
SOLICITORS:
Longton Legal for the plaintiffs/respondents
Hall & Wilcox for the
defendants/applicants
Introduction
[1] This is an
application for security for costs by Mr Junyan
Lu as the defendant in
two proceedings being heard together: proceeding numbers 11276/2022 (the
directorship proceeding
) and 14509/2024 (the
). The amount of security sought up to the first day of trial in
the directorship proceeding is $290,735.04 (excluding GST) and the
security sought in the derivative proceeding is $248,912.40 (excluding
applications are opposed by the respondent plaintiffs on the discretionary
Factual overview
[3] A coherent
overview of the relevant (contested) facts, and chronology of the two
proceedings, is not readily discernible on the
material before me. But,
generally speaking, Mr Yongman Zhao, Mr Penghong Zhang and Ms Rui Jin (the
Chinese parties
) are a group of non-English speaking Chinese nationals, who,
sometime in 2018, became involved in business dealings in Australia
Australian Chinese citizens – Mr Lu and Ms Wenming
The relevant dealings between
the parties surround the purchase of two lots of real property at Carbrook (the
Carbrook Properties
[4] According to
Mr Lu, the original plan was that the Chinese parties, Mr Lu and other investors
in a company called CN-AU Investment
Group Pty Ltd (the
purchase the Carbrook Properties. That plan did not come to fruition. Instead,
the parties “pivoted” and the
Company, as corporate trustee of the
CN-AU Investment Trust (the
Investment Trust
), acquired mortgages held by
other financiers over the Carbrook
Properties.
[5] Mr Zhao and
Mr Lu were two of the original directors of the Company, while the Chinese
parties were the majority shareholders.
There are competing trust documents and
claims as to the correct unit holders of the Investment Trust. One document
lists the Chinese
parties as unit holders and the other lists a non-party as the
sole unit holder (from whom Mr Lu is said to have purchased all the
units in the
Investment Trust).
[6] The Chinese
parties allege Mr Lu caused the Company to sell Lot 2 of the Carbrook Properties
and wrongfully diverted the $2,490,000.00
sale proceeds to
Mr Lu is then said to have caused Lot 2 to be
transferred to an associate-controlled entity and secured a mortgage over it in
own favour. The Company still holds the mortgage over Lot 1. Mr Lu claims
that the Company owed him a personal debt of about $2,500,000.00
plus interest
in relation to the acquisition of the mortgages held by the Company. The Chinese
parties dispute this debt and say
that the mortgages were acquired with funds
totalling about $3,840,000.00 they invested in or loaned to the Company.
Lu, in turn, denies this. He does not appear to deny receiving significant
amounts of money from the Chinese parties, but his
case seems to be that these
monies were not used to ultimately fund the purchase of the mortgages over the
two lots. Rather, Mr Lu
argues that he loaned money to the Company and then
subsequently, as a director of the Company, he distributed the net proceeds of
sale of Lot 2 (of around $2,500,000.00) to himself. It is not clear what in fact
has happened to the funds provided by the Chinese
directorship proceeding concerns a dispute about who the proper officers of the
Company are. The derivative proceeding concerns
a dispute as to whether Mr Lu
was entitled to receive the net proceeds of the sale of Lot 2.
Relevant legal principles
Rule 670(1)
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
) confers a broad discretion to order that a
plaintiff give the security the court considers appropriate for a
defendant’s costs.
Rule 670(2)
provides that the discretion must be exercised subject to the provisions of the
UCPR, particularly rr 671 and 672. The discretion
must be exercised in the way
which best suits the interests of justice in the circumstances of the case,
keeping the obligations
set out in r 5 firmly in
application for security for costs requires the court to engage in a two-stage
process. At the first stage, the court must
consider whether any of the
prerequisites in r 671 of the UCPR are satisfied, and at the second, whether it
should exercise its discretion
to award security for costs and if so, in what
[12] In this
case, Mr Lu submits that the first stage is satisfied under r 671 of the UCPR,
which provides (in part):
671 Prerequisite for security
The court may order a plaintiff to give security for costs only if the court
is satisfied—
(b) the plaintiff is suing for the benefit of another person, rather than for
the plaintiff’s own benefit, and there is reason
to believe the plaintiff
will not be able to pay the defendant’s costs if ordered to pay them; or
(f) the plaintiff is, or is about to depart Australia to become, ordinarily
resident outside Australia and there is reason to believe
the plaintiff has
insufficient property of a fixed and permanent nature available for enforcement
to pay the defendant’s costs
if ordered to pay them...”
“reason to believe” that the plaintiff will not be able to pay the
defendant’s costs, the objective circumstances
must be sufficient to
incline the mind towards accepting, rather than rejecting, that the plaintiff
will not be able to pay the defendant’s
The onus rests on the
applicant/defendant to establish that state of affairs.
[14] Once the
threshold question has been answered, the court has an unfettered discretion to
order security for costs.
discretion must be exercised judicially considering the circumstances of the
[15] The legal
onus of proving entitlement to an order for security for costs rests on the
applicant throughout the application, although
there is an evidential burden of
raising or identifying the relevant and shifting factors on the
respondent.
exercising the discretion to order security for costs, the court must carry out
a balancing exercise.
In carrying
out that exercise, r 672 of the UCPR provides:
Discretionary factors for security for costs
In deciding whether to make an order, the court may have regard to any of the
following matters—
(a) the means of those standing behind the proceeding;
(b) the prospects of success or merits of the proceeding;
(c) the genuineness of the proceeding;
impecuniosity of a corporation;
(e) whether the plaintiff’s impecuniosity is attributable to the
defendant’s conduct;
(f) whether the plaintiff is effectively in the position of a defendant;
(g) whether an order for security for costs would be oppressive;
(h) whether an order for security for costs would stifle the proceeding;
(i) whether the proceeding involves a matter of public importance;
(j) whether there has been an admission or payment into court;
(k) whether delay by the plaintiff in starting the proceeding has prejudiced the
(l) whether an order for costs made against the plaintiff would be enforceable
within the jurisdiction;
(m) the costs of the proceeding.”
[17] Whilst
delay by a plaintiff in starting a proceeding is listed as one of the relevant
factors, any delay by a defendant in making
an application for security for
costs is not. Such a factor is, however, raised by the Chinese parties in this
case, and the authorities
confirm that it is a relevant factor to be considered
with the other discretionary
relevant principles concerning delay by the defendant in bringing an application
for security for costs were usefully summarised
by Martin J (as his Honour then
Covecorp Constructions Pty Ltd v Indigo Projects Pty Ltd
as follows:
(a) Such applications must be made promptly;
(b) It would be unfair to allow a defendant security for costs if that defendant
has stood by and allowed the plaintiff to work on
its case and incur significant
(c) Whilst delay is a significant factor, there is no rule requiring refusal on
that basis alone;
(d) The issue of delay will weigh more significantly in some cases than others;
(e) Cases where orders for security have been made despite delay usually involve
the hearing not being immediately imminent, and
where forewarning regarding the
financial status of the plaintiff has been given prior to the
application.
[19] Before
turning in more detail to the discretionary factors relevant to this case, it is
instructive to understand the timing
of the applications for security for costs
in the chronology of both proceedings.
The chronology of the
proceedings
September 2022, the Chinese parties as plaintiffs commenced the directorship
proceeding by way of originating application
against the Company, Mr Lu and Ms
Che. That application seeks declaratory relief with the aim of “restoring
proper corporate
governance” to the
Subsequently, orders
were made that the proceeding continue as if started by claim.
September 2022, the plaintiffs filed and subsequently served a statement of
claim on the defendants.
September 2022, after the directorship proceeding had been filed and served, the
plaintiffs discovered that Mr Lu was potentially
trying to cause the Company to
sell Lot 2 as mortgagee.
24 November 2022, the plaintiffs urgently applied in aid of the directorship
proceeding for an order restraining Mr Lu and
Ms Che from dealing with the
mortgages over the Carbrook Properties or, if they already had, from dealing
with the proceeds of any
such transaction. Subsequently, Mr Lu disclosed that
Lot 2 was already sold and that the Company had entered into a contract of sale
25 November 2022, Burns J made orders to protect the proceeds from the sale of
Lot 1, and for Mr Lu to disclose the use to
which he had put the sale proceeds
from Lot 2.
1 December 2022, Mr Lu filed an affidavit which revealed that:
(a) on 18 October 2022, a contract for the sale of Lot 2 was entered into
between the Company and A.C.N.661663047 Pty Ltd ACN 661
as trustee for the Carbrook Unit Trust;
(b) the settlement date was 16 November 2022;
(c) the sum of the payments due to the Company from the
sale of Lot 2 was $2,600,782.50, being the sale price after adjustments;
(d) a bank cheque from the sale proceeds was made payable to Mr Lu personally in
the amount of $2,490,400.38; and
(e) no proceeds for the sale of Lot 2 were paid to the
3 April 2023, Mr Lu filed an application for security for costs in the
directorship proceeding and on 27 June 2023, an amended
application for security
[27] On 21 July
2023, orders were agreed upon for that application to be delisted and adjourned
to a date to be fixed by the parties
in consultation with the registry.
Directions were also made for the filing of any material to be relied upon by
both parties at
the further hearing. Affidavits and submissions were
subsequently filed in August 2023, but the amended application was not
[28] On 5 June
2024 and 24 June 2024, the solicitors for the Chinese parties sent an email to
Mr Lu’s then solicitors, requesting
that the parties confer and agree on a
jointly convenient date for the re-listing and hearing of the amended
application. No response
to this correspondence was ever received and Mr Lu took
no steps to relist the amended application for security.
[29] Other than
what was stated in his affidavit on 1 December 2022, Mr Lu did not otherwise
disclose what he did with the sale proceeds
that were paid to him
. Subsequently, the Chinese parties
discovered more about the activities concerning the sale and proceeds of Lot 2
from publicly available
sources (over the 2024 year), including that:
(a) ACN Co purchased Lot 2 in its capacity as trustee
of the Carbrook Unit Trust. An associate of Mr Lu who once lived with him,
Corrie, holds 80 per cent of the units in the Carbrook Unit Trust. After
ACN Co purchased Lot 2, Mr Corrie began residing at Lot
2 and, as of October
2024, still lived there;
(b) Mr Peng, who controls ACN Co, holds the remaining
units in the Carbrook Unit Trust;
(c) The Carbrook Unit Trust had no money to purchase
Lot 2 from the Company, but Mr Lu apparently loaned $2,417,600.38 to ACN Co for
that purpose from monies payable to him by the Company from the net proceeds of
(d) On 1 February 2024, Mr Corrie used his voting power in the Carbrook Unit
Trust to remove ACN Co as trustee and to appoint Barkell
Pty Ltd as the new
trustee. The sole director of Barkell is Mr Rixing Chen;
(e) On 6 March 2024, Mr Lu and Mr Chen signed two documents on behalf of
Barkell. The first was a document called “Deed Acknowledging
Undertaking to Pay” pursuant to which Barkell acknowledged that it was
indebted to Mr Lu in respect of a loan advanced
by Mr Lu to ACN Co to allow the
purchase of Lot 2 by ACN Co. The second was a mortgage over Lot 2 in favour of
Mr Lu, securing the
repayment to Mr Lu of the loan in the amount of
$2,645,000.00;
(f) On 12 March 2024, Lot 2 was transferred from ACN Co
to Barkell and on
22 March 2024, Mr Lu lodged the Lot 2 Mortgage with Titles
Queensland; and
(g) On 3 June 2024, Barkell entered into a call option
deed for the sale of Lot 2 for a price of $6,100,000.00, with a call option
period of 12 months. The sale is subject to, among other things, the removal of
a caveat lodged by ACN Co over Lot 2 on 25 March
November 2024, the plaintiffs in the directorship proceeding obtained leave as
majority shareholders of the Company to
bring a derivative action on behalf of
the Company against Mr Lu. As part of leave being granted, the plaintiffs
produced a deposit
certificate in Chinese currency (held in a bank account in
China) and paid $50,000.00 into court as an indemnity for the Company
the derivative proceeding.
claim and statement of claim in the derivative proceeding were subsequently
filed on 3 December 2024. A defence was filed by
Mr Lu on 9 May 2025.
[32] On 30 July
2025, the Chinese Parties filed an application for the derivative proceeding and
the directorship proceeding to be
heard together. After a contested hearing on 6
August 2025, Sullivan J ordered that the proceedings be heard together, and that
evidence in one proceeding is to be used in the other.
August 2025, the solicitors for Mr Lu foreshadowed bringing applications for
security for costs in both proceedings; and
on 9 September 2025, the present
applications for security for costs were filed.
question under r 671
[34] It is not
in issue that the Chinese parties as the plaintiffs in the directorship
proceeding are not Australian residents and
have no assets in this jurisdiction.
It follows that I am satisfied under r 671(f) of the UCPR that this
Court’s jurisdiction
to order security for costs is enlivened in that
proceeding.
[35] The Company
as the plaintiff in the derivative proceeding is registered in Australia and, on
one view, holds assets in this jurisdiction.
The latter fact is discussed
further below as part of the discretionary considerations in the derivative
proceeding. It is otherwise
accepted by the Chinese parties that they are the
individuals behind the Company seeking and obtaining leave in the derivative
proceeding.
It was therefore not seriously contended on behalf of the Company
that the jurisdiction to order security for costs in the derivative
has not been established by Mr Lu.
[36] It follows
that I am satisfied that this court’s jurisdiction to order security for
costs is enlivened under r 671(b) of
the UCPR in the derivative proceeding. This
finding is consistent with the concession in the written outline of submissions
on behalf of the Chinese parties that the applications should be refused
on the discretionary grounds.
Should security be ordered in the directorship
proceeding?
[37] The Chinese
parties raise the following factors as relevant to the discretion to award
security for costs in the directorship
proceeding:
(a) They are effectively in the position of a
(b) They have a strong or meritorious
(c) The genuineness of the
proceeding;
(d) There is a practical difficulty in granting security because of the overlap
in issues with the derivative
proceeding;
(e) There has been considerable delay by Mr Lu in bringing the application.
factors that need to be woven into the consideration include:
(a) The means of those standing behind the
proceeding;
(b) Whether an order for security for costs would be
oppressive;
(c) Whether an order for security for costs would stifle the
proceeding;
(d) Whether an order for costs made against the plaintiff would be enforceable
within the jurisdiction.
[39] Each of
these factors are discussed below, although it is convenient to address some
together where they overlap.
Prospects and genuineness of the
directorship proceeding
application for security for costs is not a mini
But the court may
undertake a preliminary assessment of the strength of a plaintiff’s claim
as part of its
consideration.
[41] Where a
prima facie case and cause of action are apparent on the face of the claim, in
the absence of evidence to the contrary,
ordinarily the court will proceed on
the basis that the claim is bona fide with a reasonable prospect of
If that is the case,
the court “should not go into the merits of the claim in detail unless it
can be demonstrated that there
is a high degree of probability of success or
If this cannot
be demonstrated, the merits of the claim are a neutral
submits that “it cannot be said that the Chinese Parties’ claim is
‘strong and apparently
meritorious’”.
the other hand, the Chinese parties submit that their case is “strong and
apparently meritorious”.
[43] Given the
parties’ respective positions, it is relevant to make a preliminary
assessment of the merits of the claim.
directorship proceeding concerns a dispute as to the current officeholders of
the Company. Mr Lu and Ms Che are recorded
on the ASIC register as the current
directors. The Chinese parties as plaintiffs challenge the status of Mr Lu and
Ms Che and allege
that on 22 April 2021, without any reference to them, Mr Lu
purported to appoint Ms Che as a director of the Company, made unlawful
to the ASIC records and, by ignoring the voice of the shareholders, improperly
excluded the first plaintiff (Mr Zhao) and
Mr Xiangdong Gao as directors.
3 August 2020, Mr Lu allegedly sent a letter to Mr Zhao stating that Mr Zhao was
deemed to have vacated his position as director
immediately.”
[46] The Chinese
parties also contend that on 3 June 2021, without reference to them, Mr Lu
changed the Company’s details on
the ASIC register to record that Mr Zhao
had ceased to be a director of the Company as of that date.
[47] On 11 June
2021, the majority shareholders of the Company met and resolved that:
(a) Mr Lu and Ms Che were removed as directors of the Company; and
(b) Mr Gao was appointed as a director of the Company.
November 2021, the Chinese parties as shareholders met and resolved
(a) the members’ meeting on 11 June 2021 was
validly called and held;
(b) the resolutions passed on 11 June 2021 were valid and binding; and
(c) Mr Zhao was and always had been a director of the
Company and, to the extent necessary, was re-elected as a director of the
[49] The relief
sought by the Chinese parties in the directorship proceeding includes:
(a) a declaration that Mr Lu ceased to be a director of
the Company on 11 June 2021, or in the alternative, on 5 November 2021;
(b) a declaration that Ms Che was not validly appointed
as a director, or ceased to be a director of the Company on 11 June 2021,
alternatively, on 5 November 2021;
(c) a declaration that Mr Zhao has been, since 30
October 2018, and continues to be, a director of the Company; and
(d) a declaration that Mr Gao was validly appointed as
a director of the Company on 11 June 2021, or alternatively, on 5 November
[50] Mr Lu filed
a lengthy and detailed affidavit in October 2022 to support the earlier
application for security for costs which
had been adjourned and not re-agitated.
But he has still not filed a defence to the directorship proceeding. No
explanation as to
why no defence has been filed was proffered before me.
Regardless, the material that has been filed by Mr Lu reveals his case to
[51] First, Mr
Lu contends that Mr Zhao was not validly appointed as a director in 2018. The
material facts are yet to be pleaded
but this is a curious claim
(a) the historical company search lists Mr Zhao as having been a director from
30 October 2018 to 3 June 2021; and
(b) Mr Lu clearly considered Mr Zhao to be a validly appointed director. For
example, he apparently corresponded with him about attending
directors meetings,
and also purported to remove Mr Zhao as a director for failing to attend
[52] Second, Mr
Lu argues that Mr Zhao’s position as a director was automatically vacated
as he had failed to attend meetings
or participate in the dealings of the
Company between 25 February 2020 and 27 July 2020 in breach of clause 13.6 the
Constitution
. That clause relevantly states that a director vacates
their position if they are “absent without the consent of the Directors
from meetings of the Directors held during a period of six
Lu’s sworn evidence is that on 8 January 2020 he posted two letters giving
notice of a meeting to Mr Zhao at an address
in Australia and China. Mr Zhao
denies receiving these letters or of otherwise having been given notice of any
such meeting over
this period. Mr Zhao’s case is that he was back home in
China at this time but no longer residing at the Chinese address the
sent to, and that he was in regular telephone contact with Mr Lu at the time.
Consistent with this evidence, Mr Lu’s
evidence refers to telephone
conversations and meetings with Mr Zhao over some months. Relevantly too, the
address in Australia where
the letter was sent was Mr Lu’s residential
address. Ultimately, the issue of whether Mr Zhao had notice of the meeting will
be one for trial, but it is instructive to note that the relevant period was
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
[54] I accept
that there is a factual dispute about the constitution of the directorship of
the Company. The issue in the directorship
proceeding turns on the construction
of the Company
Constitution
and on whether Mr Zhao was served with the relevant
notice on 8 January 2020. Mr Zhao’s evidence is that he was not served
with the notice. That evidence, on its face, is credible, particularly
considering the worldwide crisis at the time. But most relevantly,
preliminary assessment is that Mr Lu’s evidence of service and/or notice
[55] It was
submitted on Mr Lu’s behalf that there is likely to be cross-examination
on this issue. That may be true. But it
is difficult to see how cross
examination of Mr Zhao will be effective in challenging his evidence that he was
not given notice of
any meeting.
preliminary assessment of the Chinese parties’ case is that it is a strong
and meritorious claim.
[57] Relatedly,
I am satisfied of the genuineness of the proceeding, in that it seeks no more
than declarations to restore the Company’s
corporate governance.
[58] Where the
plaintiff has a strong and meritorious claim, the court will be reluctant to
make an order which may have the effect
of shutting the plaintiff out from
running its case.
In this case,
there is no suggestion that an order for security will stifle the proceeding
under r 672(h); but regardless, the strength
of the Chinese parties’ case
weighs heavily in the balance. This is particularly so when, for the reasons
that follow, the
Chinese parties had no choice but to commence the proceedings.
Characterisation of the directorship proceeding: aggressive
or defensive?
[59] An order
for security for costs is generally not made against a party who is forced to
litigate to defend the actions of the
The task for the
court is to characterise the proceedings – that is, to determine who, in
substance, is the attacker, and who
is defending the
approach is to consider whether the moving party was forced to take legal action
in a “practical” or “commercial”
sense, rather than out
of legal necessity.
[61] Mr Lu does
not acknowledge the members’ resolutions referred to in paragraphs [47]
and [48] above and continues to purport
to act on behalf of the Company as its
director. He continues to control the Company’s information recorded on
the ASIC register,
and he has refused to provide the Chinese parties the ASIC
Corporate Key for the Company.
[62] The Chinese
parties submit that they had no choice but to bring proceedings to redress the
corporate governance issues raised
by Mr Lu altering the corporate register. In
this way, they characterise their action in bringing the claim as
“responsive”
to Mr Lu’s conduct as opposed to being
“attackers”.
alleges that this argument overlooks that he was entitled to remove Mr Zhao as a
director because of clause 13.6 of the Company
Constitution
[63] In the
circumstances discussed at paragraphs [44] to [55] above, I am satisfied that
the Chinese parties had no choice but to
bring proceedings to defend themselves
against what appears to be questionable conduct by Mr Lu in having Mr Zhao
automatically removed
as a director. I am therefore satisfied that the Chinese
parties are effectively the defendant in the directorship
proceeding.
the plaintiff is forced to litigate in this sense, it is a
“significant
“weighs heavily”
against ordering security for costs. It can also reduce the amount of any
security ordered, which will be limited to claims which
cannot be characterised
as defensive.
Leaving aside
whether Mr Zhao was validly appointed in the first place (a claim from Mr Lu
that appears to be very weak), the issues
surrounding subsequent meetings and
valid appointments all turn on the overarching issue of the vacation of the
appointment under
the Company
Constitution
. I am therefore satisfied that all of
the claims in the directorship proceeding are defensive in nature, so it is
unnecessary to
consider claims which are not.
[65] The fact
that a claim is defensive rather than attacking can, in and of itself, provide a
sufficient basis to refuse to order
security for
In the present case I
consider that fact to be of considerable weight – but not sufficient in
itself to refuse to order security.
remain other competing discretionary factors. One such factor is that an order
made against the Chinese parties would not
be enforceable within the
Although, given
the defensive nature of the claim and the good prospects of success, I am
satisfied that such a factor ought to be
afforded less weight.
[67] Delay is a
relevant factor in determining whether to order security for
If the application for
security is not made promptly, it is almost inevitable that there will be some
prejudice to the plaintiff.
longer the delay, and the greater the costs the plaintiff has been allowed to
incur, the less likely it is that an order will
[68] On any
view, Mr Lu has delayed pursuing an application for security for costs in the
directorship proceeding.
determining the weight to be given to the effect of delay, the following three
matters need to be
considered:
(a) whether there is an explanation for the delay and, if so, what weight it
should be afforded;
(b) the level of prejudice caused to the plaintiff if required to lodge security
at a late stage; and
(c) the timing of the application for security for costs.
[70] It was
submitted on behalf of Mr Lu that some responsibility for the delay in bringing
this application ought to be apportioned
to the Chinese parties because they
requested to adjourn the initial application so that material could be prepared
in response.
Whilst it was reasonable for Mr Lu to have acceded to such a
request, that does not adequately explain (nor was any reasonable explanation
offered) why no steps were subsequently taken for over two years to re-list the
amended application. This is particularly so given
a request by the Chinese
parties’ solicitors in June 2024 to have the applications re-listed went
unanswered.
[71] Mr Lu also
submits that even accepting some delay is attributable to him, there is no real
prejudice to the Chinese parties because
the proceeding is at a relatively early
stage. I accept that, technically speaking, the proceeding is at an early stage
defendant for unknown reasons has not yet filed a defence and
disclosure is yet to occur. But it cannot be overlooked that Mr Lu
has allowed
the Chinese parties to incur considerable costs in the meantime. These costs
(a) the Chinese parties’ filing material in response to the abandoned
security for costs application;
(b) both parties filing substantive evidence in the directorship proceeding
(amounting to about 800 pages worth of affidavits and
exhibits); and
(c) the Chinese parties agitating an application in the directorship proceeding
(as discussed under the chronology of the proceeding
above) which led more
broadly to the derivative proceeding being pursued by the Chinese parties.
[72] I am also
satisfied that there is prejudice to the Chinese parties in Mr Lu delaying the
hearing until after leave to commence
the derivative proceeding was granted.
Senior Counsel for the plaintiffs “hypothesised” this point during
oral argument
my clients been ordered to pay security in August 2023, they would not have been
able to bring the derivative proceeding
unless they would have been able to
satisfy the security order. They would there never have been given leave, they
have been put to the cost and expense of then doing that, putting
in a statement of claim and advancing some interlocutory steps
in the derivative
proceeding, before being confronted with what we’re now confronted with
[73] I accept
this submission. It is reasonable to infer that if the Chinese parties had been
ordered to pay security for costs in
the directorship proceeding, they may not
have incurred the costs leading up to and including the commencement of the
proceeding.
[74] In the
present circumstances, Mr Lu has failed to adequately explain the delay in
bringing the current application. In doing
so, has he has allowed the Chinese
parties to incur considerable costs – not only in the directorship
proceeding but also by
bringing the derivative proceeding.
[75] The delay
in bringing the present application is also relevant in one final way. The fact
that the Chinese parties have no assets
in this jurisdiction, and there is no
evidence of any reciprocal agreements in terms of the registering of judgments
in China, is
another relevant discretionary factor to be considered in this
But given the unexplained
delay in prosecuting the application, Mr Lu’s apparent concern about
recovery is of less weight than
it might ordinarily be on a timely application
for security.
Conclusion: the balancing act required
[76] Counsel for
Mr Lu submitted that all things being equal in terms of the discretionary
factors, “security ought to be given
because of the prerequisite
This submission
was maintained as follows:
(a) “The question then is, is there anything else which displaces it on
the other side? And my submission is because everything
is neutral, it
doesn’t. The scales still tip in the favour of security being
(b) A foreign plaintiff having no assets in the jurisdiction was “such a
significant prerequisite factor” that “incredibly
discretionary factors” were required to “outweigh
(c) The Chinese parties are unable to displace the significance of the fact that
the threshold for under r 671(e) is satisfied and
therefore, they ought to
provide security.
[77] Support for
this submission was said to be founded on the observations of McHugh J in
PS Chellaram & Co Ltd v
China Ocean
Shipping Co
[1991] HCA 36
(1991) 102 ALR 321.
The relevant observations were made in the
context of an application for security for costs on appeal to the High Court as
“...for over 200 years, the fact that a party, bringing
proceedings, is resident out of the jurisdiction and has no assets within
circumstance of great weight in determining
whether an order for security for costs should be made
. Indeed, for many
the practice has been to order such a party to provide security for
costs unless that party can point to other circumstances which
overcome the
weight of the circumstance
that that person is resident out of and has no
assets within the jurisdiction” (emphasis added).
following observations of Gummow J in
In Energy Drilling Inc v Petroz NL
(1989) ATPR 40-954 were also relied upon by counsel for Mr
purpose of ordering security for costs against an applicant ordinarily resident
outside the jurisdiction is to ensure
that a successful respondent will
have a fund available within the jurisdiction of this Court against which it can
enforce the judgment
for costs, so that the respondent does not bear the risk as
to the certainty of enforcement in the foreign country and as to the
complexity of the action there which might be necessary to effect
enforcement...”
[79] But these
observations must be seen in the context of the remainder of the passage, where
his Honour went on to
other hand,
the mere circumstance that an applicant is resident outside the
in favour of
ordering security
, the question being how justice will best be served in the
particular case” (emphasis added).
[80] I do not
accept the approach to the exercise of the discretion articulated in paragraph
[76] above is correct for three reasons.
[81] First, it
conflates the prerequisite requirement of r 671 and the discretionary factors in
r 672 by suggesting that there is
a presumption in favour of security once the
prerequisite or condition precedent is established.
[82] Second, it
suggests that the onus is somehow reversed and that once the prerequisite to the
making of an order for security for
costs has been established, it is incumbent
on a plaintiff to show that the discretionary factors outweigh the established
prerequisite
such that security for costs should not be granted. Such an
approach is exactly the type of error that was recently identified by
Queensland Court of Appeal in
DGR Global v P.T. Limited
[2025] QCA 122
reasons reveal that the judge effectively imposed a persuasive burden on the
appellant by approaching the application on
the basis that once the threshold
condition had been satisfied, the power to order security for costs fell to be
exercised in the
respondents’ favour unless the appellant persuaded the
court by reference to discretionary matters, that the power should not
exercised.”
[83] Third, I
accept that the fact that a plaintiff is resident outside of the jurisdiction
and has no assets within the jurisdiction
is, depending on the case, a factor of
considerable weight in the exercise of the discretion. But there is nothing in
either of the
passages relied upon by counsel for Mr Lu to suggest that in such
a case the onus of satisfying the court that security ought to
be ordered shifts
to a plaintiff. Rather, the observations in both decisions are entirely
consistent with the well-established principles
that the onus always remains
with the applicant defendant, but there is an evidentiary onus on a plaintiff to
identify the relevant
discretionary factors that weigh in its favour. The weight
to be given to a particular discretionary factor is dependent on the
circumstances
and justice of the case.
[84] The factor
that weighs most in Mr Lu’s favour is that an order for costs made against
the Chinese parties would not be
enforceable in this jurisdiction. But that is
just one of the factors to be weighed. Upon a consideration of all the relevant
as discussed above, I am not satisfied that Mr Lu has satisfied the onus
on him. I do not consider the justice of this case warrants
an order for
security for costs.
Should security be ordered in the
derivative proceeding?
[85] The Chinese
parties raise the following discretionary factors:
(a) The Company is a company incorporated in Australia and there is nothing to
prevent Mr Lu from enforcing a costs order against
(b) The Company’s
impecuniosity was caused by Mr
(c) The means of those standing behind the
proceeding;
(d) The Company is effectively in the position of a
(e) The Chinese parties raise a good arguable case on
behalf of the Company;
(f) The enforceability of an order for costs made against the plaintiff within
the jurisdiction;
(g) The genuineness of the
proceeding;
(h) Mr Lu delayed seven months
after requesting security before filing his application in September 2025.
[86] Again, each
of these factors are discussed below although some are more conveniently
addressed together.
Position of the defendant, prospects and
genuineness
derivative proceeding concerns a dispute as to whether Mr Lu was entitled to
receive the net proceeds of the sale of Lot
2 over which the Company held
mortgages. The Company contends (and Mr Lu disputes) that Mr Lu breached his
duties under
Corporations
(Cth) by distributing the net proceeds of the sale of Lot 2 to
himself without the consent of the directors of the Company (being
Mr Zhao and
Mr Gao). The relief sought in the derivative proceeding includes a declaration
that Mr Lu holds a mortgage over Lot 2
in his favour on trust for the
[88] By his
pleaded defence, Mr Lu alleges that:
(a) Mr Zhao and Mr Gao were, but no longer are,
directors of the Company;
(b) he and Ms Che have been the duly appointed
directors of the Company since 22 April 2021; and
(c) the duly appointed directors of the Company (Mr Lu
and Ms Che) directed the Company to distribute the net proceeds of sale of
[89] Essentially,
Mr Lu’s case is that he was the “proper” director of the
Company and at the time of the distribution
of the net proceeds of the sale of
Lot 2 to himself, “he was entitled to do or direct the company to do what
[90] Given what
I have found to be a strong case on the overlapping issue of Mr Zhao’s
alleged “automatic
of the office of
directorship, it follows that, at least to the extent that that issue infects
other issues in the derivative proceeding,
I am satisfied that there are strong
prospects of success in relation to the derivative proceeding.
[91] In terms of
the balance of the derivative case, Mr Lu submits that the Chinese parties
“cannot assert” that the Company
will be successful
“...another
issue in dispute is the origin of funds by [the Company] as trustee for the
Trust to pay the outgoing mortgagees
their debts in order to take assignment of
the mortgage. The Plaintiff in the Derivative Proceeding alleges the funds used
$2,417,600.38 paid by the Chinese Parties, whereas Mr Lu says he leant
[sic] all the funds used to [the Company]. To the extent that
the Chinses [sic]
Parties may have transferred funds in relation to the purchase of the Carbrook
Property, the correspondence of
30 October 2018 indicates that those transfers
were in relation to the Original Plan and not for the purposes of [the Company]
the mortgages.”
circumstances where no reasonable explanation has been given about what has
happened to the money the Chinese parties transferred,
even in terms of the
“Original Plan”, the defence by My Lu appears weak.
[93] It is also
difficult to understand what Mr Lu’s defence to his self-dealing regarding
the mortgage on Lot 2 is, even if
he is found to have been the sole director of
the Company at the relevant time. But for his actions, the Company would have
proceeds from the sale of Lot 2 in the amount of $2,490,000.00. There
is no suggestion that the majority shareholders approved such
[94] It follows
that I am satisfied that, at the very least, the claim is a bona fide one with
reasonable prospects of success. Relevantly
too, the individuals behind the
derivative proceeding have:
(a) produced a deposit certificate of holding CNY1,202,380.84 (equivalent to
(b) paid $50,000.00 into Court in aid of the grant of
leave to bring the derivative proceeding.
[95] In such
circumstances, I am also satisfied that the proceeding is a genuine
In my view, the Company was
left with no option but to challenge Mr Lu’s alleged self-dealing.
Considered another way –
if Mr Lu had pursued the Company to recover
funds, no security would be required from it. I am satisfied that in those
circumstances
the Chinese parties are effectively in the position of a
Attribution of impecuniosity and
enforceability
[96] The Chinese
parties allege that the Company’s impecuniosity was caused by Mr Lu.
This submission made on two bases:
(a) First, that Mr Lu caused the Company to sell Lot 2 and received the net
proceeds of the sale in circumstances where he was not
authorised or entitled to
do so, and he then used those proceeds to advance a loan to ACN Co and acquire a
mortgage over Lot 2;
(b) Second, there is evidence that the Chinese parties transferred significant
sums of money to Mr Lu (about $3,850,000.00) and that
the mortgages held by the
Company were acquired with the money the Chinese parties advanced to the
accepting both premises are found to be true, I am not satisfied that the
Company is impecunious. The evidence is that the
Company holds a significant
asset in this jurisdiction, namely the mortgage over Lot 1 (which was not
ultimately sold in 2022). There
is no evidence of the present value of Lot 1
because Mr Lu controls the books and records of the Company, but there is
evidence that
the Carbrook Properties were contracted to sell in 2017 for
$9,600,000.00 and the Company acquired the mortgages over the Carbrook
Properties in 2018 for approximately $2,500,000.00 million. It is reasonable to
assume the mortgage over Lot 1 has some considerable
however, the Chinese parties are unsuccessful in the derivate proceeding, I
accept that it may not be in the interests of
justice for the Company to have to
pay Mr Lu’s costs. But given the strength and nature of this case being
defensive, I am
not satisfied much weight ought to be given to this factor.
[99] The fact
that the Chinese parties as the nominal plaintiffs were individual residents
outside of Australia (without any assets
within the jurisdiction) means that any
judgment in favour of Mr Lu will not be enforceable in this
For the reasons
stated in the previous paragraph, I am not satisfied that much weight ought to
be afforded to this factor either.
Chinese parties refer to the extensive procedural steps that have been
completed, including pleadings, disclosure, and the
issuing of non-party
notices; and also to considerable evidence having been filed of over 1,000 pages
of affidavits and exhibits,
namely the Affidavit of Yongman Zhao filed on 25
October 2024 and the Affidavit of Junyan Lu filed on 14 April 2025.
Chinese parties point to this as a significant factor against awarding security
for costs in this case. There is some tension
between this submission and one
made a few months ago in the consolidation application that the case is still
not ready for trial.
The delay of seven months in bringing this application has
not been explained. But I am not satisfied that the delay is a significant
factor either way in the derivative proceeding.
Conclusion:
the balancing act required
[102] The factor
that weighs most in Mr Lu’s favour in the derivative proceeding is that an
order for costs made against the
Chinese parties would not be enforceable in
this jurisdiction. But that is just one of the factors to be weighed. In my
view, other
factors such as the strength and nature of the derivative case
outweigh the factors in Mr Lu’s favour.
therefore not satisfied that Mr Lu has satisfied the onus upon him. I do not
consider the interest of justice warrants
an order for security for costs being
made in the derivative proceeding.
Overlap in proceeding:
[104] There is
no suggestion that an order for security will stifle either
proceeding,
but the issue of
whether an order for security for costs would be oppressive was raised by the
Chinese parties.
That factor is
underpinned by the submission that there is a practical difficulty in granting
security due to the overlap in the
proceedings.
[105] The issue
of who are and were the duly appointed directors of the Company at the relevant
times is the only real issue in the
directorship proceeding. The resolution of
the corporate governance of the Company is also a critical issue in the
derivative proceeding.
But that proceeding also involves broader issues,
including allegations by the Chinese parties of conflicts of interest and
self-dealing
by Mr Lu, and potentially the resolution of the correct identity of
the unit holders of the Investment Trust.
[106] The issue
of oppressiveness is, in my view, a neutral one in terms of the discretionary
factors. But it is relevant to the quantum
of costs sought by Mr Lu in both
proceedings, which total over half a million dollars. Those costs are excessive
and do not take
sufficient account of or reflect the considerable overlap in the
proceedings. Taking a broadbrush approach, if I had been minded
security, I would have reduced the costs sought by at least half and I would
have only allowed costs up until a mediation
– not the first day of the
[107] I order
further amended application filed 9 September 2025 in BS 11276/22 is
application filed 9 September 2025 in BS 14509/24 is dismissed;
defendant, Mr Lu, pay the costs of both applications.
Ms Che is separately
represented and had filed her own application for security for costs on 26 June
2023. That application has
not been heard and was not returnable before me.
T1-11, lines 30-33.
Pearson v ING Bank (Australia) Ltd
[2023] QSC 86
(2023) 14 QR 170
(Cooper J), citing
Equititrust Ltd v Tucker
[2020] QSC 269
(Bond J, as his Honour then was).
Monto Coal 2 Pty Ltd v
Sanrus Pty Ltd
[2018] QCA 309
[2019] 3 Qd R 143
(Gotterson JA, McMurdo JA and
Boddice J, as his Honour then was, agreeing).
See generally
Sir Lindsay
Parkinson & Co Ltd v Triplan Ltd
[1973] QB 609.
Covecorp Constructions Pty
Ltd v Indigo Projects Pty Ltd
[2007] QSC 262
(Martin J, as his
Honour then was).
DGR Global v P.T.
[2025] QCA 122
Cornelius v Global Medical
Solutions Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 65
(2014) 98 ACSR 301
JA) and citing
Monto Coal 2 Pty Ltd v Sanrus Pty Ltd
[2018] QCA 309
(2019) 3 QR 143
(Gotterson JA, McMurdo JA and Boddice J, as his Honour then was,
ACN 006 577 162 Pty Ltd
(formerly Harrop Engineering Australia Pty Ltd) & Ors v Beauville Pty Ltd
[2014] VSC 298
(Derham AsJ).
Commonwealth v Cable Water Skiing (Australia)
(1994) 116 FLR 153
at 157 (Bollen J, Mohr and Duggan JJ agreeing).
Crypta Fuels Pty Ltd v Svelte Corporation
(1995) 19 ACSR 68
at 71 (Lehane J).
See Plaintiffs’
outline of submissions filed by leave on 16 October 2025 at [16].
Plaintiffs’ outline
of submissions filed by leave on 16 October 2025 at [2].
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 672(f).
Ibid r 672(b).
Ibid r 672(c).
Ibid r 672(g).
Ibid r 672(a).
Ibid r 672(g).
Ibid r 672(h).
Ibid r 672(l).
Constructions Australia Pty Ltd & Anor v Gainspace (Mackay) Pty Ltd
[2016] QSC 67
(Jackson J).
Mecrus Pty Ltd v
Industrial Energy Pty Ltd
[2015] FCA 103
(2015) 327 ALR 523
(Murphy J).
KP Cable Investments Pty
Ltd v Meltglow Pty Ltd
[1995] FCA 76
(1995) 56 FCR 189
at 197-8 (Beazley J);
Projects Pty Ltd v Islamic College of Brisbane Ltd
[2012] QCA 114
(Margaret Wilson AJA, Margaret McMurdo P and Applegarth J agreeing).
Suncare Constructions
Australia Pty Ltd & Anor v Gainspace (Mackay) Pty Ltd
[2016] QSC 67
(Jackson J), quoting
ACN 006 577 162 Pty Ltd (formerly Harrop
Engineering Australia Pty Ltd) & Ors v Beauville Pty Ltd & Ors
[2014] VSC 298
(Derham AsJ).
Mio Art Pty Ltd v Mango
Boulevard Pty Ltd
[2018] QSC 31
(Daubney J), quoting
Ltd v Morningstar Research Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWSC 664
Outline of argument of the
applicant filed by leave on 16 October 2025 at [16].
Plaintiffs’ outline
of submissions filed by leave on 16 October 2025 at [27].
Affidavit of Junyan Lu in
BS 11276/22 filed 27 October 2022 (CFI 11-12) at [40] and Ex JL41.
Affidavit of Junyan Lu in
BS 14509/24 filed 14 April 2025 (CFI 17) at [91].
J & M O’Brien
Enterprises Pty Ltd v Shell Co of Australia Ltd (No 2)
[1983] FCA 92
(1983) 70 FLR 261
264 (Bowen CJ).
[1935] HCA 76
(1935) 54 CLR 175
at 184-5 (Dixon J, Rich J agreeing). Applegarth J
summarised the authorities considering the discretionary factor
of whether the plaintiff is effectively
the defendant in the proceeding in
Global Access Ltd v Educationdynamics, LLC
[2009] QSC 373
[2010] 1 Qd R 525
528-31 [14]-[22].
Mio Art Pty Ltd v Mango Boulevard Pty Ltd & Ors
[2018] QSC 31
(Daubney J);
Pty Ltd v National Gold Pty Ltd;
Denjim Pty Ltd v AU Gold Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2023] QSC 54
(Cooper J).
Amalgamated Mining
Services Pty Ltd v Warman International Ltd
(1988) 19 FCR 324
(Wilcox J).
T1-30, lines
Woolworths Ltd v
[2018] NSWSC 1340
Olbers Co Ltd
Commonwealth
[2002] FCA 1269
(French J, as his Honour then
Pty Ltd v National Gold Pty Ltd; Denjim Pty Ltd v AU Gold Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2023] QSC 54
v Tricontinental Corporation Ltd
(1991) 5 ACSR 621
Quarries v Devine Shipping
[1994] TASSC 76
(1994) 14 ACSR 186
at 189 (Zeeman
J), see also
Interwest Ltd v Tricontinental Corporation Ltd
at 627 (Ormiston J).
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 672(l).
Commonwealth v Cable
Water Skiing (Australia) Ltd
(1994) 116 FLR 153
at 157 (Bollen J, Mohr and
Duggan JJ agreeing).
[2008] QCA 36
Cross Exploration NL
v Fire & All Risks Insurance Co Ltd
at 125 (Waddell J).
Constructions Pty Ltd v Indigo Projects Pty Ltd
[2007] QSC 262
(Martin J, as his Honour then was).
T1-31, lines 4-10.
Uniform Civil Procedure
(Qld) r 672(l), see also
[2025] QSC 172
(Hindman J).
T1-13, lines 11-14.
T1-38, lines 11-14.
T1-40, lines 6-7.
Outline of argument of the
applicant filed by leave on 16 October 2025 at [30].
PS Chellaram & Co
Ltd v China Ocean Shipping
[1991] HCA 36
(1991) 102 ALR 321
at 323 (McHugh
In Energy Drilling Inc v Petroz NL
ATPR 40-954 at [24] (Gummow J), citing
Barton v Minister for Foreign
(1984) 2 FCR 463;
CBS Records Australia Ltd v Telmak
Teleproducts (Aust) Pty Ltd
(1987) 72 ALR 270
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 672(l).
Ibid r 672(e).
Ibid r 672(a).
Ibid r 672(f).
Ibid r 672(b).
Ibid r 672(l).
Ibid r 672(c).
T1-15, lines 26-7.
T1-12, line 32.
Outline of argument of the
applicant filed by leave on 16 October 2025 at [21(b)].
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 672(c).
Ibid r 672(l).
Ibid r 672(h).
Ibid r 672(g).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (465 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter