URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLPT/2009/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Richardson [2009] QLPT 17 (16 July 2009)
Legal Services Commissioner v Richardson [2009] QLPT 17 (16 July 2009)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Legal Services Commissioner v Richardson
[2009] LPT 17
LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER
(applicant)
IAN GEORGE MARSH RICHARDSON
(respondent)
6611 of 2008
Legal Practice Tribunal
PROCEEDING:
Discipline Action
DELIVERED ON:
16 July 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
27-29 April 2009
PRACITIONER PANEL MEMBER:
Mr P Mullins
LAY PANEL MEMBER:
Dr M Steinberg
Mr Richardson is guilty of professional misconduct with regard to Charge 1 and
Charge 2 and unsatisfactory professional conduct with
regard to charge 4, as
particularised in 4.1, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.9, 4.10 and 4.11.
CATCHWORDS:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – GENERALLY –
where respondent
charged with dishonestly or improperly obtaining his clients’ certificates
of title – where respondent
appointed as power of attorney under enduring
power of attorney of his clients – where respondent lodged the enduring
of attorney with the Department of Natural Resources and made an
application for certificates of title without authority –
where respondent
refused to deliver the certificates of title and claimed to a possessory lien
– whether respondent guilty
of professional misconduct
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – GENERALLY –
where respondent
charged with acting deceitfully – where respondent acted for clients in a
conveyance – where clients
removed certain equipment allegedly on the
advice of the respondent – where purchaser claimed the equipment was
where respondent failed to advise clients that they were
required to attend a directions conference – where respondent did
attend directions conference and sent an employee solicitor to seek an
adjournment – where judgment was entered against
respondent’s
clients – where respondent made application to have judgment set aside
without instructions – whether
respondent guilty of professional
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – GENERALLY –
where respondent
charged with breaching professional obligation to co-operate with investigations
undertaken by the Queensland Law
Society and/or Legal Services Commission
– where Commissioner provided twelve examples alleging a breach on behalf
of the respondent
– whether respondent guilty of professional misconduct
Guardianship and Administration Act
Legal Profession
2004 (Qld) ss 266, 267, 269, 270, 274
Legal Profession
Powers of Attorney Act
Barratt v Gough-Thomas
[1950] 2 All ER 1048
[2005] NSW CA 268
Belmont Finance Corporation Ltd v Williams Furniture Ltd
[1979] Ch 250
Bolster v McCallum
(1966) 85 WN
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[2006] QSC 378
[2007] 2 Qd R 323
Harle v Legal Practitioners Liability
[2003] VSCA 133
Leeper v Primary Producers’
Bank of Australia Ltd
(In Voluntary Liquidation)
[1935] HCA 19
(1935) 53 CLR 250
Legal Services Commissioner v Browne
[2004] NSW ADT 63
Legal Services Commissioner v Madden (No. 2)
, considered
Rejfek v McElroy
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 CLR 517
Stark v Dennett
[2007] QSC 171
QLS v Carberry; A-G v
[2000] QCA 450
Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR
, considered
[1982] EWCA Crim 2
[1982] 1 QB 1053
, considered
Walsh v Law Society of New South Wales
[1999] HCA 33
(1999) 198 CLR 73
MacSporran A J, SC for applicant
Davis P J, SC and Wilson, E for respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Services Commission for applicant
Michael Cooper Lawyer for respondent
Introduction
[1] Ian George Marsh Richardson is a legal practitioner
presently aged 61 who was admitted to practice as a solicitor by the Supreme
Court of Queensland in 1976 and has, apart from six years of that time,
practised on his own account. He has been the principal
of KRG Law at Southport
since 1996, except for a period of two years when he did not practise because of
ill health. The firm is
also known as KRG Conveyancing. During the course of
this judgment it will be referred to as KRG. KRG has a very busy conveyancing
practice. It carried out 18,626 cottage conveyances between 1 January 2005 and
30 April 2008.
[2] Mr Richardson was charged with four charges
by the Legal Services Commissioner (the “Commissioner”). One did
proceed in the Tribunal but three remain to be adjudicated by the Tribunal
in these disciplinary proceedings. The remaining charges
relate to complaints
by his clients, Richard and Mollie Litherland, David and Lynne West, and his
failure to co-operate in the investigation
by the Commissioner or the Queensland
Law Society (the “Society”) of complaints made by Mr and Mrs
Litherland, Mr and
Mrs West, Dennis and Sharyn Sacshe, Vickie Pollock, Simon and
Nadine Graves, Robert Shepherd and Kate Chalmers, Rachel Hinton, Cameron
Tracie Corish, Peter Walker, Dr Ratna Ghosh, Fung Ling Siu Reis and Wheldon
& Associates.
[3] The Commissioner alleged that the charges constitute
professional misconduct or in the alternative unsatisfactory professional
conduct. The charges are:
1 Dishonestly obtained Certificates of Title
or about 15 January 2008 the respondent dishonestly or improperly obtained
certificates of title being reference numbers 50488049
and 50488050 (the
“Litherlands’ certificates of title”) in the names of Ronald
Douglas Litherland and Mollie May
Litherland (“Litherlands”) from
the Department of Natural Resources and Water (“DNR”).
Charge 2 Deceit – David West and Lynne West
May 2006 and February 2007, whilst acting on behalf of David West and Lynne West
(“Wests”) in civil proceedings,
the respondent acted
deceitfully.
Charge 4 Failure to co-operate with investigations
January 2005 and April 2008 the respondent breached his professional obligation
to co-operate with investigations undertaken
by the Queensland Law Society
and/or Legal Services Commission.
The statutory regime
[4] The conduct complained of in charge 1 was
governed by the
Legal Profession Act 2007
(Qld) (“the 2007 Act”).
When the conduct complained of in charge 2 occurred, it was governed by the
Legal Profession
Act 2004 (Qld) (“the 2004 Act”). Part of the
conduct complained of in charge 4 occurred during the currency of the 2004
and part during the currency of the 2007 Act. The charges were all brought
under the 2007 Act which came into effect on 1 July
2007 since the transitional
provisions found in s 423 and Part 9 of the 2007 Act apply the 2007 Act to
the relevant conduct all of
which occurred after 1 July 2004.
[5] Chapter 4
of the 2007 Act deals with complaints and discipline. Section 423(1) provides
that Chapter 4 applies to conduct of
an Australian legal practitioner which
happened in Australia whether before or after the commencement of the 2007
[6] Schedule 2 of the 2007 Act defines “unsatisfactory
professional conduct” as follows:
dealing with a complaint about conduct that happened before 1 July 2004 –
see chapter 9; or
(b) otherwise – see section 418.”
[7] Section 418 of the 2007 Act applies since all of the conduct occurred after
1 July 2004. It provides:
Meaning of unsatisfactory
professional conduct
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an Australian
legal practitioner happening in connection with the practice of law that falls
short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of the public is
entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal
practitioner.”
[8] Schedule 2 of the 2007 Act defines “professional misconduct” as
“(a) for dealing with a complaint about conduct
that happened before 1 July 2004 – see chapter 9; or
(b) otherwise – see section 419.”
[9] Section 419 provides:
Meaning of professional
Professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner,
if the conduct involves a substantial or consistent failure
to reach or keep a
reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, whether happening in
connection with the practice of law or happening otherwise than
in connection
with the practice of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice.
(2) For finding that an Australian legal practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice as mentioned in subsection
(1), regard may be
had to the suitability matters that would be considered if the practitioner were
an applicant for admission to
the legal profession under this Act or for the
grant or renewal of a local practising certificate.”
[10] “Suitability matters” are dealt with in s 9 of the 2007
Act. Section 9(2) provides that a matter under s 9(1) is
“suitability matter” even though it happened before the commencement
of the section.
[11] Section 420 of the 2007 Act deals with examples of
conduct that is capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct. It provides:
420 Conduct
capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
The following conduct is capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct –
(a) conduct consisting of a contravention of a relevant law, whether the
conduct happened before or after the commencement of this
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Statutory Instruments Act 1992
, a contravention in relation to
this Act would include a contravention of a regulation or legal profession rules
and a contravention
in relation to a previous Act would include a contravention
of a legal profession rule under the
Legal Profession Act 2004
(b) charging of excessive legal costs in connection with the practice of
(c) conduct for which there is a conviction for –
(i) a serious offence; or
(ii) a tax offence; or
(iii) an offence involving dishonesty;
(d) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner as or in becoming an
insolvent under administration;
(e) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner in becoming disqualified from
managing or being involved in the management of any
corporation under the
Corporations Act;
(f) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner in failing to comply with an
order of a disciplinary body made under this Act or an
order of a corresponding
disciplinary body made under a corresponding law, including a failure to pay
wholly or partly a fine imposed
under this Act or a corresponding law;
(g) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner in failing to comply with a
compensation order made under this Act or a corresponding
(2) Also, conduct that happened before the commencement of this subsection
that, at the time it happened, consisted of a contravention
of a relevant law or
a corresponding law is capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
(3) This section does not limit section 418 or 419.”
[12] This Tribunal’s jurisdiction is conferred by s 601 of the 2007
Act which provides that “the tribunal’s jurisdiction
is to hear and
decide a discipline application made to the tribunal.” A discipline
application is brought by the Commissioner
the tribunal must, pursuant to s 453 of the 2007 Act, hear and decide each
allegation stated in the discipline application.
[13] The statutory
Services Commissioner v Madden (No.
[2008] QCA 301
show the precise delineation of the Tribunal’s role and powers on the
hearing of a discipline application:
“[72] ... The procedural provisions in Pt 4.9
of the 2007 Act, notably ss 452, 453, 455 and 456, confirm that the legislative
intention was to confine the Tribunal’s jurisdiction by reference to the
particular allegations made by the Commissioner in
the discipline application.
That appears clearly from the requirement in s 453 that the disciplinary
body must hear and decide ‘each
allegation stated in the discipline
application’. It is that which the Tribunal is ‘empowered to deal
with under this
Act’ in terms of s 598, the provision that identifies
the purpose of s 601.
[74] The scheme of the 2007 Act is that the Commissioner investigates
possible misconduct, decides whether to bring a charge, and
decides what to
charge. The Tribunal’s role is
adjudicative.
[14] The onus of proof lies on the Commissioner to satisfy the Tribunal on the
balance of probabilities that the allegation is
The degree of satisfaction varies
depending on the seriousness of the
Charge 1: Dishonestly obtained
Certificates of Title
[15] The particulars of the charge are as italicised.
Where Mr Richardson admitted the particular without qualification, that is
specifically noted but rather is taken as proved. Otherwise the response made
by Mr Richardson is as set out.
[16] 1.1 At all material times the
respondent knew and purported to act on behalf of the Litherlands.
or about 5 April 2007 the Litherlands appointed the respondent as power of
attorney pursuant to two separate enduring Powers
of Attorney.
[17] 1.3 At the time of executing the enduring Powers of Attorney, the
respondent did not advise the Litherlands about the nature
and meaning of
those documents.
The respondent said the Litherlands were at all
times aware of the nature and effect of the Enduring Powers of Attorney executed
by them and said further that the Litherlands authorised and directed the
respondent to execute various documents pursuant to those
powers of attorney
(a) option agreement for the purchase of the property referred to in
paragraph 1.4 of the applicant’s particulars;
(b) notice of exercise of such option; and
(c) contract of sale and purchase pursuant to the exercise of such
[18] 1.4 In December 2007 the Litherlands were involved in the purchase of
property described at Lots 531 and 532 on SP 156110
(“property”).
1.5 On or about 14 December 2007 settlement of
the property occurred.
[19] 1.6 On 2 January 2008 the respondent lodged the Enduring Powers of Attorney
with DNR without authority from the Litherlands.
1.7 On 10 January 2008 the respondent made
application to DNR for certificates of title for the property without authority
Litherlands.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraphs 1.6 and 1.7
to the extent that such acts were without express authority,
but said that they
were within the scope of his implied authority and not contrary to any express
instructions from the Litherlands.
[20] 1.8 On 15 January 2008 certificates of title in respect of the property
were issued to the respondent by DNR.
The respondent denied the
allegations contained in paragraph 1.8 and said the certificates of title in
respect of the property were
issued, as that term is used in the Land Titles
Act, to the Litherlands and delivered to the respondent by the Registrar of
[21] 1.9 On or about 1 February 2008 the Litherlands directed the respondent to
deliver all files and documents held on their
1.10 Despite demand the respondent refused to
deliver the certificates of title to the Litherlands by claiming a lien on
unpaid legal fees.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraph 1.10 insofar
as the respondent refused to deliver the certificates
of title but said further
that he had a
claim of right to a possessory lien for unpaid
legal fees in respect of which he had since been paid $180,000.00.
[22] 1.11 In the premises, the respondent obtained the certificates of title
(a) he had no authority (express or implied) to
use the powers of attorney to obtain the certificates of title; and/or
(b) he knew or ought to have known that his personal interest in obtaining
remuneration for services rendered was in conflict with
his duty to exercise the
powers of attorney bona fide and in the interests of the Litherlands.
Findings relating to Charge 1
[23] The evidence showed that Mr and Mrs
Litherland had been friends and clients of Mr Richardson for more than 40 years.
never been a client agreement between the Litherlands and Mr
Richardson.
[24] Mr Litherland said that Mr Richardson assisted him in a
contractual dispute involving his online business, Clubfreedom. The
dispute was
with Wholesale Leisure Holidays (“WLH”) who at that time provided
services to Clubfreedom. Mr Litherland
said he transferred $10,000 into Mr
Richardson’s trust account on behalf of Clubfreedom on 28 March
[25] Mr Richardson said that in February 2007 he requested that Mr and
Mrs Litherland deposit $10,000 into his trust account for professional
rendered between November 2006 and January 2007. He received the funds by
telegraphic transfer in February 2007 from a
company associated with Mr
Litherland. Mr Richardson later attempted to use those funds in an unsuccessful
attempt to purchase vouchers
on behalf of the Litherlands so it was not applied
to payment of the Litherlands’ legal fees. Mr Richardson retained custody
of the cheque for $10,000 sent as a refund after the unsuccessful attempt to
purchase vouchers.
[26] Mr and Mrs Litherland met with Mr Richardson on 5
April 2007 to sign documents which Mr Richardson told them they needed to sign
in order for him to represent them while they were overseas. They were due to
go overseas later that week. Mr Litherland said that
the nature and meaning of
the documents was not explained to him or to his wife by either Mr Richardson or
the person who witnessed
the documents. Mr Litherland said they signed the
documents because they trusted Mr Richardson. Mr Litherland thought that he was
signing a document to give Mr Richardson the authority to act on his behalf
while he was overseas particularly in regard to the purchase
Sovereign Island which is referred to in these reasons as “the
property”. Mr Richardson said to them words
to the effect “You
better sign this before you go so I can look after things while you’re
overseas” and gave them
one page to sign. They signed it and then Mr
Richardson called in a member of his staff, Karen Farrow, to witness their
signatures.
Mrs Litherland asked Mr Richardson what they were signing. Mr
Richardson laughed and said he would fill it out later.
Farrow’s evidence was given on affidavit and she was not required for
cross-examination. Her evidence was therefore
unchallenged. She said that, as
was his usual practice, Mr Richardson went through each form with his clients
ticking the appropriate
squares as they advised him. She said that as she
certified, both Mr and Mrs Litherland appeared to understand clearly the purpose
and effect of the documents they signed. She said that she particularly
recalled that Mrs Litherland said at the time she signed
the document that she
and Mr Litherland had to make new wills with Mr Richardson when they were next
in Australia.
[28] Mr Litherland deposed that, although they did not know it
at the time, he now knows that the documents that he and his wife signed
fact Enduring Powers of Attorney in favour of Mr Richardson in respect of
financial matters. It is not necessary to resolve
the conflict in evidence.
For the purpose of the charge, the Commission did not allege that the Enduring
Powers of Attorney were
not valid. Mr and Mrs Litherland trusted Mr Richardson
and signed documents allowing him to act as their attorney while they were
overseas without taking a great deal of notice of what they were doing. Mr
Litherland knew that the documents gave Mr Richardson
authority to act on his
behalf while he was overseas. Mrs Litherland was not called to give evidence
but whilst she might have given
evidence relevant to the circumstances of the
signing of the Enduring Powers of Attorney, the validity of the Powers of
is not part of the charge made against Mr Richardson.
accepting the appointment as attorney Mr Richardson stated, inter alia, that he
understood that he must exercise the power
in accordance with the
Attorney Act 1998
(Qld) and the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
This included the duties found in
Powers of Attorney Act
honestly and with reasonable diligence and the duty found in
Powers of Attorney Act
not to enter into a conflict transaction unless the
principal authorised the transaction or conflict transactions of that type or
conflict transactions generally.
[30] In October 2007, Mr and Mrs Litherland
entered into a contract to purchase two blocks of land at Sovereign Island and
Mr Richardson to act on their behalf.
[31] Mr Litherland said that
Mr Richardson assisted him in relation to two matters arising in the United
States being litigation in
Pennsylvania regarding a potential class action
against Clubfreedom and a transaction involving e-Gold Currency Exchange
American litigation”). Mr Litherland said that Mr Richardson
procured the services of United States lawyers to act on his
behalf in those
matters. Those firms had invoiced Mr Litherland’s business directly and
all invoices issued had been paid.
In about September 2007, Mr Richardson
requested Mr Litherland to deposit some funds into his trust account in relation
to the American
litigation and Mr Litherland said he transferred $20,000 into
his trust account. Mr Richardson said that upon his request Mr Litherland
transferred $30,000 into Mr Richardson’s trust account. Mr Richardson
said he specifically asked for the money so he could
pay some dental
[32] Mr Richardson had never invoiced Mr Litherland for his legal
but he expected he would share in the
success of Mr Litherland’s business ventures. Mr Richardson said that
they had orally
agreed that Mr Richardson would charge a 10 per cent
“success fee” for his professional services i.e. 10 percent of the
total value of funds released from e-Gold and e-Bullion accounts once
injunctions in the United States were set aside.
[33] Mr Richardson’s
understanding of the arrangement between himself and the Litherlands was
revealed in the following answer
in cross-examination. Mr MacSporran on behalf
of the Commission established that Mr Richardson was aware that Mr Litherland
become very wealthy “almost overnight” because of the success of
his Clubfreedom business. Mr MacSporran then asked:
“And you believed that, because of that, he
was in a position then to – to pay you a proper fee for all the work
done from him in respect of that and perhaps other
[34] Mr Richardson’s response was:
“No. Well, I inferred – my reaction,
when he wasn’t paying, was to deliver bills even in earlier matters.
I withdrew those because that was not the arrangement. The arrangement
had been that I would carry out those services with a view
to participation. In
this case, he was unable to grant participation because he’d taken on
another partner and so I’d
said to him, ‘Ron, I’ve got to
charge you. You know, I can’t continue to work with no prospects of
participation
and – no money.’”
The matter he was referring to, where Mr Litherland had taken on another
partner, was Clubfreedom.
[35] On 30 November 2007 Mr Richardson requested Mr
Litherland in a telephone conversation to deposit a “substantial sum of
money” into his account towards his professional fees. Mr Litherland said
he could not hear him. Mr Richardson became incensed
because he thought Mr
Litherland was pretending not to hear him to avoid paying him. On the following
day, 1 December 2007, Mr Litherland
received an email from Mr Richardson saying
that Mr Richardson was of the view that he was trying to avoid further payment
“If you require, we
will complete your property purchase. We will not accept any further work. You
should retain other solicitors
to do various trusts etc.
We will also finalize [
] the US class action provided our fees are
paid and the balance secured.
We will prepare detailed bills for all work and advice given over the past
few years. At your request we held off doing so until
you were in a position to
Obviously this accommodation entitles us to a reasonable premium.”
[36] On 2 December 2007 Mr Litherland replied by email saying that he intended
to pay the fees but Mr Richardson had never given
him an amount to pay. Mr
Richardson replied later that day saying that he no longer wished to act for Mr
Litherland and that he
would complete the land transaction and nothing more. Mr
Richardson said that the major reason bills had not been prepared was because
Litherland held out not only to him, but also to Mr Richardson’s children,
that they would ultimately receive additional
benefit from their association and
support. Mr Richardson expressed the view that he had been used and that he
intended taking his
time in recovering as much as he could which he believed
would ultimately be between $350,000 and $450,000. On the following day
Richardson sent an email with a copy to Mr Litherland to Bruce Parker who was a
friend and business associate of Mr Litherland’s
stating in no uncertain
terms that he no longer wished to act for Mr Litherland.
[37] Mr Richardson
continued to act in the property purchase but Mr Litherland instructed redchip
on 12 December 2007 with regard to
other matters. On 14 December 2007 the property purchase settled and Mr and Mrs
Litherland became
registered owners on 2 January 2008.
[38] A number of
transactions took place without specific instructions from Mr and Mrs Litherland
and of which they did not become
aware until 21 January 2008:
December 2007, Mr Richardson signed an application (using the unregistered
Enduring Powers of Attorney) for the issue
of two certificates of title for the
property which was being purchased by Mr and Mrs Litherland.
January 2008 Mr Richardson lodged the Enduring Powers of Attorney given by Mr
and Mrs Litherland with the DNR.
• WLH Collections Pty Ltd
(“WLH Collections”) was incorporated on 4 January 2008, with Gregory
Edwards Reynolds,
an employee of Mr Richardson’s, as its sole director.
Mr Richardson said that he intended the names to be an ironic reference
company with a similar name
that alleged it
was owed a significant amount of money by Mr Litherland. It may well be that Mr
Richardson wished to put pressure
on Mr Litherland who would assume, unless he
investigated ownership of the company, that a company associated with WLH had
caveat on his residential property.
• On 10 January 2008, KRG
lodged for registration in respect of the property, releases of mortgage,
transfers and applications
for certificates of title. The applications for
certificates of title were executed by Mr Richardson using the Enduring Powers
Attorney which had been lodged with the DNR on 2 January. The application for
certificates of title had been executed by Mr Richardson
as attorney for Ronald
Litherland and Mollie Litherland on 13 December 2007.
• Also on 10
January, caveats were lodged over the property by WLH Collections claiming
“an equitable share or interest
as mortgagee of an estate in fee
simple.” The grounds of claim were said to be pursuant to an assignment
to the caveator dated
3 January 2008 of “an equitable lien over an estate
in fee simple”. The caveats allowed for the registration of the
lodged by KRG on the same date. In fact, WHL Collections was not incorporated
until 4 January 2008 and Mr Richardson said
he originally intended assigning to
it the debt owed by the Litherlands and the benefit of his lien but changed his
mind when he
realised it was not possible to assign his possessory
• On 11 January 2008 notification of the caveats was sent by post
by the DNR to Mr Litherland.
• On 15 January 2008 the releases of
mortgage, transfers and an application for certificates of title were registered
certificates of title requested by Mr Richardson were issued and
collected by KRG on the following day.
• On 16 January 2008 the
Registrar of Titles issued a requisition notice to the caveator, WLH
Collections, as it did not meet
with DNR requirements for
registration.
• On 18 January 2008 a request to remove the caveats was
lodged with the DNR. It was treated as an application to withdraw
the caveats
and registered on 29 January 2008.
[39] After receiving notice of the
caveats, Mr Litherland then sought advice on about 23 January 2008 from redchip
lawyers. Neither
Mr nor Mrs Litherland had ever requested Mr Richardson to
obtain the certificates of title nor knew that he intended to do so.
29 January 2008 Mr Barnes of redchip lawyers wrote to Mr Richardson on behalf of
Mr and Mrs Litherland noting that Mr Richardson
had registered Enduring Powers
of Attorney without the consent or authority of Mr and Mrs Litherland and
applied for the certificates
of title without their consent. Mr Barnes
requested Mr Richardson to cease acting with respect to the properties and on
of Attorney and revoked any authority that Mr Richardson may have to
act on behalf of Mr and Mrs Litherland.
[41] On 30 January 2008 Mr and Mrs
Litherland signed an authority directing Mr Richardson to deliver all files,
documents and records
including safe custody documents held by them or on their
behalf (including any certificate of title) to redchip lawyers. On Friday
February 2008 redchip lawyers sent Mr Richardson the signed authority from Mr
and Mrs Litherland. In particular redchip lawyers
requested the immediate
delivery up of the certificates of title which Mr Richardson had procured
without instructions from Mr and
Mrs Litherland. They also requested the
immediate return of all funds placed by Mr and Mrs Litherland in Mr
Richardson’s trust
account. They also formally notified Mr Richardson of
the revocation of the Powers of Attorney.
[42] On the same day, Mr Barnes of
redchip lawyers received a telephone call from Mr Richardson where he said he
was claiming a solicitor’s
lien over the certificate of title and all
other documents and files belonging to Mr and Mrs Litherland. Mr Barnes made a
note of the telephone conversation on the same day. Mr Barnes
commented to Mr Richardson that there seemed to be a blurring of the
involvement
between Mr Litherland and Mr Richardson between a solicitor/client relationship
and a business relationship. When Mr
Barnes asked Mr Richardson why he had
requested a copy of the certificate of title Mr Richardson replied that
“he wanted to
get it mounted and present it to Ron Litherland as a
gift.” He acknowledged that he had no authority or instructions from
client to use the Power of Attorney for the purpose of securing and receiving
the duplicate certificates of title. Mr Barnes
conceded on cross-examination
that Mr Richardson was admitting that he did not have specific instructions from
his client to use
the Power of Attorney in that way. Mr Richardson said that he
was claiming a solicitor’s lien over the certificates of title
other documents and files belonging to the client.
[43] On 6 February 2008,
redchip lawyers sent a letter to Mr Richardson repeating the request for the
delivery up of all documents.
[44] On 8 February 2008 Mr Richardson sent an
email to redchip lawyers with a copy to Mr Litherland saying that Mr Litherland
his companies owed Mr Richardson in excess of $360,000 in fees; that Mr
Richardson would also be seeking a “significantly larger
sum by way of
damages” and that he would be exercising a lien over the “land
titles” to ensure payment.
[45] Mr Litherland swore in his affidavit
that at the time of receiving that email Mr Richardson had never produced an
account for work performed in relation to any matters conducted on
behalf of himself or his wife. Mr Litherland then instructed
redchip lawyers to
write to Mr Richardson requesting that he immediately provide itemised invoices
in respect of the amount demanded
[46] By letter dated 8 February,
posted on 11 February 2008, redchip lawyers requested from Mr Richardson
immediate delivery of all
itemised bills or invoices relating to the work for
which he was requesting payment and demanded immediate delivery up of the
certificates
of title. On 25 February 2008, on instructions from Mr Litherland,
redchip lawyers forwarded a complaint to the Commissioner.
[47] On 11 March
2008 Mr Barnes at redchip lawyers received invoices from Mr Richardson in
respect of what was said to be fees outstanding
from the Litherlands. The
correspondence noted attachments of copies of invoices for AUD$55,913 and
US$371,530 and a copy of an
invoice from Florida lawyers, Carlton Field. Mr
Richardson also said that KRG would continue to exercise their lien over the
The invoices are undated and not itemised. Mr Richardson had never
previously sent invoices to Mr and Mrs Litherland except in
conveyancing matters where invoices were sent and paid.
[48] The invoices
were sent on that date both by email and by facsimile. However the two sets of
documents are not identical: for
example included in the faxed documents, there
is an invoice entitled “Wholesale Leisure Holdings” in the amount of
where the invoice is in respect of “reopened negotiations with
Wholesale Leisure Holdings attempted renegotiations and settlement
dispute”. Also amongst the faxed documents, is an invoice entitled
“various multilevel schemes” in the amount
of $5,280 which appears
to be a second invoice in respect of the same work and the same amount although
with slightly different wording
from another invoice included in the faxed
documents. Although the wording is not precisely the same, it is sufficiently
to show that there are two invoices for the same work. The invoice for
$1,210 and the second invoice for $5,280 are not found in
the documents sent by
email. However, in the documents sent by email is another invoice entitled
“appointment of Hong Kong
director” which is an invoice for US$450
where the work said to have been done is “discussions re local director
discussions
with Mr Beckett”. This invoice was not included in the
documents sent by facsimile. Mr Barnes pointed out that neither copy
an invoice from Carlton Field.
[49] Mr Richardson explained those
discrepancies by saying that two of the invoices sent by email were
inadvertently omitted from
those sent by facsimile and that the invoice from
Carlton Field was addressed to him and not the Litherlands.
Litherland deposed that the retention of the certificate of title by Mr
Richardson prevented him and his wife from lodging
with the DNR an amalgamation
survey prepared with the purpose of amalgamating the two lots that form the
property into one lot.
The amalgamation needed to occur as the construction of
a house over both lots comprising the property was scheduled to commence.
also prevented the lodgement with the DNR of a mortgage on the property in
favour of Ruby Year Pty Ltd as trustee for the Sovereign
Family Trust which was
the entity that provided the finance for the purchase of the property. Mr
Litherland deposed that Mr Richardson
was aware prior to 13 December 2007 that a
mortgage in favour of the entity financing the purchase of the property was to
be registered
over the property following the registration of the ownership by
Mr and Mrs Litherland.
[51] On 26 March 2008 on Mr Litherland’s
instructions, redchip lawyers filed an application in the Supreme Court seeking,
alia, a return of all documents, files and material held by Mr Richardson
in respect of Mr and Mrs Litherland. Mr Litherland filed
an affidavit in that
matter which is in similar terms to the affidavit filed in this
[52] Mr Richardson prepared, but did not swear or file, an affidavit
for those proceedings. He swore to its truth while giving evidence
proceedings. He says in that affidavit that the primary purpose of his use of
the Enduring Powers of Attorney was for the
benefit of Mr and Mrs Litherland.
He said that he could instead have exercised a lien over the Form 1 and Transfer
documents. He
also prepared and annexed to that affidavit a schedule setting
out more details with regard to each invoice. This version was not
the same as the email or faxed copies referred to earlier. The second invoice
for $5,280 found in the faxed copies but
not in the emailed copies was not
included in the schedule; the invoice for US$450 found in the emailed copies but
not in the faxed
copies was not included in the schedule; the invoice for $1,210
found in the faxed copies but not in the emailed copies was in the
schedule. By
then Mr Richardson had contacted Carlton Field and found that the invoice from
them had already been paid by the Litherlands.
[53] The dispute was settled
by a Deed of Settlement dated 2 May 2008 (the “Deed”). Mr
Litherland said he decided to
resolve the dispute on a commercial
[54] In the Deed Mr and Mrs Litherland agreed they would:
Mr Richardson $140,000;
(b) authorise Mr Richardson to bank the cheque
provided by ICE Gallery Asia-Pacific Pty Ltd made out to “KRG Law”
amount of $10,000 into the KRG Law general account and that Mr Richardson
should be absolutely entitled to those funds;
(c) provide an authority,
acknowledgement and release in a form satisfactory to Mr Richardson’s
solicitors ratifying and accepting
the withdrawal and use of the $30,000 paid
into the KRG Law trust account in or about September 2007;
(d) discontinue
the proceedings with no order as to costs; and
(e) advise the Commission that
they wished to withdraw the complaint made by redchip lawyers on their behalf
against Richardson.
[55] Mr Richardson agreed that he would:
the payment of $140,000 in full and final satisfaction of all and any claims
that he or his related parties might have
against Litherland or e-Cash or their
related parties;
(b) accept the payment of $140,000 in full and final
satisfaction of any lien that he might have over documents or records in his
possession that were the property of Litherland or e-Cash or their related
(c) deliver to Mr and Mrs Litherland the documents. Mr Richardson
would be at liberty to retain copies of the documents which he
was obliged to do
in his role as a solicitor; and
(d) take all steps to discontinue the
proceedings with no order as to costs.
[56] Upon the performance of the
obligations any lien claimed by Mr Richardson whether over the certificates of
title or any replacement
thereof or otherwise was at an end.
Litherland did advise the Commission that he wished to withdraw his complaint.
However, the Commissioner, as he is entitled
to do so, elected to continue his
investigation.
[58] By letter dated 3 June 2008 the Commission provided Mr
Richardson with draft charges in respect of a number of complaints including
complaint with regard to Mr and Mrs Litherland and requested that he make any
further submission by 24 June 2008. Mr Richardson
replied with regard to this
matter on 11 June 2008 saying, inter alia, “the Power of Attorney was used
by me for the benefit
for my clients and for no other
[59] The Commissioner did not dispute that there was a basis
for claiming a lien over the certificate of title but rather that it
improper and/or dishonest to obtain the certificates of title for the purpose of
claiming the lien. While it might considered
that it was in the interests of
his client to obtain a paper Certificate of Title as good conveyancing practice,
it was done with
the intention of benefiting the practitioner in a situation
where there was conflict between his own interests and those of his clients
exercising the powers of attorney.
[60] Mr Richardson said that he would have
been entitled to exercise a lien over the form 1 Transfer or the Release of
It was conceded by Mr Davis SC appearing for Mr Richardson before the
Tribunal that Mr Richardson was wrong when he thought he could
have exercised a
lien over those documents. The Commissioner replied to Mr Richardson’s
letter of 11 June 2008 on 13 June
2008 saying in part:
the Commissioner’s view, following the settlement of the conveyance on 14
December 2007 any asserted entitlement to
exercise a lien over the form 1
Transfer or Release of Mortgage was negated by your obligation to act in your
clients’ best
interests in registering those documents promptly.
Further, in circumstances where:
terminated your retainer with Mr and Mrs Litherland with the exception of the
land transaction and were in dispute regarding
fees allegedly owed in other
matters; and
It has not been
evidenced that you received instructions from the Litherlands to obtain the
certificate of title; and
The Litherlands
have disputed the purpose of providing the Enduring Powers of
The Commissioner believes there is a reasonable likelihood
an inference would be drawn that your sole purpose for obtaining the certificate
of title was to enable you to claim a solicitor’s lien thereby
strengthening your bargaining power in the fees dispute.”
[61] Mr Richardson said in his affidavit filed in this disciplinary proceeding
that in obtaining the certificates of title, he was
acting as a “prudent,
competent and diligent solicitor”. He relied upon an affidavit filed by
an experienced property
lawyer, Robert Scott Gregory, that a prudent, competent
and diligent solicitor acting for the registered owner/proprietor of a fee
simple interest in land that is unencumbered ought to advise and encourage his
or her client to apply for the issue of a duplicate
[62] However, Mr
Richardson conceded in cross-examination that once he lodged the Form 1 Transfer
and Release of Mortgage he had nothing
over which he could exercise a lien so
one of the reasons he applied for the certificates of title was so that he could
a lien over them. Mr Richardson did not advise or encourage his
clients to apply for a certificate of title to protect their interests.
it upon himself to apply for the certificates of title using the Enduring Powers
of Attorney so that he would have valuable
documents over which to execute a
lien. This was his primary purpose. The prospect that it might protect his
clients was, at best,
incidental. He claimed he could not see that this put him
in a situation of conflict. However he agreed in cross-examination that
statement in the Solicitors Handbook on conflict of interest that “a
practitioner should give undivided fidelity to the
client’s interests,
unaffected by any interest of the practitioner or any other person” was a
“fairly basic proposition”
and admitted that he was not giving
undivided fidelity to his clients’ interests when he obtained the
certificates of title.
As an experienced solicitor, he well knew that he was in
a situation of conflict.
[63] He conceded that had he explained to the
Litherlands that he intended to lodge the powers of attorney, use them to apply
certificates of title and then hold the certificates himself for the purpose
of exercising a lien over them they would have given
him instructions not to do
it. Mr Richardson deliberately chose to use the powers of attorney, without the
knowledge or consent
of the Litherlands, to obtain the paper Certificates of
Title to enable him to exercise his lien for unpaid legal fees. The validity
the lien is not in issue in these proceedings. The right of a solicitor to
claim a possessory lien at common law is an incident
or an implied term of the
solicitor’s retainer.
There is no doubt
that a lien can be claimed over property of a client that comes into the
solicitor’s possession in the course
of the retainer and in his or her
capacity as a solicitor.
However there is an
important qualification found in the general principle as stated in
Halsbury’s Laws of England 3rd ed,
Vol 36, par 238 quoted with approval by
Asprey JA in Bolster v McCallum (1966) 85 WN
NSW 281 at 286, which was
referred to in the judgment of McColl JA in Bechara v Atie
[2005] NSW CA 268
and Douglas J in Stark v Dennett
[2007] QSC 171
“At common law a solicitor has a lien upon any documents which come
into his [or her] possession in the course of his [or her]
employment and in his
[or her] capacity as a solicitor
with the sanction of his [or her]
and which are the property of his or her clients.” (emphasis
[64] Mr Richardson conceded that in conveyancing practice ordinarily, once the
matter had settled, the solicitor would seek the purchasers’
instructions
as to whether or not they wished the solicitor to obtain for them a paper copy
of the certificate of title and that
their instructions would be sought as to,
if they did want it, whether they wanted the solicitor to maintain safe custody
document. He agreed that it is a matter of choice for the client. The
client was not given a choice here nor were specific instructions
Richardson obtained and retained the certificate of title, not because it was in
his clients’ interests, but because
it was in his own. In doing so, he
breached his retainer to his clients and his duties under the
Powers of Attorney
to act honestly
and not to enter into a
conflict transaction.
[65] The charge specifically alleges that Mr
Richardson’s conduct in obtaining the certificates of title was dishonest
or improper.
The charge is made in clear
There can be no doubt that his
conduct was improper. Mr Richardson deliberately used the powers of attorney to
obtain certificates
of title so that he could claim a possessory lien over them
and in doing so improperly preferred his own interests to those of his
In a situation where he found himself in a position of conflict he should have
made full disclosure to the client and sought
instructions. He failed to make
full disclosure and obtain instructions because he knew that if he did, the
client would instruct
him not to apply for the certificates of title. In the
circumstances, in failing to make full disclosure and obtain instructions
to further his own interests, he acted dishonestly. This is so whether one
applies the test of dishonesty found in R v Ghosh
[1982] EWCA Crim 2
[1982] 1 QB 1053
(1) Whether the conduct was dishonest by the ordinary standards of
reasonable and honest people; and
(2) Whether the respondent must have
realised that what he was doing was by those standards dishonest;
one applies a purely objective text favoured in Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
at 503-504, 508,
[66] As his conduct was both
improper and dishonest, the Tribunal is satisfied to the relevant standard that
he was guilty of professional
misconduct in respect of the charge as
particularised.
Charge 2: Deceit –
David West and Lynne West
[67] The respondent denied that he acted deceitfully when acting for Mr and Mrs
West (also referred to as “the clients”).
The italicised
particulars of the charge and Mr Richardson’s response are as set out
below. Where Mr Richardson admitted
the particular without qualification that
is not specifically noted but rather taken as proved.
[68] 2.1 At all
material times the respondent:
(a) acted for the
[clients]; and
(b) was the principal of the law practice KRG Law
2.2 In or about May 2006 the clients retained the respondent to act on
their behalf in respect of civil proceedings in the Coolangatta
Magistrates
Court. The clients were the defendants to a claim alleging breach of contract
and/or misrepresentation under the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(“proceedings”).
The respondent said in relation to the allegation contained in paragraph 2.2
that his firm acted for the clients in a conveyancing
matter involving the sale
of a house property, in the course of which the clients removed the pool heating
equipment which the purchaser
claimed was a fixture. The clients were advised
by the respondent’s firm that such items should not be removed.
The respondent said further that the clients were advised they had little
prospect of successfully defending the action and the only
legitimate defence
open to them centred around the purpose of annexation of the chattel.
The respondent advised the clients that no fee would be charged for
preparation of the defence but he reserved the right to do so
in the event that
the matter went further. No fee was ever charged for this matter.
[69] 2.3 The respondent filed a defence in the proceedings.
2.4 A Notice of the Holding of a Directions
Conference dated 14 August 2006 was issued by the Coolangatta Magistrates Court
Notice”) and forwarded to KRG. The Directions Conference was
to take place on 3 October 2006 at 10.30am and the parties themselves
legal representatives were required to attend.
2.5 The respondent failed to advise the clients that the Notice had been
issued and that the parties themselves and their legal representatives
required to attend the Directions Conference.
2.6 On the morning of the Directions Conference the respondent instructed
an employee solicitor Ms Eleanor Huang to attend the Directions
Conference and
seek an adjournment.
[70] 2.7 The respondent telephoned the purchasers’ solicitors and advised
that a representative from KRG would be attending
the Directions Conference
and would be seeking an adjournment on the basis that the purchasers’
costs would be paid.
The respondent did not seek the client’s
instructions in relation to paying the purchasers’ costs.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in
paragraph 2.7 and said that he did not seek the clients’ instructions in
relation to paying the purchasers costs as he at all times intended that he
would pay those costs as they had been incurred because
of his failure to notify
the clients of the directions conference.
[71] 2.8 On 3 October 2006, judgment was entered against the clients pursuant to
Rule 525(2)(b)
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
[72] 2.9 On 18 October 2006 the respondent made an application to
have the judgment set aside without his clients’ instructions.
The respondent admitted the
allegations contained in paragraph 2.9 but said that he telephoned his female
client on her telephone
number 55938684 at 12.48pm on 15 November 2006 to
discuss the matter. The duration of that call was four minutes thirty six
The respondent said that during the course of that telephone
conversation he advised the client that judgment had been entered against
and obtained instructions to appear in the Magistrates Court on 16 November 2006
on the hearing of the application to have judgment
set aside. The respondent
said that he had not telephoned the client prior to this as he was mostly absent
from his office in ill
health and his practice was under the control and
management of a
locum tenens
in the period 17 October 2006 through to 18
January 2007.
[73] 2.10 The application was heard on 16 November 2006 and was
unsuccessful.
[74] 2.11 In order that his clients did not become aware of his
delay and inattention, the respondent acted deceitfully in that
(i) failed to notify his
clients about the Directions Conference and their requirement to attend;
(ii) chose to refrain from telling his clients that judgment had been
entered against them;
(iii) did not seek his clients’ instructions in respect of making an
application to set aside judgment;
(iv) appeared before the Coolangatta Magistrates Court without
instruction;
(v) did not return his clients’ phone calls following notification
of the judgment against them.
The respondent denied the allegations contained in paragraphs 2.11(ii),
2.11(iii), 2.11(iv) for the reasons aforesaid. Further, the
respondent denied
the allegations contained in paragraph 2.11(v) and said that he returned his
female client’s telephone call
by a call to her mobile telephone
0414641323 at 10.52am on 23 November 2006. The duration of the call was two
minutes eleven seconds
and during the course of that conversation the respondent
advised his client that the application to set aside judgment had been
unsuccessful.
[75] 2.12 The respondent thereby preferred his own interests to those of his
The respondent denied the allegations contained in
paragraph 2.12 for all reasons aforesaid.
Further the respondent said that the matter was investigated by the
Queensland Law Society on behalf of the applicant. The Society
recommended that
the complaint be dismissed pursuant to
s 274(1)(b).
Findings with regard to Charge 2
[76] The evidence relevant to this charge
was given by Mrs Lynne West, Ms Xiao Yu (Eleanor) Huang and Mr Richardson, each
gave evidence on oath in these proceedings by way of affidavit and were
cross-examined, and by Kaye Trenham who gave evidence on
affidavit and was not
required for cross-examination. In addition, the Tribunal had the client file,
the correspondence about the
complaint and the relevant court file from the
Coolangatta Magistrates Court.
[77] Mr and Mrs West retained KRG to act on
their behalf in the sale of their home at 9 Coffeebush Court, Reedy Creek
property”). The contract was dated 8 March 2006. Mrs West
was cross-examined about the precise date of the retainer. She
thought it was
immediately after the contract had been signed but was not certain. The
purchasers were Samuel Gimellaro and Louise
Gimellaro. Their solicitors were
Woodward Lawyers. The real estate agent was Andrew Parkes from Robina Village
Real Estate. Settlement
was due on 28 April 2006.
[78] At some time prior to
settlement Mr and Mrs West removed a pool heater from the property as they were
of the belief that it was
not included in the sale of the property.
28 April 2006, there was an agreement to extend the time for settlement. The
purchasers’ solicitors wrote to KRG asking
for their clients to be able to
take possession and asked for return of the pool heater which they asserted was
[80] In his affidavit filed in these proceedings, Mr Richardson
said that Mr and Mrs West were then advised that the pool heater was
and should be returned to the property. He said they did not accept such advice
and advanced various reasons as to why
it did not have to be returned and that
shortly prior to the settlement they advised they had contacted the buyers who
would not make an issue of the matter.
[81] In fact Mr Richardson
did not meet or speak with Mr and Mrs West before settlement so it is necessary
to go to the affidavit
of Kaye Trenham who was working at KRG as a conveyancing
clerk at the time and handling this matter. She said she was not aware
problem about the pool heater until she received the letter of 28 April 2006.
She said she rang the client and although she
kept no notes of the call, her
recollection was Mrs West informing her that the heater was not a fixture, they
would not be bringing
it back and that it was never meant to be part of the
[82] Ms Trenham says she has a note on the file of a call made
later on that day of her conversation with Mrs West saying that she
to the purchasers who told her they would take possession of the property and
would not make an issue in respect of the
heater. Ms Trenham said to her that
their solicitors would have to put that in writing. She annexed what she said
was a copy of
the file note to her affidavit.
[83] In fact the file note is
from a Carolyn Brown not Kaye Trenham. It records a telephone call from Mrs
West on 28 April 2006 at
5.27pm to that effect and that Mr Woodward of the
purchasers’ solicitors rang back and said his clients would not take
possession,
that they would settle on the following week on 4 May and pay
interest and reserve their rights.
[84] Mr Richardson’s evidence that
Mr and Mrs West were advised prior to settlement that the pool heater was a
fixture and should
be returned to the property and that they did not accept such
advice is not supported by any other evidence, particularly not the
given, unsatisfactory as it is, from Ms Trenham his employee. The Tribunal
cannot accept Mr Richardson’s unsupported
hearsay evidence as to
[85] The contract settled on 3 May 2006.
[86] On 11 May 2006,
after settlement, Mr and Mrs Gimellaro commenced proceedings against Mr and Mrs
West in the Magistrates Court
in Coolangatta for damages in the sum of $7,315
for the cost of replacing and reinstalling a heat pump and water control flow
for the pool. The statement of claim showed that they relied upon
representations made by the real estate agent acting for Mr and
Mrs West, Mr
Parkes, who said words to the effect that, “It is a heated pool and you
will be able to swim in it all year round,
there is a spa at one end and also a
pool cover included”; and “yes this is the pool heating
[87] They also relied upon the promotion of the property on
the internet as including “a heated salt water pool for you to enjoy
year round”.
[88] The purchasers said that they noticed the pool
heating equipment had been removed in the course of a final inspection on 28
2006 prior to settlement and, by letters from their solicitors on 28 April
2006 and 3 May 2006 to Mr and Mrs West’s solicitors,
gave notice that they
required the return and installation of the heating pool equipment prior to
settlement. The heating equipment
was not returned or reinstalled.
purchasers then elected to complete the purchase on 3 May 2006 giving notice of
their intention to seek compensation for
damages for the removal of the heating
equipment to the pool.
[90] Mrs West said in evidence that she was concerned
KRG not to be concerned, that she had spoken to a solicitor and that they should
settle on time and it would be sorted out afterwards.
[91] KRG was retained
to defend Mr and Mrs West. Their defence was due 28 days after service of the
claim. A Notice of Intention
to Defend and Defence was filed on 20 June
[92] Prior to the filing of the defence Mr and Mrs West met with Mr
Richardson on 16 June 2006. Mrs West told Mr Richardson on that
occasion, as
she said she had during previous telephone conversations, that the real estate
agent had produced an affidavit in support
of the defendants’ case. Mrs
West made a file note of the meeting and said that Mr Richardson was extremely
rude to both her
and her husband and shouted at them and abused them when she
confronted him as to why his conveyancer and legal assistant had not
issues of the pool heater prior to settlement as she had asked them to. Ms
Trenham and Ms Stubbs, employees of KRG, were,
according to Mrs West, in and out
of that meeting. Mrs West was told she had a 50/50 chance of
[93] Ms Trenham said that after settlement, Mr Richardson, Cherie
[Stubbs], a trainee solicitor with the firm of KRG, Mr and Mrs West
and herself
had a meeting in the boardroom of KRG to discuss the claim issued by the
purchasers in respect of the heater. It appears
that no notes were kept of that
meeting by anyone at KRG. Ms Trenham said her recollection of that meeting was
that Mrs West thought
that Ms Trenham had not told her the full story about the
heater. Ms Trenham said she explained to Mrs West that she had said that
her understanding that the heater was part of the “chattels to go to the
purchaser” and told Mrs West that Mrs
West had told Ms Trenham that she
was not leaving the heater as she had paid a lot for it and was taking it to her
new property.
This of course further contradicts Mr Richardson’s evidence
that Mr and Mrs West were told by KRG prior to settlement that
the pool heater
was a fixture.
[94] Mr Richardson confirmed that Mr and Mrs West said that
their real estate agent was happy to confirm that the pool heating equipment
not part of the sale. He says that Mr and Mrs West were advised that they had
little prospect of successfully defending the
action. He denied being extremely
rude but accepted that the conversation may have become heated but said that was
no more than
often happens when a client receives advice he or she does not want
to hear. He said he was nevertheless prepared to help out Mr
and Mrs West by
filing a defence at no cost to them.
[95] On 19 June 2006, Ms Stubbs, who was
an articled clerk at KRG, sent an email to Mr and Mrs West saying she attached a
the defence which had been filed and noting they had made various
non-admissions because they had not yet received a letter from
the real estate
agent’s solicitor and the plaintiff’s solicitor had refused their
request for an extension of time to
file the defence. The Wests then rang the
real estate agent who told them that the affidavit was waiting for collection at
the solicitor’s
office. They passed the information on to Ms Stubbs and
told her to get it.
[96] On 14 August 2006, the Coolangatta Magistrates Court
issued a notice of a directions conference to be held at 10.30am on 3 October
2006. It was sent to the address for service for the plaintiffs and for the
defendants which, in the case of Mr and Mrs West, was
at KRG. As Mr Richardson
has admitted, he failed to advise Mr and Mrs West that the notice to attend the
directions hearing had
been issued and that the parties themselves were required
to attend with their legal representatives. He said that Ms Stubbs had
one day’s notice and there was no file handover so he did not become aware
of the directions hearing until 2 October
[97] Mr Richardson swore in
his affidavit that he then telephoned the plaintiffs’ solicitors and
advised them what had happened
and said they would attend and seek an
adjournment on the basis that “we pay their costs”. The solicitors
would need to obtain instructions from their clients. Mr Richardson
said he “sensed they understood” his situation and
he expected the
conference to be adjourned. He said he could not contact Mr and Mrs West about
the matter because the file could
not be located on such notice and their new
phone number was not on their permanent records. He thereby accepted that in
the adjournment he was acting without instructions.
[98] Xiao Yu
(Eleanor) Huang commenced employment as a junior solicitor at KRG at Southport
on 23 August 2006. At that time she held
a restricted employee legal practising
certificate. She was a graduate in law from Bond University where she had also
practical legal training which included a 14 week placement in a
Sydney law firm. She was admitted as a solicitor in New South Wales
December 2003 and then travelled overseas and undertook further study during the
following three years. She was employed on
the basis that she would handle New
South Wales conveyancing matters and was assured that training would be given to
her. She did
receive two weeks training at KRG in New South Wales conveyancing
procedures from a paralegal who was employed at the firm and was
leaving. She
received no training in, and had no prior experience of, civil litigation
practices and procedures or Queensland conveyancing.
Until 3 October 2006, Ms
Huang worked only on New South Wales conveyancing matters.
Huang’s evidence was that on the morning of 3 October 2006, Mr Richardson
handed her a document headed “Notice
of Compulsory Conference” in a
matter between Gimellaro and West and said words to the effect “Eleanor,
we act for Mr
and Mrs West, I’m not sure where the file is but I want you
to go down to Coolangatta Magistrates Court and seek an adjournment
matter, on the basis that we need to obtain instructions from the client.”
She told him that she was not happy to do
so as she did not know where the
Coolangatta Magistrates Court was, had no experience of civil procedure and no
knowledge of the
file. However he insisted. He told her to contact the
[100] Ms Huang said she could not locate the file prior to leaving
the office and so was unable to establish telephone contact with
her clients.
She had never had any contact with Mr and Mrs West during the original
conveyance or the subsequent litigation. Ms
Huang had difficulty finding the
courthouse as she had never been there before. She had, as Mr Richardson knew,
no experience at
all in civil litigation and, without the file, no contact
details for Mr and Mrs West.
[101] Mr Richardson said that after Ms Huang
left the office, the plaintiffs’ solicitors contacted him and advised they
received instructions to ask that judgment be entered. He told them that
his solicitor would be attending at court that morning
and arguing for an
adjournment. He did not contact Ms Huang to inform her that the adjournment
would be opposed. Mr Richardson
said that he thought that when Ms Huang
informed the Registrar of the situation the Registrar would have granted the
adjournment
and set a new date a few weeks ahead. He gives no basis for this
belief. He attributes responsibility for judgment being entered
to the fact
that Ms Huang became lost and arrived at the court half an hour late by which
time judgment had already been entered.
He said that Ms Huang rang him from the
court and he attempted to intercede by telephone to assist her but to no avail.
in evidence that he spoke to the Registrar by telephone and said he
would be making an application to have the judgment set aside.
application for an adjournment was unsuccessful and judgment was entered against
Mr and Mrs West. The judgment was entered
by the Registrar for the claim of
$7,315, interest of $344.95, professional costs of $1,235 and court fees of
$192.40. The total
amount of the judgment was $9,087.35. Ms Huang returned to
the office and provided Mr Richardson with a copy of the judgment.
Huang was given the client file and instructed by Mr Richardson to prepare an
application to have the judgment set aside.
He did not tell her to notify the
client of the judgment or the making of the application. She said that she
understood that Mr
Richardson had obtained all necessary instructions from the
client in that regard. In fact, no one informed Mr and Mrs West that
had been entered against them. Nor of course did anyone seek instructions from
Mr and Mrs West to make application to have
the judgment set aside.
Huang prepared a draft application and supporting affidavit based on a precedent
from the firm’s computer system.
Mr Richardson settled the documents and
witnessed Ms Huang’s signature on the affidavit. In the affidavit she
deposed that
she arrived at the Coolangatta Magistrates Court at 10.45am and
requested an adjournment to allow KRG to establish contact with Mr
and Mrs West
as there had been a change in the staff handling the matter, however the
application for adjournment was opposed and
judgment entered.
[105] Mr Huang
filed the application to set aside the judgment and the supporting affidavit on
18 October 2006. Mr Richardson did
not instruct her to contact Mr and Mrs West
application.
They knew nothing about it. Mr Richardson said in evidence that
he did not see any need to tell them. He said that he would tell
them when he
had fixed the firm’s mistake. Mrs West said in evidence, and the Tribunal
accepts, that if they had been consulted
they would have considered carefully
what to do next particularly if they had been told that the real estate agent
was not co-operating.
They were not given the opportunity to consider their
position and take advice since they were not informed of what had
[106] On 20 October 2006 KRG received a letter from Woodward
Lawyers, the lawyers for the purchasers, referring to the delay in the
which the defendants had conducted the proceedings, their failure to comply with
court rules or to attend to the directions
hearing without any justification or
excuse and of the defects in the original defence which was still relied upon.
They notified
that they would seek indemnity costs if the defendants did not
withdraw their application. Mr Richardson reviewed the letter but
instructions to Ms Huang in relation to it. Mr and Mrs West were not
[107] On 9 November 2006, on instructions from Mr Richardson, Ms
Huang sent a letter to Turnbull and Co, solicitors acting for the
real estate
agents who had sold the property on behalf of Mr and Mrs West, saying they would
file an application for leave to file
a third party notice against the real
estate agents. This letter was sent without instructions from the clients. On
13 November
2006 Woodward Lawyers for the purchasers sent a letter by facsimile
to KRG noting that they had not received a reply to their letter
of 20 October
2006 other than a copy of the facsimile of 9 November 2006 which showed that the
defendants proposed to join their
real estate agents as third parties in
proceedings which had already been determined by judgment. Mr Gimellaro filed
an affidavit
confirming various matters that were referred to in the statement
[108] Mr Richardson said that he telephoned Mrs West on 15
November 2006. A four minute phone call to her phone number is shown in
telephone records. He did not keep a file note of the conversation. He said
that he advised her that judgment had been entered
against them and obtained
instructions to appear in the Magistrates Court on 16 November 2006 on the
hearing of the application to
have the judgment set aside. He said he had not
called her before that because he was mostly absent from the office due to ill
and his practice was under the control of a locum from 17 October 2006 to
18 January 2007. He said nevertheless he was apologetic
to Mrs West and assured
her that he would sort the matter out. He did not seek her instructions on the
application to set aside
the judgment.
[109] Mrs West’s evidence was
that she did not receive any correspondence or communication from KRG until 16
November 2006.
She thought that the plaintiffs had withdrawn their complaint as
they had not heard anything for so long. On 16 November 2006 Mr
telephoned Mrs West and told her that he was very sorry, that it was his fault
and that he had not informed them of the
court date set for 3 October 2006. It
appears from her report of this conversation that this was in fact the
conversation she had
with Mr Richardson on 15 November, and she mistakenly wrote
the date 16 November on the note. He said not to worry as he would fix
was his fault and he would make it right. He apologised profusely. He told Mrs
West that he did not get the affidavit
she had spoken about from the
agent’s solicitor. He told her that the “girl” in his office
who was working on
the defence had resigned and he did not know what she had
done. Mrs West reiterated the need to get the affidavit from the real
agent. Mr Richardson did not inform Mrs West that there was a judgment against
them or that they had lost their case. Nor
did he tell her about the
application to set aside the judgment or seek her instructions. She kept a file
note of that conversation.
Apart from the date, the Tribunal accepts the
accuracy of her account of the conversation, the details of which she recorded
contemporaneously.
[110] The application to set aside the judgment was
heard on 16 November 2006 and dismissed by the Registrar. Mr Richardson said
asked his locum and Ms Huang to appear on the application to set aside judgment
but both refused. Mr Richardson appeared personally
at the hearing of the
application to set aside judgment. The defendants were ordered to pay $310 in
costs. Mr Richardson instructed
Ms Huang to write to Mr and Mrs West and notify
them of the decision. It was put to her that she was told by him to write a
to the clients. She had no memory of that. It seems unlikely since she
was not present at court when the application to set aside
the judgment was
heard and dismissed.
[111] On 23 November 2006 Ms Huang sent a letter as
instructed enclosing a copy of the further judgment. Shortly after she sent
letter, Mr Richardson became extremely angry with her for sending it and
was very rude to her. She was distressed and resigned without
notice and left
the office the same afternoon. As she said in her affidavit at all times during
the litigation involving Mr and
Mrs West the carriage of the file remained with
Mr Richardson and her role as a junior solicitor was limited to carrying out his
instructions.
[112] Mr Richardson gave evidence that he spoke to Mrs West for
telephone records. In fact the phone call was made to Mr West’s mobile
and it does not appear that he had a conversation
with Mrs West on that day. Mr
Richardson gives a detailed account of what he said to Mrs West in that
conversation but his account
is unreliable because the Tribunal does not accept
that he had any conversation with Mrs West on that day. It may well be that
conversation was had with Mr West but Mr Richardson does not depose to any
such conversation with Mr West therefore the Tribunal
does not propose to try to
guess what might have been said to Mr West. Mr West was not called by the
Commission. While his evidence
might have been useful in resolving the content
of that conversation, it is essentially irrelevant because the conversation was
judgment had been entered and the application to set it aside had been
[113] On 26 November 2006 Mrs West received the letter from KRG
which had been sent by Ms Huang enclosing the judgments of 3 October
2006 and 16
November 2006. That was the first time that she realised that they had lost the
case and that judgment had been entered
against them. She did not know that KRG
had made an application to set aside the judgment. She had not given any such
instructions.
She immediately rang Mr Richardson who again apologised and said
the letter was not supposed to have been sent out but not to worry
he would fix
it and that he would “terminate the girl who had sent it out.” Mrs
West asked for a full explanation from
Mr Richardson and kept a file note of the
conversation.
[114] Mr Richardson told Mrs West that he had sent a young
inexperienced solicitor to the hearing to try to adjourn it but she was
granted the adjournment. He said the opposing solicitor railroaded his
solicitor because she did not know what she was doing.
He told her that the
court ruled against Mr and Mrs West because they did not attend court. He also
said that the adjournment was
unsuccessful because the solicitor arrived late.
He said he had submitted an affidavit to the court explaining that it was his
that Mr and Mrs West did not attend court because he failed to inform them
of the date. He told her not to worry, that he would
fix it. She again told Mr
Richardson to get the affidavit from the real estate agent. He said he was
going to sue the real estate
agent to recoup the cost of the judgment. She told
him not to do that as the real estate agent was supporting the Wests and told
Richardson to ring the agent’s solicitor to retrieve a copy of the
[115] About an hour later, Mr West rang the real estate agent
himself to get a copy of the affidavit. The agent told Mr West that
already received papers from Mr Richardson threatening to sue them. As Mrs West
said, this was directly against their instructions
and done without their
[116] The plaintiffs filed an application for an enforcement
hearing summons. As a result, orders were made against Mr and Mrs West
December 2006. The order was served on Mr and Mrs West on 11 December 2006.
They were required to pay the debt of $9,557 to
the plaintiffs and submit
financial information and attend a court hearing on 10 January 2007. Mr
Richardson said in evidence that
he had intended to pay the costs assessed on
the default judgment but in fact he had not because Mrs West had never asked him
[117] Between 12 December and 24 December 2006, Mrs West rang Mr
Richardson’s office every day, on several occasions twice a
day. On each
occasion she spoke to Mr Richardson’s secretary who told her that Mr
Richardson was home sick but was taking
messages. She said she would pass on
the message and get back to Mrs West but she did not. Mrs West was told there
was no other
solicitor in the office to whom she could speak. Mr Richardson
sought to explain this by his absence from the office due to his
ill health and
a secretary who did not follow his instructions and had resigned.
West said that when it became apparent that no one from Mr Richardson’s
office was going to contact her she sought
advice from other solicitors and sent
Mr Richardson a letter dated 19 December 2006 telling him about the documents
that had been
served on them at home. She told him the advice she had from
other solicitors was that as Mr Richardson was at fault for neglecting
them of the court dates on 3 October and 16 November he should pay the court
ordered debt of $9,557. She did not receive
a reply to that
[119] Mrs West went to the courthouse to find out what had actually
transpired and attended the hearing on 10 January 2007 without
representation. Mr and Mrs West borrowed $9,557 from the bank and paid the
court ordered debt. As a result of advice
she had received from other
solicitors, Mrs West made a complaint to the Commission on 8 January
[120] The investigation of the complaint is dealt with in more detail
in charge 4.4 however it is relevant here to note that Louise
Syme, who is a
legal officer in the employ of the Commission, deposed that she reviewed the
file kept by KRG with respect to the
Wests’ matter and noted that the file
did not contain any record of Mr Richardson or his staff:
• informing
the Wests of the Directions Hearing or their need to attend;
the Wests’ instructions in relation to the Directions
• informing the Wests that a judgment was entered against them
immediately after the decision; or
• seeking the Wests’
instructions to make an application to have that judgment set aside.
Richardson said in his affidavit that he did the best he could for Mr and Mrs
West and did not charge them in respect of
the litigation against them. This
was an audacious submission. It is difficult to see on what basis he could
charge them for such
grossly negligent and incompetent
representation.
[122] As the Commission submitted, Mr Richardson’s firm
made a mistake in not noting the date and informing Mr and Mrs West
directions hearing. Thereafter instead of facing and owning up to the errors,
Mr Richardson embarked on a course of concealment
from his clients. He took it
upon himself to file the application to set the judgment aside. He did that
without instructions.
He appeared on the application without instructions to do
so. He did not inform his clients of what was going on and did not properly
advise them as to their options and the consequences of those options. In this
sense, he engaged in active deceit preferring his
own interest in concealing his
errors to those of his clients in being fully informed and being given
professional advice.
[123] The Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite
standard that Mr Richardson’s behaviour was deceitful rather than just
incompetent
and so also constitutes professional misconduct.
Failure to co-operate with investigations
[124] This charge was that:
January 2005 and April 2008 the respondent breached his professional obligation
to co-operate with investigations undertaken
by the Queensland Law Society
and/or Legal Services Commission.
The Commissioner provided twelve instances where he alleged that there was a
breach of the respondent’s obligation to co-operate.
[125] The gravamen of this charge is not the enumerated breaches of statutory
requirements but rather the overall failure to co-operate.
[126] The response
of Mr Richardson to this charge was as follows:
respondent denied he breached any obligation to co-operate in the course of
investigations undertaken by the Queensland Law Society
and/or Legal Services
Commission. He said further that he had a reasonable excuse for non-compliance
with the various statutory
notices. The respondent said further his
explanations to the Society had always been candid, admitting errors when they
made and such explanations had not been in any way evasive. The
respondent said he did not believe that the Queensland Law Society
investigators
had submitted in their various reports to the Legal Services Commission that the
respondent had not been co-operative.
respondent said further that the officers of the Commission had variously failed
to reply to correspondence, denied him telephone
access and otherwise acted in a
manner which was not fair and reasonable.
Powers of investigation
[127] Mr Richardson was the subject of numerous
complaints made to the Commission by former clients. These complaints were
investigated
and it is Mr Richardson’s alleged failure to co-operate with
many of those investigations that forms the basis of Charge 4
as particularised.
As the investigations covered the period from January 2005 to April 2008, they
were governed first by
of Chapter 3 of the 2004 Act and from 1 July 2007
by Part 4.6 of Chapter 4 of the 2007 Act.
[128] The 2004 Act provides that an
investigation can be commenced into the conduct of an Australian legal
practitioner upon a complaint
being made or on the Commissioner’s
initiative.
The Commissioner may refer the
complaint to the relevant regulatory authority, that is the Law Society or the
Bar Association.
If that is done, the referral may state a date by which the
regulatory authority is to report to the Commissioner and give directions
the way in which the regulatory authority is to conduct the
investigation.
[129] However, pursuant to s 266 of the 2004 Act, the
Commissioner must investigate a complaint if satisfied that it is inconsistent
with the public interest for the relevant regulatory authority to investigate
the complaint or it is in the public interest for the
Commissioner to
investigate the complaint. The Commissioner must also investigate the complaint
if he or she has not referred it
to a regulatory authority.
[130] The body
carrying out the investigation must give to the respondent to the complaint
written notice of the making of the complaint,
the nature of the complaint, the
identity of the complainant and the action taken by the entity in relation to
the complaint. The
written notice must also advise the respondent that he or
she may make submissions on the complaint by a stated date that is
reasonable.
Under s 270, a respondent
who has given notice of a complaint may make written submissions to the
Commissioner or the relevant regulatory
authority about the
[131] Section 269 of the 2004 Act sets out the powers reposed in
investigators and the obligations of a practitioner being investigated.
269 Powers for investigations
(1) The entity carrying out an investigation as mentioned in section 265 or
266 101 may, for the investigation –
(a) require an Australian legal practitioner who is the subject of the
investigation –
(i) to give the entity, in writing or personally, within a stated reasonable
time a full explanation of the matter being investigated;
(ii) to appear before the entity at a stated reasonable time and place;
(iii) to produce to the entity within a stated reasonable time any document
in the practitioner’s custody, possession or control
that the practitioner
is entitled at law to produce; or
(b) engage a costs assessor to report on the reasonableness of an Australian
legal practitioner’s bill of costs.
(2) Subject to subsection (6), the practitioner must comply with a
requirement under subsection (1)(a).
Maximum penalty – 50 penalty units.
(3) If the practitioner fails to comply with the requirement, the entity may
give the practitioner written notice that if the failure
continues for a further
14 days after the notice is given the practitioner may be dealt with for
professional misconduct.
(4) If notice under subsection (3) is given and the failure continues for the
14 day period –
(a) the practitioner is taken to have committed professional misconduct,
unless the practitioner has a reasonable excuse for not complying
requirement within the period; and
(b) the entity may bring a charge of professional misconduct against the
practitioner.
(5) In a hearing before the tribunal about a charge of professional
misconduct, a copy of the notice mentioned in subsection (3) and
any enclosures
with the notice are evidence of the matters in the notice and the
enclosures.
(6) An Australian legal practitioner may refuse to give the entity an
explanation of a matter being investigated if –
(a) the practitioner satisfies the entity that to give the explanation would
contravene, or invalidate, a policy for professional
indemnity insurance held by
the practitioner; or
(b) the explanation would tend to incriminate the practitioner.”
265 (Referral by commissioner to law society or bar association) or 266
(Commissioner investigating a complaint or investigations
[132] It can be seen that the failure to comply with a requirement under
s 269 of the 2004 Act may have serious consequences for
practitioner.
[133] The Commissioner has the power to refer a complaint to
the Law Society or Bar Association pursuant to s 435 of the 2007 Act.
Section 439 deals with the role of the Law Society or the Bar Association in
investigating complaints. As with the 2004 Act, the
Commissioner must
investigate a complaint if it has not been referred to a regulatory authority,
it is in the public interest for
the Commissioner to investigate the complaint
or it is inconsistent with the public interest for the relevant regulatory
to investigate the complaint. Section 437 deals with the giving of
notice to the legal practitioner of the complaint that has been
s 438 for the practitioner to make submissions in
[134] Section 443 deals with the powers of the investigating body
and the responsibilities of the practitioner during an investigation
substantially similar terms to s 269 of the 2004 Act. The only relevant
changes are to subsections (1)(b) and 4(b). In the 2007
Act subsection
443(1)(b) provides:
a person, who the entity considers is qualified because the person has the
necessary expertise or experience, to report
on the reasonableness of an
Australian legal practitioner’s bill of costs.”
[135] Subsection 443(4)(b) which in the 2007 Act provides:
“the commissioner may apply to the tribunal
for an order in relation to the charge that the practitioner has committed
professional
misconduct as stated in paragraph (a) as if the application were an
application in relation to a complaint against the practitioner.”
[136] The first instance of failure to co-operate was in respect of the
investigation of a complaint by Mr and Mrs Sachse. The particulars
4.1 and Mr Richardson’s response are as follows:
4.1 Complaint of
(a) The respondent admitted that by complaint to the Commissioner dated 4
December 2006, Dennis and Sharyn Sachse complained about
the respondent.
(b) By letter dated 11 December 2006 the Commission required the respondent
to provide a full written explanation of the matters being
investigated and the
client file by 20 January 2007.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraph (b) save that
he said it was the Queensland Law Society which required
such explanation and
file and not the Commission.
(c) The respondent admitted that he did not provide an explanation or the
client file within the time specified but said that following
on receipt of the
enquiry from the Queensland Law Society he advised Craig Smiley, the Manager
– Investigations, that there
would be delay in the reply as the hard copy
relevant file could not be located. Mr Smiley agreed to several requests for
of time in which to respond pending location of the file.
(d) The respondent provided an explanation to the complainant on 21 May
The respondent said that once the file had been located he provided a full
and frank explanation of the matters being investigated
to the Queensland Law
Society by letter dated 21 May 2007. The respondent did not provide a copy of
his file because it was a standard
practice adopted by the respondent and
accepted by the Queensland Law Society that the respondent would simply copy and
forward those
parts of the file or correspondence which were relevant to the
enquiry. The Queensland Law Society had made no complaint of failure
co-operate.
(e) By letter dated 25 February 2008 the Commission requested that the
respondent provide a copy of the client file by 10 March 2008.
The respondent admitted the allegation contained in paragraph (e) and said
that he caused a copy of the file to be forwarded to the
Commission by express
mail such that it would have under normal circumstances reached the Commission
by the due date 10 March 2008.
(f) The client file was forwarded to the Commission by the respondent on or
The respondent said that Ms Syme an officer of the Commission is well aware
that the envelope had been incorrectly addressed to the
Incorporated Council of
Law Reporting and this letter was directly on forwarded by that office to the
Commission and accordingly
the respondent denies that such delay constitutes
evidence of a failure to co-operate in the investigation.
Further, the respondent said that Mr Edwards an officer of the Commission
failed to respond to correspondence dated 7 September 2007
wherein the
respondent set out reasons for denying that it was appropriate that any
compensation should be paid to the complainant.
Findings re Sachse investigation
[137] The evidence shows that on 11
December 2006, the Commission sent a notice under s 269(1) of the 2004 Act
to Mr Richardson with
regard to a complaint by Mr and Mrs Sachse saying inter
“Would you please
forward me a full explanation of your conduct subject to complaint at your
earliest convenience but in any
event by no later than 20 January 2007. Please
also provide your firm’s file relating to the transaction.”
[138] He was told how to apply for an extension of time to reply. Mr
Richardson’s statement in his response that it was the
Queensland Law
Society that required such file and explanation is incorrect although it appears
that by April of the following year
the investigation had been referred to the
[139] On 2 February 2007 the Commission wrote to Mr Richardson
noting that, following discussions, an extension had been granted to
the Sachse complaint and others to the end of January 2007. That time had now
passed but the requested explanation and
information had not been
forthcoming.
[140] On 7 February 2007 Mr Richardson responded to the
Commission referring to “half a dozen or so complaints” being
considered by the Commission and advising that he remained in extremely poor
health. Nevertheless he had returned to work. He said
that his secretary, who
failed to do anything during his absence, immediately resigned and his locum
solicitor proved “less
than capable” and a replacement had been
appointed for him. Mr Richardson sought an extension to reply for a further 10
There was no doubt that Mr Richardson was quite ill. A letter from his
treating physician of 25 January 2007, which was attached
to his letter of 7
February 2007, shows that he suffered from histocytosis with associated type 1
respiratory failure; triple vessel
ischaemic heart disease and mild
[141] On 2 April 2007 Mr Foote, the senior solicitor from
Professional Standards at the Society wrote to Mr Richardson noting that
not provided a response to the Sachse complaint. He said that the
Commissioner/Society had not yet issued a statutory notice
for this matter
requiring a response from him, pending his recent advice that his response was
imminent. Mr Foote said in the letter:
concern of the Society (and the Commissioner) regarding both these matters is
not so much the nature of the complaints
that have been made, but your belated
and/or failure to respond, to the Commissioner’s correspondence in each
As you may be aware,
& (4) of the
Legal Profession
provides for you to be dealt with for professional misconduct (as
opposed to unsatisfactory professional conduct) if you have received
notice and you do not provide an explanation to the complaint within the time
period provided for in that notice
you have ‘a reasonable
excuse for not complying with the requirement within the period.’”
(emphasis in original)
[142] On 16 April 2007 Mr Richardson wrote to Mr Foote at the Society with
regard to the fact that he had sought an extension from
the Commission because
of his ill health.
[143] On 21 May 2007 Mr Richardson wrote to Craig Smiley
in his position as manager of investigations at the Society, responding to
Sachse complaint and saying that he had by then located the file. He did not
however provide the file.
[144] Mr Smiley said in his affidavit that he knew
that Mr Richardson was often incapacitated by illness and that “though Mr
Richardson was sometimes slow in responding to requirements for information from
the Society, he invariably did so.” As a
result Mr Smiley said he
afforded Mr Richardson a “good deal of latitude in the time of his reply
and the nature of his replies
to complaints.”
[145] Mr Smiley then said
in evidence that Mr Richardson was at all times co-operative and that he
“just about always”
information.
The only exception he could
think of was the Corish investigation. He said that he would issue a
notice if he had not heard from him at all after the issue of a
notice. He said that he did not make a record of the telephone
calls he received from Mr Richardson but most were received after
the issue of a
[146] On 24 May 2007 Mr Smiley on behalf of the Society
wrote to the Commissioner saying that the Society had completed its
investigations
and recommending that the matter should be dismissed pursuant to
s 274(1)(a) of the 2004 Act which provides that the Commissioner
dismiss a complaint if satisfied there is no reasonable likelihood of a finding
by a disciplinary body of unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional
misconduct by an Australian legal practitioner.
[147] Mr Smiley did not
himself conduct this investigation.
[148] On 7 June 2007 the manager of
complaints at the Commission, Mr Brittan, wrote to Mr Richardson asking
questions of him about
the complaint by Mr and Mrs Sachse and informing him that
the steps he had taken with regard to their matter would be relevant to
question of whether or not it was in the public interest to proceed further with
their complaint. Mr Richardson did not answer
those queries until 7 September
2007 when he wrote giving a response to some of the Commission’s
[149] On 25 February 2008, the Commissioner wrote to Mr Richardson
giving a notice under s 443(1) of the 2007 Act requiring an explanation
with regard to an allegation made by Mr and Mrs Sachse which had not yet been
the subject of a response. The notice under s 443(1)
was in the following
“Accordingly
I now require you, pursuant to
section 443(1)
Legal Profession Act
to provide me:
a full paper
copy of your client file in relation to the Sachse’s conveyance; and
your explanation
of any correspondence received from the plaintiff’s solicitor before 8
September 2006 and your responses to
that correspondence.
this additional information at your earliest convenience but in any event by not
later than close of business on
Monday 10 March 2008
[150] On 25 February 2008, the Commissioner also wrote to Arcuri Lawyers who
acted for the other party in the conveyance which was
the subject of the
complaint by Mr and Mrs Sachse seeking copies of correspondence and details of
any telephonic communications about
the matter that was the subject of the
[151] On 10 March 2008, Mr Richardson telephoned Louise Syme from
the Commission asking if she had received the Sachse file as he
had sent it via
Express Post on the previous Friday [7 March 2008] to save courier fees. He
rang again later in the day leaving
a message for Ms Syme that the Sachse file
was addressed to the Society but had ended up at the “Queensland Reporting
and he had asked them to forward it to the Commission. He said
he would also email Ms Syme so she did not think he was “telling
fibs” and asserting that it was a mistake in good faith. Mr Richardson
telephoned Ms Syme on 11 March 2008 to ensure she had
received the telephone
message left on the previous day.
[152] On 12 March 2008, the Commission
received a copy of the client file in the matter of Sachse from Mr Richardson.
Attached to
it was a “with compliments’ slip from the Incorporated
Council of Law Reporting with the words “sent to us in error”
printed on it in handwriting. No explanation was given by Mr Richardson as to
why the file was sent in error to the Incorporated
Council of Law Reporting and
not to the Commission which has an entirely different name and an entirely
different address. No satisfactory
explanation was given as to how a
client’s file came to be sent to the Incorporated Council of Law
[153] On 12 March 2008, the Commission wrote to Mr Richardson
referring to the copy of the client file provided and noting a number
documents which should have been on that file but appeared to have been omitted.
An additional explanation was required pursuant
to s 443(1) of the 2007 Act
and a full copy of the client file by no later than close of business on 26
March 2008. On 31 March
2008 Mr Richardson spoke to Ms Syme and indicated that
he had someone checking the files for him and that he hoped to have a response
to the Commission shortly. She agreed to take no further action before the end
of the week [4 April 2008].
[154] No further contact was made by Mr
Richardson with the Commission after that telephone call, so on 18 April 2008
the Commission
wrote to Mr Richardson noting his failure to comply with the
direction given in the letter of 12 March 2008 and saying:
“Accordingly,
I hereby give you written notice pursuant to
section 443(3)
Profession Act
that you may be dealt with for professional misconduct
if your failure to comply with that direction continues for a further 14 days
– that is to say beyond 2 May 2008.
Please note that the Act provides at section 443(4) that you will be taken to
have committed professional misconduct if you fail without
reasonable excuse to
provide me with the explanation by that date.”
[155] An application for an extension of time to respond to the notice was not
received until an email was sent on behalf of Mr Richardson
on 1 May 2008. On 6
May 2008 Mr Richardson was informed by the Commission that his recent illness
might constitute a reasonable
excuse for non-compliance and asking for his
response together with a copy of a medical certificate or any other relevant
documentation
in support of his explanation for the delay in responding to this
and other matters. The Commission said it would take no further
relation to the matter before 14 May 2008.
[156] By letter dated 14 May 2008,
the Commission received a further copy of Mr Richardson’s client file but
no medical certificate
or any other documentation in support of his explanation
for his delay.
[157] On 21 May 2008 Mr Richardson wrote to the Commission
asking for a copy of the investigation report prepared by the Society and
for a reply to his letter to Ms Syme’s colleague, Mr Edwards, sent by him
on 7 September 2007. In fact that letter
was addressed not to Mr Edwards but to
Mr Brittan and did not invite a response.
[158] On 22 May 2008, Mr Brittan
replied on behalf of the Commission saying that the Commissioner had considered
all of the material
and had formed a preliminary view that there was a
reasonable likelihood that a disciplinary body would make an adverse finding
Mr Richardson and had referred the matter for the preparation of draft
[159] On 3 June 2008, the Commissioner provided Mr Richardson with
draft charges in respect of a number of complaints which included
this charge
relating to the failure to co-operate with regard to the Sachse complaint. Mr
Richardson was requested to make any further
submissions by 24 June 2008. On 24
June 2008, he was granted until 27 June 2008 to make submissions. No further
submissions were
[160] In summary, an explanation was received on
21 May 2007 in response to a request made on 11 December 2006 and the client
on 12 March 2008 in response to a request first made on 11 December 2006
and then on 25 February 2008.
[161] Because of acquiescence by the Society it
cannot be said that Mr Richardson failed to co-operate with the Society’s
investigations.
The same cannot be said with regard to the investigation by the
Commission with which he manifestly failed to co-operate.
particulars of charge 4.2 and Mr Richardson’s response are as
4.2 Complaint by Pollock
respondent admitted that by complaint to the Commissioner dated 6 December 2006
Pollock complained about the respondent.
(b) By letter dated 27 February 2007, as the respondent admitted, the Society
required the respondent to provide a full written explanation
of the matters
being investigated and the complainant’s client file by 27 March 2007.
(c) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the client file within
the time specified.
(d) By facsimile dated 28 March 2007 the Society gave the respondent a Notice
pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2004
(2004 Act Notice)
which required the respondent to provide a full written explanation of the
matters being investigated.
(e) On 18 April 2007 the respondent provided an explanation to the Society.
That explanation did not include the client file.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraph (e) but said
further that the Queensland Law Society granted the respondent
an extension of
time in which to provide the requested explanation and further that it was a
long standing practice that the respondent
simply provided copies of relevant
correspondence with his explanation. For this reason no file was forwarded to
the Society. The
Society made no complaint of a failure to co-operate in the
investigation.
(f) On 8 October 2007 the respondent provided a copy of the client file to
the Legal Services Commission following a notice from the
Commission pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2007
(2007 Act Notice).
The respondent admitted the allegation contained in paragraph (f) and said
that the file was provided within the time limited by the
2007 Act Notice.
Findings re Pollock investigation
[163] Following the complaint by Vickie
Pollock, the Commissioner referred the complaint to the Society for
investigation on 14 February
2007. By letter from the Society dated 27 February
2007, Mr Richardson was required to provide a full explanation pursuant to
269(1)(a)(i) and a copy of the client file pursuant to
s 269(1)(a)(iii) of the 2004 Act. He was advised that if he failed to do
so a notice pursuant to s 269(3) of the 2004 Act would be issued. He did
not respond to that letter.
[164] The notice under s 269(3) of the 2004
Act, as was set out in the particulars of the charge, was given on 28 March
was signed by Mr Smiley. As set out in the particulars, Mr
Richardson’s explanation was not sent until 18 April 2007 and he
forward the client file or any other documents with this response.
Smiley said in his affidavit before the Tribunal that he thought that Mr
Richardson’s response was sufficient to deal
with the complaint
notwithstanding the fact that Mr Richardson had not provided his file. In
evidence he said that he did not receive
a formal request for an extension but
that Mr Richardson may have rung him and told him it was on its way.
28 June 2007, Mr Smiley on behalf of the Society wrote to the Commissioner with
the recommendation of the Professional Standards
Committee of the Society that
Mr Richardson should engage a management consultant to conduct a management
review of his practice
with a view to recommending appropriate practices and
procedures to be implemented; provided he undertook that course and he
successfully
implemented the recommendations made by the consultant then it
would not be in the public interest to further pursue this matter.
24 September 2007 the Commissioner noted that the client file had not been
provided to the Society and required Mr Richardson,
pursuant to
s 443(1)(a)(iii) of the 2007 Act, to provide a full copy of the client file
by no later than 1 October 2007. After a
telephone request from Mr Richardson,
Mr Brittan the Manager of complaints at the Commission granted Mr Richardson an
extension of
time until 8 October 2007 to provide the file. On 8 October Mr
Richardson provided the file.
[168] In summary, an explanation was received
on 18 April 2007 in response to requests made on 27 February and 28 March 2007,
the client file on 8 October 2007 in response to requests made on 27
February, 28 March and 24 and 25 September 2007.
[169] Mr Richardson cannot
be said to have failed to co-operate in the investigation of this complaint.
The Society acquiesced in
his approach to their investigation. Once the
Commissioner made a request of Mr Richardson, he co-operated in meeting that
within the required time as extended.
4.3 Complaint
(a) By complaint to the Commissioner dated 13 December 2006 Graves complained
By letter dated 8 January 2007 the Commission required the respondent to
provide a full written explanation of the matters being
investigated and the
complainant’s client file by 29 January 2007.
(b) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the client file within
the time specified.
(c) By letter dated 30 January 2007 the Commission required the respondent to
provide a full written explanation of the matters being
investigated and the
complainant’s client file by 7 February 2007.
(d) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the client file within
the time specified.
The respondent could not admit or deny the allegations contained in
paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) because despite a search for
correspondence the respondent could not locate this. The respondent said that
his practice was under the control of Mr Ross
locum tenens
the period 17 October 2006 through to 18 January 2007 during which time the
respondent was absent in poor health.
(e) By letter dated 20 February 2007 the Society required the respondent to
provide a full written explanation of the matters being
investigated and Mr and
Mrs Graves’ file by 20 March 2007.
(f) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the client file within
the time specified.
(g) By facsimile dated 23 March 2007 the Society gave the respondent a 2004
Act Notice which required the respondent to provide a
full written explanation
of the matters being investigated and the complainant’s client file.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraphs (e), (f) and
(g) and said that on the occasion of each such request
or notice he telephoned
the Society and obtained an appropriate extension for provision of an
explanation as required by the Society.
(h) On 21 May 2007 the respondent provided an explanation to the Society.
That explanation did not include the client file.
The respondent admitted that he did not provide the client file as alleged in
paragraph (e) [the Tribunal presumes he meant (h)] but
said that his explanation
was accompanied by copies of all relevant documents. This procedure was with
the long standing consent
of the Society and adopted with a view to minimising
the need for the Society to scour a file looking for relevant documents. The
Society has made no complaint of a failure to co-operate in the
investigation.
(i) On 8 October 2007 the respondent provided a copy of the client file
following a 2007 Act Notice dated 25 September 2007.
The respondent admitted that the Legal Services Commission gave a 2007 Act
Notice and that it did so many months after the Society
had closed its file.
The respondent said further that he complied with the Notice within the time
limited by that Notice.
Findings re Graves investigation
[170] On 15 February 2007, the Commissioner
referred the complaint to the Society for investigation.
[171] The evidence
supports the particulars found in 4.3(a), (b) and (c). The letter from the
Commissioner of 30 January 2007 required
an explanation pursuant to
s 269(1)(a)(i) of the 2004 Act. No explanation as required was
[172] The matter was then referred to the Society for
investigation. On 20 February 2007, the Society sought an explanation from
Richardson by 20 March 2007. There was no reply from Mr Richardson so a notice
under s 269(3) of the 2004 Act was sent on 23
March 2007.
facsimile from the Society of 23 March 2007 read:
the Practitioner, in breach of
Section 269(1)(a)(iii)
Legal Profession
(“the Act”) have failed to give an explanation in
writing of the matters referred to in the complaint of Simon &
Nadine Graves
dated 4 January 2007 and to provide your client file or provide the
files/documents for the matter, which requests
were made of you in the
Society’s letter to you dated 20 February 2007. A copy of the
Society’s letter is
to this Notice.
I, Craig Smiley, being the Manager of Professional Standards Department of
the Queensland Law Society Inc hereby notify you that if
such failure continues
for a period of 14 days after the date of your receiving this notice you will be
liable to be dealt with for
professional misconduct, unless you have reasonable
excuse for not complying with the requirement of Section 269(1)(a)(i) of the
to give an explanation in writing within the specified period and for not
complying with the requirement of Section 269(1)(a)(iii)
to provide your client
file or provide the files/documents as specified in the Society’s letter
dated 20 February 2007.
Your attention is drawn to Section 269(5) of the Act which provides as
‘In a hearing before the tribunal about a charge of professional
misconduct, a copy of the notice mentioned in subsection (3)
and any enclosures
with the notice are evidence of the matters in the notice and the
enclosures.’
This notice is given to you pursuant to Section 269(3) of the Act.”
[174] On 21 May 2007, Mr Richardson wrote to the Society providing an
explanation and enclosing some documents from the file. Mr
Smiley said Mr
Richardson may have rung him after the issue of the s 269(3) notice and Mr
Richardson’s written response. On
30 May 2007 Mr Smiley on behalf of the
Society wrote to the Commissioner submitting that the Commissioner should
dismiss the complaints
against Mr Richardson under s 274(1)(a) of the 2004
[175] By letter dated 21 September 2007, sent via express post on 24
September 2007, the Commission gave a notice to Mr Richardson
s 443(1)(a)(iii) of the 2007 Act requiring a full copy of the client file
which had not been provided to the Society during
its investigation. Mr
Richardson telephoned on 25 September 2007 requesting an extension. An
extension was granted by letter from
the Commission on 25 September 2007 until 8
October 2007.
[176] On 8 October 2007 the Commission received the file with
regard to Mr and Mrs Graves.
[177] By letter dated 3 March 2008 the
Commission provided Mr Richardson with draft charges in respect of a number of
complaints including
the complaint by Mr and Mrs Graves and requested that he
make any further submissions by 7 April 2008.
[178] In summary, an
explanation was received on 21 May 2007 in response to requests made on 30
January, 20 February and 23 March
2007 and the client file on 8 October 2007 in
response to requests made on 20 February, 23 March and 21 and 25 September
[179] The complaint of failure to co-operate is not made out with
regard to charge 4.3.
4.4 Complaint by West
particulars of the charge and the respondent’s response are as
(a) By complaint to the Commissioner dated 8 January 2007 the Wests
complained about the respondent.
(b) By letter dated 21 February 2007 the Society required the respondent to
provide his client file in this matter by 8 March 2007.
(c) The respondent did not produce the client file within the time
(d) By facsimile dated 13 March 2007 the Society gave the respondent a 2004
Act Notice which required the respondent to provide the
client file.
(e) The respondent did not produce the client file within the time
As well as admitting the allegations, in paragraphs 4.4(a) – (d), the
respondent also admitted the allegation contained in paragraph
4.4(e) but said
he requested an extension of the time for compliance with the 2004 Act Notice
and said that such request was granted.
(f) By letter dated 22 May 2007 the respondent provided an explanation to the
The respondent admitted the allegation contained in paragraph 4.4(f) and said
further that such explanation was accompanied by all
relevant documents from the
client file in accordance with a long standing practice. The Society made no
complaint concerning the
respondent’s co-operation in the
investigation.
(g) The client file was provided to the Commission on 8 October 2007
following a 2007 Act Notice dated 25 September 2007.
The respondent admitted the allegation contained in paragraph 4.4(g) and said
the file was provided within the time limited by such
Findings re West investigation
[180] David and Lynne West made a complaint about Mr Richardson on 8 January
2007 enclosing a copy of an affidavit by Xiao Yu Huang
sworn 18 October 2006,
the defence filed on behalf of Mr and Mrs West by KRG on 20 June 2006, a letter
of 23 November 2006 enclosing
judgment issued on 16 November 2006 against Mr and
Mrs West as well as judgment entered on 3 October 2006.
[181] On 14 February
2007 the applicant referred the complaint to the Society for investigation. All
that the Society required of
Mr Richardson, by letter dated 21 February 2007,
was his client file and that was to be produced by 8 March 2007. The respondent
did not reply to the Society’s letter and the file was not
[182] On 13 March 2007 the Society gave a notice to Mr Richardson
under s 269(3) of the 2004 Act which read:
the Practitioner, in breach of
Section 269(1)(a)(i)
Legal Profession
(“the Act”) have failed to give an explanation in
writing of the matters referred to in the complaint of David &
dated 7 February 2007 which request was made of you in the Society’s
letter to you dated 21 February 2007. A copy
of the Society’s letter is
to this Notice.
I, Craig Smiley, being the Manager of Professional Standards Department of
the Queensland Law Society Inc hereby notify you that if
such failure continues
for a period of 14 days after the date of your receiving this notice you will be
liable to be dealt with for
professional misconduct, unless you have reasonable
excuse for not complying with the requirement of Section 269(1)(a)(i) of the
to give an explanation in writing within the specified period.
Your attention is drawn to Section 269(5) of the Act which provides as
“In a hearing before the tribunal about a charge of professional
misconduct, a copy of the notice mentioned in subsection (3)
and any enclosures
with the notice are evidence of the matters in the notice and the
enclosures.”
This notice is given to you pursuant to Section 269(3) of the Act.”
[183] No reply was received within the time stipulated in the notice. No
request for an extension of time was received although
Mr Smiley conceded that
Mr Richardson might have rung to tell him it was coming.
[184] On 22 May 2007
Mr Richardson sent a reply to the Society about the complaint by Mr and Mrs
West. He says that it was accompanied
by all relevant documents from the client
file. However on the face of the letter there were no enclosures and the letter
does not refer to any enclosures. I conclude that there were in fact no
enclosures. Mr Richardson said in that letter:
“Our situation was
not enhanced when Ms Huang became lost, arrived half an hour late and was met
with this unexpected opposition.
The registrar had, in fact, already written
out his judgment. I attempted to intercede by telephone to assist Ms Huang but
I personally contacted Mrs West and advised her of the judgment, the reason
for it and of intention to make application to set it
We filed such application which was set for hearing on the
day of November 2006. I appeared before Mr
Costanza and the plaintiff was represented by Mr Woodward.”
[185] If Mr Richardson meant to convey the order in which events occurred, the
letter was at best misleading. Mr Smiley considered
the response, which he says
was without the file, to be adequate. Of course, without the file Mr Smiley had
no way of checking the
accuracy of what Mr Richardson said.
[186] On 28 May
2007 the Society reported to the Commissioner that it had completed its
investigations with the following recommendation
by Mr Smiley:
“You should dismiss
this complaint pursuant to
section 274(1)(b)
Legal Profession Act
. There was a kafuffle [
] Mr Richardson has done what he can to
right the situation but the West’s [
] position from the outset
was always doomed.”
[187] On 24 September the Commission sent a notice via Express Post to Mr
Richardson saying, inter alia, “I now require you,
pursuant to
443(1)(a)(iii)
Legal Profession Act 2007
, to provide me a full copy of
your client file in relation to the litigation conducted on behalf of Mr and Mrs
West against Samuel
Joseph Gimellaro and Louise Marie Gimellaro and to do so at
your earliest convenience but in any event by no later than 1 October
2007.” The copy of the client file was provided by Mr Richardson by
letter dated 8 October 2007.
[188] On 8 May 2008 the Commissioner sought a
copy of various materials regarding this matter from the Registrar of the
Coolangatta
Magistrates Court. The court file was provided on 9 May
[189] In summary, an explanation was received on 22 May 2007 and the
client file on 8 October 2007 after it had been sought on 21
February, 13 March
and 24 September 2007.
[190] Mr Richardson’s responses to the Society
were most unsatisfactory. In spite of Mr Smiley’s view expressed to the
Commission, the Tribunal is satisfied that Mr Richardson failed to co-operate
with the Society’s investigation.
4.5 Complaint
Shepherd and Chalmers
[191] The particulars of charge 4.5 and Mr Richardson’s response are as
(a) By complaint to the Commissioner dated 12
February 2007 Shepherd and Chalmers complained about the respondent.
(b) By letter dated 20 February 2007 the Society required the respondent to
provide a full written explanation of the matters being
investigated and the
complainant’s client file by 20 March 2007.
(c) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the client file within
the time specified.
(d) By facsimile dated 23 March 2007 the Society gave the respondent a 2004
Act Notice which required the respondent to provide a
full written explanation
of the matters being investigated together with the client file.
(e) By letter dated 10 May 2007 the Society required the respondent to
provide an explanation to the matters being investigated by
31 May 2007.
(f) The respondent provided a response by letter dated 19 July 2007.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraphs 4.4(a),
4.4(b), 4.4(c), 4.4(d), 4.4(e) and 4.4(f) but said that he
had a reasonable
excuse for non-compliance with the Notice in that the client had agreed to
withdraw the complaint on issue of a
replacement certificate of title in respect
of which the respondent was paying her legal costs. The clients ultimately did
such complaint.
(g) By letter dated 21 September 2007 the Commission required the respondent
to provide the complainant’s client file by 1 October
2007 which was
subsequently extended until 8 October 2007.
The respondent admitted the allegation contained in paragraph 4.4(g) and said
the client file was provided within the time limited
by the 2007 Act Notice.
(h) The respondent provided the client file on 8 October 2007 following a
2007 Act Notice dated 25 September 2007.
Findings re Shepherd and Chalmers investigation
[192] Robert Shepherd and
Kathleen Chalmers made a complaint about Mr Richardson in writing on 12 February
2007. The complaint was
referred to the Society for investigation on 15
February 2007. The letter of 20 February 2007 from the Society required Mr
pursuant to s 269(1) of the 2004 Act to provide an explanation
and the client file by 20 March 2007. Mr Richardson did not respond
Society’s letter.
[193] On 23 March 2007 a formal notice was given to
Mr Richardson by the Society under s 269(3) of the 2004 Act. The Notice
the Practitioner, in breach of
Section 269(1)(a)(iii)
Legal Profession
(“the Act”) have failed to give an explanation in
writing of the matters referred to in the complaint of Robert Shepherd
Kathleen Chalmers dated 15 February 2007 and to provide your client file or
provide the files/documents for the matter, which
requests were made of you in
the Society’s letter to you dated 20 February 2007. A copy of the
Society’s letter is
to this Notice.
I, Craig Smiley, being the Manager of Professional Standards Department of
the Queensland Law Society Inc hereby notify you that if
such failure continues
for a period of 14 days after the date of your receiving this notice you will be
liable to be dealt with for
professional misconduct, unless you have reasonable
excuse for not complying with the requirement of Section 269(1)(a)(i) of the
to give an explanation in writing within the specified period and for not
complying with the requirement of Section 269(1)(a)(iii)
to provide your client
file or provide the files/documents as specified in the Society’s letter
dated 20 February 2007.
Your attention is drawn to Section 269(5) of the Act which provides as
‘In a hearing before the tribunal about a charge of professional
misconduct, a copy of the notice mentioned in subsection (3)
and any enclosures
with the notice are evidence of the matters in the notice and the
enclosures.’
This notice is given to you pursuant to Section 269(3) of the Act.”
[194] Mr Smiley, who had sent both notices on behalf of the Society, had Ms
Carpenter, who was an officer in the Client Relations
Centre of the Society,
success in managing to have Mr
Richardson resolve complaints concerning
matters.” Mr Smiley himself also spoke to Mr Richardson by telephone on
[195] By letter dated 10 May 2007 the Society referred to the
telephone conversation between Mr Smiley and Mr Richardson on 9 May
confirmed that it would prefer to close its investigation in relation to this
matter with Mr Richardson having rectified
the incorrect registration of the
property in his clients’ names as joint tenants when they should in fact
have been registered
as tenants in common. The letter from Mr Smiley
“When giving your
response to the complaint, which the Society would appreciate – by 31 May
2007, could you please also
provide details of having rectified the position of
Ms Chalmers and Mr Shepherd?”
[196] Mr Smiley said in his affidavit that this letter did not require
production of the file; it was not a formal request for information
pursuant to
the 2004 Act; but it did not excuse failure to respond to the letters of 20
February and 23 March 2007.
[197] Mr Richardson did not reply to that letter.
On 20 June 2007 the Society wrote again to Mr Richardson asking for his answer
the Society’s letter of 10 May 2007 by no later than 30 June 2007.
[198] Mr Richardson did not reply until 19 July 2007. He commenced the
letter as follows:
a thoroughly exhaustive search, we have not been able to locate either the
certificate of title or transfer reflecting
the change from joint tenancy to
tenants in common.”
In his affidavit filed in these proceedings Mr Richardson said that the relevant
documents had been lost or mislaid in his office.
[199] In his letter of 19
July 2007, Mr Richardson said that he had apologised to Ms Chalmers and arranged
to pay for the costs of
her local solicitors in New South Wales to rectify the
error. He said that Ms Chalmers had agreed that she would withdraw the
on completion of the application to issue replacement certificates of
[200] On 4 September 2007 the Society wrote to the Commissioner saying
it had completed its investigations. Mr Smiley referred to
the recommendation
made with regard to the Pollock complaint in regard to Mr Richardson’s
engaging a management consultant
and said that this matter was another one which
fitted within that recommendation save that the Commission might consider
or not charges ought to be brought for a failure to comply with the
notices within a due time. At the date the Society had still
not received the
file from Mr Richardson.
[201] By letter dated 21 September 2007 the
Commission required Mr Richardson, pursuant to s 443(1)(a)(iii) of the 2007
Act, to provide
the Commission with a full copy of the client file in regard to
the Shepherd and Chalmers conveyance by no later than 1 October 2007.
September 2007 Mr Richardson rang Ms Syme asking for an extension of time in a
number of matters including this matter until
8 October 2007. On 25 September
2007, Mr Brittan on behalf of the Commission notified Mr Richardson that he was
given an extension
of time to provide full copies of the files that had been
requested in relation to the following matters: Marsh, Graves, Hinton,
and Chalmers, Pollock, Corish and West. He referred to the number of times the
Society had asked for copies of these files
and said that in the circumstances
where the Society had been endeavouring to obtain a number of those files for
over six months
he would not consider any further requests for extensions to
comply with the most recent notices.
[202] On 8 October 2007 Mr Richardson
sent the Shepherd and Chalmers file as well as other files to the
Commission.
[203] On 8 November 2007 the Commission received a telephone
message from Ms Chalmers. Ms Syme returned the telephone call on 9 November
2007 when Ms Chalmers informed her that she wished to withdraw the complaint as
she had received the amended title deeds for her
house. Ms Chalmers confirmed
that in writing.
[204] On 26 February 2008 Ms Syme had a telephone
conversation with Ms Chalmers where they discussed the length of time it had
for the title to be rectified. Ms Chalmers said that she was happy for Ms
Syme to contact her New South Wales solicitors. Ms Syme
then rang the New South
Wales solicitor who agreed to retrieve his file from archives and provide her
with further information.
Ms Syme undertook further investigations and on 3
March 2008 the Commission provided Mr Richardson with draft charges in respect
of a number of complaints including a charge about his failure to co-operate in
the investigation of the Shepherd and Chalmers complaint
and requested that he
make any further submissions by 7 April 2008.
[205] In summary, an
explanation was received on 19 July 2007 after it had been sought on 20
February, 23 March, 10 May and 30 June
2007 and the client file on 8 October
2007 after it had been sought on 20 February, 23 March, 21 and 25 September
[206] Mr Richardson failed to co-operate with the Society’s
investigation by failing to respond without reasonable excuse to
Society’s letters.
4.6 Complaint
(a) By complaint to the Commissioner dated 26 April 2007 Hinton complained
(b) By letter dated 30 May 2007 the Society required the respondent to
provide the complainant’s client file by 13 June 2007.
(c) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the client file within
the time specified.
(d) By facsimile dated 19 June 2007 the Society gave the respondent a 2004
Act Notice which required the respondent to provide a full
written explanation
of the matters being investigated together with the client file.
(e) The respondent failed to respond.
(f) By letter dated 6 July 2007 the Society required the respondent to
provide a full written explanation to the matters being investigated
complainant’s client file by 27 July 2007.
(g) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the client file within
the time specified.
(h) By facsimile dated 8 August 2007 the Society gave the respondent a 2007
Act Notice which required the respondent to provide a
full written explanation
of the matters being investigated and the complainant’s client file.
(i) The respondent provided the client file to the Commission on 8 October
2007 following a 2007 Act Notice dated 25 September 2007.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraphs (a), (b),
(c), (d), (e), (f), (g) and (h) but said further that he
did not simply ignore
the requests referred to in those allegations but continued to request
extensions of the time for compliance.
This was necessary because the relevant
file could not be located.
Findings re Hinton investigation
[207] Rachel Hinton complained to the
Commission in respect of Mr Richardson on 26 April 2007. The Commission
referred the complaint
to the Society for investigation on 14 May 2007. On 30
May 2007 the Society required Mr Richardson to forward a copy of his file
pursuant to s 269(1) of the 2004 Act by 13 June 2007. Mr Richardson did
not provide the file so on 19 June 2007 the Society issued
him a notice under
s 269(3) of the 2004 Act requiring him to provide a copy of the file within
14 days. Both notices were issued
by Mr Smiley on behalf of the
[208] By letter dated 6 July 2007 the Society wrote to Mr Richardson
saying it had received further particulars of Ms Hinton’s
complaint which
were attached and required his response to the matters particularised in that
letter by 27 July 2007. Mr Richardson
was reminded that the explanation should
also be accompanied by the relevant client file which had previously been
requested. On
8 August 2007 the Society gave a notice to Mr Richardson under
s 443(3) of the 2007 Act because of his failure to give an explanation
writing or to provide the client file. He was notified that he should provide
the explanation and the client file within 14 days.
[209] On 3 September 2007
Mr Smiley on behalf of the Society wrote to the Commissioner saying that it had
completed its investigations
and they made a similar recommendation with regard
to Pollock but also drew the Commissioner’s attention to the fact that Mr
Richardson had not given any response in relation to the matter and that he was
in breach of notices issued pursuant to s 269(1)
of the 2004 Act dated 30
May 2007, s 269(3) of the 2004 Act dated 19 June 2007, s 443 of the
2007 Act dated 6 July 2007 and s 443(3)
of the 2007 Act dated 8 August
2007. Mr Smiley said in evidence that he did not recall receiving any
communications from Mr Richardson
concerning this matter.
[210] On 24
September 2007 Mr Brittan on behalf of the Commission gave a notice to Mr
Richardson pursuant to s 443(1)(a)(iii) of the
2007 Act to provide a full
copy of the client file. This is one of the matters about which Mr Richardson
rang asking for an extension
of time and finally provided the file on 8 October
2007. Mr Richardson was provided with draft charges in respect of this matter
on 3 March 2008.
[211] In summary, no explanation was ever received in spite
of requests on 19 June, 6 July and 8 August 2007; the client file was
on 8 October 2007 after requests on 30 May, 19 June, 6 July, 8 August, 24 and 25
September 2007.
[212] The Tribunal is satisfied that Mr Richardson failed to
co-operate with the Society’s investigation of this matter.
4.7 Complaint
(a) By complaint to the Commissioner dated 14 May 2007 Corish complained
(b) By letter dated 30 May 2007 the Society required the respondent to
provide his client file in this matter by 13 June 2007.
(c) The respondent did not produce the client file within the time
(d) By facsimile dated 19 June 2007 the Society gave the respondent a 2004
Act Notice which required the respondent to provide the
client file.
(e) The respondent did not produce the client file within the time
(f) By letter dated 6 July 2007 the Society required the respondent to
provide a full explanation to the complaint by 27 July 2007.
(g) The respondent did not provide an explanation within the time
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraphs (a), (b),
(c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) but said that he had a reasonable
non-compliance in that the relevant file could not be located in his office. On
at least two occasions he contacted the
Society by telephone to advise of a need
for an extension of time for compliance and said that such extensions were
(h) By facsimile dated 8 August 2007 the Society gave the respondent a 2007
Act Notice which required the respondent to provide a
full written explanation
to the complaint.
(i) The respondent did not provide a response within the time specified.
(j) The respondent provided the client file on 8 October 2007 following a
2007 Act Notice dated 25 September 2007. The respondent
failed to provide an
explanation to the complaint.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraph (h) but did
not admit the allegations contained in paragraph (i) and
said that he telephoned
the Society and was granted yet a further extension of time for compliance
however prior to the expiry of
that extension he was advised by the Society that
they had already reported on the matter to the Legal Services Commission. The
respondent said that it seems that no record had been made by the Society of the
extension granted. The respondent said further
that there had been a change in
the secretary to Mr Smiley which may have resulted in no record being kept.
The respondent said he complied with the 2007 Act Notice dated 25 September
2007, requiring production of the client file within the
time specified.
Findings re Corish investigation
[213] Cameron and Tracie Corish complained
they had had in getting their complaints dealt with by the firm. The
matter was referred by the Commissioner to the Society for
investigation on 23
[214] On 30 May 2007 the Society required Mr Richardson to provide
the client file by 13 June 2007 pursuant to s 269(1) of the 2004
There was no response to that letter so on 19 June 2007 Mr Smiley on behalf of
the Society gave a notice to Mr Richardson under
s 269(3) of the 2004 Act.
That notice required Mr Richardson to provide the file and an explanation in
writing of the matters referred
to in the complaint. There was no response from
Mr Richardson to that notice.
[215] On 6 July 2007 the Society required an
explanation with regard to the complaint pursuant to s 443(1) of the 2007
Act. A response
was required by 27 July 2007. A request was once again made
for the relevant client file to be provided. On 8 August the Society
hand of Mr Smiley gave a notice to Mr Richardson under s 443(3) of the 2007
Act, in view of his failure to provide an explanation
or the file, to provide
those files within 14 days. Mr Richardson did not respond to that
[216] Mr Smiley’s evidence was that it was the “usual
case” that Mr Richardson would contact him and tell him that
response would be late it would be forthcoming. No such communication, however,
took place on this occasion. When it
was put to him in cross-examination that
Mr Richardson had tried to ring him, Mr Smiley said that he had no file note of
that message.
[217] On 3 September 2007 the Society reported to the
Commissioner repeating the recommendation it had made in the matter of Pollock
but noting in addition that Mr Richardson had failed to respond to the following
notices issued relevant to this complaint:
notice pursuant to s 269(1) of the 2004 Act dated 30 May 2007;
(b) the notice issued pursuant to s 269(3) of the 2004 Act dated 19 June
(c) the notice pursuant to s 443(1) of the 2007 Act dated 6 July 2007;
(d) the notice issued pursuant to s 443(3) of the 2007 Act dated 8
August 2007.”
[218] On 24 September 2007 the Commission sent a notice to Mr Richardson
pursuant to s 443(1(a)(iii) to provide a full copy of the
client file by 1
October 2007. This was one of the files for which Mr Richardson sought an
extension from the Commission until 8
October 2007 and the file was then
received on 8 October 2007. Mr Richardson was provided with draft charges with
regard to this
investigation on 3 March 2008.
[219] Mr Richardson said in his
affidavit filed in this matter that it was not clear to him until he read the
affidavit filed by Mr
Corish in these disciplinary proceedings that Mr Corish
was out of pocket so he then had his solicitor write to Mr and Mrs Corish
April 2009 reimbursing them and apologising.
[220] In summary, no explanation
was ever received in spite of requests on 19 June, 6 July and 8 August 2007 and
the client file was
received on 8 October 2007 after requests on 30 May, 19
June, 6 July, 8 August, 24 and 25 September 2007.
[221] The allegation that
Mr Richardson failed to co-operate in the Society’s investigation of this
complaint is made out.
4.8 Complaint
(a) By complaint to the Commissioner dated 18 June 2007 Walker complained
(b) By letter dated 12 July 2007 the Society required the respondent to
provide a response to an allegation contained in the complaint
(c) The respondent did not provide an explanation within the time
(d) By letter dated 8 August 2007 the Society gave the respondent a 2007 Act
Notice which required the respondent to provide a full
explanation to the letter
dated 12 July 2007.
(e) The Society provided the respondent with an extension of time in which to
respond to the complaint until 29 October 2007.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraphs (a), (b),
(c), (d) and (e) and said further that the Society provided
a further extension
of time in which to respond until 11 November 2007. The respondent provided his
response by letter dated 12
November 2007. The Society made no complaint of
lack of co-operation.
(f) By letter dated 12 November 2007 the respondent provided a response to
the complaint.
(g) By letter dated 9 January 2008 the Commission required the respondent to
provide further information in respect of the complaint
by 23 January 2008.
(h) The respondent did not provide the information within the time
(i) By letter dated 30 January 2008 the Commission gave the respondent a 2007
Act Notice.
(j) The respondent provided the requested information on 31 January 2008.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraphs (g), (h),
(i), (j) and said further that the response provided on
31 January 2008 was
within the time limited by the 2007 Act Notice.
Findings re Walker investigation
[222] As Mr Richardson admitted, Peter
Walker made a written complaint about Mr Richardson’s conduct on 18 June
2007. The complaint
was referred to the Society for investigation by the
Commission on 26 June 2007. The Society wrote to Mr Richardson attaching the
complaint on 12 July 2007 and required him to give an explanation by 25 July
2007. On 8 August 2007 the Society sent a notice to
Mr Richardson under
s 443(3) of the 2007 Act requiring compliance with the request made in the
letter of 12 July within 14 days.
Mr Richardson requested an extension of 21
days and an extension was granted by the Society until 29 October 2007. On 12
2007 Mr Richardson sent an explanation to the Society. Mr Smiley could
not recall any request by Mr Richardson for a further extension
but conceded
that Mr Richardson might have telephoned to say it was coming. On 11 December
2007 the Society provided a report to
the Commissioner. The Society recommended
that the complaint be dismissed.
[223] On 9 January 2008 the Commissioner
required Mr Richardson to provide certain documents from the trust account and
the file together
with additional information by 23 January 2008. The notice
was given under s 443 of the 2007 Act. The Commission also sought
information
from the solicitors for the other party to the conveyance. That
material was provided by those solicitors. As Mr Richardson had
not replied to
the letter of 9 January 2008, on 30 January 2008 the Commissioner gave him
notice under s 443(3) of the 2007 Act to
provide the information within 14
days. On 31 January 2008 Mr Richardson sent a response by facsimile
transmission with attached
papers. On 12 February he again wrote to the
Commissioner saying that the Commission’s letter of 30 January had crossed
his facsimile of 31 January and asked for confirmation that his letter had
adequately addressed their further queries. On 13 February
2008 the Commission
told Mr Richardson that the requirement to provide additional information as
required by the Commission had been
satisfied and that information would be
considered together with the rest of the investigation material. On 15 May 2008
Mr Richardson
wrote to the Commission complaining about the fact that the
investigation was not yet concluded. On 23 May 2008 the Commission informed
Richardson that draft charges were being considered and explaining why in the
Commission’s view the complaint had substance.
Mr Richardson was provided
with draft charges on 3 June 2008.
[224] In summary, an explanation was
received on 12 November 2007 after requests on 12 July and 8 August 2007 and
further information
on 31 January 2008 after requests on 9 and 30 January
[225] It cannot be said that Mr Richardson failed to co-operate with
the investigation by the Society in this matter.
4.9 Complaint
(a) By complaint to the Commissioner dated 20 July 2007 Ghosh complained
(b) By letter dated 8 August 2007 the Society required the respondent to
provide the client file in this matter together with trust
account records by 15
August 2007.
(c) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the client file within
the time specified.
(d) On 20 August 2007 the Society gave the respondent a 2007 Act Notice which
required the respondent to provide the client file and
the trust account
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraphs (a), (b), (c)
and (d) but said further that the complainant had made
complaints with the New
South Wales Police Service that the respondent had threatened the life of the
female complainant and defrauded
her of the amount of $10,000. Those matters
were under investigation by the Queensland Police Service on behalf of the New
Wales service. The respondent advised the Society that he did not wish to
respond to their various requests until the police investigations
satisfactorily concluded.
(e) On 3 October 2007 the respondent provided the trust account records to
the Society.
(f) On 26 October 2007 the respondent provided the client file to the
(g) By letter dated 14 January 2008 the Society requested an explanation to
the complaint by 28 January 2008.
(h) The respondent provided a reply by letter dated 11 February 2008.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraphs (e) (f) (g)
and said further that the Society wrote to the respondent
on 30 January
requesting a response no later than 11 February 2008. The respondent replied by
that date. The Society made no complaint
of lack of co-operation.
Findings re Ghosh investigation
[226] Dr Ratna Ghosh made a complaint to the
Commissioner about Mr Richardson on 20 July 2007. The matter was referred to
the Society
for investigation on 24 July 2007. Dr Ghosh’s husband, Dr
Bandyopadhyay, gave a letter in support of her complaint on 23 July
[227] On 8 August 2007 the Society required Mr Richardson to provide
his full file in relation to this matter. That request was apparently
and by notice sent by facsimile on 20 August 2007 the Society noted that Mr
Richardson was in breach of the requirement to
provide his client file and trust
account records and he was given notice under s 443(3) of the 2007 Act that
he should provide it
within 14 days. He did not do so.
[228] On 4 September
2007 Dr Ghosh sent further information to Mr Smiley at the Society saying that
$10,000 was paid into Mr Richardson’s
trust account on 18 June 2007. This
was confirmed by a letter from the Commonwealth Bank. Mr Smiley’s
evidence was that he
had not had any correspondence from Mr Richardson regarding
this matter by this time. On 7 September 2007, Mr Smiley wrote to Mr
on behalf of the Society saying that he had not responded and should do so by 17
September 2007.
[229] On 3 October 2007, Mr Richardson contacted Mr Smiley
and asked for an extension of time to comply with the notices. Mr Richardson
confirmed this by email where he said that his involvement in US litigation
involving class action and interim injunctions had severely
interrupted his
normal working days.
[230] By an undated facsimile transmission which bears
the date impressed by the machine of 3 October 2007, Mr Richardson sent to
Franklin at the Society one page of his trust ledger and said he would forward
other material on the following day. The trust
account ledger appeared to show
that he had retained $9,400 of Dr Ghosh’s money in his trust account. He
sent a log dated
3 October 2007 of various phone calls that an employee in his
office had had between 26 April 2007 and 3 September 2007 with regard
matter and a facsimile from the file from the solicitors who acted for the other
parties in the sale dated 18 June 2007.
[231] On 4 October 2007 Mr Franklin
wrote to Dr Ghosh on behalf of the Society saying that it was satisfied that Mr
Richardson had
not stolen the sum of $10,000 and that KRG had received the sum
from the Commonwealth Bank of Australia. He asked for a copy of
Ghosh’s letter wherein she instructed KRG Law that if the show cause
notice issued by the Council was not resolved within
one month, the sum of
$10,000 was to be paid to her.
[232] On 8 October 2007 Mr Smiley granted Mr
Richardson an extension on that and two other files until 29 October 2007. By
dated 16 October and 25 October Dr Ghosh and her husband Dr
Bandyopadhyay provided further material to the Society enclosing a letter
KRG to the solicitors for the other party to the transaction dated 18 June 2007
which states in part:
have also been advised by our clients of the amount of $10,000 to be held in our
trust account for one month from settlement
date after which time this amount
will be returned to our client should the Gold Coast City Council approvals for
the deck and carport
not be received.”
[233] Mr Richardson provided the file on 26 October 2007 in response to the
notices of 8 and 20 August 2007.
[234] On 26 November 2007 Mr Richardson
advised Mr Smiley in writing that he had been admitted to the Prince Charles
Hospital on the
evening before. By letter dated 5 December 2007 from the
Society to the Commissioner, the Society provided an investigation report
this matter.
[235] Mr Smiley said he was aware that by January 2008 that Mr
Richardson was again able to work so on 14 January 2008 he wrote to
Richardson on behalf of the Society asking on what basis he held the sum of
$10,000 in trust and asking for his response by 28
January 2008. No response
was received to that letter so another letter was sent by the Society to Mr
Richardson on 30 January 2008
asking for his response to that letter by no later
than 11 February 2008. On 11 February 2008 Mr Richardson wrote to the Society
reported to the Commission submitting that the complaints
should be dismissed
pursuant to s 448(1)(a) of the 2007 Act.
[236] On 3 June 2008 the
Commission provided Mr Richardson with draft charges in respect of the Ghosh
complaint. On 11 June 2008
Mr Richardson requested a copy of the investigation
report which was sent to him on 13 June 2008.
[237] In summary, trust account
information was provided on 3 October 2007 after requests on 8 and 20 August
2007; the client file
on 26 October 2007 after requests on 8 and 20 August 2007
and an explanation on 11 February 2008 after requests on 14 and 30 January
[238] Mr Richardson was dilatory in his responses to the Society and,
contrary to what he said in his response to the Tribunal, the
explanation given
to the Society for his delay was because of pressure of other work. He failed
to co-operate in the Society’s
investigation of Dr Ghosh’s
4.10 Complaint
(a) By complaint to the Commissioner dated 26 October 2007 Reis complained
(b) By letter dated 19 November 2007 the Commission required the respondent
to provide a full written explanation to the matters being
investigated and the
client file by 3 December 2007.
(c) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the client file within
the time specified.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraphs (a), (b) and
(c) but said further that on 16 November 2007 he received
extensive dental
implant work which caused massive bleeding as a consequence of which he was bed
ridden for a period of one week
and subsequently admitted to the Prince Charles
Hospital for blood transfusions. The period of that hospitalisation was of the
of one week after which he spent a further period recuperating. The
respondent’s secretary Jo Bartrim (now Watson) advised
Ms Syme of these
matters by way of reasonable explanation for the delay in response.
(d) By letter dated 13 December 2007 the Commission required the respondent
to provide a full written explanation of the matters being
investigated and the
client file by 18 January 2008 which was further extended until 23 January
The respondent admitted the allegation contained in paragraph (d) and said
the Commission agreed to the extension until 23 January
2008 because the
respondent’s daughter gave birth to her first child on 18 January
(e) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the client file within
the time specified.
(f) By letter dated 30 January 2008 the Commission gave the respondent a 2007
Act Notice which required the respondent to provide
an explanation to the
complaint together with the client file.
(g) The respondent provided an electronic copy of the client file together
with an explanation to the complaint on 13 February 2008.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraphs (e) and (f)
and say that he complied with the terms of the 2007 Act
Notice in that he gave
an explanation and electronic copy of the file on 13 February 2008.
The respondent said that by letter dated 14 February 2008 the Legal Services
Commission had not formed a view as to whether or not
provision of an electronic
copy of the file was sufficient to discharge his statutory obligations and
required that the respondent
provide a full paper copy of the client file.
The respondent subsequently provided a paper copy of the file to the
Commission.
Findings re Reis investigation
[239] As Mr Richardson admitted, Ms Fung Ling
Siu Reis complained to the Commissioner about Mr Richardson by written complaint
26 October 2007. On 19 November 2007 the Commissioner required Mr
Richardson to give a full explanation of his conduct the subject
complaint and also a full copy of the file in relation to the conveyance. He
was asked to do that by 3 December 2007. On
26 November 2007 the Commission
received a phone call from an employee of Mr Richardson’s saying that he
had been admitted
to hospital on the previous evening. On 13 December 2007 Ms
Syme from the Commission called Mr Richardson’s office. A receptionist
explained that he was not coming into the office because he was not well but
that he was receiving correspondence by letter and email.
By letter dated 13
December 2007 the Commission gave Mr Richardson notice under s 443 of the
2007 Act to provide an explanation
and full copy of the file by 18 January
[240] On 21 January 2008 Ms Syme was informed when she called Mr
Richardson’s office that he had not responded by 18 January
2008 as he had
“other family matters”. Later on that date Ms Syme from the
Commission received a phone call from the
receptionist at Mr Richardson’s
law firm saying that his daughter went into labour on Friday and asking for an
extension until
Wednesday. Ms Syme said she agreed and would confirm by
facsimile. Accordingly on that day the Commission sent a letter confirming
extension of time until 23 January 2008. Ms Syme received a telephone message
to contact Mr Richardson on 23 January 2008. There
was further message left
with the Commission from Mr Richardson’s assistant saying that their
computer was “down”
and that a response would be sent on the
following day. No response was received on the following day so on 30 January
Commission sent a notice to Mr Richardson under s 443(3) of the
2007 Act advising him that he might be dealt with for professional
misconduct if
his failure to comply with that direction continued for a further 14
[241] By letter dated 13 February 2008 Mr Richardson sent an
explanation of the complaint. On the following day he also emailed as
attachment what was said to be a copy of the file. The Commission was unable to
download the file. On 14 February 2008 the Commissioner
sent a letter to Mr
Richardson requiring a paper copy of the file within 14 days, that is by 28
February 2008. That notice was given
under s 443(3) of the 2007 Act. A
paper copy of the file was enclosed by letter dated 28 February
[242] However, on 7 March 2008 Mr Brittan on behalf of the Commission
wrote to Mr Richardson having reviewed the file and noting a
number of documents
that were not present asked for confirmation that it was a full copy of the file
or for him to provide copies
of the other materials not previously provided.
The letter requested that if it was a full copy of the file, additional
explanation
be provided. The information was to be provided by 21 March
[243] On 31 March 2008 Mr Richardson telephoned the Commission
explaining that he was having someone check the file so he hoped to
response to the Commission shortly. Ms Syme agreed to take no further action
before the end of that week, that is before
4 April 2008.
[244] On 18 April
2008 the Commissioner wrote to Mr Richardson about his failure to respond to the
letter of 7 March 2008 and giving
him notice under s 443(3) of the 2007 Act
that he was required to do so by 2 May 2008. On 1 May 2008 the Commission
received an
email on behalf of Mr Richardson seeking an extension of time to
respond to the notice. The Commission replied by email of 6 May
2008 advising
that no further action would be taken on the notices before 14 May
[245] The respondent provided a copy of the client’s file by
letter dated 14 May 2008 but did not provide a response to the
issues raised in
the Commission’s letter of 7 March 2008. Mr Richardson was provided with
draft charges in respect of this
and other complaints on 3 June
[246] In summary, an explanation and electronic version of the client
file was received on 13 February 2008 after requests on 19 November,
13 December
2007 and 30 January 2008 and the paper version of the client file on 28 February
2008 after a further request on 14 February
2008. No further information was
received in spite of requests on 7 March and 18 April 2008.
sequence of events shows a failure by Mr Richardson to co-operate with the
Commission’s investigation.
(a) By complaint to the Commissioner dated 25 February 2008, redchip lawyers
complained about the respondent on behalf of their clients,
the Litherlands.
(b) By letter dated 4 March 2008 the Commission required the respondent to
provide a full written explanation of the matters being
investigated and
documents by 28 March 2008.
(c) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the documents within the
time specified.
The respondent admitted the allegation contained in paragraphs (a), (b) and
(c) but said further that on 26 March 2008 the Litherlands
application 2647/08 in the Supreme Court of Queensland. Such application and
the supporting material traversed all matters
dealt within the complaint and the
respondent said that he advised the Commission to that effect in the course of a
telephone conversation
with Ms Syme on 31 March 2008.
The respondent said that the Commission acknowledged such conversation in its
letter dated 8 April 2008 but continued to require the
respondent’s
submissions and explanation confirming the status of the matter before the
Court. The respondent admitted that
he did not respond to that request as he
regarded it as improper given that the matter was before the Court.
(d) By letter dated 8 April 2008 the Commission required the respondent to
provide an explanation of the matters being investigated
by 18 April 2008.
(e) By letter dated 21 April 2008 the Commission gave the respondent a 2007
Act Notice.
The respondent admitted that allegations contained in paragraph (e) and said
further that the Supreme Court proceedings were settled
on 1 May 2008. It was a
term of such settlement that the Litherlands and their solicitors would withdraw
the complaint made to the
applicant. Accordingly the respondent contended this
amounts to a reasonable excuse for non-compliance with the Notice.
(f) By letter dated 7 May 2008 the Litherlands withdrew the complaint.
(g) By letter dated 13 May 2008 the Commission advised the respondent that it
would continue with the investigation.
(h) By letter dated 27 May 2008 the respondent purported to respond to the
Litherland investigation.
(i) By letter dated 27 May 2008 the respondent purported to provide further
submissions in respect of the Litherland investigation.
(j) By letter dated 3 June 2008 the Commissioner sought submissions in
respect of a draft charge arising from the Litherland investigation.
The respondent further admitted the allegations made in paragraphs (h), (i)
and (j) and said further that he made some submissions
by letter dated 11 June
2008 and on 23 June wrote to the applicant seeking an extension of time in which
to address further submissions.
That request was refused.
(k) During the course of the investigation, the respondent failed to provide
a full explanation regarding the matters being investigated
Commissioner.
The respondent denied the allegations contained in paragraph (k) for reasons
herein before stated.
Findings re Litherland investigation
[248] After the letter from the
Commissioner of 4 March 2008 referred to in paragraph 4.11(b) of the charge, Mr
Richardson, as he
said in his response, telephoned Ms Syme at the Commission
telling her that the matter was before the court. She asked him to confirm
in writing. He did not.
[249] On 8 April 2008 Mr Richardson left a message
for Ms Syme to call him. She returned the call and he asked her to email a copy
of the complaint. She emailed a copy of the complaint to the email address he
provided. He did not however provide any written
advice as to the matters being
before the court nor did he provide an explanation or the documents requested by
8 April 2008.
[250] On 8 April 2008 the Commission sent Mr Richardson a
notice pursuant to s 443(1)(a)(i) of the 2007 Act requiring an explanation
of certain matters by 18 April. Those matters were his explanation confirming
the status of the matter before the court and in particular
detailing how the
matters raised in Mr Barnes’ complaint formed the basis of any court
action. Further an explanation was
required of a possible breach of the
obligations found in s 332(2) of the 2007 Act in that he had allegedly
failed to provide itemised
accounts in response to Mr Barnes’ request.
The Commissioner noted that the accounts were not itemised in that they did not
reflect full details of the date on which services were provided or specifics of
services provided on those dates. Mr Richardson
did not reply to that
[251] Accordingly, on 21 April 2008, the Commissioner sent Mr
Richardson a notice pursuant to s 443(3) of the 2007 Act that he might
dealt with for professional misconduct if his failure to comply with the
direction given on 8 April 2008 continued for a further
14 days, that was beyond
6 May 2008. He was asked to advise Ms Syme in writing if he believed he had a
reasonable excuse for failing
to provide the explanation by that
[252] On 1 May 2008 the Commission received an email on behalf of Mr
Richardson saying that he was absent from the office with the
flu and asked for
an extension of seven days in respect of the Litherland complaint and others.
Mr Brittan on behalf of the Commissioner
emailed a response on 6 May 2008 saying
that because of the issue of the s 443(3) notices he was not able to
provide an extension
of time but that Mr Richardson’s recent illness might
constitute a reasonable excuse for non-compliance. He asked for Mr
Richardson’s
responses in relation to the various matters along with a
copy of a medical certificate or other relevant documentation in support
explanation for the delay and said that he would take no further action before
14 May 2008.
[253] On 7 May 2008 Mr Barnes from redchip lawyers by letter
advised the Commissioner that Mr and Mrs Litherland wished to withdraw
complaint against Mr Richardson.
[254] On 13 May 2008 Mr Brittan, on behalf
of the Commission, wrote to Mr Richardson referring to the withdrawal of the
by Mr and Mrs Litherland but informing Mr Richardson that pursuant to
s 443 of the 2007 Act the Commissioner might, of his own initiative,
continue the investigation of a complaint irrespective of the
complainants’ withdrawal of their original complaint. Mr Brittan
that, given the seriousness of the conduct alleged in the complaint made by Mr
and Mrs Litherland, the Commissioner had decided
to continue the investigation
and still required Mr Richardson’s explanation and submissions as set out
in the Commission’s
correspondence of 8 April 2008. He reiterated that he
would take no action in relation to the matter before close of business of
[255] On 13 May 2008, Mr Richardson sent an email to the
Commission, to the attention of Ms Syme, saying that because the settlement
the court matter was confidential and all his files had been handed to the
Litherlands’ solicitor he would have considerable
difficulty preparing a
response and asking for her advice. On 14 May 2008, Ms Syme obtained a copy of
the court file in relation
to the dispute between Mr Litherland and Mr
Richardson from the Supreme Court Registry. The court file included an
affidavit from
Mr Litherland setting out the matters referred to in charge 1
before this Tribunal. On 14 May 2008, Mr Brittan on behalf of the
wrote to Mr Richardson setting out the history of the matter and telling him
that he remained under a statutory obligation
to provide a full explanation of
his conduct.
[256] By letter dated 16 May 2008, Mr Richardson wrote to the
Commission saying that he had contacted Mr Michael Long of redchip lawyers
requesting he obtain his clients’ instructions to release him from the
confidentiality condition and submitting that his knowledge
of the withdrawal of
the complaint was a reasonable excuse for non-compliance with the s 443(3)
notice. Mr Brittan responded on
behalf of the Commission on the same
[257] On 22 May 2008 Ms Syme conducted a number of searches as a part
of the investigation. She obtained from the Australian Securities
Investments Commission (“ASIC”) a copy of the application for
registration of WLH Collections made by Gregory Reynolds;
a search of the DNR
for the property purchased by Mr and Mrs Litherland and dealings in respect of
the caveat.
[258] On 27 May 2008 Mr Richardson sent to Ms Syme at the
Commission a response to the allegation that he might be in breach of
332(2) of the 2007 Act. He referred to the letter from redchip lawyers
of 8 February 2008 on behalf of the Litherlands which had
request the immediate delivery of all itemised bills or invoices relating to the
work for which you are requesting payment.”
[259] It appears that Mr Richardson took the view that the word
“itemised” referred to bills but not to invoices. He
said that the
invoices were prepared on a “value billing basis”. He said during
the course of the litigation he had
provided further particulars to Mr Barnes
and now provided that to the Commission.
[260] On 30 May 2008 the Commission
received further material from redchip lawyers explaining the circumstances in
which their clients
agreed to withdraw the complaint and confirming that neither
party was bound by confidentiality obligations with regard to disclosure
the Commissioner.
[261] In summary, an explanation was provided on 16 May
2007 and 27 May 2008 after requests on 4 March, 8 and 21 April 2008. The
file was never provided in spite of a request on 4 March 2008.
Tribunal is satisfied that Mr Richardson failed to co-operate with the
Commission’s investigation of this complaint.
4.12 Complaint
Wheldon & Associates
(a) By complaint to the Commissioner dated 6 March 2008, Wheldon &
Associates complained about the respondent.
(b) By letter dated 12 March 2008 the Commission required the respondent to
provide a full written explanation of the matters being
investigated together
with the client file by 2 April 2008.
(c) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the client file within
the time specified.
(d) By letter dated 8 April 2008 the Commission required the respondent to
provide a full written explanation of the matters being
investigated and the
client file by 18 April 2008.
(e) The respondent did not provide an explanation or the client file within
the time specified.
(f) By letter dated 21 April 2008 the Commission gave the respondent a 2007
Act Notice which required the respondent to provide a
full explanation and the
client file.
(g) On 14 May 2008 the respondent provided an explanation to the complaint
together with the client file.
The respondent admitted the allegations contained in paragraph (a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) and said further that these delays were occasioned
by the need to obtain
information and copy documents.
Findings re Wheldon investigation
[263] On 6 March 2008, the law firm of
Wheldon & Associates made a complaint to the Commission about the conduct of
a conveyance
by the firm of which Mr Richardson is the principal. Mr Wheldon
enclosed six items of correspondence sent by Wheldon & Associates
an attempt to deal with the problem that had arisen for their client as the
result of KRG’s conduct of the conveyance
to which he had not had any
response in almost four months.
[264] The Commission wrote to Mr Richardson
on 12 March 2008 enclosing a copy of the complaint and asking for a full
explanation of
his conduct and a full paper copy of the client file no later
than 2 April 2008. There was no response to the Commission’s
letter so on
8 April 2008, the Commission required an explanation and the file by no later
than 18 April 2008. That notice was given
pursuant to s 443 of the 2007
Act. Mr Richardson did not respond to that letter.
[265] On 21 April the
Commission wrote to the body corporate managers of the property which was the
subject of the dispute seeking
information relevant to the complaint. On the
same date the Commissioner gave Mr Richardson a notice pursuant to s 443(3)
2007 Act requiring the explanation by 6 May 2008. On 28 April 2008 the
Body Corporate sent the requested information to the Commission.
On 1 May 2008
the Commission received an email on behalf Mr Richardson about the number of
complaints that the Commission had asked
him to respond to and asking for an
extension of seven days because he was absent from the office with the
[266] Mr Brittan on behalf of the Commission said he would take no
further action before 14 May 2008. In addition to the material
he had already
sought he sought a copy of a medical certificate or any other relevant
documentation in support of his explanation
for the delay in responding to these
matters. On 14 May 2008 Mr Richardson provided an explanation as requested on
12 March 2008
and sent the file by courier. No medical certificate or other
relevant documentation relating to the delay was sent.
[267] On 3 June 2008
the Commission provided the respondent with draft charges in respect of a number
of complaints including this
complaint and requesting any further submissions be
made by 24 June 2008. On 13 June 2008 Mr Richardson sought a copy of documents
that had been provided to the Commission in respect of the investigation. The
documents were sent to Mr Richardson on 16 June 2008.
[268] In summary, the
explanation and client file were provided on 14 May 2008 after requests on 12
March, 8 April and 21 April 2008.
[269] Mr Richardson responded to the
s 443(3) notice within the time as extended. It is of concern that he
failed to provide a medical
certificate but it could not otherwise be said that
he failed to co-operate with the Commission’s investigation.
with regard to Charge 4
[270] Mr Richardson’s response to requests from
the Society and the Commission showed, as he agreed in evidence, that he always
ignored the first request for information. This led to a notice being issued
under s 269(3) of the 2004 Act or s 443(3) of the 2007
carried with it the risk of a prima facie finding of professional misconduct.
This usually brought a response but inevitably
later than the date by which a
response had been sought. It reveals a pattern of behaviour by Mr Richardson of
being less than diligent
in fulfilling his professional obligation to respond to
information requests. It was true that when the matter was being investigated
by the Society, Mr Smiley often acquiesced in Mr Richardson’s tardiness;
but the same cannot be said of the Commission. Mr
Richardson was well aware
that his responses were required on time.
[271] The Commissioner submitted
that Mr Richardson failed to comply in a timely manner with 12 separate
investigations. It was submitted
his course of conduct in failing to comply
with the notices and to co-operate with the Society and Commission in the
investigation
of the allegations was a serious breach of Mr Richardson’s
professional obligations.
[272] The Commissioner relied on the following
passage from Legal Services Commissioner v
where the Tribunal
“The Tribunal again sends a very clear message to the profession that
Practitioners must comply with correspondence sent to
them by the Commissioner
or the Law Society in a timely fashion. In
Veghelyi -v- Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales
12662 of 1989, unreported, NSW SC6/9/89, Mr
Justice Smart stated at page 16:
‘It is important that Solicitors respond promptly to the Society when
it asks for a reply in response to complaints that have
been made. It will be
an unusual and complex case when a delay of more than 14 days is acceptable and
often, the replies should
be delivered within a shorter period such as 7/10
days. Replies to the Law Society in respect of complaints warrant a high
[273] The Commissioner submitted that the respondent’s failure to comply
with the requests for explanations and client files
in a timely manner over an
extended period of time could only be described as professional
misconduct.
[274] Senior counsel for the practitioner submitted that the 2004
Act and the 2007 Act have provided a mechanism whereby the practitioner
obliged to provide information and documents to the Society and the
Commissioner. He submitted that there are professional repercussions
notice is not complied with but there cannot be professional repercussions if
there is no notice given or if the notice is complied
with within time or any
extended time.
[275] What is alleged is a failure to co-operate in the
various investigations of the many complaints against Mr Richardson. There
statutory regime, breach of which on even one occasion, can lead to the
imposition of a fine or constitute professional misconduct.
It is not a breach
of that statutory regime that is alleged here rather a breach of a duty to
co-operate. The question is whether
Mr Richardson’s response to the
investigation of complaints against him constitutes unsatisfactory professional
professional misconduct.
[276] The definitions of
“unsatisfactory professional conduct” and “professional
misconduct” in the 2007 Act
are inclusive. It includes conduct by the
legal practitioner in connection with his or her practice which falls short of
the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of the public is entitled
to expect of a reasonably competent legal practitioner.
[277] A member of the
public who makes a complaint against a legal practitioner to the
practitioner’s professional association
or the statutory body set up to
investigate complaints is, in the Tribunal’s view, entitled to expect that
a reasonably competent
legal practitioner will respond competently and
diligently to the investigation of that complaint. The public interest in
maintaining
confidence in the legal profession demands no less.
[278] If the
practitioner fails to comply with a notice given under s 443(3) of the 2007
Act or its equivalent in the 2004 Act, then
the practitioner has prima facie
been guilty of professional misconduct. However, this does not mean that the
practitioner can ignore
the investigation until such notice is given. Indeed
the failure to give a full explanation in response to a notice under
s 443(1)(a)
gives rise to the liability to pay a fine of up to
[279] In this case Mr Richardson failed to demonstrate the standard
of competence and diligence the public is entitled to expect from
a competent
Australian legal practitioner in his response to the investigation of a number
of the complaints. The public is entitled
to expect a legal practitioner,
unless he or she finds himself or herself in peril under s 443(6), to be
“candid” and
“co-operative” to use the words of Pincus
JA in QLS v Carberry; A-G v Carberry
[2000] QCA 450
. This is part of his
or her professional duties.
[280] The Tribunal is satisfied that Mr
Richardson failed to co-operate with the Society in its investigation of the
West complaint,
the Shepherd and Chalmers complaint, the Hinton complaint, the
Corish complaint and the Ghosh complaint, and failed to co-operate
Commission in its investigation of the Sachse complaint, the Reis complaint and
the Litherland complaint. On each occasion
where that occurred it represents
unsatisfactory professional conduct in that it fell short of the standard of
competence and diligence
that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a
reasonably competent legal practitioner.
[281] Mr Richardson exhibited
unsatisfactory professional conduct on a number of occasions and that there are
circumstances where
such conduct could give rise to a finding of professional
misconduct as defined in s 419(1)(a) of the 2007 Act. However the statute
expressly provides for a circumstance that represents professional misconduct if
a practitioner fails to respond to notices and so
the Tribunal would not in this
instance find that the failures to co-operate with the investigations
represented professional misconduct
particularly in the absence of an allegation
by the Commissioner of a failure to comply with a notice given under
s 443(3) of the
2007 Act or its 2004 Act
equivalent.
[282] The Tribunal has found that Mr Richardson is
guilty of professional misconduct with regard to Charge 1 and Charge 2 and
unsatisfactory
professional conduct with regard to charge 4, as particularised
in 4.1, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.9, 4.10 and 4.11.
[283] The Tribunal, having
been satisfied that Mr Richardson has been guilty of professional misconduct and
unsatisfactory professional
conduct, will now consider the appropriate order to
be made under s 456 of the 2007 Act.
2007 Act s 452.
Walsh v Law Society of New South Wales
[1999] HCA 33
(1999) 198 CLR 73
2007 Act s 649(1).
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 360-361;
Rejfek v McElroy
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 CLR 517
KRG always charged the Litherlands for conveyancing done for them.
Lower case used by the firm.
Wholesale Leisure Holidays Pty Ltd (WLH).
Barratt v Gough-Thomas
[1950] 2 All ER 1048
Primary Producers’ Bank of Australia Ltd
(In Voluntary
Liquidation)
[1935] HCA 19
(1935) 53 CLR 250
at 256, 261.
was overturned on appeal in
[2008] QCA 50
but not on this point.
As to which see
[2006] QSC 378
[2007] 2 Qd R 323
at 329-330.
Belmont Finance Corporation Ltd v Williams Furniture Ltd
at 268 quoted by the Court of Appeal in
Legal Services Commissioner v
[2008] QCA 301
Harle v Legal Practitioners Liability Committee
[2003] VSCA 133
For ease of reference, I will refer to both as a complaint for the purposes of
this judgment.
2004 Act s 267.
Unfortunately
this attitude may be thought of as an example in Queensland of what the New
South Wales Law Reform Commission described
as one of the shortcomings of the
former system of discipline of legal practitioners where the system of the Law
Society of New South
Wales was criticised for showing “excessive sympathy
for, and leniency to, solicitors whose conduct was the subject of investigation
and adjudication”: New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Second Report on the Legal Profession: Complaints, Discipline and
Professional Standards
(1982) p 20.
[2004] NSW ADT 63
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (432 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter