URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2005/46.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MV, Re [2005] QGAAT 46 (26 August 2005)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL,
[2005]QGAAT46
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Declaration about Capacity
The Appointment of a Guardian
The Appointment of an Administrator
In the Matter of MV
MATTER NUMBER:
2005/682 2005/683
2005/1738 2005/2350
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, Brisbane
DATE OF HEARING:
27 June 2005
DATE OF ORDER:
28 June 2005
DATE OF REASONS:
26 August 2005
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
A Lyons President
Dr. R Stafford Member
J Allen Member
CATCHWORDS:
IMPAIRED CAPACITY-GUARDIANS-ADMINISTRATORS-FINANCIAL MATTER-ENDURING POWER
OF ATTORNEY-VALIDITY-CONFLICT TRANSACTION-GENERAL PRINCIPLES-adult
with severe
end stage Parkinson’s disease-capacity to instruct solicitors-payment of
fees to his lawyers-did not freely and
voluntarily enter into the execution of
enduring powers of attorney-unable to understand nature and effect of clause
authorising
conflict transactions.
CASES QUOTED:
Gibbons v Wright
(1954) 91CLR423
Ranclaud v Caban
NSW ConvR55 385
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
GUARDIANSHIP
That the applications for the appointment
of a guardian for MV are
DECLARATION
It is declared that TR is currently
MV’s Statutory Health Attorney.
DECLARATION ABOUT CAPACITY
The Tribunal declares
(i) Did not have capacity to instruct his solicitors
to sever the jointly owned bank accounts and investments;
(ii) Did not
have capacity to give instructions to sever the jointly owned property in
Brisbane more particularly described as Lot
x on RP xxx County of xx, Parish of
xx Title Reference xxx.
ADMINISTRATION
That the Public Trustee of Queensland is
appointed as administrator for MV for all financial
The Tribunal directs the administrator to
provide accounts to the Tribunal when requested.
order remains current until further order of the
RECOMMENDATION
7. The Tribunal recommends the
administrator pay all reasonable legal expenses incurred by Mr MV in relation to
the applications before
the Tribunal.
Tribunal directs that the administrator provide a written report to the Tribunal
within eight (8) weeks in relation to the
management of Mr MV’s financial
affairs particularly with respect to what actions they intend to
(i) in relation to the jointly owned investments;
(ii) jointly
owned property
taking into account Mr MV’s best interests, proper
care and protection and his expressed wishes that both TR and MA are to benefit
equally from his assets.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Mr MV was born overseas in 1916 and is
now eighty-eight years old. He lived for some period of time in China and
emigrated to Australia
after the second world war. His first wife died and he
has been married for 37 years to Mrs M who is eighty. Mr MV has been suffering
from Parkinson’s Disease for at least ten years and has been in the care
of Dr Silburn a specialist neurologist for the last
seven years. He now resides
at a Home for the Aged having lived at his home until late 2004 with his wife.
Mr MV has a daughter Mrs
TR from his first marriage and Mrs M has one daughter
from her first marriage, Mrs TN.
Mr MV was a very successful business
man and he has extensive assets which were jointly owned with his wife. These
included a property
and contents his home valued at $433,000 as well as shares
and extensive financial investments with Suncorp the combined value of
in excess of one million dollars.
Mr MV and his wife had many years
previously executed wills which would be described as “mirror wills”
in that they each
left all of their assets to the other and then to their
children, Mrs TR and Mrs TN equally.
Mr MV’s cognition and mobility
declined markedly during 2004 and he was hospitalised three times including a
lengthy stay after
a fall at his home on 12 May 2004 when he fractured his right
hip and a three week admission in September to stabilise the side effects
Parkinson’s medication as Mr MV was experiencing intrusive visual
hallucinations which centred around a belief that
his elderly wife was
unfaithful to him.
He was assessed by the Aged Care
Assessment Team (ACAT) in 12 October 2004 as requiring “high residential
care” and the
assessment noted he required assistance with all personal
hygiene, showering, dressing and toileting as well as supervision with
location changes, mobility and transfers. Mrs M cared for him at home until 26
November 2004 when he went into respite care at
the nursing home where he
continues to reside.
Between November 2004 and February
2005 Mr MV executed three different Enduring Powers of Attorney appointing three
different people
as his attorney as
On 16 November 2004 he appointed
his wife, Mrs M as his attorney for financial and personal matters. This
Enduring Power of Attorney
was witnessed by Mr C, solicitor and notary public
who was present at the house when the documents were executed together with Mr
GR, Mr MV’s grandson who was an employed
On 7 December 2004, he appointed
his grandson, Mr GR as his attorney for personal, health and financial matters.
This enduring document
was witnessed by Mr A, solicitor, who was advised by Dr
Serdiuk that Mr MV “was competent” Mr MV also executed a new
On 3 February 2005 he appointed
his daughter Mrs TR as his attorney for all matters. Once again this document
was executed by Mr A.
During his appointment (from 7 December
2004 to 3 February 2005) the second attorney Mr GR wrote to Suncorp on 8
December 2004 requesting
that the jointly owned assets be split and on 13
December 2004, Mr GR executed documents severing the joint tenancy in relation
the property in Brisbane and changing the ownership to tenants in common.
The essential issues for the Tribunal
are whether Mr MV had capacity firstly to execute all these enduring documents
and secondly
whether he had capacity to give his solicitor and his attorney the
instructions to sever all of the jointly owned assets. Capacity
is defined in
Schedule 4 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
and requires
that a person understands the nature and effect of a decision they are making,
freely and voluntarily makes the decision
and then is able to communicate that
The questions for the Tribunal are did
Mr MV understand the essential requirements for making an enduring power of
attorney on these
three occasions and did he freely and voluntarily execute
these instruments? In addition when Mr GR as attorney wrote to Suncorp
requesting that the jointly owned assets be split and when he severed the joint
tenancy in relation to the property in Brisbane did
Mr MV understand the nature
and effect of these decisions to the extent that he was actually capable of
giving these instructions?
These issues are before the Tribunal
because Mrs M states that Mr MV did not have capacity to make these decisions
and on 21 February
2005 she lodged applications with the Tribunal to this
If the Tribunal determines that Mr MV
did not have capacity then under
section 113
Powers of Attorney Act
it can make a declaration that the document is invalid. If the Tribunal
makes such a declaration then we need to consider whether
there are currently
adequate decision making arrangements in place for Mr MV in relation to his
personal affairs and financial affairs.
If there are not appropriate
arrangements in place then the question is whether he needs a guardian and
administrator if he does
not have a validly appointed attorney to make decisions
for him. Mrs M in her application sought her appointment as Mr MV’s
guardian and administrator.
Due to the escalating conflict between
the parties and an indication that Suncorp was about to sever the jointly owned
investments
an Interim Order overriding the EPA was issued on 22 February 2005
appointing the Public Trustee as administrator for all financial
matters for a
period of six (6) months.
On 3May 2005, Mrs TR lodged an
application with the Tribunal seeking her appointment as administrator.
This matter was heard by the Tribunal
over three days namely, 10 May, 31 May and 27 June 2005. These Reasons reflect
the Tribunal’s
determinations on all of the applications before it based
on the evidence obtained from these three hearings. A short history of
hearings is set out below.
10 May 2005
Present at the hearing on 10 May 2005
were Mr MV who was accompanied by Mr A, solicitor. Mr A was not however given
leave to represent
Mr MV at this hearing as Mr A was required by the Tribunal to
give evidence in relation to the execution of the EPA’s on 7
December 2004
and 3 February 2005. Mrs M was also present and she was represented by Mr B.
Also present as active parties were Mrs
TR, Mr GR, Mr DR, Mrs TN as well as Mr
Robert Yorke from the Public Trustee. Ms Margaret Arthur from Caxton Legal
Centre attended
as an observer.
The Tribunal heard oral evidence from
Mr MV and Mr A as well as submissions from all active parties on this date. The
hearing was
then adjourned to a date to be fixed to allow Dr Silburn, Mr
MV’s Parkinson’s specialist, and the geriatrician Dr Lim
evidence before the Tribunal with a direction that all current medical reports
be made available to both these expert witnesses.
May Hearing
On 31 May 2005, the matter was again
listed for hearing before the Tribunal. Given that Mr A had given his evidence
to the Tribunal
at the previous hearing he was given leave at this hearing to
represent Mr MV, who attended by phone. Mrs M attended and was represented
B. Also in attendance as active parties were Mrs TR, Mr DR, Mrs TN and Mr Robert
Yorke. Ms Majella Baker and Mr Joseph Ho from
Caxton Legal Centre attended as
observers. Dr Serdiuk, Mr MV’s general practitioner, Dr Silburn and Dr Lim
gave oral evidence
to the Tribunal as did all the active parties.
The evidence on this day was in
relation to Mr MV’s capacity to make decisions in relation to financial
matters including legal
matters at the time of the hearing and during the period
November 2004 to February 2005 when the 3 EPA’s were executed and
instructions were given to sever the assets.
DOES MR MV HAVE CAPACITY FOR COMPLEX FINANCIAL
The evidence before the Tribunal in
answer to this question is essentially contradictory. There are numerous medical
reports before
the Tribunal with basically two opposing medical opinions
regarding Mr MV’s capacity.
A number of the reports would indicate
that Mr MV has capacity for both personal and financial matters. Dr Serdiuk,
general practitioner,
provided two reports, one dated 8 December 2004 addressed
to the Solicitors and one dated 7 March 2005 provided to the Tribunal.
initial report states that Mr MV is “
fully orientated in time and place
and is competent to manage his affairs
.” The second report indicated
that Dr Serdiuk considered that Mr MV was able to make complex personal and
financial decisions
but he subsequently noted in his report that Mr MV was only
able to understand one of the six criteria required to be understood
At the hearing on 31 May 2005, Dr
Serdiuk explained to the Tribunal that he had been Mr MV’s general
practitioner over many
years but that he had lost track of him for a period of
6-8 months during which time he believed Dr Clarke was looking after him.
not have a personal or business relationship with Mr MV but had been on the same
board at the Home for the Aged. He said he
had based his reports on generally
speaking with Mr MV and he considered he was a very intelligent man. He
considered that since
Mr MV’s medication had been reduced and the
administration of the medication Comtan had ceased he was more physically
However he noted that he was becoming more physically disabled over time
and that he was not as mentally alert in that he was more
hesitant and slow in
his conversations.
Dr Serdiuk said, in answer to questions
from the Tribunal, that he was unable to comment on any issues related to
frontal lobe deficits
that Mr MV may have as he had not examined him for these.
He also told the Tribunal he was not aware of the relationship issues between
MV and Mrs M but he knew that Mr MV has not been seeing his wife. In reply to
questions from Mr B, Dr Serdiuk said he had not
specifically assessed Mr MV for
his ability to make an enduring power of attorney.
The report from Dr Kent, general
practitioner, dated 14 January 2005 states that he last saw Mr MV on 28 October
2003. The Tribunal
considered that Dr Kent was not able to give an opinion on Mr
MV’s recent condition.
There are two reports from allied
health staff from the Home for the Aged namely Ms SC, registered nurse, dated 7
March 2005, and
Ms KB, physiotherapist, dated 8 March 2005. Ms NH, nursing home
manager provided a feedback form to the Tribunal dated 14 March 2005.
these reports indicate that the parties believe that based on their professional
relationships with Mr MV he has the capacity
for both personal and financial
Dr Lim, consultant physician and
geriatrician, has two reports before the Tribunal. The first report dated 4
February 2005 was in
respect to a referral from Dr Serdiuk for an assessment of
Mr MV’s ability to organise an EPA and a Will. Dr Lim summarises
problems as general frailty, Parkinson’s disease with a past problem of
right hemi-arthroplasty. On 3 February 2005 Dr
Lim found that cognitively Mr MV
was alert and orientated and scored 28/30 on the Mini Mental State Examination
(MMSE). He concluded
that Mr MV had demonstrated an understanding of what an EPA
and a Will were. His report of 18 March 2005 confirms that he had only
MV on two occasions, 3 February and 18 March 2005. He notes that he considers
that Mr MV has a full ability to make decisions
on personal and financial
matters, that he is capable of making decisions freely and voluntarily and he is
not influenced by other
In his oral evidence to the Tribunal on
31 May 2005 Dr Lim confirmed that he had the referral letter from Dr Serdiuk
which noted that
Mr MV had Parkinson’s disease treated by Dr Silburn, a
fractured neck of femur with resultant poor mobility and a copy of his
medications and a letter from Ms SC, registered nurse from the Home for the
Aged. Dr Lim did not have specific details of the history
or treatment by Dr
Silburn nor did he contact Dr Silburn for further medical information.
In answer to questions from the
Tribunal Dr Lim agreed that Parkinson’s disease can cause dementia and
that the MMSE is not
a marker that can tell you whether a person has capacity or
not. He said that on the occasions he saw Mr MV he did not focus on examining
him for cognitive impairment. However he considered from his assessment that Mr
MV was capable of making all decisions and he felt
that he understood the
effects of his decisions. He said he was unable to comment on Mr MV’s
condition in 2004 but considered
that increased medications at that time could
have had a potential impact on his cognition.
In contrast to the above, there are a
number of reports which indicate that Mr MV has impaired capacity. A copy of a
report from Dr
Fiona Harris, consultant physician in Internal Medicine and
Geriatrics, dated 30 June 2004 notes that at that time he had a diagnosis
cognitive impairment and hallucinations. A nursing discharge summary from
Hospital dated 3 October 2004 notes that Mr MV is “
very prone to
hallucinations, anxiety, agitation and impulsive actions”.
Care Assessment Team report dated 12 October 2004 notes a diagnosis of cognitive
Dr Clarke, general practitioner and
neighbour of Mr MV’s, provided a letter and a report. In a short letter
dated 12 January
2005 he says he has been treating Mr MV recently and notes that
he has developed dementia associated with his Parkinson’s disease.
opines that Mr MV in not mentally able to make rational judgements with regard
to his finances and other matters. In his report
of 2 March 2005 he confirms
that Mr MV has dementia and cannot make any complex decisions. He states that he
has known Mr MV for
There are two letters from Dr Peter
Silburn, consultant neurologist, before the Tribunal. A letter to Dr Serdiuk
dated 13 August 2004
indicated that Mr MV has been experiencing hallucinations
and that it was important to balance his medications. Dr Silburn wrote
to Mrs M dated 28 January 2005 in which he notes that
“Mr MV has severe
end stage Parkinson’s disease with both motor and cognitive dysfunction.
This was clearly evident during
his stay at Hospital in September 2004 where
there was definite evidence of dementia.”
He goes on to note that he
believes that although Mr MV would be aware of what he was about to do, he would
not appreciate the significance
and the nature and extent and value of his
estate or be able to evaluate and discriminate between respective strengths of
Dr Silburn gave oral evidence to the
Tribunal on 31 May 2005. He advised that he is a consultant neurologist with a
special interest
in Parkinson’s disease and that he has treated Mr MV
since 24 April 1998. He saw him in September and October 2004 and more
on 15 March 2005 and stated that Mr MV has advanced Parkinson’s disease
with motor and cognitive impairment. In September
2004 Dr Silburn said he
considered that Mr MV required placement but he was determined to go home from
hospital. Dr Silburn detected
tension and a conflict of interest between Mr MV
and his wife.
Dr Silburn advised the Tribunal that Mr
MV is an intelligent man but he was fixated on not going to a nursing home at
that time. He
commented on the history of hallucinations which had been treated
with antipsychotic medication. He said that this indicated cortical
involvement (a cause of cognitive impairment). He considered that these drugs
could contribute to effects such as shaded
consciousness but said that Mr MV had
definite evidence of higher cognitive deficits. He considers that Mr MV has
evidence of frontal
lobe deficits which include problems with executive
functioning such as planning and organisation, concrete thinking and loss of
impulse control.
When Dr Silburn was specifically asked
whether the submission by the solicitors for Mr MV, ‘that Mr MV’s
cognition improved
after he was taken off the medication for
Parkinson’s’ was correct Dr Silburn stated very specifically that
not the case. He stated that Mr MV had to be taken off the medication
because the progress of the disease had reached the stage where
cognitive reserves had deteriorated to such an extent that he could no longer
tolerate the medication
.” It was this inability to cope with the
medication which was actually evidence of the cognitive deterioration. Dr
stated that whilst Mr MV showed some improvement after being taken off
the medication his higher cognitive functioning showed no
improvement and the
MMSE of 19/30 after he had been off the medication for some time endorses the
finding that his cognition has
not improved since ceasing the
medication.
Dr Silburn stated that Mr MV would not
understand the effects of his decisions. He noted Mr MV was angry with his wife
who he believed
was letting him down by even considering that he should go to a
nursing home where the evidence was that she was not physically capable
caring for him at home due to her own health issues. He considered that Mr MV
would be influenced by others in making decisions
because of his deficits. On 15
March 2005 Mr MV scored 19/30 on a MMSE with Dr Silburn.
Dr Silburn noted that Dr Lim is a
respected clinician but he had no history of Mr MV’s cognitive problems
and Dr Lim relied
on the MMSE which Dr Silburn considers is insufficient by
itself in diagnosing dementia and is not useful in determining focal deficits
and frontal lobe problems.
As noted previously there are two
bodies of medical evidence with differing opinions regarding Mr MV’s
capacity to make decisions.
These reports have been summarised above. In
particular there is a difference of opinion between the two specialists, Dr Lim
Dr Silburn. After careful review of all the evidence, in particular the oral
medical evidence to the Tribunal, the Tribunal prefers
the evidence of Dr
Silburn. Dr Silburn has been Mr MV’s treating specialist for over seven
years and therefore has the advantage
of assessing Mr MV’s condition over
a long period of time. Dr Silburn is recognised as a well respected neurologist
special interest in Parkinson’s disease and has expertise in
assessing the dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease
with particular
reference to problems with high level executive functioning and frontal lobe
deficits. Dr Silburn’s opinion
is confirmed by earlier reports from Dr
Fiona Harris, an experienced geriatrician who was involved with Mr MV’s
rehabilitation
in 2004. In contrast, it would appear that Dr Lim was not aware
of Mr MV’s full history including earlier evidence that he
had cognitive
impairment. Dr Lim relied on a MMSE but as explained by Dr Silburn this test is
not a capacity marker nor useful in
determining focal deficits or frontal lobe
At the end of this hearing the
Tribunal made the following
Date of Order:
DECLARATION ABOUT CAPACITY
1. That MV does not
currently have capacity for complex financial matters including the execution of
an Enduring Power of Attorney
and did not have capacity to execute the Enduring
Powers of Attorney dated 16 November 2004, 7 December 2004 and 3 February
ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
The following Enduring Powers of Attorney
for MV are declared invalid pursuant to
Powers of Attorney Act
and s84(2) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(a) The Enduring Power of Attorney dated 16 November
2004 appointing MA as attorney for financial, personal and health
(b) The Enduring Power of Attorney dated 7 December 2004
appointing GR as attorney for financial, personal and health
(c) The Enduring Power of Attorney dated 3 February 2005
appointing TR as attorney for financial, personal and health
ADJOURNMENT
3. The applications in relation to the
appointment of a guardian and administrator are adjourned to a date to be
27 June Hearing.
Prior to the hearing of these adjourned
applications in relation to whether the appointment of both a guardian and an
administrator
was required Mr MV’s solicitors lodged an application with
the Tribunal on 6 June 2005 for a declaration that Mr MV had capacity
instructions that his joint account and investments managed through Suncorp be
split and that he had capacity to give instructions
that the joint tenancy in
relation to his property be severed.
On 21 June 2005, Mrs TR lodged an
application seeking her appointment as guardian for Mr MV.
The adjourned applications and the
new applications came on for determination by the Tribunal on 27 June 2005.
Present at this hearing
were all of the active parties who were present at the
31 May hearing. No further evidence was heard at this hearing in relation
capacity but rather clarification was sought by the solicitors for Mr MV in
relation to declarations that were previously made
by the Tribunal with respect
to Mr MV’s capacity for complex financial matters. Further submissions
were received from parties
in this regard. On the day following the hearing the
Orders set out at the commencement of these Reasons were made.
These Reasons therefore set out the
basis upon which the Tribunal made its Orders on both 31 May 2005 and 27 June
Findings re Capacity for Complex financial
On the basis of the medical evidence
which the Tribunal has accepted, the legal question for the Tribunal to
determine is whether
Mr MV has capacity for financial matters as defined by the
Act. As set out previously Dr Silburn has indicated that Mr MV has end
Parkinson’s and has higher cognitive deficits, frontal lobe deficits which
include problems with executive functioning
such as planning and organisation,
as well as concrete thinking and loss of impulse control. Dr Silburn also stated
that Mr MV would
be susceptible to the influence of others due to these
deficits. The question for the Tribunal is what impact these medical conditions
have had on his capacity to make financial decisions. We need to look at the
circumstances surrounding the decisions Mr MV made with
respect to the execution
of the EPA’s and the jointly owned property and determine whether these
medical conditions affected
his capacity to make these particular financial
Capacity is defined in schedule 4 as
, for a person for a matter, means the
person is capable of—
(a) understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the matter;
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
(c) communicating the decisions in some way.
In particular the Tribunal has been
specifically asked to make declarations in relation to whether Mr MV had
capacity to execute the
3 EPA’s which were executed between November 2004
and February 2005.
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
the essential elements which an adult must have an understanding of in order for
them to be held to have capacity to execute
an EPA. This section provides as
41 Principal’s capacity to make an enduring
power of attorney
(1) a principal may make an enduring power of attorney only if the
principal understands the nature and effect of the enduring power
(2) Understanding the nature and effect of the enduring power of attorney
includes understanding the following matters –
(a) the principal may, in the power of attorney, specify or limit the
power to be given to an attorney and instruct an attorney
(b) when the power begins;
(c) once the power for a matter begins, the attorney has power to make,
and will have full control over, the matter subject to terms
or information
(d) the principal may revoke the enduring power of attorney at any time
the principal is capable of making an enduring power of
attorney giving the
same power;
(e) the power the principal has given continues even if the principal
becomes a person who has impaired capacity;
(f) at any time the principal is not capable of revoking the enduring
power of attorney, the principal is unable to effectively
oversee the use of
The evidence clearly shows that Mr MV
was an astute businessman who exercised sole control over his finances while he
was able to
do so. At the time that his first enduring power of attorney was
executed on 16 November 2004 he had accumulated investments worth
approximately
$1,100,000.00 which were held as joint tenants with his wife and he also owned a
house and contents worth approximately
$433,000 which were again held jointly
with his wife.
In regard to the holding of the assets
as joint tenants Mr MV would have been fully aware of the effect of holding
assets in that
way as he had at one stage been a real estate agent. In
particular he would have known that holding property in this way meant that
the death of one of the joint owners the survivor would be entitled to the share
of the deceased joint owner automatically as
opposed to holding of the assets as
tenants in common whereby the share of the deceased owner would be subject to
the provisions
of their will. Mr MV and his wife had executed their mirror wills
with this knowledge.
Mr MV was therefore an independent
retiree who with his wife relied totally on the income produced by his
investments and had many
years previously set up how all this property was to
devolve on his death. Having set up this structure Mr MV was managing his
affairs without any great difficulty as essentially he simply needed
to ensure his bills were paid. There is no evidence that Mr
MV in the short term
at least could not have continued to conduct his financial affairs with the
assistance of his financial adviser
as his affairs at that stage were relatively
straightforward.
However at the end of 2004 Mr MV made
great changes to the way in which he had set up all his financial arrangements.
He made 3 different
enduring powers of attorney, he changed his will, and he
gave instructions to sever his jointly owned real property and all the jointly
held investments. These are all appropriate strategies if they are strategies
that Mr MV thought through for himself and if they
are decisions that he made
for himself and was not influenced to do so by other people or that he entered
into on the basis of a
mistaken set of beliefs.
The essential question for the Tribunal
is: did he have capacity to make these particular decisions which are of their
very nature
more complex than the decisions he had been making about his
finances up until then? As the High Court stated in
Gibbons v Wright
(1954) 91CLR 423 at 437,
The law does not prescribe
any fixed standard of sanity as a requisite for all transactions. It requires,
in relation to each particular
matter or piece of business transacted, that each
party have such soundness of mind as to be capable of understanding the general
nature of what he is doing by his participation.
Accordingly we need to look at whether
Mr MV had capacity for each of these transactions. Turning firstly to the issue
of capacity
with respect to the execution of the three enduring powers of
attorney during the period November 2004 to February 2005; it needs
to be noted
in this regard that the evidence shows that Mr MV had been suffering from
Parkinson’s disease for almost 10 years
by the end of 2004 and had been
treated by Dr Silburn for 7years. Mr MV also made all these changes to his
financial arrangements
at the end of a year in which he was hospitalised three
times and according to Dr Silburn, he had experienced a major deterioration
his cognition characterised by intrusive hallucinations. Dr Silburn considered
that Mr MV had “
severe end stage Parkinson’s with both motor and
cognitive dysfunction”
Mr and Mrs M had been discussing the
need for enduring powers of attorney for some years but it was not until Mr MV
was about to go
into respite care at the Home for the Aged that the decision was
made to make an enduring power of attorney. Of particular concern
Tribunal is the fact that Mr MV made three different enduring documents within
three months and changed his mind on each occasion
as to who he wished to be his
attorney. The Tribunal is also concerned that the person who seemed to have the
greatest influence
on Mr MV at any given time was appointed as his
In discussions with his grandson Mr GR,
Mr MV had apparently indicated at an early stage that he wanted both Mrs M and
Ms TR to be
his attorneys. As it turned out it was Mrs M who was first to be
appointed as attorney for both financial and personal/health matters.
document was prepared by xxx lawyers, a firm of which Mr GR was an employed
solicitor and was witnessed by Mr C the principal
of that firm. Mr C was certain
after a short conversation that Mr MV had the requisite capacity to execute the
enduring power of
attorney however no medical evidence as to his capacity to
make an enduring power of attorney was obtained at the
The enduring power of attorney granted
to Mrs M had no special terms such as a conflict clause which could have been
expected as the
power was being granted to a spouse so he had clearly not turned
his mind to this issue.
Within 3 days of the grant of this
enduring power of attorney Mr MV expressed concern about it to his grandson and
then began a round
of meetings and telephone calls between Mr MV, Mr GR, Ms TR
and Mrs M which ultimately culminated in Mr MV instructing the Lawyers
prepare a new enduring power of attorney appointing Mr GR as Mr MV’s
attorney. Mrs TR was subsequently appointed attorney
in February
In relation to all 3 EPAs the Tribunal
is not satisfied that Mr MV freely and voluntarily decided who was to be his
attorney on any
of these 3 occasions. The evidence of Dr Silburn was that Mr MV
would be susceptible to the influence of others and the Tribunal
is satisfied on
the evidence this was the case. The very fact that there were 3 enduring
documents executed in 3 months appointing
3 different people to be the attorney
is by itself a cause of some concern. In
Ranclaud v Caban
ConvR55-385 where six powers of attorney to 2 different appointees were made
over a nine month period the judge considered
that such inconstancy was in fact
evidence of a lack of the requisite capacity.
In regard to Mr MV’s capacity to
grant the first of the enduring powers of attorney the significant issue is that
he appointed
as his attorney someone who he evidently did not really want to
fulfil that role. Therefore even if he was able to understand the
effect of an enduring power of attorney in the abstract the appointment of Mrs M
as his attorney was not his free and
voluntary act because he was able to be
overborne by Mrs M’s desire to be his attorney and her vehement desire
that Mrs TR
not be involved. The definition of capacity set out above clearly
sets out that one of the essential elements of capacity is the
ability to decide
freely and voluntarily. Mr MV, because of his Parkinson’s disease, lacked
the cognitive reserves required
to deal with this sort of influence.
It is clear from the evidence that Mr
MV had initially wanted to have both Mrs M and Mrs TR as his attorneys but Mrs M
did not want
to share control of Mr MV’s affairs with Mrs TR as she felt
that she would be overborne by her. In Mrs M’s words TR was
bossy.” Mr MV suffering end stage Parkinson’s disease and being
physically frail and fully dependent on Mrs
M for all his daily cares was not in
a position to ensure that his wishes were carried out and it would appear that
against his better
judgment he initially appointed only Mrs M as his attorney.
The fact that the appointment of Mrs M as his attorney was not his free
voluntary act as is borne out by the evidence that just 3 days after the
execution of the document he was expressing concerns
While Mr MV was not comfortable with
Mrs M being his sole attorney the evidence supports a finding that he still
wanted to please
her as he decided to appoint his grandson as his attorney as
opposed to appointing his daughter Ms TR as this would keep the peace
the two women. At the same time that Mr MV was giving instructions to his
Lawyers in regard to his enduring power of attorney
they were giving advice to
him in regard to the holding of his assets jointly with his wife and his will.
The advice was that there
was a possibility that because he did not have mutual
wills with his wife that his daughter Ms TR may not benefit from his estate,
Mrs M could alter her will and disinherit Ms TR or spend all of the inheritance.
The evidence shows that Mr MV was very
willing to believe this would occur even though Mrs M had never withdrawn any
money from their
joint account in 37 years of marriage despite having
contributed her wages from her employment into this account. It was clear from
the evidence Mr MV gave to the Tribunal that he was very angry with his wife for
not caring for him at home and considered that his
wife was now trying to make
out he was a “nut case” and didn’t know what he was doing. Mrs
M gave evidence that
she and her husband had a clear understanding as to how
their combined assets were to be distributed on their deaths which she intended
to fully honour.
Mr MV gave evidence at the hearing that
he told his Lawyers to protect his interests, that he wanted half his assets to
wife on his death and half to his daughter TR. Mr MV made it very
clear at the hearing that he wanted to be fair to both. On Mr A’s
they acted in accordance with these broad instructions. On this basis an
enduring power of attorney was drawn up appointing
Mr GR as the attorney and
actions were taken to sever all of the joint assets including the home in which
the couple had lived for
over 30 years. Mr MV advised his wife by telephone that
he had appointed GR as his attorney but he did not at anytime discuss with
his concerns in regard to the jointly held assets and his will. The question is
did Mr MV understand the documents executed and
the transactions entered into
pursuant to his instructions?
In relation to whether Mr MV understood
the nature and effect of the 3 EPA’s the Tribunal is particularly
concerned that Mr
MV did not understand the nature and effect of the EPA’s
dated 7 December 2004 and 3 February 2005 because in those documents
clause allowing conflict transactions which is actually quite a complicated
clause with wide reaching implications. On
questioning Mr MV it was clear that
he did not understand the full reasons for the inclusion of this clause which
specifically allowed
charging by professional attorneys and gifting. These
powers would enable the attorney to enter transactions which could benefit
attorney at the expense of Mr MV. Mr A stated in evidence that the explanation
given to Mr MV was that they were needed because
Mr GR may need to engage the
firm of solicitors he was working for to do work on the file. However given the
much wider implications
of this clause this is not an adequate understanding of
the consequences of the inclusion of this clause particularly as this clause
not requested by Mr MV but was included on the solicitor’s
initiative.
It was this clause which enabled Mr GR
to sever the joint tenancy and to give instructions to Suncorp to sever the
investments because
these two actions are classically defined as “conflict
transactions”. These types of transactions are called
transactions because the transactions involve a conflict
between the attorney’s clear duty to the adult and the attorney’s
duty to protect their own interests or the interests of people in a close
relationship with them. In this case because of the changes
Mr MV had made to
his will these actions to sever these assets would confer a direct benefit on a
relation of the attorney namely
his mother, Mrs TR. These actions allow Mrs TR
to inherit property via the will rather than the usual consequence of jointly
property operating whereby Mrs M or Mr MV would receive the jointly held
portion of the property from the other as the survivor.
The above analysis in relation to Mr
MV’s understanding of the conflict clause also applies to this power of
attorney granted
to Ms TR on 3 February 2005 as the same clauses were contained
in this power of attorney and the explanations given to Mr MV in regard
special powers were the same as those given in respect of the power granted to
Mr GR. As the High Court indicated in
Gibbon v Wright
The mental capacity required by the law in respect
of any instrument is relative to the particular transaction which is being
by means of the instrument, and may be described as the capacity to
understand the nature of that transaction when it is explained....Ordinarily
nature of the transaction means the broad operation, the “general
purport” of the instrument; but in some cases it
may mean the effect of
the wider transaction which the instrument is a means of carrying out.
The Tribunal is satisfied that Mr MV did not understand this
conflict clause in these two documents and in particular did not understand
wider implications of these clauses in these documents.
It was Mr GR who advised Mrs M of the
decision to split the joint assets by telephone and who actually signed the
transfer documents
to be lodged in the Titles Office. It was Mr GR who later
sent her a letter confirming the severance of the joint tenancies. Mr MV
explain these steps to his wife or even foreshadow them. Indeed Mr MV later
expressed to his solicitor that he did not understand
why Mrs M was acting the
way she was. That is why she was taking active steps to frustrate the severing
of the joint tenancy and
the investments with Suncorp and which ultimately
resulted in her application to the Tribunal.
In relation to the question as to
whether Mr MV had capacity to give instructions to sever the jointly owned
property and investments
it has been submitted that the severing of a joint
tenancy is a not a complex financial matter. Having regard to the fact that this
act will alter the effect of a person’s will and in particular that in
this case it would mean that Mrs M would on Mr MV’s
death no longer have
full ownership of her family home it is not a simple matter. In particular the
Tribunal notes that Mr MV at
the hearing indicated that he did not realise that
the consequence of Mrs M now being a tenant in common rather than a joint tenant
was that the property could be sold after his death even if she did not want
this to occur. It is a complex matter and to understand
the full implications of
the decision would require a high level of capacity.
In addition, the consequence of
severing the jointly held Suncorp investments was that the impact of exit
charges and capital gains
tax would need to be taken into account as the Suncorp
investment could not be easily dealt with and splitting the investments would
result in a capital gains liability to not only Mr MV but also Mrs M. When
questioned about the capital gains tax at the hearing
Mr MV simply said that
you have to pay tax”
, but in this case the tax is payable
not in respect of the sale of an asset but a mere change in tenancy. Mr MV also
expressed concern
at the hearing when told of the amount of tax to be charged
and the high exit fees. When Mr MV was told the extent of the amounts
hearing he was surprised and he said that he “
may have to rethink
. If Mr MV did not realise that capital gains tax and exit fees
would be charged as a result of his decision to sever it is difficult
that he understood the true nature and effect of his decision to
The medical evidence is that due to Mr
MV’s illness he is subject to impulsive actions and this is clearly seen
in his decision
making around the splitting of the joint assets.
Mr MV did not understand the effect of
severing the joint tenancies in respect of the assets he had jointly with his
wife for many
years and had not considered the consequences for the both of them
in respect of costs and also the effect of the transaction on
his wife. Instead
he had let a fear that his daughter might not be provided for by his wife
control his decision making without giving
his wife an opportunity to either
reassure him or enter another arrangement which would have adequately protected
his and his daughters
Accordingly the answer to the essential
question, of whether this evidence shows Mr MV had capacity to make these
decisions, is that
the Tribunal is satisfied that Mr MV did not have this
capacity. He did not freely and voluntarily enter into the execution of any
the enduring powers of attorney due to his susceptibility to influence and he
was also unable to understand the full nature and
effect of the last two
enduring document documents given his inability to understand an essential
clause in the document namely the
clause authorising conflict transactions.
The Tribunal is therefore satisfied
that in accordance with section 113 of the
Act a declaration should
be made that the documents are invalid and the Order of 31 May 2005 reflects
these findings.
The Tribunal is also satisfied that Mr
MV did not understand all of the implications of the decision to sever the
jointly owned Suncorp
investments and the jointly owned property. This
incapacity for complex financial matters also extended to incapacity to give
instructions
to his solicitors and his attorney to this effect.
The Tribunal makes no comment however
as to Mr MV’s capacity to give instructions in relation to the execution
of a new will
as this is a completely different question of capacity. The issue
of capacity is decision specific and the Tribunal’s findings
relate only
to the specific financial decisions before it. The capacity to execute a will
involves completely different issues and
the capacity required to understand the
nature and effect of a will is quite straightforward. Capacity in that regard is
quite distinct
from the capacity to execute an enduring power of attorney and
sever jointly owned property. The latter decisions are by far more
their nature.
DOES MR MV NEED AN
ADMINISTRATOR?
Having determined that the three
enduring documents Mr MV executed are all invalid the question is whether he
needs decision making
arrangements to be put into place given that he does not
have a validly appointed attorney to act. The Tribunal is satisfied that
are extensive assets to be managed which include the ownership by Mr MV of a
half share of the property as a tenant in common.
There are also the jointly
owned investments and decisions need to be made in relation to these assets. The
jointly owned property
has already been severed and any appointed administrator
will need to consider whether this transaction should be reversed and will
need to consider all of the financial implications of such a reversal including
whether any stamp duty or other charges apply.
The administrator will also need
to consider whether the jointly owned investments should be severed and whether
this transaction
should go ahead given the capital gains and exit fee issues
that have been foreshadowed. The administrator will also need to consider
payment of legal fees in relation to the services provided by the
The Tribunal is satisfied that there is
now significant family conflict in relation to these financial matters. Mr MV
has also now
firmly formed a view against Mrs M, whether justified or not. It is
noted that Mr MV was determined to go home to her care and appoint
attorney at the end of 2004 but as soon as he went to the nursing home he formed
a view against her which is really without
explanation. It is clear from the
evidence however that this is a firmly held view and Mr MV was adamant in his
discussions with
the Tribunal that he now does not want Mrs M making any
decisions for him. He also said however that he did not wish to divorce her.
When faced with these intractable views at the hearing Mrs M supported the
appointment of the PTQ rather than herself as administrator.
Mrs TR has applied to be administrator
should her appointment as attorney be overturned and the Tribunal notes her
daily contact with
her father and the enormous amount of work involved in doing
all the running around for her father. The question however is whether
TR’s is the most appropriate person to be appointed as administrator. From
the evidence she clearly has the business skills
and acumen. The difficulty is
however that the Act at section 15(1)(c) requires that the Tribunal should
consider the extent to which
the interests of the administrator and the
interests of the adult are likely to conflict. In the present case this is a
real possibility
for Mrs TR because if she were appointed administrator she
would have a duty to consider whether the transaction which severed the
tenancy should be reversed. If this occurs then her interests under the changed
will could be materially affected.
For this reason there is a good reason
to appoint someone completely independent of the family and the PTQ will be
appointed to manage
Mr MV’s financial affairs until further
As indicated the administrator will
need to make some difficult decisions and the Tribunal requires that the PTQ
advise the Tribunal
within 8 weeks as what decisions it is going to make in this
regard. The Tribunal notes Mr MV’s frequently expressed view throughout
the hearing that he wishes Mrs M and his daughter to be treated equally. As
required by the General Principles any administrator
is required to take Mr
MV’s views and wishes into account but ultimately they must make a
decision which is in accordance with
his proper care and
protection.
DOES MR MV HAVE CAPACITY FOR COMPLEX
PERSONAL MATTERS?
When the matter came back for
determination by the Tribunal on 27 June 2005 the other issues that were
required to be determined by
the Tribunal at this further hearing were
whether Mr MV had impaired capacity for
personal matters;
whether there was the
need for the appointment of both a guardian and an administrator for Mr MV; and
who was the most appropriate guardian
and/or administrator.
The evidence before the Tribunal in
relation to Mr MV’s capacity for personal matters was that he is very
confused and is still
very subject to the influence of others. Mr MV had clearly
made a decision in October 2004 that he would return home despite all
evidence that it would be difficult for him to be managed at home given his need
for “high care”. At the hearing,
it was clear to the Tribunal that
Mr MV lacked insight into his future care. He considered that he could continue
to be managed at
the Home for the Aged into the future when it is clear this is
not the case and a decision will need to be made in the future as
to where he
will need to be accommodated so that he can receive the standard of care that he
After a consideration of all the
available evidence the Tribunal made the following findings of fact in relation
capacity for complex personal
Mr MV’s insistence that he
could manage at home in October 2004 and his lack of insight into his future
high care needs indicate
some concerns about Mr MV’s ability to make
decisions for complex personal matters.
MV has a history of being susceptible to acceding to other peoples
The Tribunal is not satisfied however
that the presumption of capacity has been rebutted and accordingly is not
satisfied that it
can make a finding that at the present time Mr MV has impaired
capacity for personal matters. It is clear however that Mr MV lacks
understanding of many issues in relation to health matters and that the time is
fast approaching when Mr MV will not be able
to accurately weigh up and consider
all the issues in relation to the personal decisions he has to make particularly
in relation
to his health care and decisions as to where he should be
accommodated. The Tribunal is particularly concerned that Mr MV may refuse
move to high level care when the time comes.
NEED A GUARDIAN?
Whilst the Tribunal is not currently
satisfied that Mr MV has impaired capacity for personal matters it is satisfied
that on the basis
of Mr MV’s health and the prognosis for his
Parkinson’s condition this time is rapidly approaching. When this time
itself however there is not always the need to appoint a guardian to
make these decisions if there are appropriate informal arrangements
Powers of Attorney Act
actually sets up a regime allowing informal decision makers, called statutory
health attorneys, to make decisions for adults when
they have lost capacity.
However, for this regime to successfully operate it is necessary for the
Tribunal to declare who is Mr MV’s
statutory health attorney because under
of that Act, Mr MV’s statutory health attorney would normally
be his spouse. However this priority to the spouse is defeated
relationship is not a close and continuing relationship.
In this regard therefore the Tribunal
makes the following findings:
Mrs M and Mr MV have been physically
separated since November 2004.
only had infrequent contact with Mr MV during this
Mr MV’s expressed wish is that
he does not want contact with Mrs M and he does not want her to make any
decisions for him.
There is continuing
conflict between Mrs M and Mrs TR as to who should be making health decisions
The decision as to where Mr MV
should receive high care assistance is a health decision which a statutory
health attorney may make
once Mr MV has lost
The Tribunal therefore declares that
Mrs TR is Mr MV’s statutory health attorney and she should be the one who
makes decisions
for Mr MV when he is no longer able to make health decisions for
OTHER MATTERS
Solicitors Fees
An issue which needs to be discussed is
the question as to the payment of fees to his Lawyers for their legal services
decision has been made by the Tribunal that Mr MV lacked capacity for
financial matters and in particular did not have capacity to
instructions that he gave.
As the General Principles state an
adult is presumed to have capacity and this presumption would generally continue
until a declaration
is made which rebuts this presumption. In some cases however
it will be clear to a solicitor that a person lacks capacity and the
may need to advise the person seeking to instruct them that they cannot assist
them. Many cases however fall into the category
where it is unclear and it is
then a question of the solicitor taking reasonable steps to assure themselves
the person has a good
understanding of the nature and effect of the instructions
they are being given bearing in mind that capacity is decision specific
a global concept. If such reasonable steps are taken it would be appropriate for
the solicitor’s fees to be paid by
an administrator who is subsequently
appointed by a Tribunal after a finding has been made that a person in fact did
not have capacity
at the time they gave the solicitor
instructions.
What are the reasonable steps a
solicitor should take? In this difficult area of what is now being referred to
as elder law it is
vitally important that the solicitor has a clear
understanding about who the client actually is. Often family members may be
in the legal concerns of the older person and they may be the ones
driving the execution of documents rather than the older person
themselves. The
client is however the person who is going to be executing the documents not the
family members who bring them. The
older person is the client. It is from them
that instructions are to be taken and not from any other person. This is
particularly
important with family members as they may indeed have a stake in
the outcome of the instructions. Family members should normally
not be present
when instructions are taken.
Given that the client is clearly
identified it is important that they are seen by themselves. This is to ensure
that they are not
being influenced by any other person. It would also involve
testing the person’s real understanding of the instructions they
giving. In cases of concern it is important to obtain medical reports in
relation to the person’s capacity for the particular
matter. For example
if the question was whether a person has the capacity to execute an EPA sending
a medical practitioner a copy
of the relevant section of the
Attorney Act
would be essential.
of that Act specifically
sets out the understanding required and a medical practitioner should address
these criteria for decision
making specifically if the opinion is to be relied
In the current case Mr MV was clearly
identified by the solicitors as the client and he was seen separately on many
occasions. Mr
A did take steps to satisfy himself of Mr MV’s capacity on
several occasions and he took careful notes of his instructions.
He also took
the further step of obtaining a medical opinion from an independent specialist
geriatrician who had no previous history
with Mr MV. Ultimately the Tribunal
preferred the evidence of another medical specialist who had been the
longstanding specialist
but Mr A’s actions were reasonable in the
circumstances given Mr MV’s expressed view to the Tribunal that he had
confidence in his usual specialist presumably because Mr MV knew that this
doctor considered that he had lost capacity to manage
This was clearly a difficult case with
a significant conflict in the medical evidence. It was only after a considered
view of all
the available medical evidence and a thorough examination of all
this evidence that the Tribunal made a finding that Mr MV lacked
capacity. The
Tribunal is not at all critical of the solicitor’s actions in taking
instructions. As Justice Young said in
Ranclaud v Cabban
A person only seeing a little bit of the picture
and seeing the plaintiff for a short time in view of her strong feelings on the
may well from the view that it is safe to allow the plaintiff to
proceed. It is only when one gets the complete view of the evidence
that one can
see just how incapable the plaintiff really is.
Accordingly, whilst it would ultimately
be a decision for an administrator to make decisions in this regard in the
view it would be appropriate in the circumstances to pay all
reasonable legal fees which Mr MV has incurred in instructing the
solicitors.
Solicitors Who Witness Enduring
In the course of their practice many
solicitors are called upon to witness the execution of enduring documents.
Section 44(4)
Powers of Attorney Act
provides that a
witness must sign a certification that the principal appeared to the witness to
have capacity to execute the document.
This means that in any contested matter a
solicitor may be required to give evidence as to the circumstances surrounding
the execution
of the document and the basis upon which he came to the conclusion
that the principal had capacity.
The past two years has seen a huge
increase in the number of matters coming before the Tribunal where the issue in
dispute is whether
the principal had capacity to execute the enduring document.
In some cases the solicitor who has witnessed the document has then
sought leave
to appear at the Tribunal to represent the principal when it is clear that they
will need to give evidence in relation
to the circumstances surrounding the
execution of the document.
Section 5.04 of the Queensland Law
Society’s Solicitor’s Handbook clearly states that a practitioner
having accepted instructions
should withdraw if it is reasonable to believe or
it becomes apparent that the practitioner is likely to be a witness. There are
exceptions to this rule namely if it relates to an uncontested matter; or
refusal or withdrawal will jeopardise the client’s
Due to the very real difficulties in
cases where a solicitor seeks to represent a party and also give evidence, the
Tribunal, in these
contested cases, has not generally given leave to the
solicitor to represent the party. Best practice would be for a solicitor other
than the solicitor who is required to give evidence to represent the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (257 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter