URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2009/62.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:38:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SAF, Re [2009] QGAAT 62 (27 July 2009)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL
[2009] QGAAT 62
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Guardianship Application
Administration Application
In the matter of SAF
MATTER NUMBER:
2009/595 2009/596
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
DATE OF HEARING:
DATE OF ORDER:
DATE OF REASONS:
27 July 2009
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
P Feil Presiding Member
M Wood Member
P McGrath Member
CATCHWORDS:
GUARDIANS-ADMINISTRATORS-ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY-Where family
conflict-Where adult vulnerable to exploitation-Where appropriateness
proposed appointee.
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorneys Act 1998
GUARDIANSHIP
the Adult Guardian is appointed as guardian for SAF for decisions about the
following personal matters:
(a) Accommodation;
(b) With whom
SAF has contact and/or visits;
(d) Provision
of services.
the Tribunal orders otherwise, this appointment remains current for two (2)
ADMINISTRATION
The Public Trustee of Queensland is appointed as administrator for SAF for all
financial matters.
administrator is to provide a financial management plan to the Tribunal within
four (4) months.
Tribunal directs the administrator to provide accounts to the Tribunal when
the Tribunal orders otherwise, this appointment remains current for two (2)
NOTICE OF INTEREST IN LAND
the administrator shall within three (3) months:
by way of a search of the records held by the Registrar of Titles or other
means, any interest in real property registered
in the name of SAF (“the
with the Registrar of Titles a copy of this order and a notice notifying the
Registrar of any interest in land held by the adult
which is subject to this
administration order.
to the Tribunal:
(i) a copy of
the search of records held by the Registrar of Titles referred to above
(ii) a copy of
the lodgement summary with the dealing number showing lodgement of the order in
respect of any interests in land held
by the adult which is subject to this
administration order.
if any change is made in an interest in land held by the adult which is the
subject of this administration order or if there
are any further dealings in
land on behalf of the adult by the administrator, the administrator shall lodge
with the Registrar of
Titles within 14 days of the finalisation of such interest
a copy of this order and a notice (in a form prescribed by the Registrar
Titles), concerning such changes or dealings.
the administrator pay, from the adult’s funds, any fee associated with the
above notices.
ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
any purported Enduring Power of Attorney for SAF is overtaken by the making of
these appointments and, in accordance with
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
can no longer be acted upon to the extent that these
appointments have been made.
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
[1] SAF is the adult. She was 80 years of age on the day of the hearing. SAF
lives in South East Queensland with one of her sons,
[2] On 4 February 2009, the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal (the
Tribunal) received an Application from YM, Clinical Nurse,
seeking the
appointment of the Office of Adult Guardian (Adult Guardian) as guardian and The
Public Trustee of Queensland (PTQ) as
administrator for SAF.
[3] A previous hearing was adjourned on 17 March 2009 to enable an interpreter
to be present to assist SAF at the hearing.
The Issues and the Legislation
[4] The issues for the Tribunal are:
(a) Does SAF have capacity
for the matter?
(b) Is there a need for a Guardian? If so, who should be appointed? and
(c) Is there a need for an Administrator? If so, who should be appointed?
[5] The threshold issue before the Tribunal is whether SAF has capacity to make
personal and financial decisions. The Tribunal may
appoint a guardian and an
administrator for SAF, only if it is satisfied that she has impaired capacity
for the matter. If there
is a need for an appointment, the Tribunal is required
to determine the most appropriate appointee. For the Tribunal to make an
appointment,
it must be satisfied according to the provisions of
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
12 Appointment
The Tribunal may, by order, appoint a guardian for a
personal matter, or an administrator for a financial matter, for an Adult if
Tribunal is satisfied—
Adult has impaired capacity for the matter; and
(b) there is
a need for a decision in relation to the matter or the Adult is likely to do
something in relation to the matter that
involves, or is likely to involve,
unreasonable risk to the Adult’s health, welfare or property; and
(c) without
an appointment—
Adult’s needs will not be adequately met; or
Adult’s interests will not be adequately
The appointment may be on terms considered appropriate by
the Tribunal.
The Tribunal may make the order on its own initiative or on
the Application of the Adult, the Adult Guardian or an interested
[6] In making its decision, the Tribunal is bound by the general principles
found in Sch 1 of the Act.
[7] It is also bound by the appropriateness considerations found in s15 of the
Act which provide as follows:
15 Appropriateness considerations
In deciding whether a person is appropriate for
appointment as a guardian or administrator for an Adult, the tribunal must
the following matters
(“appropriateness
considerations
(a) the general principles and whether the person is likely to apply
(b) if the appointment is for a health matter—the health care
principle and whether the person is likely to apply it;
(c) the extent to which the Adult’s and person’s interests are
likely to conflict;
(d) whether the Adult and person are compatible including, for example,
whether the person has appropriate communication skills or
appropriate cultural
or social knowledge or experience, to be compatible with the Adult;
(e) if more than 1 person is to be appointed—whether the persons are
compatible;
(f) whether the person would be available and accessible to the
(g) the person’s appropriateness and competence to perform functions
and exercise powers under an appointment order.
The fact a person is a relation of the Adult does not,
of itself, mean the Adult’s and person’s interests are likely to
Also, the fact a person may be a beneficiary of the
Adult’s estate on the Adult’s death does not, of itself, mean the
Adult’s and person’s interests are likely to conflict.
In considering the person’s appropriateness and
competence, the tribunal must have regard to the following—
(a) the nature and circumstances of any criminal history, whether in
Queensland or elsewhere, of the person including the likelihood
the commission
of any offence in the criminal history may adversely affect the Adult;
(b) the nature and circumstances of any refusal of, or removal from,
appointment, whether in Queensland or elsewhere, as a guardian,
administrator,
Attorney or other person making a decision for someone else;
(c) if the proposed appointment is of an administrator and the person is
an individual—
(i) the nature and circumstances of the person having been a bankrupt or
taking advantage of the laws of bankruptcy as a debtor under
Bankruptcy Act
(Cwlth) or a similar law of a foreign jurisdiction; and
(ii) the nature and circumstances of a proposed, current or previous
arrangement with the person’s creditors under the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
or a similar law of a foreign jurisdiction; and
(iii) the nature and circumstances of a proposed, current or previous
external administration of a corporation, partnership or other
entity of which
the person is or was a director, secretary or partner or in whose management,
direction or control the person is
or was involved.
THE PARTIES
[8] The following active
parties attended the hearing:-
SAF – the adult
YM – Clinical Nurse – Applicant
ST – Son and proposed guardian and administrator
Interpreter
The Evidence
[9] In addition to the written material contained on the Tribunal file, all of
the parties attending the hearing were given the opportunity
to express their
views. These views, where specifically relied upon by the Tribunal, are
discussed below.
DOES SAF LACK CAPACITY FOR THE MATTER?
[10] Capacity is defined in the Act as;
, for a person for a
matter, means the person is capable of-
(a) understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the matter;
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
(c) communicating the decisions in some way.
Written Evidence
[11] The Application refers to SAF being unduly influenced by her youngest son
ST, whose behaviour is intimidating. It indicates
that family conflict meant
that SAF follows directions from ST, and ignores input from her eldest child
[12] The Application referred to SAF being able to make simple personal
purchases, and to her being able to make simple lifestyle
decisions such as
decisions as to her dress, choosing activities, and attending to her personal
[13] The Tribunal received a letter from YM enclosing the Application dated 2
February 2009. This letter is signed by YM and HM,
Director of Nursing. It
referred to possible financial exploitation by ST due to SAF’s impaired
decision-making capacity. This
letter refers to SAF as not having
decision-making capacity, and to a belief that she is subject to undue influence
[14] ST’s Feedback Form dated 9 February 2009 indicated that SAF makes
good decisions about her finances and property, and
that she does not make
health decisions well.
[15] A Cerebral Function Test performed on 12 November 2001 concluded that SAF
had significant cognitive loss at that time.
[16] A letter from an Optometrists dated 29 June 2004 to Dr C G.P, indicated
that SAF has diabetes and glaucoma.
[17] A letter from Dr B, Orthopaedic Surgeon to Dr C dated 19 July 2004,
indicated that SAF’s medical history is significant
in that she has had
“heart attacks”, a previous stroke, probable atrial fibrillation,
and insulin dependent diabetes.
[18] Queensland Health documents refer to SAF being hospitalised as follows:
28 July 2004 to
2 August 2004 - dehydration, acute renal failure secondary to gastroenteritis
and urinary tract infection
4 March 2009 to
6 March 2009 - increased weight and history of dyspnoea
[19] Bluecare documentation received by the Tribunal on 16 April 2009 refers to
SAF having diabetes, an enlarged heart, kidney failure,
TIAs, arthritis, and
memory loss. She is dependent for meal preparation, housework, community access
and transport.
[20] A Health Professional Report of HM Director of Nursing dated 2 February
2009, indicates that HM has known SAF for sixteen years.
In respect of personal
health care decision making, SAF demonstrates limited understanding of the
consequences of these decisions.
In respect of lifestyle and accommodation
choices, she has very limited understanding of the consequences of living
[21] In respect of financial decision making, SAF is able to manage simple
transactions. She has no capacity for future planning
or budgeting. SAF is
unable to make decisions freely and voluntarily. The report indicates that SAF
is negatively influenced by her
younger son ST, whose behaviour is intimidating.
The report indicates that SAF cannot make any complex decisions. She can only
simple financial decisions.
[22] In a letter from ST to the Tribunal dated 20 April 2009, he indicated that
his parents moved to Australia around 1963. SAF found
mastering the English
language considerably difficult, and has spent all her life in Australia relying
on the family to support her
with any matters that she may be required to
explain in any detail. This letter indicated that SAF has poor English, and has
had good communication skills with people who do not understand her
[23] In this letter ST indicates that he and SAF believe that SAF continues to
make sound decisions on all aspects of her life, which
is led by a lifetime of
family custom, family workings and intertwinement. In this letter ST indicated
that SAF suffers from diabetes
and had suffered a minor stroke. He is required
to ensure the correct medication is available for his mother each day. He
and collates her medicines daily. ST also monitors SAF’s food
intake due to her diabetes condition. He attends to all grocery
shopping and
meal preparation. SAF attends to the washing up. ST attends to all washing and
general cleaning duties, organising medical
appointments, taking SAF to these
appointments, the payment of bills, organising visits back to the family home in
rural South East
Queensland, and daily needs of SAF as required. This letter
provides that SAF can wash and clean herself. ST has no concerns with
SAF’s personal hygiene issues.
[24] The letter provides that SAF has never personally used any banking facility
of any kind in Australia. She has only completed
and performed regular shopping
at a store a number of times. Her husband always attended to shopping duties
prior to his death, as
well as attending to all financial matters. ST and his
brother SG have assisted SAF since their father’s death. The letter
provides that it is a normal family custom for SAF to ask for assistance with
all financial and household matters as required.
Oral Evidence
[25] Despite requests from the Tribunal during the hearing, while SAF was giving
her evidence, ST interrupted and spoke with SAF
in Her native language. As such,
it is difficult to determine the extent of ST’s influence on SAF’s
oral evidence at
the hearing.
[26] Through the interpreter, SAF gave evidence that she gave her home as a
present to ST two to three years ago because her husband
said the home was to be
given to ST, as her husband had purchased a home for SG. SAF gave evidence that
her husband had always looked
after the finances. After his death the children
undertook this role. SAF could not recall the approximate date on which her
died. The letter supporting the Application referred to SAF being
widowed approximately sixteen years ago.
[27] SAF indicated that she receives her income from a pension and that she
received “one hundred dollars and something”
from an Overseas
pension, and approximately $400.00 per fortnight from an Australian pension.
[28] SAF explained that her expenses included “to eat” and rent. She
was unable to explain how her income was spent.
She indicated that it
“vanishes”. SAF indicated that ST pays for everything and looks
[29] SAF could not remember the name of the bank where her savings are held, or
the extent of her savings. She could not remember
the street number of her home
in rural South East Queensland where she had lived for many years, without
prompting. ST’s letter
to the Tribunal of 20 April 2009 indicated that SAF
had lived at this address since 1977. SAF could not recall the town in which
currently lives with ST, or the name of the street in which she lives. She
thought that a number 7 was on the letterbox.
[30] SAF gave evidence that she last saw SG approximately two years ago when she
lived with him. After ST was released from jail,
she commenced living with him.
SAF could not remember when ST was released from jail. SAF gave evidence that
the reason she stopped
living with SG was that she wanted to speak to her sister
in Italy by telephone, and that she got annoyed. In response to a question
whether she would like to see SG, SAF indicated “yes, but now I’m
[31] In respect of her health issues, SAF responded that she was “very
happy”. She denied having any heart problems,
then indicated “just a
little”. In respect of her medication regime, SAF gave evidence that she
takes about ten pills
and that there are too many to remember. She gave evidence
that if she was alone, assistance from a service provider would be better.
gave evidence that she could not live by herself. SAF gave evidence that
“ST does everything,” and that he cooks,
attends to the laundry, and
looks after the home. SAF indicated that she could go to the bathroom alone. She
indicated that her only
health issue was her sore hip and “the
[32] SAF gave evidence that she does not like going out, and that ST attends to
the shopping. The last time she went out was to attend
a medical appointment.
She indicated that she does not see her friends in rural South East
Queensland.
[33] YM gave evidence that at the time SAF was hospitalised in rural South East
Queensland in early February 2009, her mini mental
state examination score was
quite low, and that SAF was unable to record the year or her address. She
explained that an Aged Care
Assessment Team (ACAT) decision was unable to be
given as to SAF’s level of care, as the position regarding her finances
[34] ST gave evidence that SAF can administer her own insulin and take tablets
from a Webster pack. He indicated that SAF is currently
able to shower and
toilet herself.
[35] The evidence before the Tribunal is that SAF has impaired capacity for
complex personal and financial decision making. She is
only able to make limited
simple personal decisions. She has significant memory impairment. SAF needs
assistance with her activities
of daily living. She is vulnerable to
exploitation. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that SAF has impaired capacity
for personal
and financial decision making.
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF A GUARDIAN?
[36] The personal issues to be considered include decision making relating to
SAF’s health, the provision of services for SAF,
and accommodation and
Written Evidence
[37] The Application referred to no planning or decision making occurring at the
time SAF remained an inpatient of a Multi-Purpose
Health Service, despite being
ready for discharge from 5 January 2009. It referred to decisions having to be
made for SAF as to where
she lives, and in respect of her health care.
[38] The letter accompanying the Application indicated that SAF was admitted to
Hospital on 2 January 2009 by ST. Following advice
that SAF was suitable for
discharge on 5 January 2009, ST indicated that he would collect SAF and care for
her. At the time of the
correspondence on 2 February 2009, ST had not collected
SAF or presented a plan or time frame for doing so. His address was unknown
the service. An application for SAF to be accommodated in an aged care facility
could not be progressed without clarification
of SAF’s financial
situation. It was inappropriate for SAF to remain in Hospital.
[39] The letter from ST to the Tribunal dated 20 April 2009 provided that due to
SAF’s age and the number of stairs at the
front door of her home, it would
be unwise for her to return to her home in rural South East Queensland on a
permanent unsupervised
basis. The letter referred to ST and his brother SG
assisting in the care of SAF after her stroke. ST moved to South East Queensland
in approximately 2003. SAF moved into his home in South East Queensland in
approximately March 2008. Prior to that time, she had
lived with SG for twelve
to eighteen months. SAF and SG’s wife did not get along. This is the
reason why SAF asked ST to care
[40] The letter explained that ST organised for SAF to stay at the local
hospital for a short period of time until he was able to
sort out a new
accommodation arrangement. During a meeting with the health professionals,
discussions were held as to the possibility
of SAF living in an aged care unit
in rural South East Queensland, which SAF opposed. After SAF’s admission,
ST was advised
that SAF was unable to stay at the hospital for an extended
period of time. SAF was unsettled at the hospital. ST rented a unit in
East Queensland at the time SAF discharged herself from Hospital in March 2009,
after an approximate six week stay. She then
moved into the unit with ST.
[41] The Report from the Adult Guardian dated 13 March 2009 recommended that the
Adult Guardian be appointed for accommodation, service
provision and health care
matters for a period of two years. This recommendation was made on the following
important for SAF to have accommodation where she is safe and appropriately
supported and not at risk;
(b) Services
will need to be introduced to support SAF if accommodation with her younger son
is appropriate;
conflict that exists within SAF’s family will impact on any decision
regarding health care matters; and
(d) When there
is conflict within a family, removing the decision making to an independent body
will usually lessen the level of conflict.
Oral Evidence
[42] SAF gave evidence that she had not seen SG, his wife or their three
children who live in South East Queensland, for approximately
two years. In
response to a question whether she would like to see SG, SAF responded
“yes, but there is a problem”. She
relayed that there had been
difficulties since a telephone call with her sister in overseas, as SG did not
wish for SAF to speak
with her sister. SAF indicated that SG was “cranky
her grandchildren.
[43] ST gave evidence that SAF was admitted to hospital in January 2009, and
that his relationship with his partner ended in 2008
due to arguments between
SAF and ST’s partner. He asked SAF’s doctor to help out and admit
her to hospital, as SAF was
not eligible for a high care placement. ST gave
evidence that the treating team indicated that SAF was not able to live
independently.
[44] In respect of SAF’s contact with SG, ST gave evidence that SAF lived
with SG for two and a half to three years.
[45] In respect of ST’s relationship with SG, he gave evidence that he had
not discussed his proposed appointment as guardian
and administrator with any
family member. He does not speak with SG and does not get on with SG’s
wife. He explained that when
he was released from jail, he stayed with SG until
an argument when he walked out. When he asked SG about accommodation decisions
for SAF, SG responded that the decision had nothing to do with him any longer.
ST gave evidence that he has not communicated with
SG since February 2008. He
acknowledged the conflict between the family members.
[46] ST explained that following his release from jail in February 2008 and
after her hospitalisation referred to above, SAF came
to live with him.
[47] YM gave evidence that initially an accommodation decision was required to
be made, and that the relationship between ST and
SG had broken down. The
treating team was concerned that while SAF was ready for discharge from 5
January 2009, she was not collected
until 6 February 2009.
[48] ST responded that he could have collected SAF at any time. However, he
advised YM that he was looking for accommodation for
[49] YM gave evidence that contact between SAF and SG was a definite issue while
SAF was an inpatient in hospital, and that SAF was
upset when she was unable to
speak with SG. YM gave evidence that SAF was “beside herself and so happy
when she could speak
with him”. Her evidence was that the conflict between
the siblings was preventing contact between SAF and SG.
[50] In respect of the provision of services, YM gave evidence that there was a
concern if SAF suffered a hypoglycaemic attack, and
there was no a full time
carer with SAF.
[51] ST gave evidence that he had made enquiries in relation to placing SAF in
respite care at times, to give ST time for himself
and to allow him time with
his former partner, as their relationship is ongoing.
[52] ST and YM gave evidence of an ongoing breakdown in communication and
conflict between ST and SG. The evidence of YM is that
this conflict is
impacting on SAF’s ability to have contact with SG and his family.
[53] General principle 8 of the General Principles contained in the Act refers
to the importance of maintaining an adult’s
existing supportive
relationships, and that this must be taken into account. The evidence indicates
that SAF previously had a close
relationship with SG, with whom she lived for a
number of years. The Tribunal considers that in order to apply this general
there is a need for a substitute decision maker for the issue of
[54] The evidence before the Tribunal is that SAF has a number of significant
physical health issues.
[55] In respect of health decisions, the Tribunal is satisfied that while the
siblings could make health decisions informally if
SAF is unable to do so, as a
result of the conflict between the siblings, SAF’s needs would not be
adequately met or protected
by family members being statutory health attorneys
under ss62 and 63 of the
Powers of Attorneys Act 1998
. Accordingly, the
Tribunal finds there is a need for the appointment of an independent guardian
for health matters.
Accommodation
[56] The evidence is that SAF is currently living with ST who is her full time
carer. The Tribunal concludes by virtue of SAF living
with ST, that her ability
to have contact with SG and his family is prevented due to the conflict between
the siblings. Therefore,
the Tribunal concludes that there is a need for the
appointment of a guardian to decide whether SAF’s current accommodation
appropriate in relation to her ability to have contact with other members of her
[57] The evidence is that at the least, respite services are currently required
to assist ST in his ongoing care of SAF. Should SAF’s
accommodation
change, there may be a need for service provision decisions. As such, the
Tribunal has determined that there is a need
for the appointment of a guardian
for service provision decisions.
[58] The Tribunal therefore concludes that there is a need for the appointment
of a guardian for SAF for health, accommodation, service
provision and contact
IF SO WHO SHOULD BE APPOINTED?
[59] At the hearing ST indicated that he sought to be appointed as guardian and
administrator for SAF.
[60] The letter from ST to the Tribunal dated 20 April 2009 indicates that ST
does not have a good workable relationship with his
brother SG, and that his
fiancé does not have a good relationship with SAF. As a result of the
previous breakdown in the relationship
between SAF and ST’s fiancé,
ST and his fiancé separated in early 2009 when ST moved to a caravan
[61] The evidence at the hearing is that it would not be appropriate for ST to
be appointed as a guardian for SAF, due to the breakdown
in his relationship
with SG. This conflict will impact on ST’s ability to make personal
decisions independently and objectively,
and to him being able to engage all
family members in the decision making process. The Tribunal concludes in
determining whether
ST would be an appropriate guardian, that he would not be
likely to apply the general principle of maintaining SAF’s relationship
with SG and his family.
[62] YM seeks the appointment of the Adult Guardian as guardian for SAF.
[63] Given the conflict that exists between the siblings, in considering the
appropriateness considerations required by s15 of the
Act, and weighing up the
options for guardian as well as the views of the parties, the Tribunal has
determined that the Adult Guardian
is the more appropriate guardian. Due to the
level of family conflict, the Tribunal has determined that ST is not an
appropriate
guardian for SAF. In making the appropriate decision, any guardian
must be free from any potential conflict of interest.
[64] Therefore in respect of health care, service provision, contact and
accommodation decisions, the Tribunal concludes that the
only available
independent appointee is the Adult Guardian, which would support the general
principles as defined under the Act.
The Tribunal has concluded that the Adult
Guardian should be appointed for a period of two years.
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF AN
ADMINISTRATOR?
[65] While ST sought to be appointed as administrator for SAF, he did not lodge
an Application or a financial management plan in
support of such appointment. As
such, there is no documentary evidence of SAF’s financial position.
[66] At the hearing YM gave evidence that she estimated the value of SAF’s
$100,000.00. She gave
evidence that the home contains old furniture.
[67] ST gave evidence that SAF has a Bank passbook account in which she receives
a monthly Overseas pension of approximately $120.00
to $160.00. She also
receives an Australian aged pension of $567.00 per fortnight.
[68] He gave evidence that he pays the rent with his money, and that he and SAF
jointly pay the grocery expenses. He explained that
he has authority to operate
on SAF’s bank account.
[69] ST gave evidence that his father sold some parcels of land and gave ST and
SG $35,000.00 each. ST gave his $35,000.00 payment
to SG, to assist SG in
purchasing a home prior to 1991. On this basis, ST’s father indicated that
the family home would be
transferred to ST. While ST referred to SAF signing
some documents at SG’s home, the interpreter gave evidence that SAF is
illiterate. No documentary evidence was provided to the Tribunal in respect of
this issue.
[70] ST gave evidence that in SAF’s Will, the family home is to be
bequeathed to him. ST gave evidence that the home is vacant.
He proposed keeping
the home and renting it out. However, in his letter to the Tribunal dated 20
April 2009, ST indicated that he
did not know whether his mother had a current
Will, and that he had been waiting to ask for Legal Aid to assist him in having
matter finalised for SAF.
[71] ST gave evidence that SAF has no debts. The insurance on SAF’s home
in rural South East Queensland lapsed approximately
six years ago.
[72] In his letter to the Tribunal dated 20 April 2009, ST indicated that his
mother’s total fortnightly income was $527.00.
This does not accord with
his oral evidence that the pension received by his mother is $567.00 per
fortnight plus the Overseas pension.
[73] The letter indicates that SAF and ST share joint financial responsibility
for the rent and general living expenses. He indicated
the fortnightly budget as
Rent $360.00
Power $50.00
Rates – (on rural SE Qld home $80.00
Medical doctor & medication $60.00
General $200.00
Food $300.00
Total $1,050.00
[74] ST indicated that any surplus funds are applied towards unexpected bills.
ST is now receiving a carer’s payment and is
SAF’s full time carer
following the termination of his employment due to lack of work in December
2008. The letter indicates
that ST receives a nett fortnightly income of
[75] On this evidence, ST’s fortnightly income is $670.00 and SAF’s
fortnightly Australian pension income is $567.00
plus the overseas pension of
approximately $50.00 per fortnight. This is a total household income of
$1,287.00 against household
expenses of $1,050.00, leaving a surplus of
approximately $237.00 per fortnight. Despite this, there is no evidence of any
held by SAF.
[76] The letter accompanying the Application referred to SAF apparently
transferring her home in rural South East Queensland to ST,
and that this could
be considered “gifting” for Centrelink eligibility purposes and for
the assessment of fees for entry
to an aged care facility. The letter refers to
SAF receiving both an overseas pension and Centrelink aged pension, and to staff
ST getting SAF to sign withdrawal forms for the withdrawal of
[77] The Tribunal is satisfied that SAF has income by way of an Australian aged
pension and an Overseas pension. She has personal
expenses and expenses relating
to her home in rural South East Queensland. SAF owns a home in rural South East
Queensland which is
currently uninsured and vacant. This asset needs to be
protected. The Tribunal has determined that without the appointment of an
administrator, SAF’s financial interests would not be adequately met or
protected. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that
there is a need for the
appointment of an administrator for SAF.
IF SO WHO SHOULD BE APPOINTED?
[78] The Application seeks the appointment of the PTQ as administrator for SAF.
ST seeks to be appointed as administrator.
[79] In his letter to the Tribunal dated 20 April 2009, ST indicated that he was
convicted of dealing in drugs in South East Queensland
and served a custodial
sentence from February 2007 to 25 February 2008. At the hearing ST gave oral
evidence that he was sentenced
to three and a half years of imprisonment
suspended after twelve months in respect of charges of possession, trafficking
driving whilst disqualified. ST gave oral evidence of his other
convictions for two assault charges and a grievous bodily harm charge
of which he served a six month term of imprisonment in 2004. He gave evidence
that he had “a few” disorderly
conduct charges. He referred to
having ten to fifteen charges “all up” since he was seventeen years
of age. He is currently
35 years of age.
[80] The Application referred to the treating team holding concerns in relation
to the possible financial exploitation of SAF by
ST, and to the treating team
being unable to present a plan in respect of SAF’s accommodation in an
aged care facility due
to lack of clarity regarding her financial status.
[81] As provided by s15 of the Act, the Tribunal must
have regard to the nature and circumstances of any criminal history of any
Applicant, in considering his or her appropriateness for an
appointment. ST’s evidence is that he has an extensive criminal
As a result, he has served more than one term of imprisonment.
[82] Further, it is the view of the Tribunal that ST is not sufficiently
independent from the financial interests of his mother to
be appointed as
administrator, given that there is a mixing of funds in respect of the household
expenses of ST and SAF.
[83] The Tribunal takes into account that while informally managing his
mother’s financial affairs, ST took no steps to insure
and protect this asset.
[84] The Tribunal also takes into account the concerns of the treating team and
SAF’s vulnerability due to her impaired decision
making capacity.
[85] The Tribunal further notes that no documentary evidence relating to
SAF’s financial position was provided at the hearing
to support ST’s
Application for appointment as an administrator, and that his oral evidence
conflicts to some extent with his
written evidence.
[86] The Tribunal takes into account the fact that being a relation of an adult
does not of itself mean the adult’s and the
person’s interests are
likely to conflict. However, after taking into account ST’s criminal
history, the conflict between
ST and his brother SG, and the concerns of the
treating team, the Tribunal concludes that it is appropriate for an independent
to be appointed as administrator for SAF. The only independent neutral
appointee open to the Tribunal is the PTQ. The Tribunal therefore
appoints the
PTQ as administrator for SAF for all financial matters for a period of two
[87] In ST’s Feedback Form received by the Tribunal on 13 February 2009,
reference was made to SAF having executed an Enduring
Power of Attorney. No
other evidence was given in respect of the existence of this document or the
terms of the Enduring Power of
Attorney. This document was not produced at the
[88] Pursuant to s22(2) of the Act, any purported Enduring Power of Attorney for
SAF is overtaken by the making of appointments by
the Tribunal at this hearing
and can no longer be acted upon to the extent of the appointments made by the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (240 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter