URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2002/40.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:48:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Black, Leonard & Leah v N & J Robertson Pty Ltd T/A RB Motors & Robertson, Noel [2002] QPAMDT 40 (11 September 2002)
PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR DEALERS TRIBUNAL
[2002] QPAMDT 40
11 SEPTEMBER 2002
APPLICATION NO:
BLACK LEONARD JOSEPH & LEAH DAWN
FIRST RESPONDENT:
N & J ROBERTSON PTY LTD t/a R B MOTORS
SECOND RESPONDENT:
ROBERTSON NOEL DENNIS
DATE OF HEARING:
22 JULY 2002 AND 6 AUGUST 2002
Black, Leonard & Leah v N & J Robertson Pty Ltd T/A RB Motors
& Robertson, Noel
[2002] QPAMDT 40
REASON FOR DECISION:
This is a claim by Leonard Joseph Black
and Leah Dawn Black (“the Blacks”) under section 119 of the
Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971
(“the Repealed Act”) against
the former auctioneers and agents fidelity guarantee fund (“the former
on the basis of an alleged contravention of the Repealed Act by N
& J Robertson Pty Ltd trading as R B Motors (“R B Motors”)
Noel Dennis Robertson (“Robertson”), the sole director of R B
The claim arose in relation to a Holden
Commodore Berlina sedan (“the vehicle”) which the Blacks gave to the
respondents
to sell on consignment. The vehicle was subsequently sold by the
respondents, and the Blacks claim the sum of $17,500 arising from
a breach of
the Repealed Act by the respondents. The Blacks state that the respondents
failed to pay them the sum of $17,500 received
by the respondents for the sale
of the vehicle.
The claim has become a claim against the
claim fund under the
Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act 2000
(‘the Act”) by virtue of section 604 of the Act which
Former fund
and liabilities of the former fund are taken to be the rights and liabilities of
the claim fund.
A claim that has been made against the former
fund, and not finished
before the commencement, continues as if it were a
claim against the claim fund.
If, before the commencement, a
person could have made a claim
against the former fund but did not make the
claim, the person may make
the claim against the claim fund.
Blacks could have made a claim against the former fund but did not do so before
the Act commenced on 1 July 2002. They filed
a formal claim on 2 October 2001.
They had made a written complaint by letter dated 31 July 2001. The Tribunal is
satisfied that
this letter was sufficient notice of the claim under section
119(4A) of the Repealed Act. The Repealed Act did not require an approved
to be completed by way of claim but simply required “giving the registrar
written notice of the substance of the claim”.
4. There was
originally some doubt about whether their claim was in time under section 119(5)
of the Repealed Act and therefore could
not satisfy the transitional provisions
contained in section 604(3) of the Act. Under section 119(5) of the Repealed
Act, notice
had to be given the earlier of 6 months after the person became
aware of suffering pecuniary loss or 3 years after the breach that
pecuniary loss. Mr Black had declared that they had approached the Department
of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading some
time after the hospitalisation of
Robertson in September 2000 to see what could be done about their money. As
this suggested that
they were then aware of their pecuniary loss, the Tribunal
raised the question of time at a Directions Hearing on 3 April 2002 and
the issue to the Chief Executive for consideration under section 473(5) of the
Subsequently, statutory declarations were
filed by Douglas Gillies (“Gillies”) dated 28 May 2002, Robertson
dated 22 April
2002 and Mr Black dated 22 April 2002. These attested to Gillies
offering to give financial assistance to Robertson when he was
in hospital to
that he therefore hoped to still repay
them their money and to the Blacks
deciding to wait and see what eventuated. Gillies later had matrimonial
property settlement proceedings
and told Robertson “some time in
May” that he could no longer “assist him financially”.
Robertson stated
that he then suggested to the Blacks that they should
“consider making a claim to Fair Trading”.
On a consideration of all of the above,
the Tribunal is satisfied that the Blacks’ pecuniary loss was not finally
established
until some time after Gillies’ advice in May and
Robertson’s subsequent advice to the Blacks that he could not repay
The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that the claim of 31 July is properly before
it pursuant to section 604(3) of the Act
as it was one that still could have
been made under section 119(5) of the Repealed Act.
The application was referred to the
Tribunal by the Chief Executive under section 476 of the Act. Notice of the
claim had been given
to both respondents and in this regard the Tribunal was
satisfied that sections 474 and 475 of the Act had been satisfied. The matter
was originally set down for hearing on 22 July 2002. The proceedings were
conducted by means of a telephone conference. Mr Black
took part and Mr R
Veivers represented the respondents. The Tribunal adjourned the proceedings to
enable further evidence to be
obtained. The matter was relisted for hearing on
6 August 2002 when the proceedings were again conducted by means of a telephone
conference. The Blacks gave sworn evidence. Mr Veivers again represented the
respondents. The Tribunal decided it also wanted
to speak to Robertson and he
gave sworn evidence. The Tribunal then reserved it
While the Tribunal is to deal with this
application under the Act, it must determine the claim based on section 119 of
the Repealed
Act which relevantly provided as
Application of fund
A&A Act 119.(1)
Subject to this Act, the fund shall be held and applied for the purpose of
reimbursing persons who may suffer pecuniary loss because
(d) the stealing or fraudulent misappropriation or
misapplication by a prescribed person of money or other valuable property
to the prescribed person in the course of the business of a licensee
as an auctioneer, real estate agent, commercial agent or motor
“prescribed person”
means a licensee, the
licensee’s partner, employee, agent or any person having the apparent
charge or control for the time being
of the office or business of the
licensee.(s.119)
A person may claim against the
fund by giving the registrar written notice of the substance of the claim.
The notice must be given within—
(a) 6 months after the
person becomes aware that the person has suffered pecuniary loss; or
years after the commission of the breach that caused the person’s
pecuniary loss;
whichever occurs sooner.
In determining the amount of any claim
the Tribunal needs to consider sub-sections 120(2) and (7) of the Repealed Act
which provided
as follows:
Claims against the
A&A Act 120.(1)
No person shall be
entitled to recover from the fund an amount greater than the balance of the loss
suffered by the person after deducting
from the total amount of such loss the
amount or value of all money or other benefits received or recovered or which in
the opinion
of the committee might, but for the person’s neglect or
default, have been received or recovered by the person from any source
than the fund in reduction of such loss.
shall be paid or be payable out of the fund as interest on the amount of any
judgment obtained or of any claim allowed against
The process of deciding a claim against
the claim fund is set-out in section 488 of the Act which provides as
Deciding claims other than minor
The Tribunal may allow the claim, wholly or partly,
or reject the claim.
However, the Tribunal may allow the claim
only if satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that—
(a) an event
mentioned in section 470(1) happened; and
(b) the claimant suffered financial
loss because of the happening of the event.
If the Tribunal allows
the claim, wholly or partly, the Tribunal must—
(a) take into account
any amount the claimant might reasonably have received or recovered if not for
the claimant’s neglect
or default;
(b) decide the amount of the
claimant’s financial loss; and
(c) name the person who is liable for
the claimant’s financial loss.
However, because this is a claim
against the former fund, the Tribunal must consider whether there has been a
contravention of sub-section
119(1) of the Repealed Act rather than sub-section
470(1) of the Act.
11. The orders the Tribunal may make on a claim
hearing are set out in section 530 of the Act which provides as
Orders Tribunal may make on claim hearing
The Tribunal may make the following orders in relation to a claim against
(a) an order allowing the claim, wholly or partly, or
rejecting the claim;
(b) an order stating that a named person is liable for a
claimant’s financial loss and the amount of the loss;
(c) an order
(d) an order that
no amount is recoverable in relation to a claim.
As set out above, Section 119 described
the relevant offence as “stealing or fraudulent misappropriation or
misapplication ...
of money ... entrusted ...”. The difference between
the offences of stealing and fraudulent misappropriation was recently
by the Victorian Court of Appeal in
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Commonwealth) Reference No. 1 of 1996
(12 September 1997) where Winneke, P.
at page 10 said:
The offence of larceny at common law, that is “stealing”,
involved a felonious or trespassory taking of property capable
of being stolen
together with an intent at the time of the taking to permanently deprive the
true owner of his property.
His Honour went on to distinguish larceny or stealing from fraudulent
misappropriation at page 15 where he said:
Larceny, as I have already said, involved a felonious taking and carrying
away of property without the consent of the owner with an
intention to
permanently deprive, whereas fraudulent misappropriation involved the dishonest
misapplication of property entrusted
to an accused and/or for which he was
obliged to account in circumstances which did not amount to a stealing.
Brooking J.A. in the same case considered the meaning of the word
“fraudulently” and, at page 27, said:
I should say that it must be accepted that the word
“fraudulently”, where twice used in s.71(1), means dishonestly:
R. v. Smart
[1983] VicRp 22
(1983) 1 V.R. 265
R. v. Glenister
N.S.W.L.R. 597
R. v. Lawrence
(1997) 1 V.R. 459
(1996) 88 A.Crim.R. 525.
13. When the Blacks made their informal claim by letter
dated 31 July 2001, Mr Black supplied a Statutory Declaration dated 28 July
2001. He stated in that declaration as follows:
“I recall that
somewhere in the 9
month of 1999 Leah and I decided to sell the car
and approached Noel and gave him the vehicle to sell for us on
consignment.
I recall that he advised us that the vehicle was sold and
my records show the loan was paid and we owed $5,500.05 on the vehicle.
informed by Noel at the time that the car had been sold for
His further evidence was they decided to
leave the money with Robertson to find and buy them another vehicle for a
similar price.
However, Robertson’s business failed and R B Motors went
into liquidation and they never received their money.
14. A Statutory
Declaration by Robertson dated 25 July 2001 was also supplied. He stated that
the vehicle had been sold “for
approximately $17,500” and that the
money “was banked into my account at Suncorp Metway” to hold while
to find the Blacks another vehicle. He said his business had
subsequently failed and he did not know what happened to the
15. The Blacks had also supplied a statement from Suncorp Metway
dated 12 October 1999 that recorded a payment of $5,500.05 on 11
October 1999
that had fully paid out the loan. There was nothing in the material before the
Tribunal, however, to indicate who had
actually paid out the loan. During the
first hearing of the matter on 22 July 2002, the Tribunal asked Mr Black about
stated that, at Robertson’s request, they had given him the
money to pay out the loan so that he had clear title to sell the
vehicle. He
said they gave him cash and did not get a receipt.
16. The Tribunal,
in the light of its statutory obligation under section 488 of the Act to decide
the amount of the Blacks’
financial loss, was concerned at the lack of
evidence before it about the quantum of the claim. Robertson had declared that
no records of the sale of the car. In addition, his statutory
declaration made no reference to the repayment of the money owing
vehicle. In the circumstances, the Tribunal adjourned the hearing to enable
further evidence to be filed in respect of these
17. On 2 August
2002, Robertson filed a further statutory declaration dated 1 August 2002, a
statutory declaration from Glen Alfred
Frith (“Frith”) dated 1
August 2002 and a form relating to clear title dated 17 August 1999 signed on
behalf of R B Motors.
The latter was addressed to G & F Frith and recorded
details about the vehicle including a sale price of $17,500. Frith’s
statutory declaration stated that the vehicle had been purchased for the sum of
$17,500. Robertson’s statutory declaration
also attested to this figure.
In addition, he stated the following:
“3. At that time I was
aware that the Berlina sedan was still under finance to Suncorp.
asked Len and Leah to obtain from Suncorp a payout figure so that if we managed
to sell the car I would be aware of what was
owing to Suncorp.
They did this and decided to pay the vehicle out.
6. From memory I
was not in a financial situation to pay out Suncorp so Len and Leah gave me cash
to pay it out.
7. I then recall paying out Suncorp with one of my
company’s cheques so we had clear title.”
resumed hearing on 6 August 2002, Mrs Black gave sworn evidence to the effect
that they had given $5,500.05 in cash to
Robertson to pay out Suncorp Metway.
She said they had been saving money at the time to buy a home and this was why
they had so
much cash on hand. She said it was kept in their house but she
could not recall exactly where or in what it was kept. Mr Black
confirmed under
oath the statements he had made at the hearing on 22 July 2002 that they had
paid Robertson the money owing to Suncorp
Metway on the vehicle. Robertson
stated under oath that the Blacks had given him the money in cash and confirmed
that he had not
given them a receipt. When asked whether he had paid the money
into his trust account, he replied that he did not have a trust account
time. When asked how much the Blacks had given him he said around $5,000. When
asked whether receiving such an amount in
cash was unusual, he said that lots of
people did so when buying motor cars and he understood that the Blacks had been
buy a house. He said he had paid the money owing to Suncorp Metway
with a company cheque.
Discussion and
19. It was not in dispute that, at the relevant times,
both respondents held a motor dealer’s licence. The Tribunal is therefore
satisfied that both respondents were a “prescribed person” under
section 119(2) of the Repealed Act.
20. On the basis of the above
undisputed evidence the Tribunal finds that the sum of $17,500 was received by
the respondents on the
sale of the vehicle on behalf of the Blacks in August
1999. Leaving aside the question of the money owing on the vehicle to Suncorp
Metway, the Tribunal also finds that the respondents failed to pay the monies
owing to the Blacks for the sale of the vehicle.
There was no evidence before the
Tribunal to suggest that either of the respondents intended to permanently
deprive the Blacks of
the vehicle at the time it was given to them to sell.
However, it was not disputed that they received the sum of $17,500 from the
of the vehicle and that they failed to account to the Blacks for the moneys due
to them. Was this fraudulent on their part?
Gibbs J., in
Stephens v. The
[1978] HCA 35
(1978) 139 CLR 315
quoted Professor Smith in an article "The Scope of
Fraudulent Conversion", (1961) Crim. Law Review 797, at p. 800, where he
the following test where the ownership in money is
transferred:
"Was the transferee permitted, under the
terms of the contract, to use
the money as he thought fit; or was he obliged
to apply it in a particular way
or to retain an equivalent sum, either in his
possession or in a bank? Only in
the latter event can the transferee commit
fraudulent conversion."
This seems to me a satisfactory practical test to
apply. (at p334)
22. Applying the above test, it is clear enough on the
evidence that, by their agreement, the respondents were obliged to apply the
moneys in a particular way or to retain an equivalent sum and that instead the
moneys were applied to the their own use and benefit
and that the respondents
were fraudulent in so applying the moneys.
23. On the basis of this
evidence the Tribunal is satisfied that the respondents have fraudulently
misappropriated the proceeds of
the sale of the vehicle and that the Blacks have
suffered pecuniary loss because of the happening of that event for the purposes
of section 119 of the Repealed Act.
The amount of the financial
24. It is clear from the evidence that the respondents
received an amount of $17,500 for the sale of the Blacks’ vehicle. The
Tribunal was troubled, however, by the evidence relating to the payment to
Suncorp Metway of the monies owing on the vehicle. That
evidence was that it
was paid in cash and no receipt was given. It was not paid into any trust
account and a company cheque was
used by Robertson to pay the amount owing to
Suncorp Metway. In other words, there is no independent corroborating evidence
where the monies came from to enable that payment.
situation was undoubtedly exacerbated by the fact that the proceedings were
conducted by means of a telephone conference.
The Tribunal was therefore
deprived of the opportunity of observing the witnesses while they were giving
their evidence. In hindsight,
it may have been preferable for the Tribunal to
have insisted on the physical presence of the parties. At the end of the day,
the sworn evidence of the Blacks and of Robertson is that the Blacks
paid the amount owing to Suncorp Metway with their own moneys.
On balance, but
with some hesitation, the Tribunal is therefore satisfied that the amount of the
Blacks’ financial loss is
26. On the basis of the above
findings, the Tribunal allows the claim under section 530 of the Act and orders
that the Chief Executive
of the Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading
pay the Blacks the sum of $17,500. The Tribunal makes no order as to the date
of payment due to the requirement of section 489 of the Act that the Chief
Executive shall not pay the amount until the end of the
period allowed for
appeal, and if there is an appeal, until the appeal is finally
27. Under section 488(3)(c) of the Act, if the
Tribunal allows a claim it must “name the person who is liable for the
financial loss”. The Tribunal finds, on the basis of the
evidence, that both Robertson and R B Motors are liable for the Blacks’
financial loss and are jointly and severally liable to reimburse the claim fund
for the amount paid to the Blacks from the fund.
28. Orders pursuant to
section 530 of the Act are made accordingly, as attached to these
......................................................
J P GALLAGHER - CHAIRPERSON
for the PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR
DEALERS TRIBUNAL
John Gallagher Kate Keating Brett
Chairperson Member Member
GJU:E:\Case Management Files\2002\W -
Claim\W018-02\Decision\W018-02D11-09-02.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (60.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter