URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workers' Compensation Regulator v Langridge [2025] ICQ 8 (17 June 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF
Workers’ Compensation Regulator v Langridge
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION
(appellant)
MICHAEL PAUL
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
17 June 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
21 October 2021
Davis J, President
decision of the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission is set
parties file and exchange submissions on costs by 4 pm on 25 June
party may apply for leave to make oral submissions on costs by filing and
serving such an application by 4 pm on 9 July 2025,
failing which the question
of costs will be determined without further oral hearing.
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION – ALTERNATIVE RIGHTS AGAINST EMPLOYER
AND/OR THIRD PARTIES AND CONSEQUENCES THEREOF – ACTIONS
FOR DAMAGES
AGAINST EMPLOYER – STATUTORY CONSTRAINT ON ACTIONS FOR DAMAGES –
PROCEDURAL MATTERS – GENERALLY –
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
limited a right to action for
common law damages to a “worker” who had an “injury”
that was assessed –
where the insurer would refer an injury for assessment
upon application by the “worker” – where the respondent
application for assessment of an injury – where the respondent applied for
assessment in the prescribed way – where
the insurer determined that the
injury was not an “injury” as defined by the legislation –
where the insurer refused
to refer the injury for assessment – where the
respondent asserted that it was no part of the insurer’s role to determine
whether he had an “injury” – where the respondent asserted
that the insurer was obliged to refer the injury if
the respondent applied in
the prescribed way – where the Workers’ Compensation Regulator
affirmed the decision of the
insurer – where the Queensland Industrial
Relations Commission set aside that decision – where the Regulator
the decision of the Commission – whether the function of the
insurer included determining whether a “worker” had
suffered an
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation
, s 257, s 258,
Allina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
(1991) 28 FCR
[1991] FCA 87
, considered
City of Enfield v Development Assessment
(2000) 199 CLR 135
[2000] HCA 5
Gates v City Mutual
Life Assurance Society Ltd
(1986) 160 CLR 1
[1986] HCA 3
Elevators Board (Vic) v Dunmunkle Shire
(1946) 73 CLR 70
[1986] HCA 3
Interlego AG v Croner Trading Pty Ltd
(1992) 39 FCR 348
FCA 992, considered
Langridge v Workers’ Compensation Regulator
[2019] QIRC 048
Langridge v Workers’ Compensation
[2021] QIRC 251
Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs v Thornton
276 CLR 136
[2023] HCA 17
Minister for Immigration v Eshetu
(1999) 197 CLR 611
[1999] HCA 21
(2019) 269 CLR 507
[2019] HCA 35
S A McLeod KC for the appellant
J A Greggery KC for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Mr McLeod KC was instructed directly by the Workers’ Compensation
Organic Legal for the respondent
Workers’ Compensation Regulator appeals against a decision of the
Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission,
which held that on a
proper construction of
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation
(WCR Act), WorkCover
was obliged to refer the injury of the respondent, Michael Paul Langridge, for
assessment upon an application
for assessment being made in the prescribed way.
An assessment of injury is a precondition to the right of an injured worker to
sue their employer for common law damages.
[2] WorkCover
did not refer the injury for assessment as it found that Mr Langridge had not
suffered an “injury”
defined in the WCR Act. The Regulator upheld that determination. Mr Langridge
successfully argued before the Commission on appeal
that the determination of
whether Mr Langridge had suffered a relevant “injury” was not a
consideration for WorkCover
when determining an application for referral for
assessment under s 132A.
Langridge’s application for referral was remitted back to
It is from that
decision of the Commission that the Regulator now appeals.
Langridge’s position is the correct one, then once he has lodged an
application with WorkCover in a form prescribed
by s 132A(3), WorkCover must
refer his injury for assessment without further consideration, thus opening the
gateway to the right
to claim common law damages in court
proceedings.
[4] In 2014, Mr
Langridge was employed by the State as a Building Construction Labourer with the
Department of Transport and Main
Roads. He claims that while working in August
or September 2014 he suffered a “cervical spine C5/C6/C7 cord
compression”
injury. He claims that the injury left him with a degree of
permanent impairment.
[5] Mr Langridge
lodged an application with WorkCover in reliance upon s 132A of the WCR Act, as
it stood at the time of the injury.
That section then
132A Applying for assessment of
before applying for
compensation
(1) This section applies to a worker who has not made an application under
section 132.
(2) The worker may apply to the insurer to have the worker’s injury
assessed under section 179 to decide if the worker’s
injury has resulted
(3) An application under subsection (1) must be—
(a) lodged with the insurer; and
(b) in the approved form; and
(c) accompanied by—
(i) a certificate in the approved form given by a doctor who attended the
worker; and
(ii) any other evidence or particulars prescribed under a regulation.
(4) A registered dentist may issue the certificate mentioned in subsection
(3)(c)(i) for an oral injury.
(5) If the worker can not complete an application because of a physical or
mental incapacity, someone else may complete it on the
[6] Section
132A(1) refers to s 132. It is common ground that Mr Langridge had not made an
application for compensation under s 132.
He only made his application for
assessment of permanent impairment pursuant to s 132A.
[7] WorkCover
rejected Mr Langridge’s application on the basis that the injury alleged
did not arise from his employment. In
other words, he had not suffered an
“injury” as defined in the WCR Act. When making its initial
assessment, WorkCover
relied upon s 132A as it appeared after amendments were
made in 2015.
Section 132A, as it
appeared after the 2015 amendments contained subsection (7). That
“(7) The insurer may reject the application only if
satisfied the worker—
(a) was not a worker when the injury was sustained; or
(b) has not sustained an
application by Mr Langridge to review that decision was unsuccessful. The
Regulator affirmed WorkCover’s decision.
In doing so, the Regulator
applied the Act as it stood at the time of its decision, not as it appeared on
the date that Mr Langridge’s
injury was allegedly suffered. In affirming
WorkCover’s decision, the Regulator relied upon s 132A(7).
[9] Mr Langridge
appealed to the Commission. That appeal raised a preliminary issue; namely,
whether the amendments to s 132A, effected
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation
and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2015
applied to Mr
Langridge’s application for referral for assessment. As already observed,
the Regulator applied the 2015 amended
version of s 132A, as had WorkCover.
On appeal, the Commission held that to have been an
The Commission held that
the Regulator should have determined the matter by reference to the law as it
stood at the time of Mr Langridge’s
injury. The Commission remitted the
matter back to the Regulator to review the decision according to the law as it
applied at the
time Mr Langridge’s injury was suffered.
Regulator considered the matter again, and again affirmed the decision of
WorkCover. In so doing, the Regulator provided
written reasons where it was
(a) by s 132A, as it stood at the time of the
WorkCover must satisfy
itself that the claimant is a “worker” who has sustained an
“injury” before it can
refer the injury for assessment;
(b) “injury” as defined by
of the Act is a personal injury
which arose out of or in the course of a claimant’s employment;
(c) the evidence does not support a conclusion that Mr Langridge’s injury
arose in the course of his employment; and, therefore
(d) the injury should not be assessed.
[11] In making
its findings, the Regulator relied upon s 132A as it stood before the 2015
amendments; that is without subsection
The Regulator’s case
on appeal is that both before, and after the 2015 amendments, as part of the
exercise of its functions
under s 132A, it must determine whether a claimant is
a “worker” who has suffered an “injury”.
Langridge appealed that decision to the
Commission.
second appeal, the Commission again held that, on a proper construction of
s 132A, WorkCover’s function did not include
determining whether the
applicant was a “worker” or if the worker had suffered an
“injury”. The Commission
held that once an application is made for
referral, WorkCover
the injury assessed, provided the application is made in accordance with the
requirements of s 132A(3). That is the decision
the subject of the current
appeal. The grounds of appeal are:
“1. The Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission erred in holding that, on a proper construction
of s.132A (in its pre-amended
form) of the
Workers’ Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act 2003
(Qld) (“the WCR Act”), WorkCover Queensland
(“WorkCover”), as insurer:
(a) was obliged to refer the respondent for assessment of permanent impairment
under s.179 of the WCR Act; and
(b) WorkCover had no capacity to reject the respondent’s application for
the said assessment under s.132A: (Reasons for decision
at [60]-[61]).”
[13] Ultimately,
the only question is as to the proper construction of the relevant provisions of
the WCR Act.
Legislative history
[14] As earlier
observed, the relevant version of the WCR Act is that which was in force at the
time of Mr Langridge’s
However, the parties
say that the legislative history of amendments both before and after the 2015
amendments is relevant to the
determination of the proper construction of
s 132A in its form at the time of the injury to Mr
[15] Section
132A was introduced by the Newman Government, consequent upon other amendments
which introduced a DPI threshold of five
per cent before a claim could be made
for permanent disablement. Those amendments were introduced by the
Workers’ Compensation and Other Legislation
Amendment Act 2013
[16] The terms
“worker” and “injury” after the 2013 amendments were
defined relevantly as follows:
11 Who is a worker
is a person who—
(a) works under a contract; and
(b) in relation to the work, is an employee for the purpose of assessment for
PAYG withholding under the
Taxation Administration Act 1953
schedule 1, part 2-5.
32 Meaning of
is personal injury arising out of, or in the
course of, employment if––
(a) ... the employment is a significant contributing factor to the
common ground that Mr Langridge is a “worker”.
[18] Section
applies s 132A to a
“worker” “who has not made an application under
s 132”. Section 132 concerns applications
for compensation. That
distinction between compensation and a claim for common law damages is a
fundamental characteristic of the
workers’ compensation scheme under all
the different versions of the WCR Act. “Compensation” is a
statutory entitlement.
Common law damages are compensatory in nature and are
awarded upon proof of a tort,
but are not included within the concept of “compensation” under the
WCR Act. The various versions of the WCR Act not
only provide for statutory
compensation, but also regulate common law
[19] “Compensation”
is defined by s 9 which provided:
“9 Meaning of
compensation
Compensation
is compensation under this Act, that is, amounts
for a worker’s injury payable under chapters 3 and 4 by an insurer to a
a dependant of a deceased worker or anyone else, and includes
compensation paid or payable under a former
[20] Chapters 3
and 4 of the WCR Act provided for the payment of compensation under the Act,
which can be by weekly payments or by
lump sum depending on the
circumstances.
[21] Section 108
108 Compensation entitlement
(1) Compensation is payable under this Act for an injury sustained by a
(2) However, if a worker’s injury is an aggravation mentioned in
section 32(3)(b) or (ba), the worker is entitled to compensation
for the injury
only to the extent of the effects of the
aggravation.”
[22] Sections
131 and 132 provided:
131 Time for applying
(1) An application for compensation is valid and enforceable only if the
application is lodged by the claimant within 6 months after
the entitlement to
compensation arises.
(2) If an application is lodged more than 20 business days after the
entitlement to compensation arises, the extent of the insurer’s
to pay compensation is limited to a period starting no earlier than 20 business
days before the day on which the valid
application is lodged.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply if death is, or results from, the
(4) An insurer must waive subsection (1) for a particular application if it
is satisfied that special circumstances of a medical nature,
decided by a
medical assessment tribunal, exist.
(5) An insurer may waive subsection (1) or (2) for a particular application
if the insurer is satisfied that a claimant’s failure
to lodge the
application was due to—
(a) mistake; or
(b) the claimant’s absence from the State; or
(c) a reasonable cause.
132 Applying for compensation
(1) An application for compensation must be made in the approved form by the
(2) The application must be lodged with the insurer.
(3) The application must be accompanied by—
(a) a certificate in the approved form given by—
(i) a doctor who attended the claimant; or
(ii) if the application relates to a minor injury—a nurse practitioner who
attended the claimant and who is acting in accordance
with the workers’
compensation certificate protocol; and
(b) any other evidence or particulars prescribed under a regulation.
(4) A registered dentist may issue the certificate mentioned in subsection
(3)(a) for an oral injury.
(5) If the claimant can not complete an application because of a physical or
mental incapacity, someone else may complete it on the
[23] Section 134
provided for WorkCover to make a decision on any
application:
134 Decision about application for
compensation
(1) A claimant’s application for compensation must be allowed or
rejected in the first instance by the insurer.
(2) The insurer must make a decision on the application within 20 business
days after the application is made.
(3) The insurer must notify the claimant of its decision on the application.
(4) If the insurer rejects the application, the insurer must also, when
giving the claimant notice of its decision, give the claimant
written reasons
for the decision and the information prescribed under a regulation.
(5) Subsection (6) applies if the insurer does not make a decision on the
application within the time stated in subsection (2).
(6) The insurer must, within 5 business days after the end of the time stated
in subsection (2), notify the claimant of its reasons
for not making the
decision and that the claimant may have the claimant’s application
reviewed under chapter
[24] As can be
seen from s 134(6), there were rights to review a decision by WorkCover to
decline an application for compensation.
Those review procedures were contained
in Chapter 13.
[25] As earlier
observed, while claims for common law damages are not “compensation”
within the terms of the WCR Act,
the legislation does regulate common law
[26] As also
already observed, the 2013 amendments introduced a DPI threshold for permanent
disablement claims. This lead to consequential
amendments to sections
regulating claims for common law damages.
[27] Section 237
before the 2013 amendments provided:
237 General
limitation on persons entitled to seek damages
The following are the only persons entitled to seek damages for an
injury sustained by a worker
the worker, if the worker
has received a notice of assessment from the insurer for the injury
(ii) has not received a notice of assessment for the injury, but—
(A) has received a notice of assessment for any injury resulting from the
same event (
the assessed injury
(B) for the assessed injury, the worker has a
of 20% or more or, under
section 239, the worker has elected to seek damages;
(b) the worker, if the worker’s application for compensation was allowed
and the injury has not been assessed for permanent
impairment;
(c) the worker, if—
(i) the worker has lodged an application, for compensation for the injury, that
is or has been the subject of a review or appeal
under chapter 13; and
(ii) the application has not been decided in or following the review or appeal;
the worker, if the worker has not lodged an application for compensation
for the injury
(e) a dependant of the deceased worker, if the injury results in the
worker’s death.
(2) The entitlement of a worker, or a dependant of a deceased worker, to
seek damages is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(3) If a worker—
(a) is required under section 239 to make an election to seek damages for an
injury; and
(b) has accepted an offer of payment of lump sum compensation under chapter 3,
part 10, division 3 for the injury;
the worker is not entitled under subsection (1)(a)(ii) to seek damages.
(4) However, subsection (3) does not prevent a worker from seeking damages
under section 266.
(5) To remove any doubt, it is declared that subsection (1) abolishes any
entitlement of a person not mentioned in the subsection
to seek damages for an
injury sustained by a
[28] Section
237(1)(d) entitled a worker to commence proceedings for damages where they had
“not lodged an application for compensation
[29] Sections
257 and 258 were in Division 6 of Part 2 of Chapter 5. Division 6 was headed
“Claimant mentioned in s
237(1)(d)”.
[30] Section 257
257 Application of div 6
This division applies to a claimant who is a person mentioned in section
237(1)(d).”
[31] As already
observed, prior to the 2013 amendments, s 132A did not exist. In the version
before the 2013 amendments, s 258 provided:
258 Access to
damages if claimant has not lodged application for compensation
The claimant may seek damages for the injury only if the
decides that the claimant
was a worker when the injury was sustained
has sustained an injury
gives the claimant a notice of assessment for the injury
(2) For subsection (1), the insurer must have the degree of permanent
impairment assessed under chapter 3, part 10 and give the claimant
a notice of
assessment.
(3) Chapter 3, part 10 applies to the assessment, but only for the purpose of
assessing the degree of permanent impairment for the
purposes of part 12.
(4) To remove any doubt, it is declared that the assessment does not give the
claimant an entitlement to lump sum compensation under
chapter 3, part 10,
division 3 for the injury.
(5) The insurer must make a decision or decisions for the purpose of
subsection (1) within 3 months after—
(a) the claimant gives, or is taken to have given, a complying notice of claim;
(b) the claimant gives a notice of claim for which the insurer waives compliance
with the requirements of section 275, with or without
conditions; or
(c) a court makes a declaration under section 297.
(6) If the insurer is WorkCover, WorkCover must notify the claimant and the
claimant’s employer of any decision it makes for
the purpose of subsection
(7) If, for any injury, the insurer decides that the claimant—
(a) was not a worker when the injury was sustained; or
(b) has not sustained an injury; the notification must include written reasons
for the decision.
(8) If, for any injury, the insurer does not make a decision for the purpose
of subsection (1) within the time mentioned in subsection
(5), the claimant may
have the failure to make a decision reviewed under chapter 13.
(9) A person aggrieved by a decision made by the insurer for the purpose of
subsection (1) may have the decision reviewed under chapter
(10) For any assessment mentioned in subsection (1) made by the insurer with
which the person does not agree, section 186
[32] By force of
s 258, a notice of assessment for injury was a pre-condition to an action for
damages. By s 258(1) an action could
only be commenced where the insurer
determined that:
(a) the claimant was a “worker”; and
(b) the complainant had sustained an “injury”.
[33] Apart from
the two findings by the insurer prescribed by s 258(1)(a)(i) and (ii),
s 258(1)(b) prescribed another pre‑condition.
That was that the
insurer must provide to the claimant a “notice of assessment for the
determination under s 258(1)(b) had to be made within three months of a
“Notice of Claim”. In the legislation,
both before and after the
2013 amendments, s 275 provided for a Notice of Claim. Section 275 before the
2013 amendments provided:
275 Notice of claim for
(1) Before starting a proceeding in a court for damages, a claimant must give
notice under this section within the period of limitation
for bringing a
proceeding for the damages under the
Limitation of Actions Act 1974
(2) The claimant must—
(a) give the notice of claim in the approved form to the insurer at the
insurer’s registered office; and
(b) if the worker’s employer is not a self-insurer, give a copy of the
notice of claim to the worker’s employer.
(3) The notice must include the particulars prescribed under a
regulation.
(4) The claimant must state in the notice—
(a) whether, and to what extent, liability expressed as a percentage is admitted
for the injury; or
(b) a statement of the reasons why the claimant can not admit liability.
(5) Any statement made by the claimant in the notice that is in the
claimant’s personal knowledge must be verified by statutory
declaration.
(6) The notice must be accompanied by a genuine offer of settlement or a
statement of the reasons why an offer of settlement can not
yet be made.
(7) The notice must be accompanied by the claimant’s written authority
allowing the insurer to obtain information, including
copies of documents
relevant to the claim, and in the possession of—
(a) a hospital; or
(b) the ambulance service of the State or another State; or
(c) a doctor, provider of treatment or rehabilitation services or person
qualified to assess cognitive, functional or vocational
capacity; or
(d) the employer or a previous employer; or
(e) persons that carry on the business of providing workers’ compensation
insurance, compulsory third party insurance, personal
accident or illness
insurance, insurance against loss of income through disability, superannuation
funds or any other type of insurance;
(f) a department, agency or instrumentality of the Commonwealth or the State;
(g) a solicitor, other than where giving the information or documents would
breach legal professional privilege.
(8) The notice must also be accompanied by copies of all documents supporting
the claim including, but not limited to—
(a) hospital, medical and other reports relating to the injury sustained by the
worker, other than reports obtained by or on behalf
of the insurer; and
(b) income tax returns, group certificates and other documents for the 3 years
immediately before the injury supporting the claimant’s
claim for lost
earnings or diminution of income-earning capacity; and
(c) invoices, accounts, receipts and other documents evidencing the
claimant’s claim for out-of-pocket
[35] Whether
before or after the 2013 amendments, the assessment itself would occur under ss
179 and 180 which, before the 2013 amendments,
179 Assessment of permanent impairment
(1) An insurer may decide, or a worker may ask the insurer, to have the
worker’s injury assessed to decide if the worker’s
resulted in a degree of permanent impairment.
(2) The insurer must have the degree of permanent impairment
(a) for industrial deafness—by an audiologist; or
(b) for a psychiatric or psychological injury—by a medical assessment
tribunal; or
(c) for another injury—by a doctor.
(3) The degree of permanent impairment must be assessed in the way prescribed
under a regulation and a report must be given to the
insurer stating—
(a) the matters taken into account, and the weight given to the matters, in
deciding the degree of permanent impairment; and
(b) any other information prescribed under a regulation.
Calculation
of lump sum compensation
(1) If, as a result of the assessment,
a worker is entitled to lump sum compensation, the amount of the lump sum
compensation must
be calculated under a regulation having regard to the degree
of permanent impairment and the table of injuries.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), lump sum compensation for injury must
not include an amount for a degree of impairment attributable
(a) a condition existing before the injury; or
(b) a condition for which the worker is not entitled to compensation.
(3) The amount of lump sum compensation is to be calculated as at the day the
insurer makes an offer of lump sum compensation to the
worker under section
[36] The term
“notice of assessment” was defined as “notice of assessment
means a notice of assessment of permanent
impairment issued by WorkCover under
section 185”.
[37] Section 185
was contained within Chapter 3,
, Division 3. Sections 184 and 185
184 Application of div 3
This division applies if an assessment of permanent impairment of a
worker’s injury has been made under section 179.
to give notice of assessment of permanent impairment
insurer must, within 10 business days after receiving the assessment of the
worker’s permanent impairment, give the
worker a notice of assessment in
the approved form.
(2) However, if a worker sustains multiple injuries in an event, the insurer
must give the notice only after the worker’s degree
of permanent
impairment from all the injuries has been assessed.
(3) The notice must state—
(a) whether the worker has sustained permanent impairment from the injury; and
(b) if the worker has sustained permanent impairment—
(i) the degree of permanent impairment attributable to the injury; and
(ii) the WRI calculated for the injury; and
(iii) the amount of lump sum compensation under section 180 to which the worker
is entitled for the injury; and
(c) if the worker’s WRI is 30% or more—the worker’s
entitlement to additional lump sum compensation under section
(d) if the worker’s WRI is 15% or more—the worker’s
entitlement to additional lump sum compensation (if any) for
gratuitous care
under section 193.
(4) If the notice states the worker has not sustained a degree of permanent
impairment, the insurer must also give the worker a copy
sections 10
239, 240 and 316.”
[38] The 2013
amendments, as already observed, brought s 132A into existence. The explanatory
note to the
Workers’ Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act 2003
Amendment Bill
inserts a new section 132A outlining the process for applying to an insurer for
an assessment of the degree of permanent
impairment in situations where an
application for statutory compensation has not been made, for example if the
applicant is seeking
to lodge a notice of claim for damages.”
[39] By force of
those amendments, s 258 was repealed and s 237 was amended, so it
237 General limitation on persons entitled to seek
(1) The following are the only persons entitled to seek damages for an
injury sustained by a worker—
(a) the worker, if the worker—
(i) has received a notice of assessment from the insurer for the injury and the
DPI for the assessed injury is more than 5%; or
(ii) has a terminal condition;
(b) a dependant of the deceased worker, if the injury results in the
worker’s death.
(2) The entitlement of a worker, or a dependant of a deceased worker, to seek
damages is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(3) If a worker—
(a) is required under section 239 to make an election to seek damages for an
injury; and
(b) has accepted an offer of payment of lump sum compensation under chapter 3,
part 10, division 3 for the injury;
the worker is not entitled to seek damages.
(4) However, subsection (3) does not prevent a worker from seeking damages
under section 266.
(5) To remove any doubt, it is declared that subsection (1) abolishes any
entitlement of a person not mentioned in the subsection
to seek damages for an
injury sustained by a
[40] Sections
179 and 180 were also amended. After the amendment, they
179 Assessment of permanent impairment
(1) An insurer may decide, or a worker who has made an application under
section 132 may ask the insurer, to have the worker’s
injury assessed to
decide if the worker’s injury has resulted in a degree of permanent
impairment.
(2) The insurer must have the degree of permanent impairment assessed—
(a) for industrial deafness—by an audiologist; or
(b) for a psychiatric or psychological injury—by a medical assessment
tribunal; or
(c) for another injury—by a doctor.
(3) The degree of permanent impairment must be assessed in accordance with
the GEPI to decide the DPI for the injury, and a report
complying with the GEPI
must be given to the insurer.
(4) If the worker sustains permanent impairment from multiple injuries
sustained in 1 event—
(a) the degree of permanent impairment for the injuries, other than a
psychiatric or psychological injury, must be assessed together
to decide the DPI
for the injuries; and
(b) the degree of permanent impairment for the psychiatric or psychological
injury must be assessed separately to decide the DPI
for the injury.
Calculation
of lump sum compensation
(1) If, as a result of an assessment
under section 179, a worker is entitled to lump sum compensation, the amount of
the lump sum
compensation must be calculated under a regulation having regard to
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), lump sum compensation for injury must
not include an amount for a degree of impairment attributable
(a) a condition existing before the injury; or
(b) a condition for which the worker is not entitled to compensation.
(3) The amount of lump sum compensation is to be calculated as at the day the
insurer makes an offer of lump sum compensation to the
worker under section
[41] After the
2013 amendments to s 237, that section:
(a) prescribed that a prerequisite to seeking damages was a notice of
assessment; and
(b) did not provide (as did s
) for a right to claim
damages only where there had been no compensation claim.
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
the enactment of the
Workers’ Compensation and Other Legislation
Amendment Act 2015
[42] In 2015,
the WCR Act was amended again. By this stage, the Newman Government had fallen.
The 2015 amendments were effected by
Workers’ Compensation and
Other Legislation Amendment Act 2015
, which abolished the five per cent DPI
requirement and amended s 132A so that it read:
Applying for assessment of DPI if no application made for compensation
(1) This section applies to a worker who has not made an application under
section 132.
(2) The worker may apply to the insurer to have the worker’s injury
assessed under section 179 to decide if the worker’s
injury has resulted
(3) An application under subsection (1) must be—
(a) lodged with the insurer; and
(b) in the approved form; and
(c) accompanied by—
(i) a certificate in the approved form given by a doctor who attended the
worker; and
(ii) any other evidence or particulars prescribed under a regulation.
(4) A registered dentist may issue the certificate mentioned in subsection
(3)(c)(i) for an oral injury.
(5) If the worker can not complete an application because of a physical or
mental incapacity, someone else may complete it on the
worker’s behalf.
(6) The insurer must, within 40 business days after an application under
subsection (2) is made, decide to allow or reject the application.
The insurer may reject the application only if satisfied the
(a) was not a worker when the injury was sustained; or
(b) has not sustained an injury
(8) The insurer must notify the worker of its decision on the application.
(9) If the insurer rejects the application, the insurer must also, when
giving the worker notice of its decision, give the worker
written reasons for
the decision and the information prescribed by regulation.
(10) If the worker is aggrieved by the insurer’s decision on the
application, the worker may have the decision reviewed under
chapter 13.
(11) If the insurer does not decide the application within the time stated in
subsection (6)—
(a) the insurer must, within 5 business days after the end of the time stated in
subsection (6), notify the worker—
(i) of its reasons for not deciding the application; and
(ii) that the worker may have the insurer’s failure to decide the
application reviewed under chapter 13; and
(b) the worker may have the insurer’s failure to decide the application
reviewed under chapter 13.
To remove any doubt, it is declared that a decision of the insurer to
allow the application does not entitle the worker to compensation
[43] It can be
seen that subsections (6) to (12) of s 132A provided that WorkCover must
determine, on a s 132A assessment, whether:
(a) the claimant is a “worker”; and whether
(b) the claimant has suffered an “injury”.
[44] Section
132A(12) provides that acceptance of the worker’s application does not
equate to an entitlement to
compensation.
explanatory notes to that
“... s 132A does not provide any entitlement to damages
but rather is merely a mechanism whereby a person can apply for an assessment
the injury where they have not made an application for compensation under s 132
of the Act.”
Arguments of the parties
Regulator accepted that, upon application by a claimant under s 132A, it
ultimately acts under s 179. It is under s 179
that the insurer refers the
injury for assessment.
[47] The power
to refer, the Regulator argued, is a power which relates to an
“injury” suffered by a “worker”.
It follows, it was
submitted, that in order to exercise the power conferred by s 179, the insurer
must determine whether the claimant
is a “worker” and whether the
claimant has suffered an “injury”.
Regulator appreciated that, before me, Mr Langridge relied upon the 2015
amendments to s 132A to show the proper construction
of s 132A as it was at the
time of Mr Langridge’s injury. In particular, Mr Langridge submitted that
the inclusion of s 132A(7)
expressly acknowledged a power to reject an
application where the insurer was not satisfied that the claimant is a
who had suffered an “injury”. Mr Langridge
submitted that the amendment changed the law where, previously, it was no
of the insurer’s function under s 132A to determine whether the claimant
was a “worker” who had suffered an
“injury”. The
Regulator submitted that the amendment merely clarified, not changed, the nature
of the insurer’s
Langridge defended the decision of the Commission. He drew a distinction
between lump sum compensation and common law damages.
He submitted that
s 132A did not provide an “implied power” to determine whether
the claimant was a “worker”
who was “insured”. The
section only provided, together with s 237, a gateway to making a common law
damages claim.
This can, he submitted, be contrasted to a lump sum compensation
claim assessed under s 180.
Langridge submitted that where an assessment is made under s 179 for the purpose
of a common law claim, s 237 is engaged,
but, ultimately, questions as to
whether the claimant is a “worker” who has suffered an
“injury” are to be
determined by the court who hears the action.
This can be contrasted, it was submitted, to where the assessment is effected
the purposes of a lump sum compensation claim. There, he submitted, the
determination of whether a claimant is a “worker”
who has suffered
an “injury” is determined as part of the assessment under
s 180. This argument is strengthened, he
submitted, by s 132A(12) as it
appeared after the 2015 amendments. It is acknowledged by the Regulator that
the assessment of entitlement
to lump sum compensation is made under s 180, not
s 132A or s 179.
Consideration
[51] As earlier
observed, the question is ultimately as to the proper construction of the
relevant provisions of the WCR Act at the
time of the injury to Mr
That is a matter of
law. As a matter of law there is only one proper construction of the
provisions. It is therefore not necessary
to identify how the Commission erred
if it did. It is only necessary for this Court to properly construe the
relevant provisions.
[52] There is no
contention as to the proper approach to statutory construction. The principles
were authoritatively stated by the
High Court in
Those principles can be
summarised by stating that the objective of statutory construction is to
ascertain the meaning of the text
adopted by the legislature, but read in the
context of the statute as a whole against other relevant context and by
reference to
its purpose. Context includes relevant extrinsic material and
legislative history. While it is ultimately the meaning of the actual
used by Parliament which is decisive, “[a] literal approach to
construction, which requires the courts to obey the ordinary
meaning or usage of
the words of a provision even if the result is improbable, has long been
eschewed by [the High
[53] Section
132A(1), as it stood at the relevant
namely after the 2013
amendments, provides that the section applies to a “worker”. That
term is defined by s 11.
s 132A(2) the “worker” may apply to have the worker’s
“injury” assessed. The term “injury”
is defined by s
[54] Reading the
definitions of “worker” and “injury” into ss 132A(1) and
(2) as it appeared after the 2013
amendments produces this
Section 132A(1): “This section applies to a
who works under a contract and is an employee for the purpose of assessment for
PAYG withholding
, who has not made an application under s 132.”
Section 132A(2): “The
person who works under a contract and is an
employee for the purposes of assessment for PAYG withholding
may apply to
the insurer to have [his]
personal injury arising out of, or in the course of
employment if the employment is a significant contributing factor to the
, assessed under s 179 to decide if [his] injury has resulted in a
[55] Section
132A does not vest a power upon the insurer. Section 132A also does not impose
any obligation upon the insurer. Section
132A merely provides a procedure where
a “worker may apply to the insurer to have the worker’s injury
assessed under
[56] Section
does not refer to s 132A
and does not refer to any “application” made by the
“worker”; neither does any other
subsection of s 179.
179(1), assessment occurs in one of two circumstances:
(a) where the insurer decides to have “the worker’s injury”
assessed. That clearly bestows a discretion upon the
insurer, of its own
motion, to conduct an assessment; or
(b) where the worker “asks” the insurer “to have the
worker’s injury assessed”.
[58] Reading ss
132A and 179 together, it must be that “a worker may
insurer to have the worker’s injury
to the insurer to have the worker’s injury
[59] It can be
seen then that the power to have the “worker’s injury”
assessed does not come from s 132A. Section
132A prescribes the procedure
whereby the claimant “asks” the insurer to assess the injury. The
power to “have
the degree of permanent impairment assessed” is
vested by s 179(2).
[60] There is
ambiguity in s 179 as it is unclear as to the scope of discretion vested in the
insurer. As already observed, there
is a discretion vested in the insurer of
its own motion “to have the worker’s injury assessed”. In
that circumstance,
or when the “worker [has asked] the insurer to have the
worker’s injury assessed”, by s 179(2) “the insurer
have the degree of permanent impairment assessed” in ways
prescribed which depend upon the nature of the
mandatory command of “must” could refer to the assessment, i.e., the
insurer “must” assess the injury.
It could apply to the nature of
the assessment, i.e., having decided (in exercise of discretion) to have the
injury assessed (if
the insurer decides to do so under s 179(1)), or, if the
worker “asks” for the assessment (s 179(1)), any assessment
done in the manner prescribed by s 179(2). While the latter alternative is
probably the correct construction, it is unnecessary
to decide that point.
executive power is vested upon a decision-maker, it is for the decision-maker to
determine whether the power has risen
for exercise before exercising it.
Generally, the existence or otherwise of those facts is a jurisdictional
question, although complicated
questions can arise as to whether a fact is
“jurisdictional” or not. Whether a fact is
“jurisdictional”
may affect the power of judicial review. A
non‑jurisdictional fact is generally reviewable only in the case of
administrative error, but a court on review may determine itself
(sometimes on new or fresh evidence) whether a jurisdictional fact
[63] The facts
that Mr Langridge is a “worker” (as defined) and has suffered an
“injury” (as defined) may
or may not be jurisdictional facts for the
purposes of any limitation upon a judicial review. That is not necessary to
On a conventional construction of ss 132A and 179, the insurer must
determine, for the purposes of the exercise of the power in s
179(2) whether it
is a “worker” (as defined) who has suffered an “injury”
(as defined), who has “ask[ed]”
it to “have the degree of
permanent impairment assessed”.
Langridge’s approach, namely, to consider whether there was an
“implied power” vested in the insurer by
s 132A to determine whether
he was a “worker” who suffered an “injury” is, in my
view, misplaced. For the
reasons I have explained, the “power” is
to obtain the assessment. That power is bestowed by s 179. By s 179(1) that
power may be exercised upon a request by a “worker” to refer the
“worker’s injury” for assessment.
There is no power to refer
for assessment an “injury”, other than an “injury”
defined by the legislation,
suffered by a “worker” as that term is
defined by the legislation. This is obvious. The insurer has no power to assess
anything, except an “injury” to a “worker”.
[65] Therefore,
in order to comply with the statutory command to assess the
“worker’s injury”, the insurer must
determine whether the
request is made by a “worker” who has an “injury”. The
fact that an assessment of compensation
is ultimately performed under s 179 or s
180 does not mean that the insurer is not obliged to determine whether the
person seeking
an assessment is entitled to do so. The fact that s 237 entitles
a person who holds an assessment under s 179 to commence a claim
for damages
does not obviate the obligations of the insurer to determine whether the person
who is seeking the assessment is entitled
to do so; that the person is a
“worker” who has an “injury”.
[66] While the
claimant may qualify to issue a claim for damages through s 237, in order to do
so they must obtain an assessment,
the insurer may only refer
a “worker” who has an “injury” for assessment.
[67] A literal
interpretation, even one based on a conventional approach to the interpretation
of provisions vesting executive power,
may give way to an alternative
construction when context is considered. Mr Langridge says this is such a case.
[68] Part of the
context against which provisions are construed is legislative history.
[69] Section
275, prior to the 2013 amendments, provided that where a worker had not lodged a
claim for compensation,
could deliver a notice of claim for damages. Upon receipt of that notice of
claim, the insurer would then act under s 258 and
may issue a notice of
assessment. In so doing, the insurer must decide whether the claimant was a
“worker” who had “sustained
an injury”. If so, the
notice of assessment would be issued and the prerequisite in s 237(1)(a) would
be fulfilled.
[70] The 2013
amendments retained s 237, but amended it so as to provide that no right to
damages arose unless the impairment to the
injured worker was more than five per
cent. Section 237(1)(d) was omitted and Division 6 of Chapter 5 which contained
was headed “Claimant mentioned in s 237(1)(d)” was
omitted. Section 275 remained.
[71] Therefore,
under the 2013 amendments the distinction between a claimant who had made, or
not made, a compensation application
fell and the right to claim damages was
dependent upon (amongst other things) receipt of “a notice of assessment
from the insurer
for the injury and the DPI for the assessed injury is more than
five per cent”.
[72] Section
540, before the 2013 amendments, provided for an avenue of review of a decision
made under s 258. That right of review
was, with s 258 itself, removed by the
2013 amendments. Consequently, after the 2013 amendments there was no right
within the WCR
Act, of review of any decision made under either s 132A or s 179
that the claimant was not a “worker” or not a worker
suffered an “injury”. Any review of such a decision could only be
made under the
Judicial Review Act 1991
[73] It was
argued by Mr Langridge that the assessment under s 179, when looked at
especially in light of s 237 and the removal of
s 258, was a mechanism which
provided a gateway to a claim for damages and all that was required was an
application under s 132A,
and the assessment then proceeded under s 179. That
there was no statutory avenue of review of a decision under s 132A or s 179
suggested, it was submitted, that no assessment was done under those sections of
whether the claimant falls within the definitions
in the legislation of a
“worker” who has an “injury”.
[74] As already
observed, Mr Langridge submitted that if the injury as assessed resulted in a
DPI of more than five per cent, a claimant
could bring an action for damages and
questions of whether he was a “worker” and had an
“injury” were matters
to be determined by the court deciding the
action for damages.
legislative history against which the exercise of construction is undertaken may
include later amendments.
However, there are significant limitations to such an approach. In
AG v Croner Trading Pty Ltd
Gummow J sitting in the Full Court of the Federal Court urged caution in using
subsequent amendments to discern legislative purpose.
His Honour said,
“It is, after all, a curious way of revealing parliamentary intention at
the time of passing the earlier
provision”.
As observed
Allina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
later amendments
may reflect on legislative desire to clarify, not alter the meaning of a
[76] Here, there
were amendments to s 132A and also to s 540 made in
As already observed, s
132A was amended to add subsection (7), which provided that the insurer could
reject the application if satisfied
that the claimant “was not a
worker” or had not “sustained an injury”. Section 540 was
amended to include
a decision to reject an application made under s 132A as a
reviewable decision. Mr Langridge argues that the introduction of s 132A(7)
empowers the insurer to reject the application in circumstances where it could
not reject it prior to the 2015 amendments.
[77] In my view,
all these arguments ought to be rejected.
[78] The scheme
created by the WCR Act in any of its versions concerns “workers” who
have sustained an “injury”.
Section 5 of the WCR
states the objects of the
legislation. Section 5(2) provided:
“(2) The main provisions
of the scheme provide the following for
sustained by
in their employment—
(b) regulation of access to damages.”
[79] The access
to “damages” which are sought to be regulated is “damages for
sustained by a
[80] Section
132A as it stood upon its introduction by the 2013 amendments enables a
“worker” who has sustained an “injury”
to commence a
process which obliges an insurer to seek an assessment of an
“injury”. That dovetails with s 237 which
is contained in Part
2 of Chapter 5. It identifies “... the
only persons
entitled to
damages for an
sustained by a
includes the “worker” seeking damages for an “injury”.
The scheme of the WCR is to shut out claims
for damages unless the
obtained an assessment of their
“injury”. The notion that the legislature, by introducing further
restrictions upon
workers seeking damages (by introducing a five per cent DPI
threshold) intended to ease procedural restrictions is not consistent
clear intent of the 2013 amendments, which was to restrict the number of claims.
Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill which resulted in the 2015 amendments
contained the following:
Policy objectives and the reasons
The Bill implements a number of policy proposals made by the current
Queensland Government in its pre-election policy document
Restoring the
rights of Queenslanders injured at work
. The Bill aims to achieve the
following objectives:
reinstate common
law rights for injured workers that were affected by changes made by the
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation and Other
Legislation
Amendment Act 2013
(the 2013 Amendment Act) ...
The Bill also
makes a number of other minor miscellaneous amendments that will improve the
day-to-day operation of Queensland’s
workers’ compensation
.” (emphasis added)
Achievement of policy objectives
The Bill will achieve the Government’s policy objectives by amending
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
current limitation on the entitlement to seek damages that requires a worker to
have a degree of permanent impairment as
a result of the injury greater than 5%
to access common law since the date of the Queensland State election; ...
certain procedural aspects of the claims process
and reduce regulatory
burden through a number of minor miscellaneous amendments.” (emphasis
And, specifically as to the amendment to s 132A:
amends section 132A of the Act to specify the
decisions the insurer must make in determining the application, the time the
must be made within, and that the decisions of an insurer is
reviewable. The amendment also clarifies that the decision of the insurer
accept the application does not entitle a worker to compensation for the
[82] While the
2015 amendments removed the five per cent DPI threshold for common law claims,
the general structure established under
the 2013 amendments by ss 132A, 179,
237, and 275 remained unchanged.
[83] In my view,
the 2015 amendments to s 132A clarified the role of the insurer established
under s 132A by the 2013 amendments by
expressly identifying the function of the
insurer as including the making of the findings specified in
For the reasons I
have explained, the exercise of power to refer the “worker’s
injury” for assessment always required
the insurer to determine whether
the “application” in the form prescribed by s
was one made by a
“worker” for assessment of an “injury” as defined by the
WCR Act. By specifically identifying
the decisions, a review avenue can be
easily created. That was achieved by the amendment to s
[84] Both the
legislative history and the Explanatory Memorandum to the 2015 Bill are
consistent with the construction I have placed
on s 132A as it appeared after
the 2013 amendments.
[85] In my view,
the Regulator was right to consider whether Mr Langridge suffered an
“injury”, as defined by the WCR
Act ,when determining whether to
refer any injury for assessment. Whether Mr Langridge does or does not, as a
matter of fact, have
an “injury”, as defined by the WCR Act, is not
an issue before me.
[86] The appeal
must be allowed. I will make directions to facilitate the determination of the
question of costs.
[87] I make the
following orders:
decision of the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission is set aside.
parties file and exchange submissions on costs by 4 pm on 25 June 2025.
party may apply for leave to make oral submissions on costs by filing and
serving such an application by 4 pm on 9 July 2025,
failing which the question
of costs will be determined without further oral
Langridge v Workers’
Compensation Regulator
[2021] QIRC 251.
As it stood at the time of Mr
Langridge’s injury being sustained.
WorkCover is the relevant
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act
: Reprint current as at 1 July 2014, sch 6, definition of
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation
, Reprint current as at 1 July 2014,
Langridge v Workers’
Compensation Regulator
[2021] QIRC 251
an injury of a worker, means an estimate, expressed as a percentage of the
degree of the worker’s permanent impairment
assessed and decided in
accordance with the GEPI” and “
Guidelines for the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment made under section
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Reprint current as at 1 July 2014, sch 6, definition of “DPI” and
Reprint current as at 1 July
Workers’ Compensation
and Rehabilitation and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2015
; section 132A in
that form appears in paragraph [42] of these reasons.
Reprint current as at 31
January 2015.
Langridge v
Workers’ Compensation Regulator
[2019] QIRC 048.
Reprint current as at 1
July 2014; see paragraph [5] of these reasons.
See paragraph [7] of these
Langridge v
Workers’ Compensation Regulator
[2021] QIRC 251.
Or any other
The relevant reprints are:
Time of injury
: Reprint current as at 1 July 2014;
amendments:
Reprint current as at 23 September 2013;
2013 amendments
Reprint current as at 29 October 2013;
2015 amendments
: Reprint current
as at 31 January 2015.
Reprint current as at 1
Act No. 52 of 2013; Reprint current as at 29
October 2013.
Reprint current as at 29
October 2013; for present purposes, the form of ss 11 and 32 in the Reprint
current as at 1 July 2014
is equivalent.
See paragraph [5] of these
reasons; Reprint current as at 1 July 2014.
See generally
City Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd
[1986] HCA 3
(1986) 160 CLR 1
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
, Reprint current as at 29 October
Reprint current as at 1
; Reprint current as at 1 July 2014.
Reprint current as at 1
Reprint current as at 1
Reprint current as at 1
Defined as “Work
Related Impairment”, sch 6; Reprint current as at 23 September 2013.
Reprint current as at 23
September 2013.
Reprint current as at 23
September 2013.
Reprint current as at 23
September 2013.
Reprint current as at 23
September 2013.
Reprint current as at 23
September 2013.
Reprint current as at 23
September 2013; In substance,
remained unchanged by the 2013 amendments,
see Reprint current as at 29 October 2013.
Reprint current as at 23
September 2013;
applies to compensation, not damages.
Reprint current as at 23
September 2013; sch 6.
Reprint current as at 23
September 2013.
Reprint current as at 29
October 2013; for present purposes, the form of
in the Reprint current as
at 1 July 2014 is equivalent.
Reprint current as at 29
October 2013; for present purposes, the form of
in the Reprint
current as at 1 July 2014 is equivalent.
Reprint current as at 23
September 2013.
Reprint current as at 31
January 2015.
By removing doubt as to the
position before the 2015 amendment; see
as appears at paragraph [42]
of these reasons and the Reprint current as at 31 January 2015.
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation
and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2015
The provisions as appears
in the Reprint current as at 29 October 2013.
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507
; followed in
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant
Services and Multicultural Affairs v Thornton
[2024] HCA 6
(2023) 276 CLR 136
[2019] HCA 35
Appearing at paragraph [5]
of these reasons.
Appearing at paragraph [16]
of these reasons.
Appearing at paragraph [16]
of these reasons.
Section 132A(2).
As appears in paragraph
[40] of these reasons; Reprint current as at 1 July 2014.
Section 179(1).
Section 132A(2).
Each of the injuries
identified in subsections (a), (b) and (c) to s 179(2); see paragraph [40] of
these reasons where the section
City of Enfield v
Development Assessment Commission
[2000] HCA 5
(2000) 199 CLR 135
at 154-155; and
see generally
Minister for Immigration v Eshetu
[1999] HCA 21
(1999) 197 CLR 611
per Gummow J.
As it stood after the 2013
amendments; see Reprint current as at 29 October 2013 and, for present purposes,
1 July 2014.
Section 237(1)(d).
Grain Elevators Board (Vic) v Dunmunkle
[1946] HCA 13
(1946) 73 CLR 70.
[1992] FCA 624
(1992) 39 FCR 348.
(1991) 28 FCR 203.
Reprint current as at 31
January 2015.
Reprint current as at 1
July 2014; see also ss 5(1), 5(3) and 5(4).
Emphasis added.
Reprint current as at 31
January 2015.
Reprint current as at 1
Reprint current as at 31
January 2015
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (404 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter