URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2003/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tony's Disco Cabaret, Fortitude Valley [2003] QLAT 4 (16 October 2002)
Ada Ranieri and Tony’s Disco Pty Ltd
RESPONDENT:
Chief Executive, Department Of Tourism, Racing And Fair Trading
(incorporating Liquor Licensing)
APPEAL NUMBER:
4 of 2002/03
Tony’s Disco Cabaret situated at 198 Wickham Street, Fortitude
HEARING DATE:
13 SEPTEMBER 2002
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST
Disqualification of adult entertainment permit for a period of five years
and suspension of on-premises (cabaret) licence for a period
of two months
Mr J. Rolls
Mrs J. Harrington
Mr D. Stitt
DECISION DATE:
16 OCTOBER 2002
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. Tony’s Disco Pty Ltd is the holder of an on-premises (cabaret) licence
which operates from premises at 198 Wickham Street,
Fortitude Valley. On the
26th of March 2002 a notice was issued to the licensee, Ada Ranieri, Anthony
Ranieri and the Registered
Proprietors of the premises on which the licensed
premises were conducted, calling upon the licensee to show cause why the licence
should not be cancelled.
2. The nominee of the licensee is
Ada Ranieri.
3. The licensee is also the holder of an adult entertainment permit under the
Act. Again, the nominee is Ada Ranieri and the controlling
persons as stated on
the licence are Ada Ranieri, Antonio Ranieri, Raffaele Antonio Saffioti and
Loretta Diane Mary Howarth.
4. The solicitors for the licensee in response to this notice provided to the
Chief Executor on 3 May 2002 statutory declarations
of Ada Ranieri, Tony Ranieri
and Yuen Lau Ho. On the 28th of May 2000 Mr Peter Thomas, the delegate of the
Chief Executive, considered
the matter including the show cause notice, the
statutory declarations and submissions made by Counsel.
5. On the 11th of June 2002 Mr Thomas determined that cause had not been shown
and made disciplinary orders which:
1. reprimanded the licensee;
2. disqualified Antonio Ranieri and Ada Ranieri from holding an adult
entertainment permit for five years; and
3. suspended the on premises (cabaret) licence for a period of two
6. On the 21st of June 2002 further submissions were received from the
appellant’s solicitors. This material was considered.
The suspension of
the liquor licence was deferred whilst this reconsideration took place.
Ultimately, the decision was confirmed
with the suspension of the liquor licence
to commence at midnight on the 26th of August 2002.
7. On the 23rd of August 2002 a stay of the suspension of the liquor licence was
ordered by the Tribunal pursuant to
Liquor Act 1992
Act). This stay is in force.
8. The notice of appeal challenges the suspension of the on-premises (cabaret)
licence and the disqualification from Antonio and
Ada Ranieri from holding an
adult entertainment permit for five years only. The grounds of the appeal are
1. the disqualification and suspension are manifestly excessive;
2. disqualification was never a part of the original notice of intention to take
disciplinary action of the 27th of March
9. The second submission can be shortly disposed of. In the notice of intention
to take disciplinary action dated the 27th of March
2002 the licensee is called
upon to show cause:
“...why disciplinary action should not be taken under
Liquor Act 1992
(disciplinary action) in respect of the general licence
known as Tony’s Disco
The proposed action - I
delegate of the Chief Executive, intend to
Cancel the licence...”
Section 137
of the Act provides the procedure for the taking of disciplinary
action against a licensee. The Chief-Executive, after considering
reasonable grounds exist to take such action, must give the licensee notice
outlining the proposed action, the grounds for the
proposed action, an outline
of the facts, an invitation to the licensee to show by a stated date 28 days
after the notice is given
why the proposed action should not be taken and an
opportunity to make submissions about the proposed action and how those
submissions
may be made. In this case, the proposed action was cancellation
of the licence. Accordingly, the matters set out in
s.137(1)(e)
, (f), (g) and
(h) do not apply.
Section 137A
of the Act provides that after considering the representations
made pursuant to
s.137(1)(i)
and (j) of the Act, if the Chief Executive still
considers there is ground to take disciplinary action, the Chief Executive may
if the proposed action was to cancel the licence, to either cancel the
licence “...or take some other form of disciplinary
“Disciplinary action” is defined in
of the Act as
“disciplinary action”
, relating to a licence,
(a) cancelling the licence; or
(b) suspending the licence—
(i) for a stated period;
(ii) until further ordered by the chief executive up to a maximum period of
(c) closing the licensed premises, or part of the licensed premises, for a
stated period; or
(d) varying the licence
(i) stating in the licence a condition to which it is to be subject;
(ii) otherwise limiting the authority conferred by the licence;
(e) reducing the times at which the licensee may conduct business under
authority of the licence; or
(f) disqualifying the licensee from holding a licence or
(i) for a stated period;
(ii) until further ordered by the chief executive up to a maximum period of
5 years; or
(g) requiring the licensee to pay to the department an amount of not more
than $10 000; or
(h) reprimanding the licensee.”
12. It can be seen that a lesser form of disciplinary action means disqualifying
the licensee from holding a licence or permit for
up to five years. In this
case, the Chief Executive gave notice in accordance with
of the Act. The
proposed action was to cancel a licence and, accordingly, a cancellation would
pursuant to
s.137A(1)(c)
include another form of disciplinary action set out in
of the Act. The cancellation of the liquor licence to which the premises
relate would also have the effect of cancelling the adult
entertainment
In those circumstances,
the original proposed action, being the cancellation of the licence, not only
contemplated, if cause was
not shown, the imposition of that penalty but any
lesser penalty which was open to the Chief Executive by virtue of the combined
operation of
s.137A(1)(c)
of the Act. This would include suspension of
the adult entertainment permit for a period of up to five years. Accordingly,
by application
of those two provisions the Chief Executive may consider imposing
a lesser penalty other than cancellation, in the form of disqualification
without reference to it being specifically referred to in the notice under
of the Act. As all disciplinary action which could be taken under
of the Act, including the proposed action of cancellation, was then being
considered by the Chief Executive, the licensee knew or
ought to have known that
disqualification for a period of time of a permit was an option which the Chief
Executive could validly
consider in these disciplinary proceedings. A licensee
should be on notice and make submissions about any such penalty which may
imposed. We note the licensee was represented by counsel at the hearing.
Accordingly, a licensee ought to have known that disqualification
from holding a
permit for a period of time up to 5 years was a disciplinary option available to
the Chief Executive as a result of
the proposed action to cancel the licence and
could be heard in relation to it. Therefore, in our view, this submission must
13. The second ground of appeal is that the disqualification and suspension are,
in the circumstances, manifestly excessive. In
order to consider this
submission it is necessary to have regard to the facts which gave rise to the
show cause notice being issued,
those facts which are relevant have been
accepted by the licensee.
14. The show cause notice contained a schedule which identified a series of
facts relied upon. It is stated that an event occurred
on the 25th of April
1996 where Ada Ranieri sold liquor other than at a time which liquor can be sold
under the authority of the
licence. Further, Ada Ranieri permitted liquor to be
consumed on licensed premises at a time other than a time when liquor may be
sold under the authority of the licence. Ada Ranieri was convicted and fined
$1,000 for each offence in the Brisbane Magistrate
15. It is not clear precisely when the licensee became the holder of an adult
entertainment permit. Nevertheless, by the 11th of
August 2000 investigations
by the Department revealed that:
1. The permittee had failed to keep the adult entertainment permit on the
premises and failed to produce that permit on request and
failed to comply with
the condition of the adult entertainment permit by having acceptable lighting
2. More significantly, it was noted that the permittee failed to have adult
entertainment supervised by a licensee, nominee, permittee
or controller and
failed to keep a daily register of controllers.
3. On the 25th of August 2000 Mr Tony Ranieri, as a representative of the
permittee, was called into the office and spoken to about
the breaches and
issued with a verbal warning. A written warning was sent on the 28th of August
16. These facts are not in dispute.
17. On the 13th of December 2000 investigations noted the failure by the
permittee to keep a daily register of
controllers.
A warning letter was
issued on the 18th of December 2000. In response to this the permittee
submitted that the controllers were
present, the register was there but, the
controller hadn’t signed the register.
18. On the 23rd of March 2000 investigations revealed that the permittee had not
kept a daily register of the name of the controller
for the premises and the
controllers’ hours of duty. A liquor seton no. LL068584 for $525 was
issued on the 2nd of May 2001.
In respect of this matter the permittee, again,
submits that the controllers and register were present on the premises however
controller had not signed the register at the time of the
inspection.
19. On the evening of the 27th into the early hours of the 28th of September
2001 Queensland Police, together with liquor licensing
officers attended at the
premises. Whilst on the premises a liquor licensing officer witnessed a female
dancer rubbing her vagina.
He considered this action to be masturbation, an act
which falls outside the definition of adult
entertainment.
Further, another
entertainer allowed a male patron to perform oral sex on her. Again, this was
considered to fall outside the
definition of adult
entertainment.
Entertainers also
allowed other persons to touch the adult entertainer’s genitalia. This
occurred on a number of occasions.
It was also noted that a number of the
entertainers were soliciting on the premises for the purposes of prostitution.
20. As a result of these observations a number of persons were charged with
criminal offences. Sonia Smith, Varina Street, Loretta
Howarth were all
convicted of offences of being found on premises for the purpose of
prostitution. They were fined. A fourth person,
Delilah Gebbett, was charged
with being found on premises used by two or more prostitutes and soliciting for
the purpose of prostitution
but failed to appear at court and a warrant has
issued for her arrest. Of significance is the fact that Howarth held a
position and was a controlling person pursuant to s.109AA of the Act
for the adult entertainment.
21. It also emerged that during the course of this investigation that another
person, Dianne Wright, who was working as a bar attendant
was found in
possession of a dangerous drug, an amphetamine. Two other staff members being,
Tina Waterfield and Kelly Armstrong,
were also fined for drug related offences.
The observation can be made that on that particular night six staff members had
the law and, one person who was charged with offences, has absconded.
22. In making his determination the subject of this appeal,
Mr Thomas observed:
“Although I find the licensee and the nominee were derelict in their
duty in allowing breaches of the AEP Code to occur and
also breached a condition
of the AEP Permit on the 28th of September 2001 I am not convinced that the
offences were of a nature to
find the licensee or nominee unfit to hold a liquor
license. Subsequently I do not find the licensee or nominee is unfit to conduct
business under the authority of a liquor
23. The appellants in their submissions, relies upon this finding by Mr Thomas
together with the fact that the disqualification from
holding an AEP is a
“serious penalty” to sustain the argument that the penalty is
excessive. Further, it was submitted
that the appellants have traded lawfully
under the Act and its predecessor for a long period of time, being approximately
It was submitted, and it is a submission which is accepted, that the
suspension of the liquor licence would have the effect of largely
destroying the
appellant’s business. The Department challenged this assertion during the
hearing of the appeal. However,
it does not appear that it is a matter that the
Department made any investigation into to ascertain what effect, if any, the
would have upon the long term viability of the appellant’s
business. It may well be that the appellant is unable to resurrect
its business
at the end of the two month suspension. This is a factor we consider to be
relevant in this case.
24. There are two matters to be considered. Firstly, whether or not the
disqualification of Ada Ranieri and Tony Ranieri from holding
entertainment permit for a period of five years is manifestly excessive. In
this matter, it cannot be said that the events
giving rise to the criminal
proceedings against staff members on the 28th of September 2001 were the first
occasion that the permittee
had come to the attention of the Department. It had
received a number of notices dated back to the 11th of August 2000 which dealt
with the manner in which it operated under the adult entertainment permit. If a
permittee does not supervise the adult entertainment
then under the Act a
controller must be appointed and that controller must supervise the adult
entertainment provided. Further,
a register of controllers under Regulation 19D
Liquor Regulations
must be maintained. These provisions ensure that the
permittee or his delegate supervises the entertainers such that they perform
adult entertainment only and that the entertainers do not step beyond the
permitted boundaries.
25. It appears to us a fundamental requirement imposed upon the holder of an
adult entertainment permit that they supervise entertainment
and record that
supervision. In this case, on the 11th August 2002, 13th December 2000 and 23rd
March 2001 the permittees knew,
or ought to have known, that they were being
examined by the Department and that their conduct in relation to the supervisory
of the adult entertainment permit was deficient. Yet, it appears that
no steps were taken to remedy the situation. A gross failure
to supervise is
the only favourable explanation that can be drawn from the events of the 27th
and 28th of September 2001. These
events are not disputed. It appears clear
that on a number of occasions on that evening entertainers performed acts which
by law, defined as adult entertainment. Indeed, such acts were acts of
prostitution.
Further, employees
solicited for prostitution, including the person designated as the controller.
26. In a statement from a Gary Oliver, a Liquor Licensing Division officer, the
following appears:
“Another offer
from Vernia Carol... During the conversation she had stated that a lap dance
was $50, $85, $150 and $200 with a range of
extras. Oral was include (sic) $85
with intercourse as the extra price, either on the premises, in the toilets or
out the back and
a motel could be available. This performer had informed me
that the money was to be given to Ms Loretta as a lot of other girls
the money and run.”
27. We have assumed that Ms Loretta is in fact Loretta Howarth, the controller.
Thus, the controller is not only in control of the
adult entertainment but
appears to be in control of prostitution which appears to be conducted on the
premises. It is hard to believe
that this unlawful activity took place without
the knowledge of the permittee. However, there is no evidence to suggest that
persons knew of these activities and, in the absence of evidence to the
contrary, the Tribunal accepts that the permittees were ignorant
28. Nevertheless, it appears to the Tribunal that the permittee was grossly
incompetent in the discharge of its obligations under
the adult entertainment
permit. Indeed, it appears that it abrogated any responsibility under the
permit delegating it to the person,
Howarth who in turn appears to have misused
her position. Even after a number of warnings directed to the issue of
supervision,
the permittee still did not endeavour to mend its ways.
29. The Tribunal views these breaches as very serious. It is not the case of a
rogue entertainer seeking to make some unexpected
short term financial gain as a
result of an opportunity which fell into her lap. Instead, it appears that
there is a reasonably
well orchestrated system in place whereby these premises
are being used for prostitution. Having regard to these matters, it does
appear to us that the decision to impose a disqualification from holding or
obtaining an adult entertainment permit for five
years on the permittee from the
27th of September 2001 could be described as manifestly excessive. Accordingly,
we are not minded
to interfere in respect of that aspect of the Chief
Executive’s determination.
30. However, there is one
feature of the order which causes us some concern.
31. Mr Thomas disqualified Antonio Ranieri and Ada Ranieri from holding an adult
entertainment permit. The order made did not encompass
the holder of the adult
entertainment permit, being Tony’s Disco Pty Ltd. Accordingly, the
disqualification should in our
view relate to the licensee who is called to show
cause under s.137. It is against the licensee that the proceedings are brought
and it is the licensee who is subject to disciplinary action. The nominee,
pursuant to s.109(6) of the Act, is also liable as a
licensee for any failure to
perform any obligations under the Act and may be punished for a contravention of
In this case, Ada
Ranieri is the nominee and it appears appropriate that this person ought also be
dealt with in the same way as
the permittee such that she is disqualified from
holding or obtaining an adult entertainment permit for five years. It does not
appear that there is any specific power under the Act to discipline Mr Antonio
Ranieri. No provision similar to s.109(6) of the
Act is contained in s.109AA.
In those circumstances, we do not believe that there is any power to discipline
Mr Antonio Ranieri.
Thus, whilst we agree with the substance of the order, it
appears that the order ought be varied so that the permittee, Tony’s
Pty Ltd, and its nominee, Ada Ranieri are disqualified from holding an adult
entertainment permit for five years.
32. As to the second matter, being the suspension of the liquor licence imposed
on the licensee, we take a different view. We accept
that the disqualification
referred to above is a significant penalty. We also observe that the
disqualification of the liquor licence
may have the effect of closing this
business down, perhaps permanently. In light of the fact that the licensee has
operated for
a long period of time and has no significant history in relation to
breaches of the
we feel these mattes ought be taken into
account on the licensee’s part. The last offence, in respect of a breach
was in 1996. However, it must be noted that
the conviction in respect of this offence was a conviction not against the
licensee but
rather against the nominee. Thus, even if it was a significant
factor in the penalty to be imposed in this instance, it is not a
against the licensee. We note proceedings were commenced in relation to an
alleged breach in June 2001, however, that
prosecution was not completed.
Accordingly, the licensee is entitled to the presumption of innocence in respect
of that matter.
33. It is noted that on the evening of the 27th/28th September 2001 a number of
persons, being staff members, were found in possession
of drugs. The Tribunal
views this matter with grave concern. However, we asked the Departmental
representative whether the Department
had made recommendations which licensees
could adopt to preclude drugs being brought onto licensed premises. No such
recommendations
were made. It was not suggested that these drugs were brought
onto the premises as the consequence of any act or omission on the
part of the
licensee. It appears from the material contained in the Appeal Book that some
of these substances may have been in reasonably
plain view, suggesting again,
that the licensee has been derelict in its duty to supervise the licensed
premises. However, in the
absence of being able to identify some act or
omission in respect of the conduct of the licensed premises by the licensee and
knowledge that there has been a positive finding made, that the licensee
remains a fit and proper person to hold the license, it
appears to us that the
suspension is excessive. Of course, if it could be demonstrated that the drugs
were found on the premises
as a consequence of the act or omission of the
licensee then, we would have no hesitation in endorsing the suspension.
that is not the case.
34. In our view, the default of the licensee in this case is able to be remedied
so that the permittee is penalised and the public
is protected by the
disqualification of the permittee and its nominee from holding or obtaining an
adult entertainment permit for
five years. It ought be noted that the defaults
that we have observed appertain to the manner in which adult entertainment was
There does not appear to be any breach of the standards imposed upon
the licensee under the
. Accordingly, we cannot see any
punitive nor any protective role in the suspension of the liquor license for a
period of two months.
In those circumstances, it appears to us that the
suspension for two months is excessive.
35. Insofar as it is necessary, pursuant to
of the Act, we would lift
the stay made by the Tribunal on the 23rd of August 2002.
36. Accordingly, we would, in accordance with s.36(3) of the Act, vary the
decision of the Chief Executive:
1. by disqualifying Tony’s Disco Pty Ltd and Ada Ranieri from holding an
adult entertainment permit for five years; and
2. deleting that part of the decision which suspends the on-premises (cabaret)
licence held by Tony’s Disco Pty Ltd for two
37. Otherwise, we would confirm the decision of the Chief Executive made on the
11th of June 2002.
We have assumed this to be an
error and that the licence held by the licensees was an on premises (cabaret)
then delegate of the Chief Executive, Michael Tolhurst.
These provisions deal with the
proposed action being the suspension of the licence, closure of the license for
a stated period,
a variation of the licence or a disqualification of the
licensee from holding or a licence or permit - the proposed disqualification
See s.109AA of the Act
and Regulation 19D of the
Regulations
See s.103E(3) of
s.103E(3)(c).
See s.229E of
the Criminal Code.
prostitution.
See s.109(7)
of the Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (81.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter