URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2001/455.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ford v La Forrest [2001] QCA 455 (23 October 2001)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
La Forrest v Ford & Ors
[2001] QCA 455
ADELE LA FORREST
(respondent/applicant)
(first applicant/first respondent)
CONRAD INTERNATIONAL HOTELS
CORPORATION
ACN 010 471 137
(second applicant/second
respondent)
DETECTIVE SERGEANT TREVOR NEWMAN
(third applicant/third
respondent)
DETECTIVE SERGEANT NOLAN WHITE
(fourth applicant/fourth
respondent)
STATE OF QUEENSLAND
(fifth applicant/fifth
respondent)
Appeal No 7555 of 2001
SC No 4348 and 4439 of 2001
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Application for extension of time
General Civil Appeal
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
23 October 2001
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
15 October 2001
McMurdo P, Thomas JA and Cullinane J
Separate reasons for judgment of
each member of the Court, each concurring as to the order made
Application for extension of time refused; applicant to pay
respondent’s costs of application to be assessed.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – QUEENSLAND – TIME FOR APPEAL –
EXTENSION OF TIME – GENERAL PRINCIPLES AS TO GRANT
OR REFUSAL –
where applicant was late by only one day – whether appeal plainly hopeless
so as not to allow extension
CONTRACT – GENERAL
CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES – OFFER AND ACCEPTANCE – OFFER – TIME
FOR EXERCISE – where
the applicant was unsuccessful in an action for
alleged personal injuries against various defendants – where she filed a
of appeal against that decision – where she received two offers of
settlement of her appeal conditional upon her discontinuance
of her appeal
action – where the offers were open for seven and four days respectively
– where the seven day offer was
“open for acceptance for a period of
seven (7) days only - where the applicant accepted both offers - where the
applicant then
rejected both offers and refused to discontinue her appeal action
– where the trial judge concluded the parties had reached
compromise agreement and that the applicant’s appeal had been
compromised
CONTRACT – GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES – OFFER
AND ACCEPTANCE – ACCEPTANCE – LEGAL PRINCIPLES - WITHIN
– where the applicant accepted the seven day offer on the last day of the
offer after business hours – whether
the time for acceptance of the offer
ran from the actual hour it was received – where the law does not in
general recognise
fractions of a day – where the proper interpretation of
the offer was that it would expire at the end of the seventh full day
receipt – where the form of words used by the applicant - ‘I am
prepared to accept this offer’ was not a
mere statement of intention to
consider but constituted a binding acceptance –
distinguished
EQUITY – UNDUE INFLUENCE AND DURESS – where
the applicant argued she should have been advised to seek independent legal
advice – where there is no onus on a party in adversarial negotiations to
advise the adversary to seek legal advice –
distinguished
Acts Interpretation Act
Transactions Act
Commercial Bank of
Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447
, distinguished
[1998] NSWSC 209
, Appeal No 40757 of 1996, 29 May 1998, referred
Ex parte Tooheys Ltd; Re Butler
[1934] NSWStRp 26
(1934) 34 SR (NSW) 277
Giblin v Duggan
, Appeal No 3105 of 1980, 8 March 1981,
distinguished
Lester v Garland
[1808] EngR 326
(1808) 33 ER 748
Morris v FAI General Insurance Co Ltd
[1996] 1 Qd R 495
Newton, Bellamy & Wolf v State Government Insurance Office
[1986] 1 Qd R 431
, referred to
Prowse v McIntyre
[1961] HCA 79
, referred to
Re North; Ex parte Hasluck
[1895] 2 QB 264
referred to
Watson v Issell
(1890) VLR 613
, referred to
The applicant appeared on her own behalf
AM Daubney for the first and
second respondents
A MacSporran for the third, fourth and fifth
respondents
SOLICITORS:
The applicant appeared on her own behalf
Quinlan, Miller & Treston
for the first and second respondents
Crown Solicitor (Qld) for the third,
fourth and fifth respondents
I agree with the reasons for judgment of
Thomas JA and with his proposed order.
This is an application for extension of time in which
to appeal against a decision of Atkinson J given 23 July 2001.
[3] The applicant appeared in person. She is legally qualified and informed
the court that she had been admitted to practice in Victoria.
The affidavits
indicate that she has a lengthy psychiatric history and that in and around the
period when she was preparing to file
a notice of appeal on 21 August 2001,
she was consulting a medical practitioner for “various medical problems
that affect her
general functioning.”
[4] She advanced lengthy submissions seeking to explain the delay including
alleged error on her part in calculating the day. In the
event, her lateness in
filing a notice of appeal was only one day. In circumstances like these, the
Court would have no hesitation
in granting the necessary extension of time,
unless of course it considered the appeal to be plainly hopeless. I therefore
to that question.
Circumstances
[5] The applicant brought an action in the District Court based upon an
incident in which she was involved at Jupiters Casino in 1992.
It was brought
against various defendants, the first two of which may be taken as representing
the interests of the Casino, and
the remaining three of which are police
officers and the State of Queensland. Quinlan Miller & Treston were the
solicitors for
the first two defendants and the Crown Solicitor represented the
third, fourth and fifth defendants. In due course the matter was
determined by Forde DCJ who dismissed the applicant’s action on 31 March
2000. She filed a notice of appeal against
that decision (within time) on 27
April 2000. Various steps were then taken by the parties including the
preparation of submissions,
and there was some disputation about the contents of
the appeal book. Correspondence ensued between the various parties on the
of settlement of the appeal. The question in issue is whether the
applicant and the respondents, in the course of that correspondence,
binding compromise agreement under which the applicant agreed to discontinue the
[6] That issue came before Atkinson J when the respondents sought a
declaration that the appeal had been compromised, and an order
stayed. On 23 July 2001 her Honour decided that issue adversely to the
applicant. It is against that decision that she
now wishes to appeal, and with
respect to which she needs an extension of time.
Correspondence with Quinlan Miller and
[7] On 22 February 2001, by which time the
appeal had been pending for about 10 months, Quinlan Miller & Treston
wrote to the
applicant and drew her attention to her then current liability in
respect of the trial costs, and to the incurring of further costs
in defending
the appeal. They also drew attention to their submission that her appeal lay
only with the leave of the court and foreshadowed
an intention to proceed with
an application to strike out the purported appeal. The letter continued
“Nonetheless, our client is minded to finalise this matter in an effort
to avoid incurring further expense which may, or may
not be recoverable from
you. In that regard, our client is willing to make a commercial offer of
settlement without any admission
of liability. We therefore advise that the
first and second respondents hereby offer to bear their own costs of this action
the trial) incurred to date in exchange for your immediate
discontinuance of the appeal against the first and second respondents
signing of a Discharge in their favour.
This offer is made on a without prejudice basis and is open for acceptance
for a period of seven (7) days only. We advise that this
will be our
client’s only offer of settlement in this matter and should you reject
this offer, we are instructed to proceed
with the defence of the appeal and
vigorously pursue recovery from you of any costs incurred in doing so, as well
as the costs of
[8] On the same day the applicant, without any reference to
Quinlan Miller & Treston’s offer, wrote to those solicitors
following terms –
“I believe that your client is responsible for causing injury to me and
I would be prepared to accept a sum of $50,000, in full
and final settlement of
this matter, with each party to bear it’s own costs.”
[9] This was rejected by Quinlan Miller & Treston on the same
day (22 February 2001), in the following terms –
“We acknowledge receipt of your facsimile dated 22 February 2001. Your
offer is rejected.”
[10] On 1 March 2001, by direct e-mail apparently sent at 5:42pm,
the applicant wrote to Quinlan Miller & Treston as follows –
“I refer to your client’s offer of settlement dated 22 February
2001, whereby you indicate that your client is offering
to (sic) bear their own
costs of this action (including the trial) incurred to date in exchange for my
immediately discontinuing
the appeal against the first and second respondents
and signing a Discharge in their favour.
I advise that I am prepared to accept this offer and await the receipt of
your discharge in this regard.”
[11] The same day, at 6:08pm, those solicitors replied as follows
“We acknowledge receipt of your e-mail to Jamie Miller of our office of
1 March 2001. We confirm that you have accepted our
client’s offer of 22
February 2001. We will prepare the relevant Discharge and forward it to you by
mail on Monday 5 March
[12] On 6 March, Quinlan Miller & Treston forwarded a
Discharge and Notice of Discontinuance under cover of the following letter
“We refer to your e-mail of 1 March 2001 and to our response by
e- mail of the same date.
We confirm that you have accepted our client’s offer of 22 February
2001 and enclose (*) the relevant Discharge and Notice of
Discontinuance herein
for your execution and return as soon as possible.
We look forward to hearing from you.”
[13] On the following day (7 March) the applicant replied in the
following terms –
“I refer to your discharge and having perused it, find it’s terms
unacceptable. I look forward to you vigorously defending
this matter at trial
and any other action you may contemplate taking to strike the matter
Correspondence with Crown Solicitor
February 2001 the Crown Solicitor wrote to the applicant as follows –
“I advise that my clients are prepared to offer to settle this matter
on the basis that each party walk away bearing their own
costs. This means that
you agree to discontinue the appeal in respect of this matter and agree to bear
your own costs of the action
at first instance and the appeal proceedings to
date and my clients, the Third, Fourth and Fifth Defendants, will do likewise
is, agree to the discontinuing of the appeal and bear their own costs
incurred in respect of this matter at first instance and on
appeal to date.
Please note that this offer will remain open until 4pm Friday 2 March
2001 after which time it will lapse.”
[15] On the same day the applicant wrote to the Crown Solicitor in
the following terms –
“I refer to the above matter and advise that I would be willing to
accept the sum of $50,000 in full and final settlement of
this matter with each
party to agree to bear their own costs although I believe the quantum is likely
to be in excess of this sum.”
“I refer to my offer to settle this matter just
faxed to you and advise that this was offered on a ‘once only basis’
and I suggest that you confer with the 1st and 2nd Respondents who have stated
their position already.”
[16] The following day the Crown Solicitor rejected the
applicant’s offer in the following terms –
“I refer to your facsimile transmission of 26 February 2001 and note
your advice that you are willing to accept the sum of $50,000.00
in full and
final settlement of this matter.
I am instructed to reject your offer of settlement.”
On the same day the applicant then sent a further facsimile transmission
acknowledging the Crown Solicitor’s reply and stating
that “there
was really no need to inform me of your
[17] On 1 March the applicant sent
the following letter to the Crown Solicitor –
“I refer to your offer of settlement dated 26 February and advise that
I accept the terms of the offer that each party bear
their own costs in relation
to both the trial and the appeal if I agree to discontinue the
[18] On 6 March the Crown Solicitor replied as follows –
“I refer to your facsimile transmission of 1 March 2001 and confirm
that you have accepted my client’s settlement offer
of 26 February 2001
namely, that this matter has settled on the basis that each party walks away
bearing their own costs incurred
in respect of this matter at first instance and
Please find enclosed, for execution, a Deed of Discharge. I look forward to
receiving the executed discharge as soon as possible.
I note the solicitors for the First and Second Defendants have forwarded to
you a Notice of Discontinuance for signing and return
together with a discharge
on behalf of their clients.”
[19] Subsequently, the applicant indicated that she found the
discharge to be unacceptable and rejected the Crown’s contentions
compromise had been effected. She declined to sign any document that would
permit the appeal to be discontinued or dismissed.
[20] The issues which the learned trial judge identified as having been
raised by the applicant included –
1. The terms of agreement were not intended to have binding effect.
The conduct of the solicitors
was oppressive and intimidatory, and that there was evidence of duress, undue
influence and unconscionability.
3. Acceptance by e-mail is not capable of creating contractual relations.
The terms of the discharges
are unsatisfactory.
The words used in the
applicant’s e-mail fall short of an unequivocal acceptance of
[21] The terms of the
applicant’s extensive written arguments on appeal range somewhat more
widely than this. But it seems
to me that the three most important questions
that she wishes to raise on appeal are these -
1. Was a binding compromise effected by the correspondence from Quinlan Miller
2. Was a binding compromise effected by
the correspondence with the Crown Solicitor?
3. Did the circumstances disclose a defence of the kind identified in
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v
[22] One of the applicant’s major points in relation to the first
question is a submission that Quinlan Miller & Treston’s
offer of 22
February had expired before she accepted it at 5:42pm on 1 March. She says that
she received the offer at 2:41pm on
22 February, and that the seven day period
therefore expired at 2:41pm on 1 March. To this submission there are
several answers.
[23] Although there are exceptions, the law does not in general recognise
fractions of a day.
“..the law in reckoning time by days ordinarily takes no account of
fractions of a day. The result is that, whenever a period
of days has to be
computed from an act or an event that occurs within the space of a day, a
decision must be made whether to start
the reckoning from the beginning or the
end of that day. Much the same question arises when a period is to be
calculated up to the
time when an act is done or an event happens.
In the form the question is ordinarily now put it is whether the day of
commencement of a period (or a day of its completion) is to
be included or
excluded in counting a given number of days. As to that, there is no universal
rule. Where it is not prescribed
by statute (as for example in the
Interpretation Act
1897 (N.S.W),
(11)) the answer depends upon
context and
circumstances.”
[24] It is true, as the applicant submitted, that there are some
purposes for which the law will take note of fractions of a day,
and she made
reference to cases of that kind listed in
. I have examined these
cases, each of which has some special feature making it necessary to identify
different parts of or times
in a day, or to use different times in the day as
reference points. None of those examples is germane to the present situation
may fairly be described as unremarkable settlement negotiations.
[25] In earlier days a good deal of apparently conflicting authority emerged
on the manner in which and the points from which and
to which time should be
reckoned. The problems, so far as interpretation of statutes is concerned, have
largely been resolved by
a statutory principle, such as
Interpretation Act
favour of excluding the day on which the beginning act or event occurs.
However, the rules in relation to commercial and private
documents remain at
large. Prior to the advent of statutory rules governing the reckoning of times
prescribed by statutes, little
relevant distinction seems to have been drawn
between the interpretation of public or private documents, and similar
approaches are
observable in relation to a reluctance to use fractions of a day,
and in favour of excluding the day of the commencing act or event.
The decision
of greatest influence in answering such questions seems to have been
. In that case, Sir
William Grant MR astutely observed that a general rule should not be laid down,
because “whichever way
it should be laid down, cases would occur, the
reason of which would require exceptions to be made.” His Lordship
considered the question whether the commencing day from which time
should be reckoned should be included, and observed “upon
reasoning I rather think it would be more easy to maintain, that the day of an
act done, or an event happening, ought in
all cases to be excluded, than that it
should in cases be included.” His Lordship further observed, “Our
law rejects
fractions of a day more generally than the civil law does.....the
effect is to render the day a sort of indivisible point; so that
any act, done
in the compass of it, is no more referrible to any one, than to any other,
portion of it; but the act and the day are
coextensive; and therefore the act
cannot properly be said to be passed, until the day is passed.”
[26] Approaches consistent with those observations were adopted by Lord Esher
North; Ex parte
, and by Jordan CJ in
Ex parte Tooheys Limited
. The observations in
those cases were made independently of any statutory interpretation act.
[27] Similarly, in the Victorian decision of
Higginbotham
having referred to
, continued –
“Consequently where an act has to be done within a certain period after
a day mentioned that day is excluded from the computation
of time, and the time
runs from the end of that day, and not from the beginning of it. The last day,
however, is included. So
the rule with reference to the interpretation of Acts
and private instruments is the same as that which has been adopted by the Rules
of Court in reference to time under the Rules. In the present case the act was
done within seven days if the day on which the judgment
was given be excluded,
as I think it should be.”
[28] In my view the proper interpretation of the words,
“..open for acceptance for a period of seven (7) days only” produces
the result that the period expires at the end of the seventh full day after
receipt of the document.
[29] None of the decisions referred to in note 4 above provide any reason to
think that in the context of settlement negotiations
of the kind in question
here the parties should, as it were, set their clocks running at the precise
moment when an offer is received
and regard the offer as terminating at
precisely the same time the prescribed number of days later. Such a view would
open up fertile
areas for unnecessary disputation, and would not be taken in the
absence of good reason. In my view the only reasonable conclusion
in relation
to the correspondence set out above is that Quinlan Miller & Treston’s
offer remained open for acceptance until
the end of Thursday 1 March 2001.
[30] There was no submission that the separate communications between the
parties in relation to the applicant’s $50,000 offers
had the effect of
terminating the respective offers of the respondents. On their face the
applicant’s offers are not presented
as counter-offers to the
respondents’ original offers, and those letters and the respondents’
replies thereto may be
regarded as separate and discreet communications. In
each instance both the applicant and the relevant respondent treated the
respondent’s
original offer as remaining open. In particular, the
applicant’s letters of 1 March treated the original offers as still open,
and the respondents by their subsequent conduct obviously agreed to treat those
offers as having been still open.
[31] A further and alternative answer to the applicant’s contention is
that even if Quinlan Miller & Treston’s offer
had expired on 28
February, the applicant’s letter of 1 March could be construed as an
offer to settle on the terms mentioned
in Quinlan Miller & Treston’s
original letter. If so construed, such offer was plainly accepted by Quinlan
Treston soon after receiving it on 1 March.
[32] It is noted that the applicant’s submissions as to expiry of the
original offer were only made in relation to Quinlan Miller
Treston’s letter of 22 February. No similar argument is open in relation
to the offer made by the Crown Solicitor.
[33] Whichever way the matter is looked at, on the face of the correspondence
there is no uncertainty, no reason to think that there
was any lack of intention
to be bound and no reason to hold that a binding contract was not made. Even if
it be assumed in favour
of the applicant that the original offers were no longer
available for acceptance on 1 March, it is inescapable that a contract was
by means of the applicant’s letters of that date and the following letters
on behalf of the other parties.
[34] It is unnecessary to re-state the arguments that were dealt with in the
published reasons of Atkinson J in which consideration
was given to whether or
not particular forms of words during negotiations in third party claims produced
an enforceable agreement
or not. The case most relied on by the applicant was
Giblin v Duggan
where an alleged acceptance of an offer was held to have been a mere
statement of intention. That decision has subsequently been
doubted in this
Morris v FAI General Insurance Company
also considered “not “persuasive” in
distinguished in
Newton, Bellamy & Wolf v State Government Insurance
Office (Qld)
Although it
was not considered necessary in
to overrule
difficult to think that it would be decided the same way
In any event the
relevant correspondence in
is distinguishable from that here.
[35] The submission that acceptance by e-mail was not capable of creating
contractual relations was adequately dealt with by Atkinson
J, and need not be
further mentioned here.
also unnecessary to deal with submissions that the terms of the discharges were
unsatisfactory. Of course if the forms of
discharge exceeded the requirements
of what had been agreed, the applicant would not be obliged to sign them, but an
argument on
this question does not answer the question whether or not a binding
agreement was made between the respective parties.
[36] In her oral submissions the applicant emphasised that the appeal against
Forde DCJ’s decision is very important to her,
and that unless the present
application is granted she will be shut out from pursuing that appeal. She also
made many assertions
in both written and oral argument that she did not intend
to be bound and did not think that she would be bound, but in the end these
assertions are not helpful to the legal analysis of the parties’ rights.
[37] I have studied the earnest, careful and, well-expressed arguments that
have been presented by the applicant, although I admit
to some difficulty in
isolating particular points of substance. I have however given particular
consideration to the applicant’s
submissions in relation to the
possibility of an
[38] The applicant contends that she raised duress and undue influence
“not in the sense that they were specifically relied
upon, but in the lead
up to canvassing the types of doctrines which have the common feature of
vitiating an otherwise valid contract
should they operate to produce an
ascendancy of power of one party over another.” She submits that there
was an inequality
of bargaining power and that the conduct of the stronger party
was not consistent with good conscience in the circumstances. She
submitted that although there may have been some grounds for her relying on
incapacity of a psychiatric nature, she chose
not to proceed in that manner.
Her submission proceeded to suggest that a recognised “way of a party
ensuring that the onus
is discharged is to ensure that a party has some
independent legal advice.” However I do not think that the principle in
can be stretched in obliging a party in adversarial negotiations
to advise the adversary to seek independent legal advice. The relevant
negotiations in this matter occurred well after the applicant had identified
herself as a litigant in person and, as it would seem,
a litigant in person with
legal qualifications.
[39] Another aspect of alleged unfairness, as mentioned in the
applicant’s submissions is the inclusion by Quinlan Miller &
Treston’s in their letter of 22 February, of statements that they intended
to proceed with an application to strike out the
appeal, and that if the offer
was not rejected they were instructed to proceed to defend the appeal and
vigorously pursue recovery
of any costs incurred in doing so. There was nothing
improper or unreasonable in their acting in this manner. When all the
circumstances
are examined there is nothing that suggests that an
enforcement of the agreement that was made.
[40] The applicant also contended that if any agreements were made they fell
under the third category of contract described in
Masters v Cameron
and accordingly were not
binding. It is enough to say that that submission is without substance, for the
reason stated by Atkinson
[41] Although the applicant asserted otherwise, it is difficult to resist the
conclusion that she knowingly made an agreement and
soon afterwards repented
having done so.
[42] Having considered all of the applicant’s submissions, I have
reached the view that there is no basis upon which the present
brought, could succeed, and that the grant of leave would merely protract and
substantially add to the cost of its inevitable
[43] In these circumstances I would refuse the application for extension of
[44] Application for extension of time refused; applicant to pay
respondent’s costs of application to be assessed.
CULLINANE J:
I agree with the reasons of Thomas JA in this matter
and the order proposed.
Commercial Bank of
Australia Ltd v Amadio
[1983] HCA 14
(1983) 151 CLR 447.
Prowse v McIntyre
[1961] HCA 79
(1961) 111 CLR 264
, 270, 271, 274, 276, 278, 280.
Ibid per Windeyer J at
Stroud’s Judicial
Dictionary 4th Edn. p 686. These references include:
Combe v Pitt
[1763] EngR 90
Burr. 1434)
Thomas v Desanges
B & Ald 586)
(4 B & Ad 263
Chick v Smith
(8 Dowl. 340)
Campbell v Strangeways
(3 CPD 105)
Clarke v Bradlaugh
Re Jubilee Cotton Mills
[1924] AC 980.
Statutory Instruments
Lester v Garland
(1808)15 Ves 248, 258;
[1808] EngR 326
(1808) 33 ER 748
[1895] 2 QB 264
[1934] NSWStRp 26
(1934) 34 SR(NSW) 277
(1890) VLR 613
Webb J concurred, and
Hodges J expressed a similar view.
Queensland Full Court
(Unreported) 8 March 1981, Appeal No 3105 of 1980.
[1996] 1 Qd R 495.
[1998] NSWSC 209
; Appeal No
40757 of 1996, 29 May 1998.
[1986] 1 Qd R 431.
Tomlin v Standard
Telephones & Cables Ltd
[1969] 1 WLR 1378
Bushwall Properties
Ltd v Vortex Properties Ltd
[1976] 1 WLR 591.
Transactions Act
(1999) Cwth,
[1954] HCA 72
(1954) 91 CLR 353
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (57.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter