URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2009/67.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:38:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SAG, Re [2009] QGAAT 67 (16 September 2009)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL
[2009] QGAAT 67
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Application for the Appointment of a Guardian
Application for the
Appointment of an Administrator
In the matter of SAG
MATTER NUMBERS:
GAA3067-09 GAA3068-09
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal.
DATE OF HEARING:
21 August 2009
DATE OF ORDER:
21 August 2009
DATE OF REASONS:
16 September 2009
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
J Ford Presiding Member
R Roylance Member
P Goodman Member
CATCHWORDS:
GUARDIANS-ADMINISTRATORS-Where, without appointments, adult’s needs
will not be met and property at risk.
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Disability Services Act 1992
Disability Services Act 2002
GUARDIANSHIP
the Adult Guardian is appointed as guardian for SAG for decisions about the
following personal matters:
(a) Accommodation;
(b) Health care;
(c) Provision of services.
the Tribunal orders otherwise, this appointment remains current for three (3)
ADMINISTRATION
The Public Trustee of Queensland is appointed as administrator for SAG for all
financial matters.
administrator is to provide a financial management plan to the Tribunal within
four (4) months.
Tribunal directs the administrator to provide accounts to the Tribunal when
the Tribunal orders otherwise, this appointment remains current for three (3)
the Adult Guardian provide to the Tribunal a report outlining their actions as
guardian and proposed future actions as guardian
by 20 August 2010.
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
[1] On 13 May 2009 an application was lodged by FJ from the Department of
Communities – Disability Services, seeking the appointment
administrator and a guardian for SAG.
[2] The Tribunal has considered previous applications involving SAG and made the
following Orders:
(a) 9 May 2005
– appointing The Public Trustee of Queensland for all financial matters
for six months.
(b) 31 October
2005 – the appointment of The Public Trustee was revoked.
(c) 10 April
2007- appointing the Adult Guardian for decisions about health care and the
provision of services, and appointing The
Public Trustee of Queensland for all
financial matters. Both appointments for one year.
(d) 3 October
2007- an application for declaration of capacity was dismissed, and
(e) 25 March
2008 – the appointments of the Adult Guardian and The Public Trustee of
Queensland were revoked.
[3] At the time of the hearing SAG lived alone in a housing commission property
and was reliant on a Disability Support Pension for
support. SAG did not provide
any written material in response to the application, and was not present at the
[4] On 22 May 2009 SAG’s advocate LN of Speaking Up For You Inc wrote to
the Tribunal confirming previous advices that SAG
was unable to leave his house
due to a medical condition, and requesting that a copy of the application be
made available to LN,
who would then pass the information on to SAG. That was
duly approved and records show that LN inspected the file on 27 May 2009.
Tribunal did not receive any further correspondence from LN prior to the
hearing, and he was not present at the hearing on 21
August 2009. The request
for these written reasons was received from LN, on behalf of SAG.
[5] In the absence of SAG and LN, the Tribunal relied on oral evidence from
employees of SAG’s current service providers Micah,
and representatives of
Disability Services. The Tribunal also had the benefit of submissions from a
representative of the Office
of the Adult Guardian. The Tribunal had regard to
written material which, if relied on, is detailed below.
The Issues and the Legislation
[6] This application involved considerations of both SAG’s personal and
financial matters. The Tribunal is unable to consider
the appointment of either
a guardian or an administrator unless it is satisfied in the first instance that
SAG lacks the capacity
to make personal and/or financial decisions for himself.
[7] If the Tribunal is satisfied that SAG does not have the capacity to make
personal decisions, it will consider whether there is
a need for a guardian, and
if there is, who it should be.
[8] If the Tribunal is satisfied that SAG does not have the capacity to make
financial decisions, it will consider whether there
is a need for an
administrator, and if there is, who it should be.
[9] The issues for the Tribunal are:
(a) Does SAG have capacity
for the matter?
(b) Is there a need for a Guardian? If so, who should be appointed? and
(c) Is there a need for an Administrator? If so, who should be appointed?
THE PARTIES
[10] The parties present at the hearing were:
TS and CH from the Department of Communities - Disability
Services (“DS”),
Jane Antoine from the Office of the Adult Guardian and
GT and CL from Micah Projects Inc (“Micah”).
The Evidence
[11] In addition to the written material contained on the Tribunal file, all of
the parties attending the hearing were given the
opportunity to express their
views. These views, where specifically relied upon by the Tribunal, are
discussed below.
DOES SAG LACK CAPACITY FOR THE MATTER?
[12] The Tribunal noted at the outset that under the legislation SAG is presumed
to have the capacity to make decisions for himself.
That presumption can be
rebutted by evidence of impaired capacity. It is within this context that the
Tribunal considered the elements
that make up capacity, as defined in the
legislation, the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
[13] Schedule 4 of the Act
, for a person for
a matter, means the person is capable of-
(a) understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the matter;
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
(c) communicating the decisions in some way.
[14] The Tribunal began by presuming that SAG had capacity and could understand
the nature and effect of decisions, could freely
and voluntarily make decisions,
and that he could communicate his decisions. The Tribunal noted that SAG does
not leave his house
but was able to communicate with service providers and his
advocate. There was no evidence that SAG was unable to communicate his
decisions, and the Tribunal did not consider that issue further.
[15] The Tribunal had regard to a letter to Disability Services written by an
employee of Micah dated 5 May 2009 setting out SAG’s
living conditions,
and their concerns for him. The letter states:
December 2008 SAG has not allowed workers to enter his home, stating that his
clothes (a sheet) has now disintegrated and
he is naked;
bathroom basin is broken and has sharp jagged edges. In December an industrial
cleaner employed to clean the unit
cut his arm and required stitches. SAG will
not allow entry to his unit to repair the basin as he is naked;
(c) SAG will
not leave the unit for fear that he will be shot by police. SAG has advised that
he has not left the unit since 2003.
(Service providers advised the Tribunal
that SAG was admitted to the PA Hospital Mental Unit in 2006 and in 2008);
bathtub is overflowing with recyclable rubbish, which he states that he is
unable to pass out the window due to a
back injury;
Easter 2009 SAG passed 9 bags of rubbish out his window. The bags were full of
neatly wrapped newspaper parcels with faeces
inside. SAG advised that a back
injury prevented him using the toilet;
(f) The last
time workers entered SAG’s home they removed 12 bags of mouldy
(g) The mouldy
rubbish currently kept on the premises raises the risk that SAG may not be able
to remain in his current housing;
(h) Glass from
the door of SAG’s oven is lying on the floor;
(i) SAG sleeps
on a fold out table. SAG will not use a bed unless it is organic;
(j) SAG has
three surveillance cameras and a tape recorder recording inside his unit at all
(k) SAG has
newspaper all over his floor to cover faeces. SAG’s windows and doors are
covered in newspaper;
(l) SAG has no
furniture. The unit is filled with fold out tables that have boxes on top. The
boxes contain mail that SAG will not
(m) Workers
suspect they have been bitten by mites inside SAG’s unit;
unknown when SAG last had a general medical check up;
(o) SAG reports
sore testicles which he claims to have injured in his unit some time ago;
incontinent of urine and faeces. He is not sure why. SAG will not wear
incontinence pads as they are not organic. He wears
a bottle over his genitals
(q) In April
2009 Micah arranged for a doctor to visit SAG at home. The doctor complied with
requests from SAG that he make copies
of his degree and relevant qualifications
available. SAG refused to allow the doctor to enter his home, stating that he
(r) SAG owned
one outfit – an organic sheet over his body, a pillow case on his head
down to his brow and a T-shirt which he
wraps around his neck to just under his
eyes. SAG reports that outfit has now fallen apart;
recently purchased SAG a certified organic sheet for him to wear ($100). SAG
refused to wear the sheet, stating that it
was see-through. He is using the
sheet as bedding;
(t) SAG will
not wear shoes unless they are 100% certified organic. Instead he wears
cardboard boxes on his feet; and
(u) Micah staff
have concerns about what they believe is a significant deterioration in
SAG’s mental health and about the unhygienic
environment in which he is
[16] GT and CL from Micah provided oral evidence that:
(a) CL visits
SAG about weekly;
(b) SAG had
advised that his religion prevents him from using the toilet;
(c) SAG had
refused to wear an organic outfit made for him at great time and expense because
a seam was not straight. SAG seemed to
have no concept of the cost of the outfit
made for him;
(d) SAG had
exhausted all other options for service providers due to the excessive demands
he made of them;
(e) Micah staff
collect mail for SAG, who has mail delivered under the name of 10 – 15
aliases, including names of Micah staff
with the spelling changed. The mail is
catalogued and recorded before entering the house;
(f) SAG did not
seem to realise that his actions could lose him the support of the last
available service that would assist him;
(g) SAG is not
able to make decisions that will sustain his good health, and ultimately his
life. He is not seeking to remedy his
living conditions, but is making it as
difficult as possible for others to help;
(h) Within the
last month, SAG had asked CL to lock him into his unit so that he couldn’t
be implicated in any crimes committed
in the area. When CL refused, he requested
that the door be sealed with tape so that it would be clear that the seal was
not broken;
(i) SAG had
told CL that his fear of the police related to an incident when he was taken to
the police station after being involved
in an altercation with a person who was
smoking too close to the door of a shop. SAG alleges that he was beaten by the
sent home with $1,000 in hush money to prevent him “ratting
out” the cigarette companies. SAG told CL that a dead possum
beside him on a park bench was a warning to him to be careful;
(j) Micah does
not do any banking for SAG, who makes all his purchases on credit card. SAG is
at risk of incurring unaffordable debt
and unauthorised use of his credit card
as he gives his credit card to taxi drivers to pay for his purchases;
followed a religion that was not recognised or consistent and has elements of
many other religions joined together. SAG states
that his religion prevents him
eating certain foods, dressing in particular ways, and using the toilet;
(l) SAG insists
that his shopping is done at an organic shop, which is significantly more
expensive than a supermarket;
(m) SAG speaks
to support workers through his laundry window and only his face area is visible.
His face is covered with the materials
stated above; and
(n) Micah staff
continue to have concerns regarding SAG’s mental health and the state of
his house, particularly as he continues
to refuse to allow anyone into the unit.
[17] The Tribunal has been provided with a letter from HA dated 16 June 2009
stating as follows:
(a) HA have
been providing a shopping service to SAG for 2 years;
(b) SAG has
placed restrictions of his food and cleaning products - must be organic with
Australian Certified Organic standard symbol
only; water must be BFA standard
only; no dairy, meat or grapes; and kosher. SAG will not accept replacements to
his preferred products;
(c) When BFA
water is not available SAG states that he will refuse to drink any other;
product choices are costly and the fortnightly total at times exceeds the
prearranged total; and
(e) After a
direct debit authorization expired on 19 December 2007 HA continued to shop for
SAG, and he attempted to pay off his grocery
bill via one off payments. As at 16
June 2009 SAG was $2,434.78 in debt to HA.
[18] TS and CH from DS advised the Tribunal that they meet regularly with key
stakeholders involved in SAG’s life. TS advised
that the Department of
Housing were due to inspect SAG’s unit within weeks of the hearing. SAG
had not provided DS with authority
to discuss his living circumstances with the
Department of Housing. TS advised that if SAG did not allow an inspection, he
be given a “Notice to Remedy Breach” which would ultimately be
likely to involve SAG being evicted from his unit. They
agreed with the evidence
outlined above and submitted that SAG does not have capacity to make personal or
financial decisions.
MEDICAL EVIDENCE
[19] There was no medical evidence available regarding SAG’s current state
of health. SAG has previously been admitted to hospital
after Justice
Examination Orders were taken out, most recently in 2006 and 2008. SAG has
previously been the subject of Involuntary
Treatment Orders (ITOs) issued by the
Mental Health Review Tribunal, although there was no current ITO at the time of
this hearing.
[20] On 1 December 2006 Psychiatrist Dr C considered SAG’s medical
condition in the context of considering whether the then
current ITO should
continue. He wrote
“I am of the opinion that the patient suffers from a
Schizophrenic illness. The patient was uncooperative at interview. He was
suspicious and guarded... There was evidence of delusional thinking. The
attempts in his unit to deter and detect intruders are consistent
persecutory thinking. The requests for food and water other than that provided
by the hospital are also consistent with paranoid
thinking. The thought
processes of the patient was often circuitous and illogical. He frequently
engages others in verbal conflicts;
this appearing to be the only method of
communication. The insight in the mental illness from which he suffers and the
need for treatment
was grossly impaired”.
[21] On 17 January, DSQ (as DS was then known), wrote to Dr C advising that SAG
had applied for DSQ support, and requesting
“documentary evidence about
his disability”
. In order to be eligible for support SAG needed to
have a “disability” as defined in the
Queensland Disability
Services Act 1992
. Under that legislation
“disability”:
attributable to an intellectual, psychiatric, cognitive, neurological, sensory
or physical impairment or a combination of impairments;
- Results in a
substantial reduction of the person’s capacity in at least one of:
communication; social interaction; learning;
mobility or self care/
management.
- Because of
the reduced capacity the person needs support; and
- Is permanent
or likely to be permanent.
[22] DSQ requested “
a psychiatric assessment of SAG’s disability
and support needs”.
[23] On 19 February 2007 Dr C wrote back to DSQ advising that while SAG was
hospitalised from 26 October 2006 to 29 December 2006,
Dr C was of the opinion
that he demonstrated symptoms of psychosis, but was also of the opinion that he
suffered from a Personality
Disorder, with significant features of Borderline
Personality, and the behaviours associated with this were the most clinically
challenging.
Dr C states:
“His personality is manifested by his demanding
behaviour and conflicts with others... His personality is not a major mental
illness. The behaviours associated with his personality however have contributed
to the current clinical state... It is apparent
that his behaviours are not
those expected from most people. However, he has no major mental illness that
substantially reduces his
capacity to communicate, socially interact, learn,
mobilise, or manage himself. The current behaviours that contribute to his
state are of his own choice. They are attributable to his personality.
He does require treatment...I would consider that he requires
psychotherapy or counselling to address the issues associated with the
development of his dysfunctional personality. Treatment
would also monitor his
mental state for the emergence of symptoms of psychosis...It is clear that he
disagrees with our plans for
treatment and assistance and has chosen not to
participate”.
[24] SAG was admitted to hospital in June 2008 where he was assessed by a
psychologist. Records refer to SAG as “A”.
Progress notes from the
hospital show SAG provided a history of his childhood and outlined his
behaviours which, the psychologist
noted, clearly undermine his quality of life.
The hospital psychologist concluded “
Psychologically, the treatment of
choice for these particular problems would be a behaviourally focused
intervention aiming at social
activation with ...psychoeducation around anxiety,
dealing with catastrophic interpretations, relaxing in the face of the
of others etc. “A” would pose a significant challenge and
would probably present a great deal of resistance...”
[25] The Tribunal notes that SAG has previously been diagnosed with severe
Obsessional/Personality Disorder with possible psychotic
features (2005),
schizophrenic illness (2006), paranoid schizophrenia (2002), and psychosis with
features of Borderline Personality
Disorder (2006). Paranoid ideation was noted
in 2002 hospital records. The Tribunal was unable to be satisfied that any final
of SAG’s medical condition had been reached. While Dr C’s
letter of 19 February referred to “no major mental illness”,
Tribunal is satisfied that the wording of that letter was in response to the
particular requirements of the
Disability Services Act 2002
. The Tribunal
noted that Dr C remained of the opinion that SAG did require ongoing treatment.
[26] In determining whether SAG has capacity to make decisions, the Tribunal has
had regard to the written and oral evidence presented
and finds that SAG does
not understand the nature and effect that his decisions have.
[27] The Tribunal notes that SAG’s decisions regarding his strict
requirements for clothing, food and water have resulted in
him exhausting all
options for services, with the exception of his current service providers Micah.
SAG’s refusal to accept
and appreciate Micah’s attempts to
accommodate his demands, and his actions in using worker’s names (albeit
with different
spelling) to order mail to his address have strained the
relationship between SAG and the last service provider prepared to work
[28] SAG’s decision to not allow cleaners into his unit has jeopardised
his accommodation. SAG’s decision to not have
his medical needs attended
to has placed his health at risk. SAG’s decision to send taxi drivers to
collect his food from the
shops with his credit card places him at risk of
theft. SAG’s decision to strictly control his diet has placed strain on
financial resources. He has not paid for the food that has been delivered to
him by HA and he is now $2,434.78 in debt.
[29] The Tribunal is satisfied that SAG does not have the capacity to understand
the effect that his decisions have on his life.
[30] The Tribunal notes SAG’s stated belief that he will be shot by police
if he leaves his unit, and his other paranoid beliefs
regarding leaving his
wearing clothes that allow sunlight
through, and engaging socially with his
community. The Tribunal heard evidence that the belief is overwhelming, and
affects almost
all aspects of SAG’s life. The Tribunal is satisfied on the
evidence that SAG’s fear of the police and of leaving his
strong that it prevents him freely and voluntarily making decisions – that
many of his important decisions are over-shadowed
by his irrational fears
[31] The Tribunal concludes that SAG does not have the capacity to make
decisions regarding his financial affairs, or personal decisions
regarding his
health, accommodation, and the provision of services.
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF A GUARDIAN?
[32] SAG lives a socially isolated life. Support workers are unaware of any
visitors to his unit and SAG has advised them that he
never leaves the unit. SAG
does receive mail from his parents and sends mail to his parents with assistance
from Micah. Support workers
report that SAG has recently stopped his regular
telephone calls to them, and are concerned that his access to the telephone may
now be restricted due to non payment of bills.
[33] The Tribunal heard evidence that SAG’s current accommodation is at
risk due to it being kept in an unhygienic state and
in poor repair. The
Department of Housing was due to inspect the property within weeks of the
hearing and SAG had refused entry to
anyone since December 2008. Refusal to
allow an inspection is likely to ultimately lead to severance of SAG’s
tenancy, leaving
him to find alternative accommodation. Further, DS did not have
authority to discuss SAG’s particular circumstances with the
Department of
Housing, who were unaware of the details of SAG’s medical condition and
could therefore not take his particular
needs and views into account in their
dealings with him. The Tribunal was satisfied that there was a need to appoint a
guardian to
make decisions about SAG’s accommodation.
[34] The only group currently providing services to SAG is Micah. SAG’s
excessive demands have strained that relationship.
The Tribunal heard evidence
that SAG is in need of further services (such as cleaning and social
interaction) which he has refused.
The Tribunal was satisfied that there was a
need to appoint a guardian to make decisions about provision of services to
[35] The Tribunal received evidence that SAG states that he is incontinent and
has sore testicles, and that he has underlying mental
health issues of many
years standing. None of these conditions is currently being treated. The
Tribunal was satisfied that there
was a need to appoint a guardian to make
decisions regarding SAG’s health.
[36] For the reasons discussed above, the Tribunal determined that it was
necessary to appoint a guardian to make decisions about
accommodation, services,
and health.
IF SO WHO SHOULD BE APPOINTED?
[37] The Tribunal was unaware of any option for appointment as guardian, other
than the Office of the Adult Guardian. The Office
of the Adult Guardian is an
experienced and professional appointee with experience in dealing with complex
situations and the various
health professionals and government and
non-government organisations that will be involved in SAG’s life. The
Tribunal was
satisfied that the Adult Guardian should be appointed for three
years so that SAG’s health, accommodation and service provision
be better met.
[38] Given the intermittent involvement of this Tribunal, and of the Adult
Guardian in SAG’s life over a number of years, and
given the current
concerns regarding the stability of his accommodation and his unmet health and
services needs, the Tribunal requested
that the Office of the Adult Guardian
provide a report outlining actions undertaken and proposed future actions to the
Tribunal by
20 August 2010.
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF AN ADMINISTRATOR?
[39] The Tribunal had very little information regarding SAG’s financial
position, except to say that he is in receipt of a
Disability Support Pension
and that he has a credit card which he has been using to pay for his groceries.
[40] SAG’s decision to allow taxi drivers to take his credit card shopping
leaves him vulnerable to theft.
[41] HA have advised that SAG was almost $2,500 in debt to them as at June 2009.
Micah staff are concerned as to whether SAG’s
telephone bill has been
[42] The Tribunal was satisfied that there was a need for an administrator to be
appointed to manage SAG’s finances: to ensure
that he was receiving all
benefits he was entitled to from Centrelink, and that all of his bills were
attended to.
IF SO WHO SHOULD BE APPOINTED?
[43] The Tribunal was unaware of any option for appointment as administrator
other than The Public Trustee of Queensland. The Public
Trustee is an
experienced and professional appointee with experience in dealing with complex
situations. To ensure continuity in
management of SAG’s finances, the
appointment was made for three years.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (189 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter