URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2021/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Eumundi Group Hotels Pty Ltd v Valuer-General [2021] QLAC 2 (22 September 2021)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Eumundi Group Hotels Pty Ltd v Valuer-General
[2021] QLAC 2
Eumundi Group Hotels Pty Ltd
ACN 893 413 454
(appellant)
Valuer-General
(respondent)
Land Court No LVA269-18
Land Appeal Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
Appeal from the Land Court of Queensland
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
22 September 2021
DELIVERED AT:
15 June 2021
FY Kingham, President of the Land Court
PG Stilgoe OAM,
Member of the Land Court
1. The appeal is allowed.
2. The decision and orders made on 13 November 2020 by the Land Court in
LVA 269-18 are set aside and substituted by the following
appeal against the Valuer-General’s valuation is allowed.
valuation as at 1 October 2017 of Lot 5 on RP196821, Property ID 444294 having
an area of 8,944 m
and located at 161 Cotlew Street, Ashmore is
Three Million, Five Hundred and Fifteen Thousand Dollars
($3,515,000).
3. Each party must bear their own costs of the appeal unless a party
applies for costs by filing and serving brief written submissions
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES –
FUNCTIONS OF APPELLATE COURT – ERROR OF LAW – ADEQUACY
– where the Valuer-General valued the land for rating and taxing purposes
at $3,800,000 – where the appellant
objected to the valuation and then
appealed against the objections decision which confirmed that valuation - where
the Land Court
allowed the appeal and valued the land at $4,500,000, the amount
contended for by the Valuer-General on appeal – where the
appealed against that decision alleging the learned Member either failed to
consider material evidence and to resolve crucial
arguments, or failed to give
adequate reasons about those matters – where the Court allowed the
REAL PROPERTY – VALUATION OF LAND – OBJECTIONS AND
APPEALS – where the Land Appeal Court reheard the appeal to determine
correct valuation - where the Valuer-General maintained the correct value is
$4,500,000 – where the appellant argued it
was $3,000,000 - where the
valuers agreed the land should be valued using the direct comparison method
– where the Court considered
the valuers’ competing views about the
selection and analysis of comparable sales – where the Court made
adjustments
to the appellant’s valuer’s valuation in deciding the
correct value is
Land Court Act 2000
Land Valuation Act 2010
Adelaide Clinic Holdings Pty Ltd v Minister for Water Resources
(1998) 65 LGRA 410
Brewarrana Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
Highways (No 2)
(1973) 6 SASR 541
Chief Executive, Department
of Natural Resources and Mines v Kent Street Pty Ltd
[2009] QCA 399
Commonwealth Custodial Services v Valuer-General
[2007] NSWCA 365
De Ieso v Commissioner of Highways
(1981) 27 SASR 248; (1981) 47 LGRA 412, cited
DL v The Queen
(2018) 266 CLR 1
[2018] HCA 26
Doherty v Commissioner of
(1974) 32 LGRA 328
Eumundi Group Hotels Pty Ltd v
Valuer-General
[2020] QLC 37
, considered
Gold Coast City Council v
[2014] QLAC 6
(2014) 35 QLCR 279
[2014] QLAC 6
Intertherm Pty Ltd v The Crown
(1978) 5 QLCR 21
ISPT Pty Ltd v City of Melbourne
[2008] VSCA 180
ISPT Pty Ltd v Melbourne City Council
[2008] VSCA 18, cited
Kelly v Western Australian Planning Commission
[2006] WASC 208
Macarthur Central Shopping Centre Pty Ltd as
TTE v Valuer General (No.2)
[2016] QLC 80
Maurici v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
(2003) 212 CLR 111
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2005] NSWLEC 20
Valuer-General v Body Corporate for ‘Tennyson Reach’
[2018] QLAC 7
Western Australian Planning Commission v Arcus
Shopfitters Pty Ltd
[2003] WASCA 295
Yates Property Corp Pty
Ltd (in liq) v Darling Harbour Authority
(1991) 24 NSWLR 156
APPEARANCES:
RN Traves QC, with S Marsh (instructed by Collins Biggers & Paisley)
for the appellant
R Anderson QC, with JP Hastie (instructed by In-house
Litigation Unit, Department of Resources) for the respondent
Boddice J, Kingham P and Stilgoe M
[1] This appeal concerns the correct valuation for rating and
taxing purposes of land owned by Eumundi Group Hotels Pty Ltd at 161
Ashmore, used for a drive through bottle shop, tavern, and associated retail.
[2] Eumundi objected to the Valuer General’s issued valuation of the
land (at $3,800,000), and then appealed to the Land Court
against the
Valuer-General’s decision to confirm the valuation.
[3] Despite that
confirmation, when the appeal came on for hearing the Valuer General conceded
the issued valuation was incorrect
and submitted the Land Court should decide
the correct value of the
Eumundi contended that was $3,000,000; the Valuer-General argued for $4,500,000.
[4] The learned Member found the correct value was the amount contended for
by the Valuer-General. He rejected Eumundi’s valuation
evidence (given by
Mr Ladewig) and accepted that led by the Valuer General (given by Mr Bale).
Eumundi appeals against that decision.
[5] Before this court, the Valuer
General submitted the appeal is all about whether Mr Ladewig’s evidence
was wrongly rejected
and what should occur in
consequence,
but Eumundi’s grounds of appeal are not so confined.
[6] It is true
Eumundi asserts error in the learned Member rejecting Mr Ladewig’s
evidence, as well as quantity surveying evidence
on which he relied (grounds 1,
2, 3, 7). However, Eumundi also asserts the learned Member should not have
accepted Mr Bale’s
evidence, (grounds 4, 5,
and that he did so
without an effective evaluation of the totality of the evidence (ground
[7] For reasons that follow, the court has decided the appeal must be
allowed on ground 9. Respectfully, the learned Member either
failed to determine
crucial arguments about Mr Bale’s selection and analysis of comparable
sales, or he failed to give adequate
reasons about those matters. That
constitutes an error of law.
[8] As foreshadowed to the parties, the Court
will rehear the appeal on the evidence before the Land Court and substitute its
decision for the decision under
The Court will address the arguments made about the remaining grounds of appeal,
to the extent they remain relevant, in giving reasons
for the substituted
The appeal should be allowed
[9] To explain this court’s conclusion on the appeal, it
is necessary to provide some background on the function of the Land
Court on an
appeal against a land valuation, and the differences between the experts in
their approach to their valuations.
[10] An appeal against the valuation of
land under the
Land Valuation Act 2010
has been described as a
The first step is establishing the issued valuation is in error. For this step,
the appellant bears the onus of proof on its grounds
of appeal, on a
consideration of all the evidence.
error is established or, as in this case, conceded, the Court moves to the
second step, which is to decide the correct value
of the land. As his Honour
the hearing
below commenced with the second step, because the Valuer-General conceded the
appeal should be allowed.
[12] The learned Member was presented with
competing expert opinions as to value. The parties were equal contestants, in
that it was for each of them to persuade the Court that their
contention as to value was correct. Eumundi no longer bore any onus
[13] The valuation exercise for this land was not straightforward.
[14] The land is located on the intersection of two busy roads, with good
access. The topography of the land is not ideal. At points
it lies well below
its street frontages. There were no sales for the current use of the land that
could be used for a comparable
sales analysis.
[15] Mr Ladewig and Mr Bale
agreed the land should be valued using the direct comparison method of
valuation, the principal method
for determining market
This requires the valuer to identify relatively contemporaneous sales of
comparable properties to provide a yardstick for valuing
the subject
[16] The lack of comparable sales for
the existing use presented a challenge to the valuers. However, land is usually
valued in accordance
with its highest and best use, which may not be its current
The first job
of the valuer is to identify the highest and best
This will inform their choice of
comparable sales.
[17] In a zone allowing commercial uses, as the zone for
this land does, the identification of the highest and best use can be complex.
The range of permitted uses may be broad. Identifying the highest and best use
may involve identifying both the nature and the intensity
complexity might explain the valuers’ apparent agreement on the highest
and best use which, as the learned Member
observed, concealed more than it
[19] In their joint expert report the valuers said the highest and best use
is a commercial/retail use in line with the current use,
however not to be
limited in scale density, and/or
choice and analysis of comparable sales shows they interpreted that highest and
best use very differently.
[20] The valuers had only one sale in common,
vacant land at 1 Marina Quays Blvd, Hope Island. It had the same zoning as the
land, and was purchased for a neighbourhood shopping centre, service
station, fast food, convenience retail, and office, all code
assessable uses on
the subject land. The valuers differed on how the sale should be analysed, but
agreed the sale was comparable.
[21] The valuers agreed the site topography
lent itself to a hypothetical development with a suspended slab construction at
near street
level. This would increase the exposure and potential density of the
was critical to Mr Ladewig’s approach.
[23] In deciding value, he
hypothesised a larger scale commercial/retail use of the land than its current
use. He identified three
scenarios and chose one as his preferred hypothesis for
development. He identified sales of vacant land, with similar zoning, and
purchased for shopping centres or supermarkets, including the Hope Island sale.
To account for the differential site improvements
on the sale sites and the
subject land, he had to make some adjustments.
[24] First, he analysed the
sales on a site-improved basis. That is, he increased the value from the sale
price to allow for the additional
value assuming the sites were ready for
development for the intended use. Then, assuming the subject land was ready for
development
for an equivalent or similar use, he assigned a value, from which he
deducted the cost of the additional site improvements required
to make the
subject land ready for that use. He relied on the evidence led by the
parties’ quantity surveyors as to the cost
of doing so.
Valuer-General made several criticisms of Mr Ladewig’s analysis: he used a
hypothesised development without demonstrating
its feasibility; his method
required too many adjustments; he relied on dated sales evidence, he relied on
quantity surveying evidence
which, albeit on the parties’ joint
instructions, made a material (but unproved) assumption about the subject land.
[26] Although Mr Bale accepted the subject land lent itself to Mr
Ladewig’s hypothesised development, he did not select his
sales on that
basis. He interpreted the highest and best use as a commercial/retail use in
line with the current use. During the
hearing, he firmed up on the highest and
best use being the existing use for a
[27] For his comparable sales analysis, because there were no sales for the
current use, Mr Bale chose sales of land proximate in
time and location to the
land. They had a variety of mixed development and residential uses. He made no
explicit adjustments to the
sales evidence to account for those differences in
arriving at the value of the subject land.
[28] Eumundi criticised Mr
Bale’s analysis for: relying on sales of mostly improved land; relying on
sales of land in different
zones; comparing sales intended for varying and
different uses to the subject land; failing to make any, or failing to expose
reasoning for making, adjustments for the differential site improvements of
the sales when compared to the subject land.
[29] When it came to the common
sale, there was a further dispute about how to analyse the sale given the
differing evidence from
the purchaser and the quantity surveyor about the cost
of site improvements to ready it for its intended use.
[30] In summary,
senior counsel for Eumundi submitted the learned Member erred in deciding to
reject Mr Ladewig’s evidence,
and, having done so, asked the wrong
question. Instead of deciding the correct value on an assessment of all the
evidence, considering
the arguments raised about both valuers’ opinion, he
looked only to Mr Bale’s evidence. He said the learned Member scrutinised
Mr Ladewig’s evidence but did not undertake the same exercise for Mr
Bale’s. As a result, he failed to consider important
evidence about both
[31] Although his Honour stated his function was to find the
correct value ‘by preferring the opinion of one of the valuers
courts do not have to accept the valuations of the valuers called by either
party and may, and frequently do, arrive at a figure
that constitutes a
modification of the figures presented by one or more
[32] As Wells J observed in
Brewarrana Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Highways (No
“The judicial task is to see the combined results of the
valuers’ work not as another valuer would see them, but as material
be used in the course of applying the principle laid down in
(1907) 5 CLR 418; the two roles of buyer and seller must in my opinion,
finally merge in the Court. I must bear in mind the conclusions
of the valuers,
and try to accord to each the sort of bearing and weight that would be accorded
to them in the notional transactions
of sale and purchase propounded by
Spencer’s Case
[33] His Honour’s task, then, was to decide the correct
value on a proper consideration of all the evidence as to value.
[34] Eumundi
was entitled to expect the Court would give the same scrutiny to Mr Bale’s
evidence as it gave to Mr Ladewig’s
before deciding the correct value of
the land. That expectation could only be reinforced by the Valuer
General’s change in
position about the land’s value. As already
noted, the Valuer-General confirmed the issued valuation after objection. In the
objections’ decision, the Valuer-General said that, when compared to
similar properties, and the sale prices for those properties,
no change was
required in the issued
That is, it confirmed the valuation on a comparable sales analysis. Yet on
appeal, also relying on a comparable sales analysis, the
Valuer General
contended for a value nearly 20% higher than the issued valuation.
[35] Although the Valuer General did not accept Eumundi’s argument
that the learned Member did not apply the same scrutiny to
evidence as he did to Mr Ladewig’s, it could not point to any passages in
which his Honour addressed Eumundi’s
criticisms of Mr Bale’s choice
and analysis of comparable sales.
[36] It is an error of law to fail to
provide adequate reasons.
[37] What is adequate depends on the circumstances
of a case. In DL v The
Chief Justice Kiefel and Justices Keane and Edelman said:
“The content and detail of reasons “will vary according to the
nature of the jurisdiction which the court is exercising
and the particular
matter the subject of the decision”...
Not every failure to resolve a dispute will render reasons for decision
inadequate to justify a verdict. At one extreme, reasons for
decision will not
be inadequate merely because they fail to address an irrelevant dispute or one
which is peripheral to the real
issues. Nor will they be inadequate merely
because they fail to undertake a “minute explanation of every step in the
process that leads to the judge’s conclusion.” At the
other extreme, reasons will often be inadequate if the trial judge
explain his or her conclusion on a significant factual or evidential dispute
that is a necessary step to the final conclusion.
In between these extremes, the
adequacy of reasons will depend upon an assessment of the issues in the case,
including the extent
to which they were relied upon by counsel, their bearing
upon the elements of the offence, and their significance to the course of
trial. In particular:
"Ordinarily it would be necessary for a trial judge to summarise the crucial
arguments of the parties, to formulate the issues for
decision, to resolve any
issues of law and fact which needed to be determined before the verdict could be
arrived at, in the course
of that resolution to explain how competing arguments
of the parties were to be dealt with and why the resolution arrived at was
arrived at, to apply the law found to the facts found, and to explain how the
verdict followed."
(citations omitted)
[38] Having canvassed some of the criticisms made of Mr
Ladewig’s opinion, the learned Member reached this conclusion:
[63] Mr Ladewig’s opinion of the site value
depends on a complex method and is fatally flawed by his criterion for choice of
which scenario to apply. The Court could not, for the reasons which have been
given, be satisfied that his approach could produce
the correct site value.
[64] It remains to consider the evidence of Mr Bale, the valuer called by the
respondent.
[39] In considering Mr Bale’s evidence, the learned
Member identified the different interpretation by the valuers of the agreed
highest and best use but did not clearly resolve it. The role and weight to be
given to the highest and best use logically depends
on its relationship to other
relevant factors affecting
Eumundi had
squarely raised the comparability of Mr Bale’s sales, given the highest
and best use, whether as stated in the
joint expert report, or as Mr Bale fixed
on it in his oral evidence.
[40] His Honour said there was no reason to
reject Mr Bale’s approach to identifying the highest and best use (that is
the existing
use), which he described as “an appropriate one, in accord
but did not consider how it supported, or did not support, Mr Bale’s
choice of sales.
[41] Similarly, the learned Member found Mr Bale’s
sales were comparable, but did not explain
mounted a substantial challenge to the comparability of Mr Bale’s sales
which his Honour did not resolve.
[42] Further, the learned Member did not
address submissions Eumundi made about Mr Bale’s analysis of those sales.
In particular,
he did not address whether Mr Bale should have adjusted the sales
to account for the differential site improvements to the subject
is not necessary for a judicial officer to spell out every detail in their
However, Eumundi raised points of substance about Mr Bale’s valuation that
the learned Member did not address.
[44] Respectfully, this court finds the
learned Member did not expose his reasons for resolving the challenges to Mr
valuation, which were critical to the contest between the
The rehearing
[45] The principles that guide the Court in rehearing this
matter are well settled and need not be recited. It is this Court’s
to find the correct value on the evidence led at the original hearing. As the
learned Member excluded some evidence led from
the quantity surveyors, something
that was in dispute on appeal, this Court should resolve whether it will
consider that evidence
on the rehearing.
The evidence for the rehearing
[46] The parties filed three reports by quantity surveyors. Two
were prepared by a quantity surveyor engaged by the Valuer-General.
the site works in existence on the sales properties. Although the parties
disagreed about the use of his costing of site
works for the common sale of Hope
Island, his quantification of costs was not in contest.
[47] The third was a
joint report of two other quantity surveyors engaged by the parties to estimate
the cost of site works on the
subject land to ready it for a hypothetical
development under three scenarios. The quantity surveyors largely agreed on the
and, subject to some revisions by the valuers, the estimates were not
in contest.
[48] The Valuer-General did, however, question the utility of the
estimates in valuing the subject land because the scenarios were
hypothetical
and relied on numerous assumptions. That is, the concern was that the objective
evidence relied on in Mr Ladewig’s
valuation had its foundation in some
important assumptions.
[49] Those assumptions included that there would be no
need to excavate rock on site and that all excavated material could be used
filling the site. The quantity surveyors agreed their estimates would not be
accurate if that assumption was not
trial, the Valuer-General did not ask his Honour to exclude the evidence of the
quantity surveyors but said this underscored
Mr Bale’s concern about the
hypothetical nature of Mr Ladewig’s method. The learned Member effectively
excluded the evidence
of the quantity surveyors because that assumption had not
been proved. On appeal to this Court, the Valuer-General said it was open
his Honour to exclude the evidence, and there was no error in his Honour having
done so. What is not clear, is whether the Valuer-General’s
position on
rehearing is that this Court should pay no regard to that evidence.
any case, this Court takes a different view for the following
[52] The experts were asked to make several assumptions, not all of
them proved by the evidence. It stands to reason that the costs
of the site
works would be greater if the assumption about soil conditions was incorrect.
That would benefit Eumundi, not the Valuer-General.
On Mr Ladewig’s
method, higher site works costs would serve to drive down the value of the
subject land, the very thing Eumundi
sought to achieve by its
[53] The Valuer-General was an active participant in the briefing process
and did not reserve its position to argue any of the assumptions
were incorrect.
It did not raise any question about the matter until the trial was underway. Its
conduct was consistent with those
assumptions being agreed between the parties
for the purpose of the costings. The Court would expect notice to be given of
its position
on an important matter, particularly by a statutory authority whose
decision is under review.
[54] The Valuer-General did not lead a positive
case on the point. It did not assert that there was rock on site. It led no
to show there was. It did not ask his Honour to exclude the evidence at
trial and it did not expressly argue he should have done
[55] The Court is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform
itself in the way it considers
appropriate.
[56] The process of valuing an improved site in its site improved state is
an artificial one, necessarily involving some hypotheses.
It would not be
consistent with equity, good conscience, and the substantial merits of the
the quantity surveyors’ evidence because an apparently uncontested
assumption, on which the parties jointly briefed
the experts, was not
The valuations
[57] Mr Bale valued the site “As Is” at $4,500,000,
using a starting rate of $600/m2, resulting in a value of $503/m2
[58] Mr Ladewig valued the site at $3,000,000 based on a rate of $400/m2
less the cost of site works on a hypothetical development
scenario, equating to
$335/m2 GSA. Although Mr Bale did provide another valuation (at $6,575,000)
which was in response to Mr Ladewig’s
hypothetical development, the
Valuer-General did not contend that is correct and it is not necessary to
consider it further.
[59] This was always going to be a difficult exercise.
There was a paucity of sales evidence of vacant land for the current use of
land. There was also limited evidence for the more intensive retail/commercial
use, which Mr Ladewig considered the land’s
highest and best use. Both
valuers said they undertook a “like for like” comparison with the
sales evidence but differed
[60] First, the valuers selected different sales, except for one common sale
of land at Hope Island.
[61] Mr Bale chose sales of improved land that
occurred close to the date of valuation of partially sloping land proximate to
subject land. Mr Ladewig chose sales that are not as proximate in time or
place, but which were purchased as vacant land with an
intended use like the
hypothetical development he conceived for the subject land.
[62] They had
one common sale, of land at Hope Island, about 12 km away, that was sold as
vacant land for a similar intended use,
within 6 months of the valuation
[63] Second, the valuers analysed their sales evidence differently,
particularly with respect to site works.
[64] Mr Bale considered the sales
evidence ‘as purchased’ site improved at their respective dates of
sales (also referred
to by the valuers as a ‘raw’ sales analysis).
He made no adjustment to the sales evidence to account for site works necessary
for the purchaser’s intended use, because it would be reflected in the
sale price. He made no adjustment to the value of the
subject land, because he
valued it on the basis that its current use is its highest and best use.
[65] Mr Ladewig used a hypothetical development scenario in valuing the
site, because he considered its highest and best use was a
similar but more
intensive form of development than its current use. He adjusted the sales to
account for the site works for the
intended use. He considered that was
necessary to allow a like for like comparison across the sites.
[66] Then, in
valuing the subject land, Mr Ladewig arrived at a figure based on the adjusted
sales, before deducting the cost of site
works required to bring the subject
land to a notionally site improved state ready for the hypothetical development.
[67] There are other, more minor differences between the valuers. To the
extent they bear on the Court’s decision on value,
they will be considered
when addressing the two key issues of the selection of comparable sales and
their analyses of those sales.
selection of comparable sales
Mr Ladewig’s sales
[68] The sales evidence chosen by Mr Ladewig supports a higher
density retail/commercial use. Mr Ladewig chose sales of land at Benowa,
Pines and Hope Island which the purchasers intended to develop as shopping
[69] Mr Bale raised three criticisms of Mr Ladewig’s choice
[70] First, except for the common sale of Hope Island, the sales
are dated and Mr Bale asserts there would have been market movement,
those sales unreliable. That issue is discussed at [75] – [90]
[71] Second, Mr Bale says the sales are exclusively for
supermarket/neighbourhood shopping centres but there is no feasibility analysis
for use of the subject land for that
Mr Bale contested that a neighbourhood shopping centre could be developed on the
subject land. Mr Ladewig did not assert that it
could. However, he conceived of
a higher density mix of retail uses than the current use for the land.
[72] The intended use on Mr Ladewig’s comparable sales is code
assessable on the subject land and, therefore, legally possible.
density retail/commercial development is consistent with the highest and best
use agreed in the Joint Expert Report. Mr
Bale evidently does accept a sale of
land intended for a neighbourhood shopping centre is relevant in valuing the
subject land, because
the common sale, Hope Island, is in that
Ladewig’s sales should not be rejected because of the intended use when
[73] Third, Mr Bale says the sales are unusable for any
retail/commercial uses in their ‘as purchased’ state, given their
predominantly flood prone, or sloping
Mr Ladewig did not choose them to analyse them in their ‘as
purchased’ state. He chose them because of their
intended use. His
analysis of the sales evidence and his valuation account for the cost of site
works to ready the site for the intended
use (in the case of the sales evidence)
and the hypothetical development (in the case of the subject land). In any case,
sale of Hope Island remains predominantly flood prone after
development
yet Mr Bale accepts it is a
comparable sale. Mr Ladewig’s sales should not be rejected because of any
difficulties with the
contour of the land or flooding.
Market movement
[74] The point of distinction between the common sale and Mr
Ladewig’s other sales is the possibility of market movement rendering
sales unreliable as evidence of market value.
[75] The valuation date is 1
October 2017. The sale of 406 Ashmore Road, Benowa occurred on 19 December 2012,
and 2 Norris Street,
Pacific Pines was sold on 29 November 2013.
Bale said there would have been market movement between the sales and the
valuation date, although he considered there would
be nominal if any adjustment
for market movement of his sales, which occurred within 6 to 16 months of the
Presumably, then, his concern was about market movement between 2012/2013, when
Mr Ladewig’s sales occurred, and October 2016,
when the earliest of Mr
Bale’s sales took place.
[77] Mr Ladewig did not agree there had been
market movement that would call for adjustment (or rejection) of any of his
[78] There was limited evidence on the point.
[79] Neither valuer
used paired sales (that is a sale and re-sale) to support their view.
Ladewig drew on the Valuer-General’s statutory valuations of the sale
properties to support his view. For Benowa, the
valuation did not increase until
1 October 2016, which he related to the completion of site works post
Mr Bale did not appear to dispute that, although he observed a further increase
by 10% in 2017.
For Pacific Pines, there
was no change in the site value applied between the valuations in 2013 and
Mr Ladewig agreed there had been
increases in 2017 for those properties. He did not place much emphasis on the
applied site values
in determining the value of the subject
[81] Although Mr Bale said the
analysed rate would have to be adjusted to account for market movement, he did
not explain how he would
valuers agreed the Hope Island sale could be looked to for evidence of market
movement. Each considered their analysis of
that sale supported their
said the sale supported his view that there had been market movement, but only
if the Court accepted his, not Mr Ladewig’s
analysis of that
[83] For reasons given at [58]
– [68], the Court has not accepted Mr Bale’s analysis of the sale.
[84] Otherwise, Mr Bale relied on his sales to assert an increase in the
market for the subject land of some 10% to 30% since
That evidence seems at odds with his view that his use of those sales required
“nominal, if any adjustment for market
[85] Mr Bale also
inferred market movement generally from falling interest rates resulting in
lower capitalisation rates, leading
to higher capital
no evidence was led about that.
Bale’s sales are of land used for a different purpose and, for some, in
different zones. Although he was somewhat reluctant
to concede the point, by the
end of cross-examination he appeared to accept there could be distinct markets
for land intended for
different uses. He accepted the industrial market is
distinct from the commercial/retail market, except for location; that the
market broadly relies on income bases and are traded as investment
properties;
that residential, retail/commercial, and industrial land did not necessarily
move together consistently in a market.
Court accepts Mr Ladewig’s evidence that, within the general market, the
residential, retail/commercial, and industrial
segments may operate distinctly
and not act or move together.
the hearing before the Land Court, counsel for the Valuer General described the
question of market movement as a secondary
with the response of the parties to the valuers’ request to introduce
further sales evidence during the Court Managed
Expert Evidence process. The
reason for their request was to address their disagreement about market
movement. The parties jointly
directed the valuers to confine their
consideration to the sales already
identified.
[88] This may well have
hampered Mr Bale, because he could not introduce further sales to support his
it prevented Mr Ladewig from doing so.
was a forensic choice made by the parties during pre-hearing preparation, and
neither sought leave during the hearing to lead
further evidence on the
[89] The limited evidence about market movement does not justify
disregarding the sales of Pacific Pines and Benowa, which would otherwise
relevant for the comparable sales analysis.
Mr Bales’ sales
[90] Mr Bale chose his sales for their features and proximity
to the subject land. All his sales are within 1 km, except for Hope
which is 12 kms from the subject land. The issue with his choice of sales is
their different uses and zoning, except for
Hope Island.
[91] Three of his
sales are zoned differently to the subject land. The Land Appeal Court has
warned of the effect of different zonings
on values. In Intertherm Pty Ltd v The
it observed:
It is a primary rule of valuation that like should be compared with like and
this applies in so far as all relevant factors, including
zoning, are concerned.
This rule was recognised by this court in
Amoco Australia Pty Ltd v The Crown
(1977) 4 QLCR 141.
At 156 of the judgment it was stated ‘It is
difficult to compare land situated in different zones. It is desirable to avoid
such comparison if
[92] Further, the uses or intended uses of those sales are
different to the current use of the subject and the hypothesised more intensive
retail/commercial development proposed by Mr Ladewig.
Southport-Nerang Rd, Southport was a small, improved lot purchased for a
proposed car-sale (retail/commercial) and servicing
(industrial) use, without
development approval. It was zoned industrial. Mr Bale agreed it was sold at a
mixed commercial/industrial
rate. The purchaser did not apply a differential
rate by use as the two areas were fairly evenly
Counsel for the appellant argued that the improvements to be retained pertained
to the industrial use. In Mr Bale’s analysis
of the sale, this skewed the
rate from an arguably comparable retail/commercial use (the car-sale) to the
industrial use (car servicing).
There is also some basis for differentiating
between a car-retail showroom market and the general retail/commercial market,
particularly
where, as here, the land is in an established car sales
[94] 383 Southport-Nerang Rd,
Molendinar is a similar sized improved lot purchased for a mixed-use
development, with retail/commercial
uses fronting Southport-Nerang Rd (service
station, drive-thru fast food and drink outlet) and an industrial use fronting
Avenue (4-storey self-storage facility). The land was zoned
industrial, located in an established industrial precinct, with a mixed
commercial/industrial rate. There is some distinction to be drawn between a
service station use and other retail/commercial uses.
The differences between
the uses proposed for this land and the highest and best use for the subject
land make comparison difficult.
[95] 74-76 Hillview Pde, Ashmore is another
smaller and improved multi-lot parcel of land purchased for a multi-unit
residential town
development,
a different use in a distinct market to the subject land.
[96] Mr Bale
considered various site attributes, combined with the zoning of the subject
land, lent itself to a wide variety of retail
and commercial utilities,
including residential multi-unit, industrial, recreation, tourism and
entertainment.
seems that Mr Bale looked at market sales evidence for a range of uses, because
a site’s highest and best use requires
consideration of alternative
competing uses for the
conflates selecting sales evidence with identifying the highest and best use. As
noted at [16] the first task for the valuer
is to identify the highest and best
use, so as to inform their choice of comparable sales.
[98] A valuer may
well articulate the highest and best use in general terms, without specifying a
single precise
That is not
what the parties’ valuers did in this case. Although it is broad, it is
not without some precision.
[99] They agreed the highest and best use is a
commercial/retail use in line with the current use, however not to be limited in
density, and/or design. While a “commercial/retail” use admits
of a range of activities, the agreement qualifies that
by reference to the use
being “in line with the current use.”
[100] Accepting Mr
Bale’s sales involve, at least in part, commercial/retail uses, they could
not be said to be ‘in line
with’ the current use. The fact that they
may be legally possible, with impact assessment, is not to the
[101] Further, as counsel for Eumundi submitted at trial, the
“raw” sales analysis that Mr Bale used does not account
differences in the nature and costs of site works required for the different
Nor did Mr Bale explain how he has accounted for differences in uses and zonings
between his sales and the highest and best use of
the subject land.
[102] The comparable sales method necessarily involves subjective judgments.
Valuation is rarely a precise exercise. However, a valuer
must reveal their
process of reasoning to enable the Court to evaluate their evidence and
conclusions.
greater the differences, the greater the reliance on evaluative judgment and the
less confidence the Court can have in inferences
drawn from the
[103] The challenges in
comparing land with different uses and zonings, and Mr Bale’s failure to
explain how he has accounted
for them, supports Eumundi’s argument that Mr
Bale’s sales evidence is unreliable in valuing the subject
[104] Further, Mr Ladewig’s sales better reflect the highest and
best use agreed in the JER. The sales of Hope Island, Benowa
and Pacific Pines
were sales of vacant land purchased for retail/commercial uses that are code
assessable on the subject land and
are in line with, although a greater scale
and intensity to, the existing use. They are also consistent with one or more of
the hypothetical
development scenarios for the subject land.
counsel for the Valuer-General confirmed in submissions at trial, Mr Bale
accepted the sales of Benowa and Hope Island were
of comparable retail utility
to the subject land. Although Mr Bale has raised a legitimate concern about
dated sales, the evidence
does not justify excluding them because of market
[106] For those reasons, the Court prefers Mr Ladewig’s sales
to Mr Bale’s.
The analysis of the sales evidence
[107] Mr Bale used
an “As Is” approach and valued the subject land on its current site
improved state, on the basis that
it is fit for its current use. He considered
the sales evidence ‘as purchased’ site improved at their respective
of sales (also referred to by the valuers as a ‘raw’ sales
analysis). Mr Bale preferred this approach because it required
the least number
of adjustments, the purchase price already reflecting the purchaser’s
anticipation of the costs of necessary
site works for the intended
[108] Mr Ladewig valued the subject land by reference to his sales evidence,
assuming both were brought to a similar notionally vacant
site-improved state to
allow the intended use (in the case of the sales) and the hypothetical
development (in the case of the subject
land). Although it required adjustments
for site works on both the subject land and the sales, except for the treatment
of the cost
of site works on Hope Island, the costs were derived from reports by
quantity surveyors and was largely uncontested.
[109] There are two key
differences in the valuers’ approaches.
[110] First, they differ about
whether a hypothetical development should be used in valuing the subject land.
[111] Second, if a hypothetical development is used, they do not agree on
which scenario should be used.
Should a hypothetical development be used in
valuing the subject land
[112] The land is in the Centre Zone under the City
of the Gold Coast City Plan 2016 which allows for a mix of commercial and retail
uses. It is in an established commercial/retail precinct of Ashmore opposite the
Ashmore Plaza district shopping centre.
[113] The current improvements on the
land are a Tavern and associated drive-thru bottle shop and office, a standalone
liquor barn
and parking. The valuers agreed the highest and best use is a
commercial/retail use “in line with the current use, however
limited in scale, density and/or
[114] That refinement of the current use contemplates a larger format
commercial/retail use and is consistent with the valuers’
agreement that
the land could support a higher density of development:
the site topography lent itself to a hypothetical
development with suspended slab construction at near street level, comparatively
reducing site works, enhancing main road exposure, and increasing the potential
development density with under-croft
[115] Mr Bale was cautious about valuing the subject land by
reference to a hypothetical development because there had been no evaluation
the engineering design or the likelihood of Council
[116] In valuing the land, the Court must consider how a hypothetical
purchaser would view the potential for more intensive development
does not decide the planning outcome, but must assess the level of uncertainty
impact of that uncertainty on the mind
of the hypothetical prudent purchaser.
Valuer-General did not articulate a basis for concern about engineering design
or planning approval and there was no evidence
of material uncertainty about
those matters. The Court should be slow to exclude a rational mode of valuing
[117] Three aspects of Mr
Bale’s evidence support using Mr Ladewig’s approach of adjusting for
site works by reference
to a hypothesised development.
[118] First, Mr
Bale’s raw sales analysis either makes no adjustments for site works or
has not exposed his reasoning about
how he would account for differences in the
site works that would be contemplated for the different types of uses on the
on the subject land. This prevents the Court from testing Mr
Bale’s comparable sales analysis.
[119] Second, his agreement to a
highest and best use not constrained by the current scale, density, or design
for the existing use,
leaves open the possibility, and therefore relevance, of a
more intensive use in valuing the subject land. Although Mr Bale did not
neighbourhood shopping centre could be established on the subject land, Mr
Ladewig did not assert that it could. He considered
the highest and best use
involved some element of a grocery convenience store with a mix of other retail
uses. The important factor
for Mr Ladewig was that there would be a more
intensive commercial/retail development than the current use.
[120] Third, Mr
Bale noted a hypothesised development using scenario 2 is consistent with
surrounding developments. This suggests
his caution about whether such a
development would be approved may not be well founded. It also supports Mr
Ladewig’s view
of the site’s highest and best use.
scenario should be used in valuing the subject land
[121] In addressing Mr Ladewig’s method, the quantity
surveyors were asked to estimate the cost of site works on the sales and
land using three scenarios, only 2 of which were considered relevant by the
[122] Mr Ladewig favoured scenario 3, which involved a part
suspended slab at street level. If the land was to be valued assuming
potential for more intensive development, Mr Bale favoured scenario 2, which
brought the whole site to a single level on a suspended
slab a few metres below
road frontages.
[123] Mr Bale’s reasoning about which scenario to use
is more persuasive than Mr Ladewig’s.
[124] Mr Ladewig identified cost
as important, albeit not the sole factor in choosing scenario
Ultimately, he saw little difference between scenarios 2 and 3 when compared
with the sales evidence, although the sales were a mix
of suspended slab, slab
on ground and slab over a general single level. Given his view there was little
difference between scenarios
2 and 3, he preferred 3 because it cost
[125] However, in valuing the subject land, the difference in cost was
nominal. In that context, the focus on cost distracted Mr Ladewig
considering which scenario would optimise the productive use of the land.
[126] Scenario 2 would allow almost complete development of the
Mr Bale considered its design, level, and scale of development was supported by
surrounding developments, and by sales evidence in
the vicinity, and in the Gold
Coast fringe locations.
He accepted if the
site were developed to its optimal density, that would potentially offset and
exceed the costs of the site works.
Scenario 2 would achieve a significantly greater density of development,
potentially as much as 50% compared with 40%. It would offer
some benefit over
and above the existing development and would utilise the current site
development works.
It could also offer a
better parking outcome, with parking on slab for the retail facility and parking
undercroft. He considered
this approach was evidenced in the vicinity by sales
such as Pacific Pines and 285 Southport-Nerang
[127] Although Mr Ladewig thought
scenario 3 better reflected the developments on 2 of his 3 sales (Pacific Pines
and Hope Island),
from a site works perspective, there was conflicting expert
evidence on the
the quantity surveyors agreed Pacific Pines was closest to scenario
they agreed Benowa was closest to
scenario 2,
and they disagreed about
whether Hope Island more closely aligned with scenario 2 or
[128] In any case, given adjustments
are made for the site works on both the sales and the subject to allow a like
for like comparison,
the scenario should reflect the potential of the subject
[129] Mr Bale’s evidence that scenario 2 would optimise
development density makes sense.
[130] The Court’s function is to
determine the hypothetical point of agreement between the hypothetical vendor
and hypothetical
purchaser at the date of valuation. The hypothetical prudent
purchaser can be expected to value the land at its most profitable potential
use. The Court accepts Mr Bale’s reasons for preferring scenario
analysis of the Hope Island sale
[131] The valuers agreed the sale of Hope Island was a good
comparator. It has the same zoning as the subject land. It was sold vacant
unimproved with the benefit of an impact assessable development approval for a
retail use (DA), infrastructure credits and agreements
for lease to Woolworths
and Aldi (AFLs).
[132] Mr Ladewig chose this sale because it has a comparable
use with good access and exposure to a high volume of traffic. It is
established residential precinct with strong catchment, good growth, and limited
local competition. Its site area is 24,810m2
and he analysed it at
Bale considered this sale was overall inferior on a pro rata “as
purchased” rate. He accepted it had similar
zoning and retail/commercial
utility, being a code assessable use on the subject land. He noted it had
superior frontage and situation
to a traffic signalled intersection and road. He
considered the fringe Gold Coast locality is inferior and its site access,
and flood prone topography are inferior to the subject land. He
analysed this sale differently to Mr Ladewig, arriving at
[134] Given
its location, use and the limited planning risk, it provides a comparable to the
subject land. The difference in the valuers’
analysed rates is largely
explained by their contrasting approaches to deductions for the benefit of the
AFL and DA and additions
for site works to prepare the site for
development.
[135] There is a significant difference in the deductions
applied by the valuers in adjusting this sale. Relying on information from
purchaser, Mr Ladewig deducted $2,500,000 because of the benefits that he said
the AFLs brought to the
Mr Bale made no allowance for that factor. Mr Ladewig allowed $350,000 for the
negated ‘hard costs’ for the DA. Mr Bale
allowed $200,000.
[136] The valuers were faced with
apparently contradictory evidence about the purchaser’s views on the
[137] Interview notes taken by a valuer with the State Valuation
Service, who was not a witness in this case, were made between 2
to 6 months
Those notes record that a director of the purchaser attributed no particular
value to the AFLs.
There is no evidence
the notes were provided to the director or that he confirmed their
[138] Prior to the trial, the same director gave very specific
responses by email to enquiries by Mr Ladewig, another valuer, Mr Elliott,
responses included statements to the following effect:
(a) The purchase took place with a DA and AFLs in
(b) The purchase would not have proceeded without the DA and
pre-commitments;
(c) If it had proceeded, the purchase price would have been
discounted by $300,000 to $400,000 for the DA and $2-3 million for the
[140] The Court is not bound by the rules of evidence and may
inform itself in the way it considers
appropriate.
must act on the best evidence before the Court. There is no objective evidence
of the actual value of the AFLs and the DA in determining
the sale price. These
were matters of subjective assessment by the purchaser.
[141] The email
exchanges reveal the director was aware of the purpose for the enquiries and the
use to which the information would
be put. His emails were responsive and
unequivocal. Had the Valuer-General wished to contest their accuracy or
veracity, the director
could have been called to give evidence.
[142] In the
circumstances, the Court prefers Mr Ladewig’s deductions for the AFLs and
the DA as they are based on the best
evidence before the Court.
does not mean the Court accepts that Mr Ladewig’s analysis of this sale
without qualification.
[144] Another significant difference between the
valuers was the additions to the purchase price for site works. Mr Bale allowed
drawing on the costings of a quantity surveyor. Mr Ladewig used the
purchaser’s estimate of $400,000. The difference of more
indicates the purchaser was ill informed about the likely costs.
[145] While
the Court prefers Mr Ladewig’s analysis of this sale, his reliance on the
purchaser’s information about the
cost of site works should be treated
with caution in arriving at the starting rate in valuing the subject land.
[146] The Court must presume the hypothetical prudent purchaser of the
subject land is properly advised. If a sale used to advise
on value is affected
by an unrealistic assessment of costs, that can skew the analysis of value on
the subject land, in this case
by fixing a starting rate that is too low.
[147] Here, there is objective and uncontested evidence of the cost of the
site works to ready the sale for development. It is reasonable
for the Court to
consider that evidence in the comparable sales analysis in deciding the value of
the subject land.
the subject land
[148] In giving effect to the Court’s findings on those
matters addressed above, the subject land should be valued on the following
1. The most useful sales for a comparable sales analysis are Benowa,
Pacific Pines, and Hope Island because of the similarity in uses
and zones. They
should not be ignored because of an assertion of market movement unsupported by
evidence to that effect.
2. Mr Ladewig’s method of valuing the land
according to a hypothesised development is preferable to Mr Bale’s
is/as purchased” raw sales analysis.
3. Scenario 2 would
deliver optimal development of the subject land with only a marginal increase in
the cost of site works.
4. In analysing the common sale of Hope Island, the
Court accepts the purchaser’s assessment of the added value of the AFLs
and the DA should be deducted.
5. In using the comparable sales to arrive at
a $rate/m2 in valuing the subject land, Mr Ladewig’s analysis of Hope
$347/m2 is affected by the purchaser’s gross underestimation of
the cost of site works and should be treated with some caution.
Bale’s ‘response’ valuation of the subject land on a
hypothesised development using Scenario 2 is $6,600,000,
or $840/m2. That rate
is anchored by his sale at 383 Southport Nerang Rd, Molendinar, which he
analyses on the same basis at $839/m2.
The next closest rate of Mr Bale’s
sales analysed on Scenario 2 is 285 Nerang Rd, Southport, at $791/m2. The
reasons for preferring Mr Ladewig’s choice of sales over Mr
Bale’s are set out at [80] – [96]. The concerns about
comparability of land purchased for different uses, subject to different zoning
provisions, is not remedied by Mr Bale’s
‘response’ analysis.
It is not necessary to consider those sales further.
[150] Considering Mr
sales of Benowa, Pacific Pines and Hope Island, Mr
Bale’s analyses indicate his rate of $840/m2 is too high. He analysed them
at $470/m2, $461/m2, and $599/m2 respectively.
[151] 406 Ashmore Rd, Benowa
is only 1.6km from the subject land, Mr Ladewig’s closest sale. It has
corner exposure, although
it falls below the road in part. It has good access
and exposure, low-moderate population growth and moderate-high level of
competition.
[152] It is a much larger site at 28,240 m2, almost 3.5 times
the size of the subject land. Mr Bale questioned how Mr Ladewig adjusted
this factor. Mr Ladewig thought it a secondary consideration. He said there was
a smaller buyer pool and market demand for larger
blocks, because of the price
point, and an increased risk in developing a larger site.
[153] Given the
site is so much larger than the subject land, all other things being equal, it
would be expected that the rate/m2
for Benowa would be less than for the subject
quantity surveyors agreed the actual site works on this site were closest to
Scenario 2,
is the scenario on which the Court has decided the subject land should be
[155] Mr Ladewig analysed it at $380/m2, compared to Mr
Bale’s rate of $473/m2, a variance of
[156] Benowa has a larger percentage of unusable land post development and a
lower density rate than the hypothesised development
on the subject land. One
reason is the requirement for a detention basin on Benowa when compared to the
subject land. Mr Ladewig
agreed that was a possible distinction which Mr Bale
allowed for, which he did
discounted the area required for a detention basis on that would remain flood
affected after development.
[157] Mr Bale also excluded an area required for
batters on the site which could not be developed. The latter were in an area
the purchaser knew would likely be resumed by the Council, another reason
to exclude it which Mr Ladewig
acknowledged.
[158] Having
regard to that evidence, the Court prefers Mr Bale’s analysis of this
sale, resulting in a rate of $473/m2.
[159] With an area of 10,150 m2, 2
Norris St, Pacific Pines is marginally larger than the subject land. It is in
the Local Business
and has good access and exposure.
an established catchment with moderate growth in the immediate vicinity and
moderate competition.
valuers’ analyses of this sale were similar, with a variance of only
Ladewig’s rate of $430/m2 and Mr Bale’s of $461/m2. The more
important difference is how it relates to the
subject land in the range of sales
considered. Mr Ladewig considered the sale superior to the subject land, Mr Bale
said it was inferior.
[161] Mr Ladewig’s considered this sale superior
on a $/m2 because, as a sale to Coles as an owner occupier, it was at the upper
his opinion at its highest, that view is tentative, and
Mr Ladewig agreed he was
inconsistent in his treatment of this factor when analysing Benowa, which was
also purchased by Coles.
Bale did not agree the sale to Coles put it at the upper end of the market. He
thought Pacific Pines was inferior to the
subject land with respect to the
subject land’s exposure, particularly as hypothetically developed. He also
relied on the lower
volume of traffic for the sale, its more indirect access,
and its surrounding amenity which has less of a retail/commercial concentration
than the subject land. These features support Mr Bale’s assessment that
the subject land is superior to this sale.
[163] As for Hope Island, Mr
Ladewig considered this sale a good comparator for the subject land, although
somewhat inferior on a
$/m2. That assessment, though, may be affected by his
acceptance of the purchaser’s underestimate of the likely costs of the
site works.
[164] Mr Bale considered Hope Island comparable in terms of a
broad retail utility. He identified several features of the sale that
considered inferior to the subject land. It is a larger block, is significantly
flood-prone, has inferior exposure and less direct
access. Again, these features
support Mr Bale’s assessment of how the subject land relates to this
[165] The Court has explained why it will treat Mr Ladewig’s use
of purchaser’s underestimate of the cost of site works
with caution in
valuing the subject land. If the quantity surveyor’s costing is used
instead of the purchaser’s estimate,
Mr Ladewig’s analysis would
come out at $392/m2, very close to the rate he applied to the subject land
($400/m2). Looking at
the same point a different way, if the Court uses Mr
Bale’s analysis of Hope Island and deducts $2,500,000 for the AFLs and
$350,000 for the DA, the rate/m2 is $437, a variance of about 10% from $392. The
variance is explained by a different approach to
on costs and holding costs; Mr
Bale making an allowance for those items, while Mr Ladewig made none.
[166] On appeal to this Court, counsel for both parties conceded the valuers
were faced with a difficult exercise, with limited sales
evidence to draw upon.
The Court was faced with the same dilemma.
[167] This Court has not accepted
Mr Bale’s choice of sales or his raw sales analysis. Although it has
largely accepted Mr Ladewig’s
approach, the Court has made allowances or
adjustments, drawing upon Mr Bale’s response valuation and the quantity
[168] The sales the Court accepts as useful in
valuing the subject land range between $392/m2 (Hope Island as analysed by Mr
but using the quantity surveyor’s cost of site works) at the
lowest and $473/m2 (Benowa as analysed by Mr Bale) at the highest.
Court finds the $/m2 for the subject land should be at the upper end of the
range for these reasons. It has accepted that
the subject land is superior to
each of the three sales for various reasons already given. Two of the three
sales are dated and,
while they are not excluded because of an increase in the
market, there is no evidence that the market has decreased in that time.
Finally, two of the three sales are significantly larger than the subject land,
with Hope Island twice the size and Benowa 3.5 times
[170] The Court
has determined the correct value of the subject land is
$3,515,000.
[171] That is calculated on the following basis:
is applied to the unencumbered area of 8,585m2, as identified by Mr Ladewig
– $4,034,950.
2. 359m2, the area encumbered by easements, will be
discounted as agreed by the valuers to 80% of the applied rate, at $376/m2
3. From the sum of those figures, $4,169,934, will be
deducted the quantity surveyors’ estimate of the cost of site works for
scenario 2, $655,040 – $3,514,894 (rounded to $3,515,000).
Land Valuation Act 2010
T 1–41, lines 18 to
Ground 6 was not pursued by
the appellant.
Valuer-General v Body
Corporate for ‘Tennyson Reach’
[2018] QLAC 7.
Eumundi Group Hotels Pty
Ltd v Valuer-General
[2020] QLC 37
Joint Expert Report of Mr
Derek Bale and Mr Coen Ladewig dated 20 June 2019 (JER), pp 54-55, 57-59.
Maurici v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
(2003) 212 CLR 111.
Kelly v Western
Australian Planning Commission
[2006] WASC 208
Adelaide Clinic Holdings
Pty Ltd v Minister for Water Resources
(1998) 65 LGRA 410
Eumundi Group Hotels Pty
Ltd v Valuer-General
[2020] QLC 37
Appeal Record Book (ARB) 79
T 1–94, lines 5 to
Eumundi Group Hotels Pty
Ltd v Valuer-General
[2020] QLC 37
Doherty v Commissioner
of Highways
(1974) 32 LGRA 328
(1973) 6 SASR 541
ARB Ex ACB 8, Decision on
Objection 1191.
[2018] HCA 26
ISPT Pty Ltd v City of
[2008] VSCA 180
Eumundi Group Hotels Pty
Ltd v Valuer-General
[2020] QLC 37
Ibid at [89].
ARB, Written submissions to
the Land Court by Eumundi Group Hotels Pty Ltd at [35(b)].
Yates Property Corp Pty
Ltd (in liq) v Darling Harbour Authority
(1991) 24 NSWLR 156
ARB Notice of Appeal to the
Land Appeal Court (LAC006-20) p 1360.
T 1–41, lines 40 to
Land Court Act 2000
JER [239]–[243].
T 3–47, lines 10 to
T 3–32, lines 7 to
JER [117], [122]-[123].
T 2–90, line 22, to T
2–92, line 44.
T 2–83, lines 31 to
T 2–85, lines 1 to 8.
T 2–88, lines 1 to
Transcript Land Court
hearing, T 1–29, lines 23 to 33.
T 3–3, lines 1 to
T 2–92, line 10.
T 3–3, line 35.
(1978) 5 QLCR 21.
Ibid at 25.
T 3–176, lines 26 to
ISPT Pty Ltd v Melbourne
City Council
[2008] VSCA 180
Appellant’s written
submissions at trial, 7 September 2020.
Western Australian
Planning Commission v Arcus Shopfitters Pty Ltd
[2003] WASCA 295
Macarthur Central
Shopping Centre Pty Ltd as TTE v Valuer General (No.2)
[2016] QLC 80
De Ieso v Commissioner
of Highways (SA)
(1981) 27 SASR 248 at 252.
Gold Coast City Council
[2014] QLAC 6
Commonwealth Custodial
Services v Valuer-General
[2007] NSWCA 365
at 189 (cited with approval by
Keane JA in
Chief Executive, Department of Natural Resources and Mines v Kent
Street Pty Ltd
[2009] QCA 399
T 1–88, lines 17 to
20; T 2–64, lines 20 to 25.
T 1–88, lines 30 to
T 1–89, lines 17 to
JER [162]–[163].
T 1–43, line 42, to T
1–44, line 22.
T 1–42, lines 37 to
T 1–43, lines 1 to
[205]–[206].
Ex 7 pp 127–129.
Notes of telephone call
with representative of purchaser on 18 August 2017, ARB p 988; JER [493].
Email from representative
of purchaser on 29 August 2019, ARB p 1257.
JER pp 130–138.
Maurici v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2005] NSWLEC 20.
T 1-42, lines 1 to 35.
JER pp 50–52.
T 3–145, lines 8 to
T 3–149, lines 1 to
JER pp 50–52.
[347]–[351].
T 3–192, lines 7
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (432 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter