URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2007/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CAB, Re [2007] QGAAT 23 (12 April 2007)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL,
[2007] QGAAT 23
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Guardianship Application
Administration Application
In the matter of CAB
MATTER NUMBER:
2007/438 2007/439
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
DATE OF HEARING:
9 March 2007
DATE OF ORDER:
9 March 2007
DATE OF REASONS:
12 April 2007
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
S Gardiner President
B Russell Member
Prof L Willmott Member
CATCHWORDS:
IMPAIRED CAPACITY-GUARDIANS-ADMINISTRATORS-ENDURING POWER OF
ATTORNEY-GENERAL PRINCIPLES-INVALIDITY-REVOCATION-87 year old with moderate
dementia-Where only one attorney accepted appointment-Where significant family
conflict-Where other appointee preferred.
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Schedule 1 and 4
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
1. That to the extent that it is necessary, the following Enduring Power of
Attorney for CAB is revoked pursuant to
Powers of Attorney Act
and s84(2) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(a) The Enduring Power of Attorney dated 9 December 2002 appointing RC or GB
together with either AW or RB as attorneys for financial,
personal and health
2. That the revocation dated 24 January 2007 of an Enduring Power of Attorney
for CAB dated 9 December 2002 is declared invalid pursuant
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
and s84(2) of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
3. That the following Enduring Power of Attorney for CAB is declared invalid
pursuant to
Section 113(2)
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
and Section
84(2) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(a) The Enduring Power of Attorney dated 24 January 2007 appointing RC as
attorney for financial, personal and health matters.
GUARDIANSHIP
4. That the Adult Guardian is appointed as guardian for CAB for decisions about
the following personal matters:
Accommodation;
whom CAB has contact and/or visits;
Provision of
5. Unless the Tribunal orders otherwise, this appointment remains current for
five (5) years.
ADMINISTRATION
6. That The Public Trustee of Queensland is appointed as administrator for CAB
for all financial matters.
7. The administrator is to provide a financial management plan to the Tribunal
within four (4) months.
8. The Tribunal directs the administrator to provide accounts to the Tribunal
when requested.
9. This appointment remains current until further order of the
NOTICE OF INTEREST IN LAND
10. That the administrator shall within three (3) months:
Identify, by way of a search
of the records held by the Registrar of Titles or other means, any interest in
real property registered
in the name of CAB (“the
Lodge with the Registrar of
Titles a copy of this order and a notice notifying the Registrar of any interest
in land held by the adult
which is subject to this administration
Provide to the
a copy of the search of
records held by the Registrar of Titles referred to above and;
a copy of the lodgement summary with
the dealing number showing lodgement of the order in respect of any interests in
land held by
the adult which is subject to this administration
11. That if any change is made in an interest in land held by the adult which is
the subject of this administration order or if there
are any further dealings in
land on behalf of the adult by the administrator, the administrator shall lodge
with the Registrar of
Titles within 14 days of the finalisation of such interest
a copy of this order and a notice (in a form prescribed by the Registrar
Titles), concerning such changes or dealings.
12. That the administrator pay, from the adult’s funds, any fee associated
with the above notices.
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
[1] CAB is 87 and resides in her family home. CAB jointly owns this home with
her sister GP. CAB’s son RC currently lives with
CAB in her home.
[2] On 27 March 1997 CAB had executed an Enduring Power of Attorney under the
provisions of the then
Property Law Act 1974
appointing her daughter GB
for financial matters only (the only appointment available at the
[3] On 9 December 2002, CAB executed a further Enduring Power of Attorney
appointing RC, GB, AW and RB as attorneys for financial,
personal and health
matters. The power was to be exercised by either RC or GB together with either
AW or RB. At the hearing of this
matter, RC informed the Tribunal that he did
sign this Enduring Power of Attorney but he appeared to be the only attorney
GB had no knowledge of the enduring document and there was no evidence
that the appointment was ever accepted by AW or RB (both professionals
CAB’s life at the time).
[4] On 24 January 2007 PM, solicitor from T Solicitors, attended CAB in the
Extended Care Unit at the Hospital where CAB executed
a Revocation of Power of
Attorney and a new Enduring Power of Attorney in favour of her son RC for
financial, personal and health
matters. The revocation signed this day revoked
the enduring document to GB dated on or about 9 December 2002. CAB
remember if that 2002 Enduring Power of Attorney appointed RC as
well. If it did, CAB revoked that appointment as well.
[5] On 30 January 2007, the Tribunal received an application by CAB’s
daughter GB, for the appointment of herself as guardian
and administrator for
her mother.
The Issues and the Legislation
[6] The issues for the Tribunal
have the capacity to execute the Revocation of an Enduring Power of Attorney and
the Enduring Power of Attorney signed by
her on 24 January
If not, does CAB have impaired
capacity now for personal and financial
Is there a need for a guardian? if
so, who should be appointed; and
need for an administrator? If so, who should be
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
sets out the
requirements for capacity to enter an Enduring Power of Attorney. They are as
A principal may make an enduring power of attorney only if
the principal understands the nature and effect of the enduring power of
Understanding the nature and effect of the enduring power
of attorney includes understanding the following
principal may, in the power of attorney, specify or limit the power to be given
to an attorney and instruct an attorney about
the exercise of the
when the power
once the power for a
matter begins, the attorney has power to make, and will have full control over,
the matter subject to terms or
information about exercising the power included
in the enduring power of
the principal may
revoke the enduring power of attorney at any time the principal is capable of
making an enduring power of attorney
giving the same
the power the
principal has given continues even if the principal becomes a person who has
impaired capacity;
time the principal is not capable of revoking the enduring power of attorney,
the principal is unable to effectively oversee
the use of the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
mirrors the
requirements for capacity to enter an Enduring Power of Attorney when revoking
an Enduring Power of Attorney.
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
that the Tribunal may appoint a guardian for a personal matter or an
administrator for a financial matter for an adult only
if the Tribunal is
satisfied that first, the adult has impaired capacity for the matter. Secondly,
there must be a need for a decision
in relation to the matter or because the
adult is likely to do something in relation to the matter that involves or is
involve unreasonable risk to the adult’s health, welfare or
property and that without an appointment the adult’s needs
adequately met or interests adequately protected. In this regard the reference
in the Act to the adult is a reference to
CAB. In making its decision the
Tribunal is guided by the General Principles and the Health Care Principle found
in Schedule 1 of
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
by the appropriateness considerations found in
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) for an appointment of a guardian or an
administrator.
[10] Schedule 4 to the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
capacity for a person for a matter as understanding the nature and effect of
decisions about the matter; freely and voluntarily
making decisions about the
matter and communicating the decisions in some way. If any of these elements is
missing, a person has
impaired capacity.
THE PARTIES
[11] The matter was heard on 9 March 2007. Active parties at the hearing were
CAB (represented by leave of the Tribunal by KR, Solicitor),
her children RC and
GB (the applicant). Representatives from the Adult Guardian and The Public
Trustee of Queensland also attended.
[12] Interested Parties at the hearing were JH (cousin), MD (friend), DS
(friend), LV (friend), NB (granddaughter), FP (social worker)
paralegal from the firm representing CAB).
[13] In addition to the written material contained on the Tribunal file, all of
the parties attending the hearing were given the
opportunity to express their
views. These views where specifically relied upon by the Tribunal, are discussed
below. Evidence was
also given to the Tribunal by PM, a solicitor with the firm
T Solicitors.
Issues One and Two: Did CAB have the
capacity to execute the Revocation of an Enduring Power of Attorney and the
Enduring Power of
Attorney signed by her on 24 January 2007?; and
no, does CAB have impaired capacity now for personal and financial
[14] In November 2006, CAB fell and broke her arm while visiting her sister GP
at the nursing home where GP resides. She was admitted
to hospital and later to
the extended care unit for convalescence. She was discharged home from that unit
on 31 January 2007.
[15] While in the extended care unit she was attended by PM solicitor on 24
January 2007 to take instructions from CAB and to sign
the Revocation of an
Enduring Power of Attorney and prepare a fresh Enduring Power of Attorney. PM,
with CAB’s consent, made
a taped recording of this interview which lasts
some one and a half hours. A copy of this tape and a transcript of the interview
(prepared by the solicitors appearing with leave for CAB) were provided to the
Tribunal. PM’s evidence will be discussed below.
[16] The Tribunal also had a number of other reports concerning CAB’s
capacity. The Tribunal had a health professional’s
report from Dr K, a
Consultant Geriatrician at the Hospital. His report
known CAB for 2 months and saw her on 30 January 2007. His report was dated 30
January 2007;
In his view CAB had dementia
with more than 2 years of cognitive decline which required increased support
from family;
She needed assistance with
short term memory;
A Mini-mental State
Examination, although a blunt instrument of indication of cognitive assessment,
performed on 15 January 2007 scored
CAB with 23 from a possible
A functional assessment to be performed
by an Occupational Therapist to provide higher testing was refused by
[17] Dr K’s report continued
some physical limitations e.g. need for support
She refused community supports
saying she relied on neighbours but could not name
She managed day to day events but
needed some supervision because she is unable to remember;
She was unable to remember the Enduring
Power of Attorney executed less than a week before his interview with her,
despite being shown
distressed at conflict between her son and
She lacked insight and judgment
and was able to make simple decisions
CAB would not be able to understand
any of the requirements of an Enduring Power of
[18] Another report was received from TC, an Occupational Therapist, dated 30
January 2007. TC advised the Tribunal that CAB was
admitted to the hospital
after a fall and break to her right arm and that she is physically unsteady with
impaired gait and balance.
She refused any mobility aids. CAB had been living
alone in high set home with many hazards and relied on family support. She
community services as follow-up to long hospital
[19] In relation to CAB’s cognition, TC gave evidence that
Was not orientated daily to date,
month or day;
Had poor short term memory,
both delayed and immediate;
Demonstrated
poor insight into condition and functional
Had impaired reasoning and problem
solving that were demonstrated in assessments of functioning in both bathroom
and kitchen assessments;
Was unable to
foresee consequences of her actions or those around
[20] The social worker of the extended care unit, KR confirmed on 31 January
2007 that CAB had been a patient in hospital since 27
November 2006 and
convalescing in extended care since 30 November 2006.
[21] However, a report was received from SM, a social worker of the extended
care unit of the hospital, that around 15 February 2007
CAB was admitted to that
unit by the Adult Guardian because of concerns of neglect by RC. The hospital
reported that the police were
called to her house because of allegations of
undue influence and that CAB expressed concerns about RC and her
[22] In a further report dated 14 February 2007, DP, a Neuropsychologist at the
hospital opined that:
Two cognitive
screening tests of CAB indicated moderate dementia with mild although clinically
significant cognitive deficits;
deficient new learning recall and recognition and her attention and
concentration was poor with executive control patchy and
abstract reasoning
All indicators were consistent
with Alzheimer’s Dementia.
[23] She stated that CAB was:
anxious and dysphoric;
Presented as a
disorganised, confused and vulnerable lady with significant memory deficits and
mildly impaired executive control –
she was unable to recall events
accurately or consistently and rapidly forgot over even a short
Appeared to be highly suggestible
to the influences of other people;
oriented to person, place and time but not to day, date or
Lost track of conversation
numerous times and her attention and concentration were poor;
Was rambling and tangential in her speech;
Was distressed by family
circumstances.
[24] On 30 January 2007, one week after the signing of the new Enduring Power of
Attorney, the progress notes of the social worker,
KR, record that CAB denied
she had seen the solicitor, PM 7 days earlier or that she had signed documents.
In CAB’s view, it
was more likely that her signature had been forged.
Evidence of PM
[25] PM advised the Tribunal that he had received initial instructions from RC
indicating that his mother wanted to change her Enduring
Power of Attorney and
her Will. PM said he told RC that he would prepare draft documents but would
have to see CAB personally to
confirm instructions. He said he was advised by RC
that the female doctor had said that CAB’s capacity was
and he informed RC that he (PM) would be a material
witness if there was a dispute about CAB’s capacity to execute the
[26] The Tribunal listened to the voice recording of the interview between the
solicitor PM and CAB on 24 January 2007. The interview’s
duration was 1
hour 38 mins 27 seconds. The Tribunal observed
constant masking by CAB of short-term memory
GB’ partner was the focus of
concern by CAB;
At an hour into the
interview, CAB did not want to decide between her children as an attorney and
suggested her sister GP, without
acknowledgment of a previous incapacity finding
made by Tribunal in relation to GP or that her financial matters being placed
the administration of The Public Trustee of
Queensland;
CAB preferred at that point in
the interview that no new Enduring Power of Attorney be
CAB had no memory of her will or its
By two thirds of the way through
interview, CAB had to ask PM his name;
repeated many issues and stories without remembering she had told PM previously
– e.g. control by GP of passbooks, care
of dogs (and funding of same) and
her attitude to the partner of her daughter;
At 1 hour 24 minutes into the interview,
it was clear that despite a detailed explanation of an Enduring Power of
Attorney and its
function, that when the subject was again introduced by PM and
despite saying she didn’t want to appoint either child, CAB
was unable to
recall the examples and explanations of the Enduring Power of Attorney
previously given in the interview.
[27] The Tribunal put to PM that the following behaviours of CAB should have
caused him some doubt about her cognitive
she could not remember if she had a Will or its
that she was repetitious of
stories and comments;
that she was not
consistent in her instructions in that she changed her mind about the
preparation of an Enduring Power of Attorney
that she wanted to appoint her sister
GP whose affairs are currently under an administration
PM’s had also commented,
assessing the interview, that “
it was quite clear that her memory was
[28] PM denied that he influenced CAB to any greater extent than any other
client in finally giving instructions to enter into an
Enduring Power of
Attorney. PM’s evidence to the Tribunal, contained in a note on
CAB’s interview provided to the Tribunal
and dated 8 February 2007, in the
ultimate paragraph, states:
RC had previously told me something that caused me to believe that the
female doctor treating CAB considered her capacity was ’marginal’.
understand she had been hospital
since November 2006, following a
fall in which her right arm was seriously broken. She told me her upper denture
had also been damaged.
I did not try to talk to the doctor, because if the
client does not obviously lack capacity, gives me coherent and reasonable
instructions,
and appears to understand what her assets are, who her family are,
the family dynamics, and what result she wants to achieve, I believe
I should do
the job even if the doctor disagrees. Interested parties can have the question
tested by the Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal without incurring much
expense and stress.”
[29] The Tribunal put to PM that the level of capacity to enter into an Enduring
Power of Attorney required by
Powers of Attorney Act
is in fact higher than as outlined by him as his perceived obligations.
The Act sets out, in the subsections of section 41, a number
of specific matters
including the principal understanding the nature and effect of making an
Enduring Power of Attorney. The list
is not exhaustive. In his interview with
CAB, PM either did not address or only superficially addressed any of these
specific matters.
Further, to understand the nature and effect of an Enduring
Power of Attorney as required by section 41, in the Tribunal’s
must be able to recall, at least in a general sense, that she had entered into
the document.
[30] Previously the evidence of Dr K and KR indicated that CAB could not recall
the documents as little as a week after their execution.
[31] At the hearing before the Tribunal, CAB could not identify PM at all and
could not remember even seeing him in the past. She
had no memory of signing the
Enduring Power of Attorney or the Revocation, even when the documents were shown
[32] The Tribunal is satisfied that CAB has moderate dementia. She has
significant short-term memory loss and poor recall. CAB has
significant executive deficits which lead to problems organising information,
abstract thinking and stable choices. She
has no insight into these deficits and
endeavours to mask her memory difficulties. This was evident also at the
hearing, for example
not recognising PM, nor identifying the Enduring Power of
Attorney she had signed. She is influenced in her decision making by the
around her.
[33] The Tribunal is also satisfied that when the documents were executed on 24
January 2007, some six weeks prior to the hearing
of this matter, there would
have been no significant difference to CAB’s cognitive abilities. This is
supported by the reports
of Dr K, TC, DP and KR, all of which were given
proximate to the signing of the Revocation and Enduring Power of
[34] The circumstances of the execution by CAB of the Revocation of an Enduring
Power of Attorney and the Enduring Power of Attorney
on 24 January 2007 are of
concern to the Tribunal. There were a number of indicia in these circumstances
that should have alerted
PM to take great care of his responsibility both as a
solicitor taking instructions and as a witness to an enduring document. CAB
in hospital. He had been warned that there were concerns about her capacity but
did not seek any information or views from her
treating doctor about these
[35] During the interview itself, PM formed the view that CAB’s memory was
not reliable. She could not recall her will or its
contents. She had to ask him
who he was again. She did not recall the circumstances of her sister. She was
repetitious of stories
and comments and clearly did not recall the previous
explanations of an Enduring Power of Attorney within the same
[36] She wavered substantially about whether she even wanted to complete an
Enduring Power of Attorney. Yet, despite deciding that
she did not want another
enduring power by the middle of the interview, the issue was returned to again
by PM after a discussion
does not believe that PM necessarily
to influence CAB, the
result of the subsequent discussion was the execution of the Enduring Power of
Attorney, despite CAB’s
views to the contrary earlier in the interview.
Discussions with CAB’s “
female doctor”
by PM would have
revealed that Dr P, the Neuropsychologist at the hospital, was of the view that,
among other things, CAB was highly
suggestible to the influences of other
[37] The making of an Enduring Power of Attorney requires a high degree of
cognitive ability. This has recently been commented on
by this Tribunal in
[2007] QGAAT 6
where the Tribunal, having reviewed the
current authorities in this area stated:
“Expert medical opinion provided to (and which appears to have been
accepted by) the Court in
Adult Guardian (In Re Enduring Power of Attorney of
Vera Hagger) v Vera Hagger, Declan James Barry and Albert Craig Ray SC Qld No
1083 of 2001(Unreported)
, was that an Enduring Power of Attorney was both
more unfamiliar and more complex (for most members of the community) than a
Accordingly, a higher cognitive ability and therefore standard of capacity
would be required for an Enduring Power of Attorney.
The making of an Enduring Power of Attorney, given the considerations to
which the principal is required by law to direct his or her
mind, would not
ordinarily be regarded as a simple decision...”
[38] In the same matter, the Tribunal also commented: “
Inherent in this
concept would seem to be an ability to retain the explanation, at least for the
duration of the decision-making process”
[39] This Tribunal respectfully agrees with these comments but is also of the
view that in circumstances where an enduring document
is being signed and there
is doubt about the principal’s capacity, not only does a person need to
retain the explanation for
the duration of the decision-making process but also
to be able to recall that an enduring power has been made and to whom the power
has been given in order to understand the nature and effect of the document
after the execution of it. No ability to remember that
an enduring document has
been made places the donor at risk in the future in a wide variety of
circumstances. These comments have
no application to the situation where an
enduring document is entered into at a time when the principal clearly has
capacity, often
years before the document is need to be enlivened, but to
circumstances where a document is being signed and capacity is at issue
contemporaneously.
[40] The Tribunal cannot agree with PM that “
Interested parties can
have the question tested by the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal without
incurring much expense and
. While the Tribunal endeavours to
practise the principles of therapeutic jurisprudence, the reality is that for
high conflict matters
in dysfunctional families, the experience of having to
bring these applications before the Tribunal is highly personally stressful
not conducive of maintaining relationships around the adult concerned.
[41] While there may not be the expense of legal representation (although in
high conflict matters, parties do increasingly feel
the need to have the
assistance of a lawyer), the personal time, expenses and stress to families,
friends and service providers are
still high. If these applications could be
avoided by proper inquiry by lawyers and witnesses at the time these documents
are entered
into, this would appear to the Tribunal to be a preferable course of
action and reflects the responsibilities of these parties under
the legislation;
see, for example,
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
requiring the witness to an Enduring Power of Attorney to be satisfied, amongst
other things, that the principal appeared to the
witness to have the capacity
necessary to make the enduring document.
[42] Within the meaning of section 41and
Powers of Attorney
, the Tribunal is satisfied that CAB was unable to understand the
nature and effect of an Enduring Power of Attorney or the Revocation
Enduring Power of Attorney entered into on 24 January 2007 because of her
cognitive incapacity. The Tribunal is satisfied that
both of the documents
executed by CAB on 24 January 2007 are invalid and orders are made
accordingly.
[43] To the extent that it is necessary (as RC appears to be the only attorney
who has ever accepted this appointment), the Enduring
Power of Attorney executed
by CAB on 9 December 2002, appointing RC or GB together with either AW or RB as
attorneys for financial,
personal and health matters is also revoked pursuant to
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
and s84(2) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
[44] All parties at the hearing (except CAB herself) agreed that CAB does not
have capacity for complex personal and financial decisions.
RC was of the view
that despite this, CAB could make an accommodation decision with the assistance
of professionals.
[45] The Tribunal was satisfied that CAB’s capacity had not improved since
January 2007 and that she is currently unable to
understand the nature and
effect of decisions about complex personal and financial matters, is likely to
do something that involves
or is likely to involve unreasonable risk to her
health or welfare, and that without the appointment of a guardian and an
administrator
her needs will not be adequately met. Within the meaning of
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
, the Tribunal
is satisfied that CAB has impaired capacity.
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF A GUARDIAN OR AN ADMINISTRATOR?
[46] All parties, except RC and CAB, agreed that there was a need to appoint a
guardian for CAB to make decisions in the areas of
accommodation, provision of
services, contact and health. As commented above, RC was of the view that CAB
could make an accommodation
decision with the assistance of
professionals.
[47] All parties agreed that there was a need to appoint an administrator for
CAB to make complex financial decisions. Both RC and
GB were of the view that
CAB could manage day to day financial decisions.
[48] The Tribunal agrees with these views. A decision as to the viability of CAB
remaining in her own home will be necessary in the
foreseeable future. Allied
with this accommodation decision will be a decision about provision of services.
There has been a recent
change to the pattern of contact between CAB and her
friends and visits to her sister GP. There is conflict between RC and GB and
other relatives and friends in this area. A clear decision-maker is
[49] Because of the level of conflict between RC and GB (discussed below), their
ability to make decisions and communicate as statutory
health attorneys for CAB
is almost non-existent. A clear decision-maker is required for health
[50] Although CAB is likely to be able to make day to day financial decisions,
it is not possible to separate out of CAB’s
finances the more simple
matters and there is a clear need to have an administrator appointed. Depending
on accommodation decisions
made by the guardian, there will be consequential
financial matters requiring decisions and implementation.
[51] The Tribunal relies on the requirement of the administrator to use the
“least restrictive option” contained in General
Principle 7 of the
General Principles contained in Schedule 1 to the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
to ensure that CAB is able to manage those financial
matters of a simpler nature herself.
WHO SHOULD BE APPOINTED?
[52] Initially, the proposed appointments before the Tribunal were of GB. At the
hearing, RC proposed that he be appointed if the
Enduring Power of Attorney of
24 January 2007 was found to be invalid. The Tribunal always has available for
appointment the statutory
appointments under the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
, the Adult Guardian and The Public Trustee of
Queensland as guardian and administrator respectively.
[53] At the close of the hearing, GB was of the view that the statutory bodies
should be appointed as they were independent of the
family. RC continued to seek
his own appointment.
Conflict between
[54] It was apparent to the Tribunal during the course of the hearing that high
levels of conflict exist between RC and GB. Both
of these parties thought the
other sibling, if appointed, would not made decisions in the best interests of
CAB. When questions about
responsibilities under General Principle 8 to consult
with other significant persons in CAB’s life, GB said she would consult
with her brother “i
f I have to speak to him”.
would speak to GB but with the view to
“limit her ability to do
[55] The Tribunal was unconvinced that either sibling would communicate or be
able to communicate with the other and, as both were
significant people in the
adult’s life, the Tribunal was not satisfied that either sibling could
apply General Principle 8.
[56] All interested parties to the hearing were of the view that independent
appointments outside the family should be made in CAB’s
best interests. In
particular, the Tribunal was impressed with the clear sightedness of NB who
strongly advocated on behalf of her
grandmother that neither her mother nor her
uncle be appointed because of the level of antagonism between them.
[57] As previously commented, by the end of the hearing GB also supported this
[58] CAB’s solicitor submitted on her behalf that she would prefer RC to
be appointed but that if the Tribunal was not minded
to that, her preference was
for the appointment of an independent person rather than a family
[59] The Tribunal is satisfied that the requirement of General Principle 8 to
maintain existing supportive relationships could only
be satisfied by the
appointment of an independent decision maker and not by the appointment of a
family member as both guardian and
administrator for CAB. The Tribunal
acknowledges that this is accepted by all family members and friends present at
the hearing except
[60] The Tribunal appoints the Adult Guardian as guardian for CAB for decisions
health care; and the provision of services for a period of five
[61] The Tribunal appoints The Public Trustee of Queensland as administrator for
CAB for all financial matters until further order
OTHER MATTERS
[62] The Tribunal recognises the importance of this application and is satisfied
that it is in the public interest that all information
in relation to this
matter including the identity of all parties and particularly these written
reasons be made available to the
Legal Services Commission if it requires them.
In accordance with
section 158(4)
the Tribunal hereby allows a copy of these
reasons, the recording of the interview with CAB by PM on 24 January 2007 and
the transcript
of that recording to be provided to this specific
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (230 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter