URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Christie, J & Steel, R v Garrison Developments Pty Ltd t/a Garrison Home [2003] QBT 25 (29 May 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 025
Christie & Steel v Garrison Developments Pty Ltd T/as Garrison
[2003] QBT B045-03
CHRISTIE John and STEEL Roger
GARRISON DEVELOPMENTS PTY LTD T/as Garrison Homes
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
29 May 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
DECISION OF:
Deputy Chairperson Ms L. Bradford-Morgan
CATCHWORDS:
Rectification costs – not recoverable when failure to notify
subcontractor of defects -
REPRESENTATION:
APPLICANTS:
Self represented
RESPONDENT:
Self represented
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
INTRODUCTION
Mr Christie and Mr Steel (“the
Applicants”) performed carpentry works for Garrison Homes (“the
Respondent”)
at a number of premises including premises owned by Mr and
Mrs Knyn at Magazine Street, Sherwood (“the Sherwood premises”).
The application filed 5 February 2003 seeks payment of the sum of seven thousand
five hundred and fifty nine dollars seventy eight
cents (which includes the
filing fee of $205 paid to the Tribunal on commencement of these proceedings).
The application annexes
invoices from Mr Steel to the Respondent for works done
pursuant to a “Contract Hourly Rate Work Agreement” for a period
December 2002 to 15 January 2003. Invoice number 968004 makes a claim for works
performed between 19 December 2002 and 2 January
2003 for 66 hours at a rate $27
per hour the total of $1960.20. The second invoice from Mr Steel number 968005
claims for 69 hours
work performed between 3 January 2003 and 15 January 2003 in
a total of $2049.30 (inclusive of GST). The application also annexes
following invoices from Mr Christie: Invoice number 001 dated 16 January 2003
claims payment for 60 hours at $27 per hour being
a total (inclusive of GST) of
$1782; and invoice number 002 dated 21 January 2003 claims for carpentry works
in the sum of $199.98.
An earlier invoice number 27 dated 6 January 2003 claims
payment in the sum of $1363 for 43.5 hours work at various sites including
Sherwood premises.
The Respondent lodged a Defence on 3
March 2003 (Exhibit 2) annexing a schedule of “Amounts Not
Disputed”. This schedule
refers to the Applicant’s 5 invoices and
admits that various amounts are owing. The amount not in dispute includes a
of $3486.85. During the proceedings Mr Neville and Mr Speechly on behalf
of the Respondent submitted that the amounts admitted in
the schedule to the
Defence had been incorrectly calculated and the amount admitted by Garrison
was reduced to the sum of $2670.10.
PREVIOUS ORDERS
On 3 March 2003 the Tribunal made an order
directing the Respondent to pay to Mr Christie the sum of $1927.60 and an amount
to Mr Steel. By further order of 11 April 2003 the amount disputed
by the Respondent was revised from $3868.13 to $4889.68. The
Respondent made
payment in accordance with orders 1 and 2 of the Tribunal’s orders of 3
March 2003. It is the Respondent’s
contention that it incurred costs to
rectify the Applicant’s defective work which it seeks to set off against
the balance of
the unpaid monies claimed by the
Applicants.
THE APPLICANTS CASE
The Applicants relied upon a joint
statement by Mr Christie and Mr Steel dated 13 March 2003 (Exhibit 3). Mr
Christie gave evidence
that his work was supervised by Mr Ken Freeman who was
formerly employed by the Respondent as a supervisor. Mr Christie stated that
Freeman was required to supply bits of hardware to enable carpentry works to be
performed and he failed to do so in a timely manner
which impacted upon the
works being performed by Mr Christie. During cross examination by Mr Christie,
Mr Speechly conceded that
the Respondent had not contacted the Applicants to
inform them of its complaints about defective work and consequently the
had no opportunity to inspect or rectify any defective works. The
Respondent concedes that it arranged for four other carpenters
rectification works at various sites including the Sherwood premises during the
period 21 January 2003 to 7 March 2003.
The Respondent submitted that the value
of rectification works performed exceeded the monies outstanding to the
Applicants for work
on the Sherwood premises.
Mr Speechly submitted to the Tribunal that
the homeowners had no confidence in the quality of the Applicants’ work
and consequently
the Respondent made a decision not to “get them
back”. The Respondent conceded that there were no site orders to rectify
defects and no defects list issued to the Applicants prior to the list of
defects being filed in the Tribunal on 10 March 2003.
It was the evidence of Mr
Christie that he telephoned a gentleman identified as “Sebastian”
(Mr Neville identified this
gentlemen as a director of the Respondent company)
who informed him on 16 January 2003 that
“there are carpenters as we
speak rectifying ..... your defective work”.
Mr Christie stated that
he immediately went to the Sherwood premises and that he asked the carpenters on
site on that day what they
were doing. Mr Christie gave evidence that the
carpenter (later identified as Mr Shirdon) informed him
“that there
were one or two doors out 1 -2 millimetres but there was not much
It was Mr Christie’s evidence that he again telephoned
the offices of the Respondent on 20 January 2003 when he was informed
“Sebastian” that the Respondent refused to pay the Applicants’
invoices until after all defects had been fixed
to determine
left if anything after other trades have fixed defects”.
Evidence – Mr Steel
Mr Steel gave evidence that Mr Christie
was on leave between Christmas and New Year while he worked on the site in an
effort to complete
the premises as the homeowner had advised him that practical
completion was to be achieved on 23 December and she was upset at the
Mr Steel stated that the Respondent’s former supervisor Mr Freeman was not
on holidays over the Christmas period and
that he had been informed by Mr
Freeman that he should continue works over the Christmas – New Year
holidays in order to get
the job finished. It was the evidence of Mr Steel that
Mr Freeman did not inform him of any complaints about his standard of work
that he was instructed to hang toilet doors without lift off hinges as they had
not been made available by Mr Freeman. Mr Steel
stated that he had worked as a
carpenter for 14 years and on other major projects he always attended to
rectification of any defective
work. It was Mr Steel’s evidence that Mrs
Knyn (“the homeowner”) had mentioned to him that an architrave was
up against the frame and that he immediately nailed it up but he received
no other complaints of defective work.
Mr Steel stated Mr Freeman had problems
getting necessary hardware to him. During cross examination Mr Speechly
referred Mr Steel
to the contract hourly rate agreement and asked whether it was
his contention that he was not responsible for rectifying defective
Steel responded that the Respondent should have instructed him to fix any
defective work and that Mr Freeman, the nominated
supervisor for the Respondent,
had not told him of any problems in his work. Mr Steel noted that the
Respondent had used several
gangs of carpenters on this job and that when he and
Mr Christie first commenced work on site two thirds of the top floor had already
been done. Mr Steel gave evidence that he and Mr Christie had observed several
significant defects in the previous carpenters’
work including the use of
hand driven nails (in lieu of a nail gun) and the use of oversized nails. Mr
Steel also noted that the
barn door had been nailed shut leaving it in a
severely damaged state.
THE RESPONDENT’S
Mr Speechly gave evidence on behalf of the
Respondent and his statements were marked (Exhibit 4). He gave evidence that
the homeowners
wanted to move in urgently as there had been delays because of
another gang of carpenters who did the framing. In response the Respondent
asked its supervisor Mr Freeman to keep Mr Christie and Mr Steel working over
the Christmas holiday period in an effort to finish
the job earlier. Mr
Speechly stated that he took the opportunity to have some annual leave over the
Christmas period and he left
“looking after defects while I
was on leave”.
Mr Speechly informed the Applicants on a number of
occasions that
“knowing Mr Freeman’s extensive experience in the
construction industry I assumed he would have raised the issue of defects
Mr Freeman did not provide a statement in these proceedings and
was not called to give evidence on behalf of the Respondent. The
adduced no evidence in support of its assumption that Mr Freeman had informed Mr
Christie and Mr Steel that there were
any items of defective
Mr Speechly gave evidence that Mrs Knyn
sent a letter to the Respondent on 10 February 2003 complaining of the poor
quality of the
Applicants’ work. Mr Speechly stated that
could’ve contacted the carpenters but we didn’t have confidence in
their ability because we wanted quality work”.
When asked to explain
the failure to notify the Applicants of their defective work and the failure to
afford them an opportunity
to rectify any defective work Mr Speechly stated that
it was a decision made by the company in an effort to satisfy the homeowners.
Mr Speechly was referred to the
conditions on the Contract hourly rate work agreement which provides for
delivery of a weekly invoice
to the Respondent’s office by Friday in order
to receive a cheque in payment of that invoice on the following Friday. Mr
stated that the Applicants’ invoices of 16 January had not been
paid in the following week and that no payment had been made
prior to the
Respondent receiving the homeowners’ complaint of defective work on 10
February 2003 (Exhibit 6). It was the
evidence of Mr Speechly that he did not
become aware of any significant defects in the Applicants’ work until Mr
Gibbons, the
painting sub-contractor retained by the Respondent, attended the
job to do the pre-paint works in February 2003.
Mr Speechly stated that the Respondent
denied that it was liable to pay to Mr Steel the outstanding balance of $3266.50
to Mr Christie the outstanding balance of $1622.68 and consequently
the sum of $4889.68 being works performed by Mr Christie and
Mr Steel at the
Sherwood premises was in dispute. Mr Speechly in his initial statement of 17
March 2003 asserted that the Respondent
had been liable to the homeowners for
liquidated damages in the sum of $3500 and asserted that the Applicants’
defective work
resulted in the delay to practical completion. The
“Project task list “ dated 18 March 2003 annexed to Mr
first statement of 17 March 2003 lists a start and finish date
for various items of work from set out to hand over. Mr Speechly
submitted that
he had made reference to the homeowners’ deduction of liquidated damages
however the Respondent was not making
a claim for liquidated damages against the
Applicants in these proceedings.
Mr Speechly was requested to clarify the
basis for the claim for set off made by the Respondent in the absence of a
schedule identifying
the components of the set off claim. It was Mr
Speechly’s evidence that the Respondent sought to deduct from monies owing
to the Applicants the costs of four carpenters performing rectification works at
the premises and the following costs:
the labour of one supervisor for 2 days,
2 hours per day over 11 days at $40 per hour;
materials which had to be replaced
(including doors and skirting boards) in the sum of $400.
Mr Speechly conceded that there was no
evidence filed on behalf of the Respondent in support of the claim for
supervisor’s costs
or materials.
During cross examination of Mr Speechly,
Mr Christie referred to the defects list annexed to the homeowners’ letter
of 10 February
2003 (Exhibit 6) and observed a number of the items did not
relate to the Applicants’ work. Mr Speechly conceded that the
referred to the whole of the construction and not simply the Applicants’
work. Mr Speechly referred to the photographs
annexed to Mr Neville’s
statement (Exhibit 5) which includes seven photographs with hand written
During cross examination Mr Speechly was
referred to the invoices from other carpenters engaged by Garrison Homes
subsequent to the
Applicants leaving the site. Mr Christie referred to the
invoice from Mr Burnitt dated 24 January 2003 (annexed to the second statement
of Mr Speechly dated 17 March 2003). This invoice dated 24 January 2003 claims
for labour and materials for two premises including
the Sherwood site and refers
to sixteen hours work for
“replaced doors and architraves; repair and
re-door doors”
at a cost of $28 per hour. Mr Speechly’s second
statement also annexes the invoice from Mr Shirdon of 24 January 2003 which
makes claim for labour on two premises including the Sherwood site for 21
January for nine hours
to “rectify door hinges arch and stops, nail off
at a rate of $28 per hour for nine
The Respondent also makes a claim for
rectification works performed by Mr Southworth in an invoice of 24 February 2003
for work identified
only as “repairs” on two projects at $27 an hour
for 60 hours. It was Mr Speechly’s submission that the second
page of the
worksheet provided by Mr Southworth referred to minor works at another job on
the Thursday, and the vast majority of
the works being performed at the Sherwood
site. The second page of the attachment to Mr Southworth’s statement
(Exhibit 10)
is illegible.
Further carpentry works were performed by
Mr Mitchell, a carpenter engaged by Garrison Homes during the period 19 February
24½ hours at $27 an hour, being a total cost of $727.65, and further
works from 3 to 7 March 2003 being 19 hours at $27 an hour.
Mr Speechly gave
evidence that a number of crews were used to do rectification work, as Mr
Burnitt disappeared and it was difficult
to find carpenters during that period
of time. Mr Speechly confirmed that the Respondent sought to offset all
rectification costs
as against the claim made by the
Applicants.
EVIDENCE OF MR NEVILLE
Mr Neville’s statement was confined
to preparation of a List of Defects dated 10 March 2003 (Exhibit 5). Mr Neville
that he could not identify the work done by other carpenters prior to
Mr Christie and Mr Steel commencing work on site, and further
he could not
identify the works performed by each subsequent carpenter engaged by Garrison
prior to the extensive works performed
by either Mr Southworth or Mr
EVIDENCE OF MRS KNYN
Mrs Knyn gave evidence that she noticed
defects in the finishing carpentry which she mentioned to Mr Freeman as
supervisor. Mrs Knyn
stated that she thought it would be addressed, however it
was not remedied and she became concerned when the first coat of paint
on, as it was her view that the application of paint indicated the
Respondent’s acceptance of the standard of workmanship.
Mrs Knyn stated
that at this stage she and her husband decided to formalise their complaints by
delivering her letter of 10 February
Mrs Knyn also gave evidence that at a
site meeting in January 2003 she met Mr Speechly on site and showed him some
architraves that
were not meeting cleanly at a 45º angle. Mrs Knyn stated
that she went to site daily and during these site visits she had a
relationship with Mr Christie and Mr Steel, however she had noted some problems
with the standard of work.
It was the evidence of Mrs Knyn that she
was contacted by the Respondent upon receipt of her letter of 10 February 2003
and that she
was informed by Garrison Homes that
“a second letter was
needed for Court”.
Mrs Knyn stated that she prepared a second letter
which is dated 17 March 2003 (Exhibit 7), however the date of that letter
after the date of the initial letter of 10 February 2003. Mr Christie
observed that the difference between the two versions of the
letters (Exhibits 6
and 7) is largely the reference to Mr Steel and Mr Christie by
It was the evidence of Mrs Knyn that no
rectification work had been done in relation to the defects identified by her
husband prior
to the 10 February 2003 letter being forwarded to the Respondent.
During cross-examination Mrs Knyn agreed
that Mr Steel had rectified an architrave that was not sitting hard up against a
she had pointed it out to him.
EVIDENCE OF
Mr Gibbons was the painting subcontractor
engaged by the Respondent and he provided a statement marked (Exhibit 8). Mr
statement is confined to a seven line statement which contends
that the standard of carpentry work was poor. The terms of Mr Gibbons’
statement are general and do not refer to any specific defects. Mr Gibbons gave
evidence that he had troubles with the doors and
architraves as the doors were
binding and consequently he could not complete the pre-paint works. Mr Gibbons
gave evidence that
he called Mr Freeman to advise him that he had problems
because of the carpenters’ standard of work and that he proceeded to
and putty nail holes and architraves which were subsequently taken off and had
to be redone. Mr Gibbons conceded that he could
not identify who had performed
the defective carpentry work prior to his commencing works on the site in
February 2003.
The Respondent also adduced evidence from
Mr Mitchell and his statement was marked Exhibit 9. Mr Mitchell gave evidence
that he spent
24½ hours removing every door and all architraves and door
jambs and replacing hinges that were installed back-to-front. Mr
Mitchell’s invoices refer to 24½ hours work at the Sherwood site on
19 February 2003 at a cost of $727.65 and a further
19 hours work at $27 an hour
in early March 2003. Being a total of 43½ hours rectification works.
During cross-examination Mr Mitchell was
referred to the invoices for Mr Burnitt for 16 hours rectification on 24 January
Mr Shirdon for 9 hours work between 21 and 24 January 2003 and Mr
Southworth’s invoices for 60 hours labour for “repairs”
between 11 February 2003 and 20 February 2003. Mr Mitchell candidly conceded
that in his view all of the carpentry finishing works
were defective and
required rectification. Mr Mitchell noted that Mr Southworth had been working
on site on the first two days that
he attended the Sherwood site and that he had
removed most of the doors on the upstairs level. Mr Mitchell stated that he
not express any view as to who had performed the defective carpentry work
prior to his commencement of work on site after being referred
to the invoice
for works done by Mr Burnitt, and Mr Shirdon.
The Respondents also adduced evidence
from Mr Southworth and his statement was marked Exhibit 10. Mr Southworth gave
evidence that
architraves were not level, there were bows in doors and it was
necessary to take off all doors and straighten jambs and replace
all door hinges
as most of the doors would not shut as they had been installed incorrectly. It
was the evidence of Mr Southworth
that it was necessary for Garrison Homes to
replace approximately six doors and/or hinges due to defective work.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPLICANTS
Mr Christie submitted that he and Mr
Steel had been required to work on several of Garrison’s sites
concurrently and that they
had experienced difficulty in obtaining necessary
hardware to properly fit doors which were to be supplied by Garrison (through Mr
Freeman). Mr Christie stated that he received no notification of any defects in
his work or the work of Mr Steel. Mr Christie submitted
that a defects list was
received for the first time almost one month after he and Mr Steel had finished
work and by this time the
Respondent had engaged several other carpenters to
rectify “defective work”.
SUBMISSIONS ON
BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
Mr Speechly’s explanation of his
company’s failure to advise the Applicants of complaints of defective work
was that the
Respondent had
“no faith in the Applicants’ work so
we went with our heart and what the owners wanted and got two good carpenters to
do rectification work”.
The Respondent seeks to set off against the
Applicants’ claim the following costs:
Rectification work by
Mr Burnitt 16
Mr Shirdon 9
Mr Southworth 60
Mr Mitchell 24½
At a total cost of $3264
Two hours for a supervisor over eleven
days - $440 (at a rate of $40 per
Materials for replacement doors and
hinges $400.
The Applicants seek payment of the unpaid
balance for work done; interest at a rate of 10% per annum and reimbursement of
the application
filing fee of
The Respondent does not dispute that the
Applicants performed the works referred to in their five invoices annexed to the
application
(Exhibit 1). The Respondent conceded that it disputed its liability
to pay Mr Christie and Mr Steel for works performed at the Sherwood
only and that the balance of the invoices which related to work at other sites
was not in dispute. The Respondent informed
the Tribunal that it had complied
with the Tribunal’s Order of 3 March 2003 which provided for a payment of
$1927.60 to Mr
Christie and $742.50 to Mr Steel.
Given the Respondent’s concession
that the Applicants performed the works at the Sherwood premises, the
Respondent’s liability
to the Applicants rests on a determination of its
claim to set off costs of rectification. The Respondent conceded that Mr
became aware of the homeowners’ complaints in relation to the
standard of the carpentry finishing works in late December 2002
or during the
month of January 2003 during which time Mrs Knyn showed Mr Speechly a number of
items of work including architraves
out of level at her home. It was the
uncontroverted evidence of Mrs Knyn, that notwithstanding her complaints to the
Respondent’s
supervisor Mr Freeman, defects had not been attended to prior
to Mr Gibbons arriving on site to commence painting works. I find
evidence adduced by the Respondent in support of its cross claim failed to
substantiate a number of essential components
of its set off claim. The
Respondent concedes that it did not notify Mr Steel or Mr Christie of the
alleged defects in their work
and that it retained the services of four
carpenters to perform rectification works during the period 21 January 2003 to 7
2003. The Respondent’s explanation for its failure to provide
notification to the Applicants was confined to a contention
that the defective
work was so appalling as to completely destroy the Respondent’s trust in
the Applicants’ work.
I found the evidence of Mr Speechly
unsatisfactory in relation to his explanation of the Respondent’s failure
to pay the Applicants
(in December and January) which was asserted to be based
upon the homeowners’ complaints in relation to the standard of workmanship
which were contained in the homeowners’ letter of 10 February 2003. It
was conceded that it was a term of the Applicants’
agreement with the
Respondent that payment for work on an hourly rate was to be made by the Friday
following submission of an invoice
to the Respondent. I am satisfied that the
Applicants promptly sought to obtain information from the Respondent concerning
defective work, and I accept the evidence of Mr Christie that he and
Mr Steel immediately proceeded to the Sherwood site whereupon
they spoke to
carpenters already on site, at the request of the Respondent to perform
carpentry works.
The statements by Mr Gibbons, Mr Mitchell
and Mr Southworth are brief and in such general terms as to be of little
evidentiary value.
The records of works performed by Mr Mitchell, Mr
Southworth, Mr Shirdon and Mr Burnitt are confined to brief notations of, for
example, “repairs to remove back door; fix two halves together and hang
just to match frames fit locks fit buffers defects”.
It was the evidence
of Mr Mitchell and Mr Southworth that all of the works performed by the
finishing carpentry trades were defective.
No evidence was adduced by the
Respondent which identified the works necessary to rectify carpentry items of
work listed in the
defects list filed 10 March 2003 (annexed to Mr
Neville’s statement - Exhibit 5) or to demonstrate that the defects were
work done by either Mr Christie or Mr Steel. I accept the uncontroverted
evidence of Mr Steel that two thirds of the first floor
carpentry works had been
performed prior to commencement of works by Mr Christie and Mr Steel at the
Sherwood site.
In these circumstances I find that there
was insufficient evidence upon which to find that the works of Mr Christie and
Mr Steel were
defective or to assess the reasonable costs incurred by the
Respondent to rectify defects (which were not adequately identified).
invoices of the four subsequent carpenters in my view demonstrates that their
work was also being rectified by later crews.
No evidence was adduced of the costs of a
supervisor to overview rectification works or of materials’ costs incurred
in rectifying
defective work. The Respondent failed to identify items of
defective work that could be attributed to the Applicants’ work
my view was a consequence of retaining several carpenters to perform works from
21 January 2003 to 6 March 2003.
I note that the set off claim seeks to
recover rectification by carpenters subsequent to the Applicants leaving the
site on 16 January
2003 at 109.5 hours.
Independent of the departure from the
accepted practice of notifying trades of defective work and affording them an
opportunity to
rectify any defective work I am not satisfied that the Respondent
has discharged the burden of proof, particularly given the evidence
Southworth and Mr Mitchell that all previous works were defective including the
works performed by Mr Burnitt and Mr Shirdon
described as “replace doors
and architraves, repair and redoor doors” and “rectify door hinges
architraves and
stops, nail off skirts”.
In the absence of cogent evidence in
support of the Respondent’s set off claim I dismiss the claim for set off
by the Respondent
and give judgment for the Applicants as
I find that the Respondent is indebted to
the Applicant Mr Christie in a sum of $1622.68 being the unpaid contract sum of
and reimbursement of the filing fee of
I find that the Respondent is indebted
to the Applicant Mr Steel in the sum of $3267.00.
In the absence of submissions as to an
appropriate rate of interest I find that the Respondent should pay interest in
the sum of 10%
per annum on the judgment sums for the period 25 January 2003 to
date being 118 days.
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
The invoices lodged by Mr Steel claim for
works done to a value of $4009.50 less $742.50 paid by the Respondent pursuant
to the Tribunal’s
Order of 3 March 2003 leaving a claim of $3267.
The invoices lodged by Mr Christie claim
payment in the sum of $3344.98 less the sum of $1927.60 paid pursuant to the
Order of 3 March 2003 leaving a balance of $1417.38. Mr
Christie also claims payment of the application filing fee of $205.
I find that the Respondent should pay to
Mr Steel interest in the sum of $105.62.
I find that the Respondent is indebted to
Mr Christie for interest in the sum of $45.82.
I find that the Applicants are entitled
to reimbursement of the application filing fee paid in the sum of $205 (which
forms part of
Mr Christie’s claim for the unpaid balance for work
The Respondent shall pay to Mr Christie
the sum of $1668.20 being judgment of $1417.38, interest of $45.82 and the sum
of $205 for
the application filing fee by:
4:00PM ON 6 JUNE 2003
The Respondent shall pay to the Applicant
Mr Steel the sum of $3372.62 being judgment in the sum of $3267.00 together with
of $105.62 by:
4:00PM ON 6 JUNE
MS L. BRADFORD MORGAN
CHAIRPERSON
29 MAY 2003
..................................................
MS J. SCHAFER -
CHAIRPERSON
Queensland Building Tribunal
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 025
Application No:
John Christie & Roger Steel
C/- 8 Mulberry Court
POINT QLD 4165
Respondent:
Garrison Developments Pty Ltd T/as Garrison Homes
BURANDA QLD 4102
- Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
Upon hearing Mr Christie and Mr Steel the applicants and Mr Neville
and Mr Speechly on behalf of the respondent, the Queensland Building
makes the following orders:
The Respondent shall pay to Mr Christie
the sum of $1668.20 being judgment of $1417.38; interest of $45.82 and
reimbursement of the
$205 filing fee by:
4:00PM ON 6 JUNE 2003
The Respondent shall pay to the Applicant
Mr Steel the sum of $3372.62 being judgment in the sum of $3267.00 together with
of $105.62 by:
4:00PM ON 6 JUNE 2003
......................................................
MS L. BRADFORD-MORGAN – DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
Queensland Building Tribunal
Date: 29 May 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (125 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter