URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mohle, Robert v Qbsa [2003] QBT 17 (4 April 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 017
Mohle v QBSA
[2003] QBT Q109-02
MOHLE Robert
QUEENSLAND BUILDING SERVICES AUTHORITY
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
4 April 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
10 December 2002
DECISION OF:
Mr P Lohrisch
CATCHWORDS:
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
– section 105
REPRESENTATION:
Self-represented
SOLICITORS:
RESPONDENT:
In-house solicitor – Mr Robinson
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Introduction
This is an application by a licensed
contractor to review a decision by the Queensland Building Services Authority
(“the Authority”)
to issue a Direction to Rectify, namely Direction
to Rectify No. 23823 dated 17 May 2002, in respect of a driveway constructed by
the Applicant at a site at 6 Airlie Crescent, Airlie
Decision Under Review
The Direction to Rectify is in the
following terms:
required to undertake rectification work necessary to address the issues listed
below within the Time Period for Completion:
EXTENSIVE CRACKING AND STEPPING
HAS OCCURRED TO THE CONCRETE DRIVEWAY IN A NUMBER OF
NOTE: IN THE OPINION OF THE AUTHORITY THE
ABOVE DEFECTS HAVE BEEN ATTRIBUTED TO BY THE METHOD OF
CONSTRUCTION.
The Applicant disputes workmanship issues
alleged by the Authority. Those issues are more particularly dealt with in the
of the Authority’s inspector, Mr Bergin.
Further the Applicant says that the
problems with this driveway were as a result of the compaction and density of
the sub-grade being
inadequate. He said that the sub-grade was not his
responsibility under his contract with the homeowner, but, in any event, he was
not aware at the time of its inadequacy and should not be held responsible for
The Authority disputes both of the above
assertions.
Further the Applicant asserts that this
was a Category 2 rather than a Category 1 defect, and that therefore the notice
(requiring notice within six (6) months of completion of the works)
have not been complied with.
The Authority, for its part, asserts that
the defects in this driveway are Category 1 and that no notice considerations
are relevant.
Applicant’s Evidence
The Applicant provided a statement
(Exhibit 1) and gave oral evidence.
statement the Applicant said that the cracking was of a cosmetic nature and did
not affect the serviceability and functionality
of the driveway, and that
accordingly the defects are Category 2 rather than Category 1
As already noted the Applicant further
asserts that the cracking is not as a result of defective works performed by his
moreover the result of a defective base course for the apron and
driveway, the laying of which he was not contracted to
By way of explanation the Applicant said
that in his quotation he quoted for the supply of 50mm of sand fill in the
driveway area.
He said he did not contract to construct the retaining wall or
to supply and consolidate the basefill behind the retaining wall.
These works
were done by others. The Applicant said that, as to the area at the back of the
house, excluding the clothesline area,
his firm supplied and consolidated the
base course at a thickness of approximately 300mm, and that this area has no
The Applicant said that the base course
behind the retaining wall needed to be checked for compliance with AS 3727, and
that the engineer’s
drawings and reports for the five (5) metres plus
retaining wall needed to be produced. He said that, in these circumstances,
these things are done, to replace the driveway on the current base course
with faulty compaction would cause the same problems.
As to driveway thickness he said the
thickness was an average of 112mm overall. He calculated this on the basis of
the number of
cubic metres of concrete apparently delivered to the site (as per
the invoices), comparing this with the total square metres in the
driveways and computing an average thickness of 112mm overall. He said that Mr
Bergin, the Authority’s inspector,
did not wish to have a core test
performed to establish the thickness of the concrete.
As to the reinforcement of the concrete,
the Applicant said that Pioneer Concrete’s product
“Microfibre” was the
concrete mix used as per his quotation. He
said that Pioneer Microfibre meets Australian Standards AS3727 No. 8.4.6
Polypropylene
fibres. The Standard he said
“Polypropylene fibres are used,
primarily, to reduce the incidence of plastic shrinkage cracking. They also
reduce bleeding
of water in the mix.”
It is to be noted that the Applicant in
his statement (Exhibit 1) refers in support of his position to Pioneer
Concrete’s publication
“Pioneer Micromesh” which is an
annexure to his statement. The Applicant’s annexure annexes the front
the publication and what appears to be the first sheet of the
publication following that front sheet.
In particular the document annexed by the
Applicant refers to:
“All components of
concrete (excluding bonding monofilaments) meet their relevant
Australian Standard.
Flexural strengths showed no increase or decrease
between plain concrete and concrete containing bonding
monofilaments.
Splitting Tensile
Splitting Tensile strengths showed a slight
increase in strength in concrete containing bonding
monofilaments.”
No other pages of the Pioneer publication
were annexed by the Applicant.
As to construction joints, the Applicant
repeated that cracking in the driveway and apron was caused by inferior
compacting of the
base course behind the homeowner’s retaining
He said that construction joints were
consistently placed over the whole job, and that there was no cracking in the
paths and steps
areas where the construction joints were of the same regularity
as in the driveway apron and clothesline area where cracking occurred.
Applicant concluded therefore that the defects were not caused by insufficient
construction joints.
As to the trimmer bars to the manhole
lid, the Applicant said that these were not required, as it was not a
penetrating structure.
He said the manhole referred to in Mr Bergin’s
initial inspection report is a non-penetrating false lid, and that the concrete
slab does not surround the manhole, but goes over the top of it. He said the
result is that the Australian Standard 8.3(a), to which
Mr Bergin refers, does
not apply to the manhole lid.
As to compacting the base course, the
Applicant repeated that he was contracted to supply and place base course at
50mm over the driveway
area and 300mm sand fill over the balance area (the
latter not being subject to cracking).
He said that he compacted both areas by
flooding with water on the day of placement, the water being hosed thoroughly
from the concrete
truck. He said that this was standard practice to consolidate
fill and stop the fill taking water from the concrete.
As to vibrating exposed aggregate
concrete, he said that the Australian Standard 3727 referred to the procedure
involved in placing
exposed aggregate finishes which is to “screed and
bullfloat the surface to the finished level”. He said there was no
mention in the Standard of a requirement to vibrate exposed aggregate. He said
his view was that the vibration of exposed aggregate
would produce an
unacceptable finish.
As to shrinkage cracks and stepping being
excessive, the Applicant said that the stepping in the cracks is minimal and
permitted tolerances. The one crack that might not be within
tolerances (in the dowel joint) covers a very small area of approximately
He said that in any event this latter stepping is acceptable visually. He said
this latter stepping is 8mm.
Mr Mohle was cross-examined. He
disagreed that the driveway was unfit for the purpose for which it was to be
As to the thickness of the concrete, he
agreed that the thickness required was 100mm, and that it varied between 75mm
He said however that he tried to keep the thickness at 100mm and
never go under 75mm.
Mr Mohle was then referred to the
transcript of a conversation on site alleged to have taken place between he and
Mr Bergin on 15
May 2002. The transcript is an annexure to Mr Bergin’s
statement (Exhibit 3) and to the Authority’s Statement of Reasons
4). It is I think useful to extract that transcript at this
“I (Mr Bergin) said: What was the
condition of the subgrade prior to the placement of the
He (Mr Mohle) said: Ratshit.
said: What do you mean by that? Was it adequately compacted?
said: No it wasn’t that was not my job.
I said: If you
knew that the sub base was not adequately prepared why did you install the
He said: Not my problem.
I said: Was
the concrete adequately compacted? By vibration.
He said: No
you couldn’t vibrate exposed aggregate as it segregates the aggregate and
the concrete slurry.
I said: The segregation of the aggregate
and the concrete slurry is only caused by excessive vibration not by adequate
The slab appears to be less than 100mm in places; in particular
slab edge appears to be 75mm in places.
He said: I was only
contracted to supply concrete of 75 to 100mm thick for
I said: Informed the licensee that the driveway would
need to be a minimum of 100mm thick to accommodate vehicular traffic and in
opinion requires a minimum of F62 reinforcement to compensate for flexing due to
vehicular traffic.
I said: Were trimmer bars provided around the
posts and manholes to top of the driveway?
He said: No he
provided Sikaflex around the steel posts.
I said: You meant Ableflex
not Sikaflex.
He said: Yes whatever.”
The Applicant agreed that the
conversation took place and that the transcript of it as above was reasonably
correct. Indeed, there
was no part of the transcript with which Mr Mohle took
issue during the course of his evidence.
Mr Mohle stated that earthworks were
specialised. He said that since receiving the complaint he had asked others
(specialists) about
5 metre boulder walls and had been told that the fill behind
such walls should be compacted.
He said accordingly his view expressed in
the transcript that the fill behind the wall, and on which he constructed the
was “ratshit” was a view arrived at after the complaint
had been received. He said he did not know at the time of laying
this driveway
as to the possible inadequacy of the sub-base upon which he was constructing the
driveway. He said he only learned
later about the way in which it should be
done. He said he had no opinion at the time as to the adequacy of the sub-base.
generally that usually he considered the sub-base upon which he laid
concrete, and that he compacted it etc as, or if,
Mr Mohle conceded that there was no steel
reinforcement in the driveway and that he used “Micromesh” as a
substitute.
Mr Mohle agreed further that, as was his
practice with aggregate, he had not vibrated the
As to control joints Mr Mohle agreed that
the control joints had been placed at 13 metres and 7
As to the sizing of the cracks he
disagreed that the cracks were wider than 1.5mm. Further he said that all
concrete driveways on
hills crack.
The Applicant considered that micromesh
had a tensile strength slightly greater than steel. Generally he said that he
did not agree
that this slab was falling apart and was deteriorating.
George Robert Thomson
Mr Thomson is an engineer who consulted
to the Applicant. He provided the Applicant with a report which is Exhibit 2.
also gave oral evidence.
In his report Mr Thomson said that, in
his opinion, the cracking of the driveway could be predominately due to
settlement of the subgrade.
He said that the slab was apparently
constructed using micromesh in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions. He said
that micromesh is a fibre mesh increasing the tensile
strength of cured concrete, and that the manufacturers claim it reduces plastic
shrinkage cracking by 70% to 90%. He said that increasing tensile strength will
reduce the number and spacing of shrinkage cracks
which was apparent in the
inspected slab.
He said the driveway as inspected had
been constructed on a filled embankment supported by an ungrouted boulder wall
and that normal
construction methods make it extremely difficult to compact an
embankment with a boulder retaining wall which can lead to future
settlement.
He said the cracks as inspected appeared
to have a differential vertical movement as well as opening up horizontally. He
vertical movement, and possibly the initial cause of the cracking,
could have been caused by settlement of the filled subgrade, particularly
cracks were in the location of possible filling. He said that once the slab had
cracked the fibre mesh would become redundant
allowing the crack to open
horizontally due to normal shrinkage.
In his oral evidence Mr Thomson said that
vehicular traffic would not affect shrinkage and that reinforcing had no effect
on strength.
He agreed that there could possibly have been more control joints
in an unreinforced concrete slab such as this.
Mr Thomson also confirmed that vibrating
of concrete such as this was good practise.
In cross-examination Mr Thomson resiled
from his view expressed in examination-in-chief and largely agreed with the
Concrete Handbook
to the effect that polypropylene was no substitute for steel
reinforcing, and further that polypropylene did not add to the tensile
of the concrete. He confirmed that the vertical steps sounded to him like
settlement. He said he accepted that the driveway
was non-performing, and that
aesthetically it did not look the best. He said that its serviceability would
further deteriorate as
the subgrade kept settling. He said that the fill could
be expected to settle for up to five years or more.
As to the work around the manhole, Mr
Thomson agreed in cross-examination that some trimmer bars should have been
placed, or something
done to reduce the possibility of cracking in this
He said that, if the cause of the
problems to the slab was settlement, then the thickness of the slab (whether it
was 75mm or 100mm)
would not have mattered.
Evidence of
Respondent Authority
Norman James Bergin
Mr Bergin provided a statement dated 23
August 2002 (Exhibit 3) and gave oral evidence.
Mr Bergin said he inspected the site on
15 May 2002 in the presence of the Applicant and the owner. He said that his
inspection revealed
that the works performed by the Applicant were defective.
He said that the nature of the defective work was as
The driveway is 75mm to 100mm thick
whereas it should be at least 100mm thick;
The driveway contains no steel
reinforcement;
The driveway has inadequate
construction joints;
The driveway contains no trimmer bars
to penetrations through the slab;
The subbase was not correctly compacted
or prepared prior to the installation of the concrete;
The contractor did not correctly
vibrate the concrete during placement; and
The shrinkage cracks and stepping are
excessive in regards to performance criteria on Table 1 of AS 3727, whereas the
crack widths
were 2mm and the stepping was 8mm, which is over and above the
limit of 1.5mm and 5mm respectively.
Mr Bergin said that, in his opinion, the
cracking was excessive and unacceptable in this driveway. He said that, in his
cracking was sufficient to categorise this defective work as a
Category 1 defect. He said in addition the method of construction
was not fit
for the purposes of the driveway, which itself leads to these defects being
Category 1 defects. He said as well the
long term serviceability of the
driveway is such that it will deteriorate further under vehicular traffic due to
the lack of tensile
strength in the concrete used.
Mr Bergin said that the Applicant
conceded in his statement that he laid the driveway on a defective base course.
He said, in his
view, a competent contractor would not proceed with the laying
of a driveway, if he believed the base course to be
Mr Bergin made reference to the Pioneer
Micromesh data sheets, the first page of which refers to the
strength showed no increase or decrease between plain concrete and concrete
containing bonding monofilaments”
and claims only a
in splitting tensile strength.
Mr Bergin further noted that the Cement
and Concrete Association of Australia Concrete Handbook at Clause 8.4.6, in
referring to polypropylene
fibres, makes the following
“Note that polypropylene fibres are
no substitute for steel reinforcement, which is also used to counteract drying
in addition to its structural purpose. If steel reinforcement is
omitted, then the spacing of joints should be the same as for unreinforced
Mr Bergin said the same advisory document
at Clause 6.4.6 refers to joint spacing in unreinforced slabs and recommends
intervals of
2.5 to 3 metres. Mr Bergin noted that this precaution had not been
taken by the Applicant, and that it constituted defective building
As to other areas not being the subject
of cracking, particularly where the Applicant had been responsible for backfill,
said that those areas were not subject to vehicular traffic and
therefore did not have the same loads as the driveway. He said as
driveway’s steep grade would increase tensile forces. He said that, if
the driveway contained adequate reinforcement
and control joints, the ability of
the slab to withstand cracking during settlement would have been greatly
increased. Mr Bergin
concluded that, had the Applicant ensured that the base
course was adequately compacted prior to laying the driveway and, in addition,
provided adequate reinforcement and control joints, the defects would not have
As to the Applicant’s calculation
of the thickness at 112mm by reason of the amount of concrete ordered, Mr Bergin
that was too simplistic a conclusion, as that would mean that the base
on which the concrete was laid would have to be perfect.
He said that, when
questioned about the edges of the driveway which appeared to be less than 100mm
thick, the Applicant responded
saying that the slab was 75mm to 100mm thick, and
that this was all he had contracted to do. He said that, as this confirmed his
observations of the slab thickness, he saw no need to have a core test
As to control joints he said that his
inspection revealed that control joints were spaced in the vicinity of 13 metres
and 7 metres
(approximately) which is far beyond the 2.5 metre to 3 metre
spacing recommended in the Standards. Mr Bergin said that, as to compacting
the base course which the Applicant was contracted to apply, the
“flooding” on the day of placement by hosing thoroughly
concrete truck could not be described as “flooding”, as a transit
mixer does not hold adequate reserves of water
to accommodate any method of
compaction by water. He said that this conclusion was further to enquiries of
Pioneer Concrete, Mackay,
who confirmed that the water capacity on larger trucks
is approximately 80 litres, and that this was used to wash down the shutes
wet concrete mix leaving inadequate water reserves to compact the base course by
I should note in this regard that this
statement was not challenged in the Applicant’s oral evidence, although
the Applicant
did suggest by way of evidence in submissions, (which cannot be
accepted) that Mr Bergin’s statement was incorrect and that
Pioneer would confirm this. It was, of course, open to the Applicant to have
made that statement during the course of
his evidence or when cross-examined
upon it, as well as calling evidence to dispute Mr Bergin’s assertions.
The Applicant
did not do that or seek to do that.
Further Mr Bergin said the purpose of
vibrating concrete is to remove air voids and ensure that the concrete will
retain strength
and density. He said that vibration of concrete is confirmed in
the Concrete Handbook published by the Cement and Concrete Association
Australia and that that handbook did not preclude any methods from that
recommended procedure. He said that only over-vibration
would affect the
ability of the mix to retain a good surface texture.
Mr Bergin said that he was of the opinion
this driveway required complete replacement, being relaid with the addition of
F72 reinforcing
mesh, trimmer bars and adequate control
In oral evidence Mr Bergin confirmed that
not all cracking was vertical, and that most of the “settlement”
cracking occurred
where there was more fill. He said that, if the Applicant was
aware that the subgrade was inadequate, then he should have brought
this to the
attention of the owner, as well informing the owner that it would further
deteriorate over time.
On the evidence of Messrs Thomson and
Bergin it is clear to me that the condition of this driveway is unacceptable in
terms of cracking
and that the likelihood of further settlement (5 years or more
in Mr Thomson’s view) will mean that it will yet further deteriorate
the possibility of it becoming even less serviceable than it currently is.
Indeed, Mr Bergin’s evidence (that I accept)
is that the driveway in its
current condition is unserviceable. In that context I consider that the defects
of this driveway are
such as to constitute them Category 1 defects, in that they
adversely affect the serviceability, performance and functional use of
Steel Reinforcement
I am satisfied on the evidence of Mr
Bergin (particularly through his reference to the Concrete Handbook of the
Cement and Concrete
Association of Australia) that “Micromesh” used
by the Applicant in this slab does not take the place of steel reinforcement.
am yet further satisfied that, as a result, the cracking of this driveway has
been further accentuated, and left uncontrolled
Control Joints
I prefer and accept the evidence of Mr
Bergin on the matter of the placement of control joints. Indeed, Mr Thomson,
engineer, agreed
in cross-examination that there could have been more control
joints. This, of course, is particularly so when the structure (because
lack of steel reinforcement) is essentially to be regarded as an unreinforced
slab which requires control joints at 2.5 metres
to 3 metres, rather than the
Applicant’s placement of them at 13 metres and 7 metres
approximately.
The Manhole
Again it is clear to me from the evidence
of Messrs Bergin and Thomson that proper practice required this area to be the
trimmer bars and generally to be dealt with as a penetration, and to
be particularly reinforced to avoid cracking. There has been,
substantial cracking in this area.
The Adequacy of the
The Applicant does not deny the
transcript. It is noted that in his statement the Applicant also refers to the
sub-base not being
his responsibility under his contract with the owner.
Effectively in his statement the Applicant absolved himself from making any
enquiry of the owner, or giving any notice to the owner, or indeed mentioning
the problem with the sub-base at all. Indeed, the
Applicant said that, in the
areas in respect of which he had contracted to perform compacting, cracking did
not occur. He said nonetheless
he performed compaction to the 50mm sand base on
the driveway by hosing (“flooding”) from the concrete truck, a
which Mr Bergin considered to be inadequate. I accept Mr
Bergin’s assessment in this regard.
In his oral evidence the Applicant
endeavoured to resile somewhat from the position he adopted in his statement and
his conversation
with Mr Bergin, by saying that he was not aware at the time of
construction that the sub-base was inadequate, and that somehow that
(connected as it was to the fill behind the boulder wall) was not available to
him until after the complaint had been made
and he then sought specialist
advice. I should note that the Applicant did not provide any statements of
witnesses confirming such
specialist advice.
I consider firstly that, as the
transcript of his conversation with Mr Bergin suggests, it must have been (or
should have been) apparent
to the Applicant that this was a filled area, having
regard to the existence of the boulder wall, and the driveway being effectively
constructed on top of that area.
Secondly, again consistent with his
conversation with Mr Bergin, I do not accept that the Applicant did not have the
requisite knowledge
as to the possible vulnerability of this area at the time he
elected to construct this driveway. The Applicant simply considered
compaction of the sub-base was not part of his contract and therefore not his
The failure of the Applicant contractor
in these circumstances to have raised the matter of the possible inadequacy of
the sub-base
with the homeowner for his consideration and decision, before the
Applicant contracted (without exclusion or limitation) to construct
driveway, means that the Applicant accepted the risks inherent in any inadequate
sub-base. To build upon ground, where the contractor
has doubts as to its
capacity to withstand the construction, is not only defective workmanship, but
renders that contractor responsible
for any damage to his works resulting from
that particular problem. Perhaps I should qualify that by saying that there
circumstances where a homeowner properly advised could absolve and
indemnify a contractor against such problems arising. That was
not however the
situation here.
I am satisfied on the evidence of Mr
Bergin, particularly from his references to the Concreting Handbook, that
vibration is recommended,
and that it is only over-vibration which would have
the effect of segregating the stones in the aggregate from the
Thickness of the Slab
Until the Applicant filed his statement
all of the Applicant’s evidence was to the effect that the thickness of
the slab was
75mm to 100mm. Indeed the thickness of the slab at the edge was
inspected by the Applicant and Mr Bergin, with the Applicant conceding
was only 75mm. Mr Bergin then considered that it was unnecessary to take a core
sample, as the Applicant was aware that
it should have been 100mm throughout. I
think in these circumstances it becomes less credible, in light of the
admissions by the
Applicant and the position that the Applicant had adopted, to
now somehow seek to rely upon calculations based on the alleged content
concrete truck towards substantiating what the thickness of this slab was. In
the circumstances I consider that the slab
did not meet the requirement of being
100mm thick and was more likely, as the Applicant himself admitted, to be
between 75mm and
100mm thick.
I think that the problems with this slab
arose as the result of a number of factors, all of which have been noted above,
and for which,
essentially, the Applicant must accept responsibility. I think
it is, as Mr Thomson said, that the initial cracking perhaps occurred
result of settlement, and then, once that set in, other matters (again for which
the Applicant was responsible in my view)
might have taken over to cause this
slab to become unacceptable.
In all the circumstances I consider that
there has been defective work by the Applicant in several respects as I have
identified in
the course of this decision. In the circumstances I consider it
appropriate for the Authority to have exercised its discretion to
have issued a
Direction to Rectify in this instance. Accordingly I confirm the
Authority’s decision.
I give leave to the parties to make
application for consequential orders, including on the matter of costs, although
I would have
thought that, in the circumstances, the Authority should have its
costs. That comment, of course, is subject to submissions in the
parties cannot agree.
I make the following
The Authority’s decision to issue
Direction to Rectify No. 23823 dated 17 May 2002 is
The parties are given leave to make
application for such further consequential orders and/or directions pursuant to
section 105(4)
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
including on
the matter of
.......................................
P LOHRISCH – MEMBER
QUEENSLAND BUILDING
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 017
Application No:
ROBERT MOHLE
34 Country Road
CANNONVALE Q 4802
Respondent:
QUEENSLAND BUILDING SERVICES AUTHORITY
11 Edmondstone
SOUTH BRISBANE Q 4101
Section 93 –
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
Upon hearing Mr Mohle, the Applicant and Mr
Robinson on behalf of the Respondent, the Queensland Building Tribunal makes the
That the Queensland Building Services
Authority’s decision to issue Direction to Rectify No. 23823 dated 17 May
2002 is confirmed.
That the parties are given leave to make
application for such further consequential orders and/or directions pursuant to
section 105(4)
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
including on
the matter of
........................................
P LOHRISCH - MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
4 April 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter