URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIC/2009/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:38:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Qantas Airways Limited v Q-Comp and Michelle Blanch [2009] QIC 20; 191 QGIG 115 (11 June 2009)
[Extract from Queensland Government Industrial
dated 19 June, 2009, Vol. 191, No. 6, pages 115-120]
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
s. 561(1) - appeal against
decision of industrial magistrate
Qantas Airways Limited v Q-COMP and
Michelle Blanch (C/2009/9)
PRESIDENT HALL
11 June 2009
At all material times Michelle Blanch was a long-haul flight attendant who
resided in Brisbane. She worked for Qantas Airways Limited
on international
flights out of Brisbane on the Brisbane/Los Angeles/New York/Brisbane route. In
September 2007 Ms Blanch was staying
at the Bonaventure Hotel on a scheduled
break between flights. The hotel accommodation was arranged and paid for by
Qantas Airways
Limited. She was on call in case operational needs changed.
This appeal arises out of events which occurred during the course of
Ms Blanch's
stay in Los Angeles.
There is a discrepancy between Ms Blanch's oral
evidence before the Industrial Magistrate about the dates of her stay in Los
and the dates which she volunteered on the workers compensation
application form developed by the self-insurer. Nothing turns on
the matter.
For convenience, I adopt the dates given by Ms Blanch in oral evidence.
Ms Blanch's oral evidence was that she had flown from Brisbane to Los
Angeles and had then flown a Los Angeles/New York sector before
returning to Los
Angeles for a rest day on 31 August 2007. Ms Blanch and Qantas Airways Limited
had the expectation that she would
fly back to Australia on 1 September 2007.
She had a pre-determined call time at the hotel of 8.30 p.m. Her anticipated
time from the hotel was 9.30 p.m. and the anticipated flight departure
time was 11.30 p.m. On 1 September 2007 (a Saturday) she
decided to go out for
lunch. She had been put in funds for such a venture by Qantas Airways Limited.
Whilst Qantas Airways Limited
paid for the hotel accommodation there was no
requirement that Ms Blanch take her meals at the hotel. On the contrary, she
given an amount of US $235 to cover food and sundry expenses during a
48 hour layover. A magazine entitled Cabin Crew News published
Airways Limited's Customer Product and Services Communications Division was in
evidence. The publication issue dated 16
November 2006 encouraged staff members
such as Ms Blanch to leave hotels and go for a walk as a fatigue management
strategy. Ms
Blanch did just that and walked to lunch at a retail establishment
named Macy's Plaza which was located a few hundred metres from
the Bonaventure
Hotel. After partaking of lunch at a coffee shop, she commenced to walk back to
the Bonaventure Hotel utilising
a wide paved area. A cyclist collided with her.
She fell on her left side and sustained physical injuries. (The nature of the
are not material to the matter presently before the Court.)
Blanch decided to seek benefits under the
Workers' Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act 2003
(the Act). It is not disputed that if compensation
would have been payable had the injury been sustained in Queensland Ms Blanch,
whose principal place of employment was in Brisbane, was entitled to benefits
for the injury sustained in Los Angeles, compare s.
115(1) of the Act. At all
times the issue has been whether Ms Blanch would have been entitled to
compensation if the injury had
been sustained in Queensland.
self-insurer rejected Ms Blanch's application for benefits. Ms Blanch, as she
was entitled to do, sought a Statutory Review.
By a letter dated 20 March 2008
Q-COMP advised Ms Blanch and Qantas Airways Limited that Q-COMP had decided to
set aside the decision
by Qantas Airways Limited and to substitute another
decision being a decision to accept the claim. From that decision Qantas
Limited appealed to the Industrial Magistrate's Court at Brisbane. By a
decision delivered on 19 January 2009 the Industrial Magistrate's
dismissed the appeal. This is an appeal against the decision of the Industrial
Magistrate.
The issue on the appeal to this Court is rather limited.
The contention is that the injuries suffered by Ms Blanch are beyond the
of the meaning of "injury" at s. 32(1) because Ms Blanch has failed to establish
that her employment was "a significant contributing
factor to the injury". It
is conceded that the injuries arose out of, or in the course of, Ms Blanch's
employment. For completeness,
I record that no reliance has been placed upon s.
34(1)(c) of the Act upon which Ms Blanch had relied (in the alternative) on the
Statutory Review and upon which Q-COMP and Ms Blanch had relied before the
Industrial Magistrate. The attractions of s. 34(1)(c)
are obvious. By s. 34(2)
an injury within the description at s. 34(1)(c) need not be shown to be an
injury to which the employment
was "a significant contributing factor". The
difficulty is that s. 34(1)(c) will attach only where a worker is temporarily
from "the place of employment" (defined in Schedule 6 to the Act) "during
an ordinary recess". The Industrial Magistrate found both
that the Bonaventure
Hotel was not Ms Blanch's "place of employment" and that Ms Blanch was not "on
an ordinary recess". Subject
to the caution that the matter has not been the
subject of argument on the appeal to this Court, it seems to me as a matter of
impression that both findings were correct. I then turn to the issue
whether Ms Blanch's employment was "a significant contributing
factor" to the
The Industrial Magistrate approached the construction of the
word "significant" in light of the decision of this Court in
Q-Comp v Green
(2008) 189 QGIG 747
and the observations of Deane J in
Tillmanns Butchery
v Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
at 338 about
the construction of the word "substantial". The relevant passage in
, appears at 750 to 751 and is in the following
"The other obvious difference to the New south Wales formula is that the
local statute uses the adjective 'significant' not the adjective
'substantial'.
Mercer v ANZ Banking Group
[2000] NSWCA 138
48 NSWLR 740
at 746 to 747,
Mason P gave consideration to the adjective 'substantial' as qualifying the
words 'contributing factor'. His Honour
'The term "substantial" may have various shades of meaning. Having regard
to the context, it may mean "large or weighty" of "real
or of substance as
distinct from ephemeral or nominal" (
Tillmanns Butchery v Australasian Meat
Industry Employees Union
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
at 348 per Deane J;
Silkfield Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 48
(1999) 73 ALJR 1427
. Here the word "substantial"
qualifies "contributing factor". Obviously it is the extent of the causal link
which is at issue.
Judge Bishop recognised this. At para 29 of his judgment he
held that the meaning to be adopted was that "substantial" meant "more
minimal, large or great". In my view this was the correct approach, remembering
that word is used in a relative sense, recognising
that the other causative
factors may be present. S9A does not require that the employment must be "the"
substantial contributing
cause, nor does it attempt to exclude predisposition or
susceptibility to a particular condition (cf
University of Tasmania v Cane
[1994] TASSC 73
(1994) 4 Tas R 156.'.
Senior counsel for Q-COMP does not seek to maintain that the adjective
'significant' requires the same sizeable contribution as substantial.
regard to the first meaning attributed to 'significant' by the Macquarie
Dictionary (2nd Revised Ed),
'important; of consequence', that
approach seems to me to be correct.".
The relevant passage from
Tillmanns Butchery v Australasian Meat
Industry Employees Union
, at 348 is in the following
"14. The word 'substantial' is not only susceptible of ambiguity: it is a
word calculated to conceal a lack of precision. In the
phrase 'substantial loss
or damage', it can, in an appropriate context, mean real or of substance as
distinct from ephemeral or nominal.
It can also mean large, weighty or big. It
can be used in a relative sense or can indicate an absolute significance,
quantity or
size. The difficulties and uncertainties which the use of the word
is liable to cause are well illustrated by the guidance given
by Viscount Simon
in Palser v. Grinling
(1948) AC 291
where, after holding that, in the context
there under consideration, the meaning of the word was equivalent to
'considerable, solid
or big', he said: 'Applying the word in this sense, it
must be left to the discretion of the judge of fact to decide as best he
according to the circumstances of each case ...' (1948) AC, at p 317. (See also
A.E. Terry's Motors Ltd. v. Rinder
[1948] SAStRp 19
(1948) SASR 167
, at p 180 and Granada
Theatres Ltd. v. Freehold Investment (Leytonstone) Ltd.
(1958) 1 WLR 845
Counsel for Qantas Airways Limited seeks to revisit the observations in
Q-COMP v Green
(2008) 189 QGIG 747
and submits that proof that an
"employment is a significant contributing factor to the injury" requires proof
of a "large" or "great"
or "weighty" contribution by the employment and contends
that in s. 32(1) of the Act "significant" has much the same meaning as
"substantial".
Given that in
Q-COMP v Green
, the meaning to
be attributed to "significant" was not a controversial matter, reconsideration
seems to me to be entirely appropriate.
Accepting that "significant" bears the
meaning of "large", "great", "weighty" or "substantial" is another
It is submitted for Qantas Airways Limited that the history of s.
32(1) of the Act and the Minister's Second Reading Speech on the
1999 amendment
of s. 35(1) of the
WorkCover Queensland Act 1996
(which came to largely
mirror s. 32(1) of the current Act) lend some support to Qantas Airways
Limited's submission. Counsel for
Qantas Airways Limited helpfully summarises
the materials as follows:
"15. It may be recalled that when the
WorkCover Queensland Act 1996
was originally passed into law the definition of '
' required the
employment to be '
the major significant contribution factor
' causing the
injury. The Labor Government in 1999 amended the meaning of '
that it is now identical to that found in s. 32(1) of the Act.
16. The second reading speech by the Honourable Mr Braddy, Minister for
Employment, Training and Industrial Relations, stated as
'The definition of "injury" will change so that workers will be compensated
if the injury arises out of or in the course of employment
if the employment is
a significant contributing factor to the injury. This means that a strong link
between injury and employment
will still need to exist before an injury is
compensable. It is proposed that this will be the case for all injuries
occurring on
or after 1 July 1999.
The current definition, which requires that employment must be "the major
significant factor causing the injury", has proven to be
harsh as it excludes
some workers from receiving the compensation they should be entitled to. This
has particularly been the case
for work-related aggravations. The definition of
"injury" will therefore also clarify that an aggravation of a pre-existing
disease or medical conditions, regardless of whether the original injury
was work-related or not, will be compensable to the extent
of the aggravation
only.'. (footnotes omitted)
For completeness, one should add that the relevant passage in the
Explanatory Notes recorded:
the major significant factor
causing injury with '
a significant contributing factor
injury. A strong link between employment and injury will need to be established
before any injury is compensable.".
I accept that there is some authority equating "significantly" and
"substantially",
Re Nelsons Wine Tavern
[1973-74] SALCR 230.
However, if one goes to the reasons in
Re Nelsons Wine Tavern, ibid.,
231 to 232, the authority is quite unhelpful to Qantas Airways Limited's
argument. The relevant passage is:
"Now to return to what concerns me about the wording of s. 48a. If I am of
the opinion that the addition to these licensed premises
significantly
affect the nature or extent of the business conducted
therein pursuant to the licence, I am required to order that notice of the
applicant be given in the manner and form prescribed by Rule 36 of the Rules of
Court. It is the word '
significantly
' which perplexes me. Having
carefully considered the question, it seems to me that this is a curious and
wholly inappropriate word
to use in this context. The Short Oxford English
Dictionary defines 'significant' as follows:-
'1. full of meaning or import; important, notable.
2. signifying something.
3. expressive or indicative of something.'.
These meanings are appropriate when the word is used as an adjective; if it
is used as a substantive its meaning, according to the
same dictionary is
'Something which conveys or expresses a meaning; a sign symbol or indication'.
Turning from the Licensing Act
one finds in various other Acts, that Parliament
uses a variety of terms to indicate degree. At the lower end of the scale one
comes readily to mind is the use in the Road Traffic Act of the word
'appreciably'. A man is deemed to be guilty of driving a vehicle
while under
the influence of alcohol if any one of his faculties are shown to be
'appreciably impaired'. I describe this as being
at the lower end of the scale,
because 'appreciably' means '
capable of being appreciated by the mind
perceptible to the senses
'. The slightest degree of impairment
is sufficient. Another expression used by the Legislature is 'materially' which
in the material degree or substantial
'. There are, of course,
many other such expressions to be found in the Statutes but I have quoted one
which appears to me to come
at the lower end of the scale and one at the higher.
I find it impossible to place 'significantly', used in its ordinary sense, in
that scale. 'Significant' is not a word which lends itself to being a precisely
definable measure or standard of degree. It seems
to me, therefore, that
general principles in the interpretation of a Statute must apply. If there is
any doubt as to the sense in
which the Legislature has used the word it is not
to be given a meaning most adverse to the Applicants, but is to be interpreted
generously in their favour. I am convinced that it should be quite wrong of me
to equate 'significantly' with 'appreciably'. It
seems to me that something
much more than that is intended here. In my view (and forgetting the affront
this may be to the language)
'significantly' must here be regarded as being
synonymous with 'substantially' or 'materially'.". (emphasis in the
It seems to me that in equating "significantly" not merely with
"substantially" but also with "materially" the learned Deputy Chairman
implicitly adopting a meaning of substantially at some distance from the upper
end of the possible "spectrum". Whilst as used
in s. 48(a) of the
(S.A.), 1967 [1974]
"significantly" may well have borne that
meaning, there is no justification for carrying the meaning into s. 32(1) of the
Act. Further,
random selection of synonyms from a dictionary seems to me not to
be a proper approach to statutory interpretation. The correct
approach, albeit
one developed in the construction of a restraint of trade clause rather than a
statute, seems to me to be that developed
by Young J in
Coombs v Bahama Palm
Trading Pty Ltd
Supreme Court of NSW Equity Division, 11 Sept, 1991, No 6013
of 1990. His Honour is reported as observing:
"So far as the word 'significant' is concerned, one looks to a component
which is so material as would reasonably affect a person
who sought to buy the
business, cf Stewart v HR Brechin and Co
[1959] SC 306
, 308. According to a
note in the 1980 Australian Digest Supplement at 366, the South Australian
Licensing Court held that 'significant'
meant substantial or material (Re
Nelson's Wine Tavern
[1974] SALCR 230)
and I think this comes close to the
meaning of the word here. Although various percentage figures were given by the
second defendant
in the witness box as to the various components of the
defendant's trade, it is important to realize that when one is assessing what
significant one does not merely look to percentages. Thus in Kuhns v Santa Cruz
County board of Supervisors (1982) 181 Cal Rep
1, 4 it was erroneous to say that
any bookshop which stocked more than 20% of 'adult books' was an adult bookshop
because it contained
a significant portion of adult books.
As the Supreme Court of California said in No Oil Inc v City of Los Angeles
(1974) 529 P(2d) 66
, 76, the word 'significant' 'cannot be adequately defined by
a random selection of synonyms for a thesaurus. Facing a spectrum of
meanings, describing a range extending from projects of relatively minor import
to those of truly momentous proportions,'
the Court must consider where along a
spectrum the parties intended to focus. As Judge Friendly said in Hanly v
Kleindienst
[1972] USCA2 542
(1972) 471 F (2d) 823
, 837, when construing the phrase
'significantly affecting the quality of human environment', 'While ...
determination of the meaning
of "significant" is a question of law, one must add
immediately that to make this determination on the basis of the dictionary would
be impossible. Although all words may be "chameleons, which reflect the colour
of their environment," CIR v National Carbide Corp
(1948) 167 F (2d) 304
per Learned Hand, J, "significant" has that quality more than most. It covers a
spectrum ranging from "not trivial" through
"appreciable" to "important" and
even "momentous".'. See also McGlone v Inaba
(1981) 636 P (2d) 158
Here the context is quite enlightening. It is useful to set out s. 32(1)
of the Act in full. Section 32(1) provides:
"An injury is a personal injury
arising out of
in the course
, employment if the employment is a
significant contributing factor
to the injury.". (emphasis added)
On the face of the section each of the words emphasised has work to do.
If "significant" bears the meaning of "large", "great", "weighty"
"substantial" it requires some ingenuity to conceive of cases in which an injury
to which the employment was a significant contributing
factor would not also be
an injury arising out of the employment. It is equally difficult to conceive of
situations in which a worker
who failed to show that an injury arose out of the
employment, but who succeeded on the alternative argument that the injury arose
in the course of the employment, would be able to satisfy the requirement that
the employment was a significant contributing factor
to the injury. Yet s.
32(1) seems to contemplate that such a case might be made out. All of that
suggests that the appropriate
meaning of "significant" is to be found at the
lower end of the spectrum. It is important to bear in mind also that the
"significant" qualifies the expression "contributing factor". The
notion of "contribution" in itself requires some linkage between
the employment
and the injury; compare
Favelle Mort Limited v Murray
[1976] HCA 13
(1975-1976) 133
In those circumstances, it seems to me that it would be wrong to place
the meaning of "significant contributing factor" so far towards
the lower end of
the spectrum that it carried the meaning of "more than ephemeral or nominal".
Without treating s. 14B of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
directive to construe a Minister's Second Reading Speech rather than of the
statute, I take the liberty of observing that "strong"
is not an inappropriate
word to use to indicate the positioning of the phrase "significant contributing
factor" within the spectrum
of meaning. With hindsight, the words adopted in
Q-COMP v Green
(2008) 189 QGIG 747
"important" and "of
consequence", seem to me to be equally apposite. I should say also that I also
doubt that if "significant" carries
the meaning of "large", "great", "weighty"
or "substantial", the amendment would have achieved the objective referred to by
the Minister
of ameliorating the difficulties which the expression "the major
significant contributing factor" had caused in cases about the aggravation
pre-existing conditions.
On the balance, I am not prepared to accept
the submission that "significant" bears the meaning of "large", "great",
"weighty" or
"substantial". I regret that I am unable to be more precise than
fixing the meaning of "significant" as towards the lower end but
not at the base
of the spectrum, and (to the extent that adjectives may be used without
supplanting the statutory language) using
words such as "strong", "important" or
"of consequence". However, the task is to apply a statutory test. The task is
not to conceptualise
I turn then to the review of the
Industrial Magistrate's conclusion that Ms Blanch's employment was a
"significant contributing factor
to the injury".
But for her
employment, Ms Blanch would not have been in Los Angeles on 1 September 2007.
Qantas Airways Limited plainly foresaw
that Ms Blanch would leave the hotel to
partake of a meal. Indeed, Qantas Airways Limited acquiesced in Ms Blanch
leaving the hotel
to partake of a meal. They put her in funds to pay for the
meal rather than permitting her to charge the cost of meals to a hotel
By its magazine, Qantas Airways Limited had encouraged Ms Blanch to confront
fatigue by going for a walk. There is no
suggestion that Ms Blanch travelled so
far in search of a meal that she entered upon a frolic of her own. Indeed,
there is now a
concession that the injury occurred in the course of her
employment. In all those circumstances, it seems to be that the Industrial
Magistrate was correct to characterise the injury as one to which the employment
was "a significant contributing factor".
I accept that the decision in
this matter does not sit well with the outcome of the appeal in
Qantas Airways Limited
[2009] NSW WCCPD 58
delivered on 27 May 2009.
However, the difference of outcome seems to me to flow inexorably from the
differences between s. 32(1)
of the Act and
Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) averted to in
Q-COMP v Green
It is not simply a matter of the Queensland Act using the adjective
"significant" while the New South Wales Act uses the adjective
"substantial".
Workers’ Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) gives
"substantial" a context and casts considerable light upon its own scope. The
section provides:
9A No compensation payable unless employment substantial contributing
factor to injury
(1) No compensation is payable under this Act in respect of an injury unless
the employment concerned was a substantial contributing
factor to the
(2) The following are examples of matters to be taken into account for the
purposes of determining whether a worker's employment was
a substantial
contributing factor to an injury (but this subsection does not limit the kinds
of matters that can be taken into account
for the purposes of such a
determination):
(a) the time and place of the injury,
(b) the nature of the work performed and the particular tasks of that
(c) the duration of the employment,
(d) the probability that the injury or a similar injury would have happened
anyway, at about the same time or at the same stage of
the worker's life, if he
or she had not been at work or had not worked in that employment,
(e) the worker's state of health before the injury and the existence of any
hereditary risks,
(f) the worker's lifestyle and his or her activities outside the
(3) A worker's employment is not to be regarded as a substantial contributing
factor to a worker's injury merely because of either
or both of the
(a) the injury arose out of or in the course of, or arose both out of and in
the course of, the worker's employment,
(b) the worker's incapacity for work, loss as referred to in Division 4 of
Part 3, need for medical or related treatment, hospital
treatment, ambulance
service or occupational rehabilitation service as referred to in Division 3 of
Part 3, or the worker's death,
resulted from the injury.
(4) This section does not apply in respect of an injury to which section 10,
11 or 12 applies.".
The New South Wales Compensation Commission was also constrained by the
decisions of the Court of Appeal in
Mercer v ANZ Banking Group
[2000] NSWCA 138
Murray v Shillingsworth
[2006] NSWCA 367
(2006) 68 NSWLR 451.
Da Ros v Qantas Airways Limited
[2009] NSW WCCPD 58
distinguishable.
I dismiss the appeal. I reserve all questions as to
costs. If need be, my Associate will make arrangements to take submissions upon
the matter of costs in writing.
Dated 11 June 2009.
D.R. HALL, President
Released: 11 June 2009
Appearances:
Mr N.T. O'Sullivan instructed by HWL Ebsworth
Lawyers for the Appellant.
Mr C.J. Murdoch directly instructed for
Mr J.S. Miles instructed by Turner Freeman Lawyers for Ms
Government Printer, Queensland
The State of
Queensland 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (71.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter