URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLC/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fairhill Coking Coal Pty Ltd v Comiskey & Anor (No 2) [2025] QLC 9 (14 May 2025)
LAND COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Fairhill Coking Coal Pty Ltd v Comiskey & Anor (No 2)
Fairhill Coking Coal Pty Ltd
(applicant)
Peter Locksley Comiskey
(respondent)
Denise Mary Comiskey
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Hearing of two general applications
DELIVERED ON:
14 May 2025
DELIVERED AT:
10 March 2025
1. The Respondents’ General Application filed on 17
December 2024 is dismissed.
2. By 4.00pm on 21 May 2025, the parties are
entitled to file and serve submissions as to the form of Order that should
conclusions expressed in these reasons.
CATCHWORDS:
ENERGY AND RESOURCES – MINERALS – COURTS OR
TRIBUNALS EXERCISING JURISDICTION IN MINING MATTERS – QUEENSLAND –
LAND COURT – JURISDICTION AND POWERS – COMPENSATION – MATERIAL
CHANGE IN CIRCUMSTANCES FOR THE MINING LEASE –
where the applicant held a
mining lease over land owned by the respondents – where there was an
existing conduct and compensation
agreement – where the applicant failed
to pay compensation in time according to that agreement – where the
parties agreed
to renegotiate the compensation amount due to that failure
– where that renegotiation was unsuccessful and the amount was paid
interest at a later time – where the respondents sought a declaration in
the Supreme Court – where the Supreme Court
referred the parties to the
Land Court noting section 28bB of the
Mineral Resources Act 1989
the agreement to renegotiate or the Supreme Court judgment or other particulars
submitted by the Respondents amounted
to a material change in circumstances for
the mining lease for the purposes of
s 283B(1)(b)
– application dismissed.
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Environmental Protection and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 2000
Mineral Resources Act 1989
Petroleum and Gas (Production and Safety) Act 2004
pseudonym) v Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission
[2024] HCA 10
(2024) 278 CLR
Comiskey v Fairhill Coking Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] QSC 137
Deimel v Phelps
[2022] QLC 6
ERO Georgetown Gold
Operations Pty Ltd v Henry
(2015) 36 QLCR 318
[2015] QLAC 4
Glencore Coal Queensland Pty Ltd & Ors v Keys & Ors
35 QLCR 194
[2014] QLAC 2
, considered
Hicks & Anor v Graham & Anor
[2004] QLRT 47
Nothdurft & Anor v QGC Pty Ltd & Ors
[2017] QLC 41
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507
Idemitsu Australia Resources Pty Ltd
[2020] QLC 40
SZTAL v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
APPEARANCES:
A Thompson KC and A Nicholas (instructed by McCullough
Robertson) for the applicant
J Horton KC and W Isdale (instructed by Suthers
Taylor) for the respondents
Reasons for decision
[1] Fairhill
plans to mine coal on the Comiskeys’
[2] There is a
conduct and compensation agreement between
agreement required Fairhill to make payments to the Comiskeys on particular
[4] The payments
were not made on those dates.
negotiation between the parties produced an agreement, the effect of which is
contentious.
[6] The payments
were eventually made, along with an amount of interest calculated by Fairhill.
[7] The question
is whether there has been a “material change in circumstances for the
mining lease” for
section 283B(1)(b)
Mineral Resources Act
[8] If there has
been a material change in circumstances for the mining lease, the compensation
agreement is able to be revised.
That is what the Comiskeys want.
[9] If there has
been no material change in circumstances for the mining lease, the compensation
agreement remains as is. That is
what Fairhill wants.
competing applications
December 2024, Fairhill filed a General Application seeking:
the Court conduct a hearing to determine, as a preliminary question of law,
whether the facts and matters in the Material Change
Particulars, or any of
them, constitute a material change in circumstances for the mining lease within
the meaning of
section 283B
of the MRA.
[11] Fairhill
seeks either that the proceeding be struck out, or the Respondents’
Particulars of Material Change
struck out.
December 2024, the Comiskeys filed a General Application seeking:
Court declare that the Applicant is bound by a duty to cooperate to enable the
Land Court to review compensation pursuant to
section 283B
MRA, which duty
precludes it from: a) pressing its General Application filed 11 December 2024;
b) contending that
MRA has not been satisfied.
Applicant’s General Application filed 11 December 2024 be dismissed.
The statute
applications turn on the construction of
section 283B
of the MRA. That
relevantly provides:
283B Review of compensation by Land Court
(1) This section applies if—
(a) compensation has been agreed under
section 279
or determined under
section 281
for a mining lease (the original compensation); and
(b) there has, since the agreement or determination, been a material change in
circumstances for the mining lease.
Example of a material change in circumstances—
a different mining method that changes the impact of mining operations under
(2) The mining lease holder or any owner in relation to the mining lease
mentioned in
section 279(1)(a)
(1) may apply to the Land Court for it to
review the original compensation.
(4) The Land Court may, after conducting the review, decide to confirm the
original compensation or amend it in a way the Land Court
considers appropriate.
(5) However, before making the decision, the Land Court must have regard
(a) the original compensation, other than any part of it that consists of an
additional amount under
section 281(4)(e)
(b) whether the applicant has attempted to mediate or negotiate an amendment
agreement for the original compensation; and
(c) any change in the matters mentioned in
section 281(3)
and (4) since the
original compensation was agreed or determined.
(6) If the decision is to amend the original compensation, the original
compensation, as amended under the decision, is for this
Act, other than this
section, taken to be the original compensation.
principles of statutory construction are well
[15] Section
283B(1)(b) is accompanied by an example. An example cannot limit the meaning of
the section, nor is it exhaustive.
The section and the example are to be read
in the context of each other and the other provisions of the Act: section 14D,
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
[16] Section
283B was inserted into the MRA by the
Environmental Protection and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 2000
. The Explanatory Memorandum does not assist
with the meaning of section 283B(1)(b). Interestingly, though, it says that
283A and 283B were inserted because “[t]here are no provisions to
amend or vary an agreement during the term of the lease if
this becomes
necessary due to operational change”.
The “agreed process” and the Supreme Court
Fairhill failed to make a payment required in the compensation agreement, the
Comiskeys initiated the dispute resolution
mechanism in the agreement. A
mediation was scheduled.
day before the mediation – on 3 April 2023 – the parties reached an
agreement by email. The agreement was:
28 April 2023
, Fairhill will pay to the Comiskey
outstanding compensation of $4,000,000 (plus default interest);
balance compensation of $3,450,000; or
Fairhill has not paid the above amounts (as detailed in paragraph 3a and 3b) in
full by 28 April 2023, the Parties agree to participate
in a renegotiation
process where:
party will be entitled to engage an independent valuer, and Fairhill will meet
the Comiskey’s reasonable and agreed costs
for their valuer;
each party has obtained its valuation report, the parties will exchange reports
and will arrange a meeting to renegotiate the
compensation payable to the
[19] That 3
April 2023 agreement has been described as the “Agreed Process”.
[20] Fairhill
did not make any payment to the Comiskeys by 28 April 2023.
[21] Then began
the second step of the Agreed Process.
[22] On 2 May
2023, the Comiskeys’ solicitor wrote to Fairhill advising that the
Comiskeys had retained a valuer to begin a
further compensation assessment.
[23] On 4 May
2023, Fairhill acknowledged that email and said it would obtain its own
valuer’s availability. It asked for the
name and expected cost of the
Comiskeys valuer.
September 2023, the Comiskeys told Fairhill that their valuer’s report was
ready and that they wished to begin the
renegotiation as soon as reasonably
practicable.
September 2023, Fairhill paid $7.45 million to the Comiskeys, plus $476,016.91
in interest.
Comiskeys said that regardless of that payment, the second step of the Agreed
Process had to be fulfilled.
[27] Fairhill
confirmed that it would follow the second step process.
[28] Fairhill
provided a valuation report. There was a mediation. No agreement was reached.
[29] After that
mediation, Fairhill told the Comiskeys that Fairhill considered that each
party’s obligations under the Agreed
Process had been fulfilled.
[30] Shortly
afterwards, the Comiskeys commenced a proceeding in the Supreme Court seeking
declarations.
application was dismissed. The Supreme Court explained:
Comiskeys submit that reaching an agreement to renegotiate compensation had the
effect of undoing the [compensation agreement]
and leaving the parties in a
position as if no agreement about compensation had been reached. This cannot be
[36] The 3 April 2023 agreement must be construed within the context of the
mechanisms of the [MRA]. The fixing of compensation is
critical under the scheme
of the Act. I reject the Comiskeys’ claim for a declaration that
compensation “has not been
agreed” for the purposes of the Act. It
has been agreed. It was agreed, by the [compensation agreement], on 27 August
I similarly reject the claim for a declaration that there is no agreement
for the purposes of the Act. There is. It is the same
aspects of the Supreme Court’s reasons in relation to the duty to
cooperate are set out, below.
Is section 283B of the MRA engaged?
key question is whether section 283B of the MRA is engaged.
Comiskeys produced particulars of what they say are the material changes. That
identifies four
(a) Fairhill breached a condition of the mining lease to make all payments of
compensation and comply with all terms of any agreement
or determination
relating to compensation at the time or times as agreed;
(b) the parties agreed to “renegotiate compensation” payable for the
grant of the mining lease, pursuant to an agreed
(c) the Supreme Court determined that the agreed process gives rise to an
obligation on Fairhill to cooperate and allow the Land
Court to review the
compensation;
(d) there has been a substantial increase in the losses occasioned to the
Comiskeys by the grant of the mining lease since the compensation
agreement was
[35] Fairhill
submits that:
(a) the example following section 283B(1)(b) means that the section is directed
to operational changes which affect the land, or
impacts the operations upon the
land, in a way that is material to the amount of compensation;
(b) there must be a material change in circumstances “for the mining
lease” – a breach of the compensation agreement
is not a material
change in circumstances “for the mining lease”;
(c) a delay in making payments may give the landholders a cause of action for
damages for breach of contract or may have amounted
to a repudiation of the
compensation agreement – but neither is a material change in circumstances
for the mining lease;
(d) section 283B(1) should not be interpreted to permit compensation to be
reassessed because land values have risen since compensation
was agreed or
determined;
(e) the Agreed Process was not itself a material change.
Comiskeys submit that:
(a) only one of the four material change particulars is required to establish
that this Court has jurisdiction;
(b) there is a binding
ratio decidendi
in the Land Appeal Court decision
ERO Georgetown Gold Operations Pty Ltd v
that compels this
Court to conclude that each of the four particulars satisfies the provision;
(c) that binding
is that section 283B(1) will be satisfied where
three conditions are met:
(i) there is a difference between the circumstances at the time
when the compensation was originally agreed or determined and at the
change is said to have occurred;
(ii) the difference (ie.
‘change’) is material; and
(iii) the difference (ie.
‘change’) relates to circumstances relevant to the agreement about
or determination of compensation.
particular 1 – Fairhill’s failure to pay compensation under the
agreement was a breach of its mining lease as
imposed by section 276(1)(j) of
the MRA. That was not a technical nor short-lived breach, but was serious and
substantial;
(e) for particular 2 – because the Agreed Process was to revisit the very
heart of the earlier bargain, it was a substantial
or significant change
relevant to the agreement about compensation;
(f) for particular 3 – the Supreme Court decision obligates Fairhill to
cooperate and allow the Land Court to review the compensation
because the
Supreme Court must have considered the change in circumstances to be material;
(g) for particular 4 – it is not just the increase in the value of the
land. The material change is the substantial decrease
in value brought about by
the mining lease between the time compensation was agreed and when the
compensation was actually paid.
[37] The parties
identified Land Appeal Court and Land Court authorities and a decision of the
Land and Resources Tribunal that may
assist with the construction of section
[38] The Land
Appeal Court decisions are
Glencore Coal Queensland Pty Ltd & Ors v Keys
Georgetown Gold Operations Pty Ltd v
Glencore Coal
was an appeal against the initial determination of compensation. The
mining companies submitted that the Land Court had erred by
applying the sales
evidence in a generous way. In that context, there was argument about how, in
theory, a compensation amount can
be changed.
[40] The Land
Appeal Court said:
... The explanatory memorandum for the amending
legislation which introduced s283A and 283B identified “operational
as the circumstance of which would make an adjustment to
compensation appropriate. These considerations suggest the section is not
applicable simply because of a change in market value over time. Once the
condition is satisfied, questions of then current
market value become relevant;
but that does not assist in identifying the proper construction of the provision
which makes the section
applicable.
The circumstances in which s 283B might be applicable were not fully argued
in this Court. Nor is it necessary in this case to determine
its scope. It is
sufficient to note that there is real reason to doubt that it would become
available, simply because of a movement
in the market for land between the date
of the determination, and the date when compensation is
ERO Georgetown
ERO Georgetown,
the miner constructed a fence with a locked gate across a
constructed road on the property. The Land Court found that constituted
material change in circumstances for the mining lease. The Land Appeal Court
[42] The Land
Appeal Court concluded:
(a) the context within which section 283B
... strongly suggests that the circumstances referred to in s283B(1)(b) are
those related to the identification of compensation.
That is consistent with
the evident purpose of s283B, which is to confer on the Land Court jurisdiction
to review compensation, at
some time after it was originally determined, by the
Land Court, or agreed.
(b) section 283B(1) requires a comparison between two sets of circumstances.
The first is the circumstances at the time when compensation
was originally
agreed or determined. The second is that prevailing when it is alleged that the
circumstances have changed;
(c) the change must relate to circumstances relevant to the agreement about or
determination of
compensation;
(d) the words “for the mining lease” were unlikely intended to be
narrowly defined. The word “for” is used
to identify a connection
between the change of circumstances, and the mining lease. The word
“for” is not to mean “with
the object or purpose of”, so
that the change must have “as its object or purpose the mining lease
(e) section 283B(1) is not limited to a change in circumstances relating to the
mining lease, considered as a grant of rights. It
extends to changes in the way
the rights are exercised, such as operational changes; and to the effects of
those changes, no doubt
on the person entitled to
compensation.
most helpful Land Court decision is
Nothdurft & Anor v QGC Pty Ltd &
There, the President
of the Court considered the meaning of section 537C of the
Petroleum and Gas
(Production and Safety) Act 2004
. Section 537C(1) was, materially, the same
as section 283B(1) of the
[44] The Court
(a) that s537C(1) sets a two stage test – first that the circumstances
have changed and second, that the change is
[28] The focus on effect rather than activity means not every change in
circumstance that might be relevant to compensation will require
review of the
original compensation. The requirement of materiality qualifies the degree of
relevance. Something is material if
it is of significance or importance. It
must be of moment or of significance, not merely trivial or inconsequential. If
is placed on a change in amenity, the impacts must be more than
(c) a “material change in circumstances” should mean actual
circumstances, not perceptions about
, the landowners identified eight matters which they said
constituted a material change in circumstances. The landowner’s evidence
fell short of substantiating all eight. The Court accepted two amounted to a
material change in circumstances:
(a) noise impacts on the landowners that had been in excess
of limits set in the Environmental
(b) the cessation of access to untreated coal seam gas water by the
landowners.
Other cases
other cases are less directly
The Tribunal decision
Hicks v Graham
indicates that the assessment of materiality is to be
based on a “change that is pertinent to what compensation should be
not a change that is of substantial import to the compensation that
should be awarded”.
, a change in operating conditions for a mining lease (replacing a
condition not to disturb more than a specified area, with a condition
area of disturbance must be
was found to be a
material change. The other cases referred to do not offer findings based on
factual situations.
Conclusions about the construction of the provision
[48] Consolidating
what the cases say, with a reading of the provision (including the example) in
its context, my view about the meaning
of section 283B(1) is:
(a) it involves a two stage test – first that the circumstances have
changed and second that the change is material;
(b) it is not engaged by a change in market value over time;
(c) it encompasses the effect of operational changes on the person entitled to
the compensation;
(d) most operational changes are easy to identify as a material change in
circumstances for the mining lease – closing a road,
creating more noise
than expected or cutting off water supply are obvious;
(e) changes that manifest ‘on paper’– but with no other change
to the way the mining is done – are more difficult
to assess. An
‘on paper’ change to the length of the mining activity would be
likely to constitute a material change
in circumstances for the mining lease
because the impact on the landowner would be prolonged. An ‘on
paper’ change that
causes no noticeable difference for the landowner would
be a different matter;
(f) an indication that a change amounts to a material change in circumstances
for the mining lease, would include a change that would
have influenced the
original negotiation for compensation. That is, an aspect of the mining
activity that the landowner would have
to adjust to – but as a result of
the change, would now have to adjust to in a different way.
[49] It should
not be assumed that any material change in circumstances for the mining lease
will lead to an increase in the amount
compensation.
Reassessment of
compensation is a separate matter.
[50] I do not
agree with the Comiskeys’ three point articulation of the
ERO Georgetown
. The third point – that the
difference (ie. ‘change’) relates to circumstances relevant to the
agreement about
or determination of compensation – is cast too broadly.
The Land Appeal Court was talking about circumstances that had been
relevant to
the way in which compensation had originally been set. That is, circumstances
of the mining lease such as deprivation
of possession, or access arrangements or
noise intrusion.
[51] Because I
do not accept that that is the
ERO Georgetown
accept the submission that this Court is compelled to accept the
Comiskeys’ four particulars are material changes
in circumstances for the
mining lease.
Conclusion about section 283B(1)
conclusions about the four matters identified in the Respondents’
Particulars of Material Change are:
(a) for item 1 –Fairhill’s failure to pay on time was not technical
nor short lived. For the Comiskeys, it was serious
and substantial. The
Comiskeys say that the failure to pay was a breach of a condition of the mining
lease, citing
section 276(1)(j).
That seems correct. Whether an act is a breach of a condition does not directly
correlate with it also being a material change in
circumstances for the mining
lease. There may be instances where it is both. Here, though, the breach of
the condition does not
satisfy the test in section 283B(1).
The parties contemplated the possibility that aspects of the compensation
agreement may not be complied when the agreement was negotiated.
That is why
there was a dispute resolution mechanism in the agreement.
(b) for item 2 – the Agreed Process is not a material change in
circumstances for the mining lease. The agreement to renegotiate
was a separate
contractual process. It does not fit within the scope of section 283B(1)(b);
(c) for item 3 – the Supreme Court’s reasons do not compel this
Court to conclude there has been a material change in
circumstances for the
mining lease. The reasons for that are set out further below in relation to the
duty to cooperate;
(d) for item 4 – the increase in the value of the land is not itself a
material change. The Comiskeys say that it became a
material change because of
a substantial decrease in value brought about by the mining lease between the
time compensation was agreed
and when the compensation was actually paid. That
is just a different way of saying that the land has increased in value since the
compensation agreement was finalised on 27 August 2020. Fairhill paid interest
at the time of making its late payments. Even if
that interest amount is not
correct – which it may not be – Fairhill accounted for the time
between when the payment
ought to have been made and when it was
The land may have
increased in value by the time the late payments were made, but this is not so
unexpected or unusual as to make
the late payments a material change in
circumstances for the mining lease.
Is Fairhill failing a duty to cooperate?
Comiskeys seek a declaration that Fairhill is precluded from pressing its
general application filed 11 December 2024. They
say that Fairhill has a duty
to cooperate with them.
[54] The duty to
cooperate is not in the statute. It is said to have been identified by the
Supreme Court. The relevant passages
from the Supreme Court reasons, follow.
The reference to the “second step” is a reference to the Agreed
Process set
out at paragraph
[29] ... the parties must have intended the obligation in the
second step to include an obligation to cooperate to enable the Land
review the original compensation agreed in the CA under s 283B of the Act, in
the event that the parties were unable to
agree on amended compensation. This
aspect of the 3 April 2023 agreement involves some difficulty. For the Land
Court to review such
a matter under s 283B of the Act, there must also have been
a material change in circumstances for the mining lease since the CA
[30] The conduct of the parties in agreeing to renegotiate the compensation,
as plainly evidenced by the 3 April 2023 agreement, assumes
that there has been
a material change in circumstances relevant for the compensation amount. It
assumes that that change in circumstances
has occurred since the amount was
[37] The exchanges between the parties that evidence the 3 April 2023
agreement, indicate that the parties were then at one in thinking
that if not
paid by 28 April 2023, the circumstances of the mining lease had materially
changed, so that the compensation Fairhill
should pay for it should be different
to the compensation they had agreed in the CA. Since then, they have been unable
to agree on
what that different compensation should be.
[39] The provisions in the Act about amendment and review are clear. Until
the parties either reach agreement on an amendment to the
compensation in the CA
and cooperate to have it registered, or until they cooperate to allow the Land
Court to review the compensation
payable under the CA in light of changed
circumstances, the CA will, by operation of the Act, continue to be in
[42] The Comiskeys say they wish to go to the Land Court. On this
Court’s analysis of the 3 April 2023 agreement, the Comiskeys
should have
the cooperation of Fairhill in doing so. A declaration could probably be sought
and made in the Land Court. One has to
be very cautious about approaching
matters that may be in the Land Court’s jurisdiction.
Comiskeys submit that it has been judicially determined that the Agreed Process
includes a contractually binding obligation
on Fairhill to
“cooperate”, “enable” or “allow” the Land
Court to review compensation pursuant
to section 283B in light of changed
circumstances. They say that an issue estoppel prevents Fairhill from
contending it is not
under an “obligation to enable the Land Court to
review the original compensation agreed in the compensation agreement,
that review under section 283B of the MRA, in the event that the
parties were unable to agree on an amended compensation”.
[56] Fairhill
(a) both parties had different positions before the Supreme
Court than each presented to this Court – including that the Comiskeys
told the Supreme Court there had been no material change in circumstances for
Comiskeys’ particulars of the material change were not available to the
Supreme Court;
(c) there is no issue estoppel because whether in fact there
had been a material change in circumstances for the mining lease was
fundamental to the decision of the Supreme Court that the decision cannot stand
The issue for determination in this Court is not identical to the issue before
the Supreme Court.
[57] This Court
is anxious to give effect to the reasons of the Supreme Court.
[58] That said,
I accept Fairhill’s submission that the decision of the Supreme Court does
not create an issue estoppel. What
the parties submitted to the Supreme Court
was different
to what was submitted here. The Respondents’ particulars
were only produced after the Supreme Court decision.
[59] Reading the
Supreme Court judgment as a whole, it appears that Justice Bradley (as his
Honour then was) intended for the compensation
to be reviewed by this Court.
That conclusion was, with respect, understandable in the context in which that
decision was made.
[60] I do not,
though, interpret the Supreme Court’s reasons as a judicial determination
that either gives this Court
or requires this
Court to conclude that there has been a material change in circumstances for the
mining lease. The submissions
made to the Supreme Court were sufficiently
different to what they now are, so as to make direct application of the Supreme
reasons difficult here.
[61] As to the
“duty to cooperate”, put in its proper context, I cannot conclude
that it goes so far as to oblige Fairhill
to not press an application in this
Court. Nor does it go so far as to oblige Fairhill to accept that section 283B
has been engaged.
Fairhill submits that the Comiskeys’ submissions
incorrectly equate cooperate with capitulation. I agree.
Conclusions
frustration experienced by the Comiskeys is understandable. Fairhill did not
pay when it was obliged to. Then the Agreed
Process became an unnecessary
source of complexity and stress.
[63] Despite
that, my view is that this Court is constrained by section 283B(1)(b).
Fairhill’s disappointing behaviour do not
qualify as a “material
change in circumstances for the mining lease”.
[64] As to the
effect of the Supreme Court’s reasons and the duty to cooperate, it is
challenging to identify the exact scope
of that duty. It is not clear that the
Supreme Court had the same picture of the dispute – particularly with
respect to the
application of section 283B(1)(b) – as is available now.
Comiskeys’ General Application filed on 17 December 2024 is dismissed.
Fairhill General Application filed on 12 December 2024 is successful in that the
Respondents’ Particulars of Material
Change does not identify a material
change in circumstances for the mining lease. What follows is that the
Comiskeys have not identified
a basis in the statute for this Court to proceed
under section 283B(1).
[67] The Court
Respondents’ General Application filed on 17 December 2024 is dismissed.
4.00pm on 21 May 2025, the parties are entitled to file and serve submissions as
to the form of Order that should follow the conclusions
expressed in these
Stuart’, Lot 2 on Crown Plan TT241. Operated with other Comiskey
properties as a cattle grazing enterprise.
Dated 27 August 2020.
Filed on 5 December 2024.
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507
AB (a pseudonym) v Independent
Broad-based Anti-Corruption Commission
[2024] HCA 10
(2024) 278 CLR 300
The Comiskeys do not accept
that the interest amount paid was a correct or appropriate amount.
Comiskey v Fairhill Coking
Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] QSC 137.
‘Particulars of Material
Change’ filed 5 December 2024.
[2015] QLAC 4
(2015) 36 QLCR 318.
[2014] QLAC 2
(2014) 35 QLCR 194.
[2015] QLAC 4
(2015) 36 QLCR 318.
Glencore Coal Queensland
Pty Ltd & Ors v Keys & Ors
[2014] QLAC 2
(2014) 35 QLCR 194
, [43] (footnotes
Specifically, sections 279,
281, 282, 283A and 286.
ERO Georgetown Gold
Operations Pty Ltd v Henry
[2015] QLAC 4
(2015) 36 QLCR 318
Ibid [35] and [45].
[2017] QLC 41
(2017) 38 QLCR 91.
Section 283B says
“... change of circumstances” where section 537C says “...
change in circumstance”.
Nothdurft & Anor v
QGC Pty Ltd & Ors
[2017] QLC 41
(2017) 38 QLCR 91
Ibid [28] (citations
Ibid [138].
Ibid [90]. The original
compensation assumed that the noise conditions would be met. The Court concluded
that steps had been taken
to reduce noise impacts and that at the time of the
hearing, the noise limits were being complied with.
Ibid [98]. Other
circumstances relating to access to water resulted in this material change in
circumstances not resulting in any
amendment to the original compensation as a
result of the change: [149]–[150]
Deimel v Phelps
[2022] QLC 6
Shaw v Idemitsu Australia Resources Pty Ltd
Hicks & Anor v Graham
[2004] QLRT 47.
Hicks & Anor v
[2004] QLRT 47
Ibid [29], [31].
the two material changes resulted in no adjustment to the compensation.
There does not seem to be a
copy of the mining lease conditions before the Court, but I am proceeding on the
basis that a condition
of the kind specified in s276(1)(j) was imposed.
The Comiskeys could pursue
what they say is the correct amount of interest as part of an action for damages
for breach of contract.
Submissions of the
applicant in reply on the General Application filed by the Respondents on 17
December 2024 filed 21 February
2025 at [2(a)(i)-(iii)], referencing the
Transcript of Supreme Court Proceedings of 1 July 2024, page 1-9 line 18 to 1-10
page 1-9 line 33; page 1-14 lines 15–21; and page 1-19 lines
[2024] NSWSC 1394
This is a Court of statute
which only has jurisdiction conferred on it by the
Land Court Act
another Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (291 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter