URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/46.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
A48 and Queensland Police Service [2025] QICmr 46 (21 July 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
A48 and Queensland Police Service
[2025] QICmr 46
Application Number:
Respondent:
Queensland Police Service
Decision Date:
21 July 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL TO DEAL -
SUBSTANTIAL AND UNREASONABLE DIVERSION OF RESOURCES - request for documents
relating to the applicant’s interactions with the agency in connection
with her property, complaints and animals - over 700
minutes of audio and video
recordings identified as responsive to application - whether dealing with the
application would substantially
and unreasonably divert agency’s resources
Right to Information Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied
to the Queensland
Police Service (
) under the
Right to Information Act 2009
for access to all
information in connection with incidents relating to her, her address and other
addresses, including phone calls
and body camera footage, over a period of
approximately one year.
receipt of the application, QPS engaged with the applicant to clarify certain
aspects of her request and revise the scope
application.
However, ultimately,
QPS did not make a decision within the time allowed under the RTI Act and was
therefore deemed to have made
a decision refusing access to the requested
documents under section 46(1) of the RTI
The applicant
to the Office of the
Information Commissioner (
) for external review of the deemed
external review, QPS submitted
processing the access application would be a substantial and unreasonable
diversion of resources relying primarily on the quantity
of located audio and
video footage (over 700 minutes). QPS proposed the scope of the request be
narrowed to written documents to
enable it to be processed. The applicant
declined to reduce the scope of her
application.
reaching my decision in this matter, I have taken into account evidence,
submissions, legislation and other material as set out
in these reasons
(including footnotes).
I have also
had regard to the
Human Rights Act 2019
particularly the right to seek and receive information and in doing so, I have
acted in accordance with section 58(1) of the HR
the reasons set out below, I set aside QPS’s deemed decision. In
substitution, I find the work involved in dealing with
the application would, if
carried out be a substantial and unreasonable diversion of QPS’s resources
and accordingly, I refuse
to deal with the
application.
Relevant law
agency is required to deal with an access application unless doing so would, on
balance, be contrary to the public
Section 41(1) of the
RTI Act permits an agency to refuse to deal with an application if the agency
considers the work involved in
dealing with the application would, if carried
out, substantially and unreasonably divert the resources of the agency from
use by the agency in the performance of its functions.
‘substantially and unreasonably’
is not defined in the
RTI Act, nor in the
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
It is therefore appropriate to consider the ordinary meaning of these
The dictionary
definitions
of those terms
relevantly provide:
‘substantial’
‘of ample or considerable amount, quantity, size,
‘unreasonable’
‘exceeding the bounds of reason; immoderate;
exorbitant.’
deciding whether dealing with an application would substantially and
unreasonably divert an agency’s resources from the performance
functions, a decision-maker must not have regard to any reasons the applicant
gives for applying for access or any belief
they may hold about the
applicant’s reasons for applying for
The decision-maker must
have regard to the resources that would be used
identifying,
locating or collating the documents, or
deciding whether
to give, refuse or defer access to any documents, including examining any
documents or conducting third party consultations,
making copies or
editing copies of any documents, or
notifying any
final decision on the application.
whether the work involved in processing a given application would, if carried
out, substantially and unreasonably divert
resources is a question of fact to be
assessed in each individual case, taking into account a given agency’s
operations and
agency may only refuse to deal with an application under section 41 of the RTI
Act if a procedural prerequisite has been met –
giving the applicant an
opportunity to narrow the scope of the application, so as to re-frame it into a
form that can be processed.
applicant is to be given the benefit of any information an agency may be able to
supply to help with this narrowing process,
as far as is reasonably practicable.
an external review, the RTI Act does not expressly address the procedure to be
followed by the Information Commissioner before
deciding to refuse to deal with
an application on the ground that doing so would substantially and unreasonably
divert an agency’s
resources from the performance of its functions. The
Information Commissioner, or their delegate, has the power to decide any matter
in relation to an application that could have been decided by the agency; and is
required to identify opportunities for early resolution
and to promote
settlement of external review applications. The procedure to be taken is,
subject to the RTI Act, at the discretion
of the Information
Commissioner.
Evidence and submissions
revised scope of the access application is relevant for the purpose of this
review. QPS set it out as follows in the notice of
deemed decision issued to the
Revised scope as at 24 July 2024:
1. All call logs and notes regarding my calls
[from two mobile
from and to police (Policesquad
[Stock Squad]
, police link,
... police, police BN) ...
o - Call logs are not kept at stations – they do not exist
o - searches can be undertaken for calls from the nominated numbers to
Policelink only. - you are saying police stations do not record
calls? - then
can I ask to send the internal memos of these calls made?
2. All Body cam footage relating to my name and my address (as well visits
[the applicant’s address]
regarding my complaint)
o - Searches cannot be undertaken for body cam footage in relation to your
o - Searches can be undertaken for Body Worn Camera footage in relation to
incidents recorded on the QPRIME computer database in relation
involving you and officers from ... Station and ... Stock Squad. - Yes
3. All Body cam footage pertaining to my name and the delivery of my
summons I lodged to 4 people (
[four named individuals]
o - Insufficient information to conduct searches
o - please provide information to identify the incident for which police
delivered summonses lodged by you – what type of matter/when/etc
o ALL Incidents relating to the damage and attacks to me and my animals
and the killing of our purebred stallion ...:
1. Summons served to
[named individual]
on or around the 13 th
November 2023
o 2. Summons served to
[named individual]
on the 19/04/24
o 3. Summons served to
[named individual]
on the 24/04/24
o 4. Summons served to
[named individual]
- I do not know the date
(please check with ... Police who was to serve it to him) - I know it was very
4. All (sic) list of people who have been interviewed so far regarding the
killing and poisoning of our horses by ... Stock Squad/...
The QPRIME computer database is able to be searched for this incident as
the information provided is able to identify the correct
report- Nil further
required from you. - Ok thank you
5. All internal notes of those interviews mentioned at point 4. Able to be
required from you.
– Ok thank you
external review, QPS identified 40 pages and 27 body worn camera (
recordings in response to the above
to OIC that processing
these documents would be a substantial and unreasonable diversion of its
resources primarily because the BWC
recordings amounted to approximately 708
minutes of combined audio and video footage. QPS estimated the time to review
and edit the
recordings to be approximately 177
QPS suggested that the
applicant could remove the ground for refusal by limiting the scope of her
request to the 40 pages of documents,
ie. excluding the BWC recordings from the
scope of her request. OIC consulted the applicant as follows about potentially
the scope of her
application:
QPS has indicated that limiting the scope of your request to the 40 pages
(i.e., excluding the BWC recordings) would remove the ground
for refusal. I
understand that you are specifically interested in BWC recordings and that the
option of pursuing only the 40 pages
may not be your preference. However, even
if the scope of those was narrowed to a copy of one officer’s interaction
at your premises
, on each occasion, this would
still take QPS about 85 hours to assess/edit the BWC recordings. I consider that
this still represents
a substantial and unreasonable diversion of QPS
Noting the number of BWC recordings located and the fact that many of them
are over 30 mins in length, you may wish to consider dividing
your request into
multiple consecutive applications and/or seeking inspection access to the BWC
recordings.
To assist you in considering your position and determining your next step,
[OIC’s letter included a]
table which describes the BWC recordings
located by QPS regarding interactions with you, including the duration of each
applicant did not agree to further narrow the scope and submitted as follows
(her emphasis):
... I would also like to make it explicitly clear that I am
not willing to
narrow the scope of my request any further
, as it was already reviewed and
refined in consultation with
[a QPS RTI officer]
further suggestion to limit or reduce the scope is unwarranted and
unnecessary.
[on 30 August 2024]
I had a phone conversation with
RTI officer who]
stated that the requested documents were “almost
ready.” If the information was nearly finalized in August, it is
unjustifiable
that it remains unavailable. Any current claims regarding
additional time requirements are therefore misleading and incorrect.
Finally, I must reiterate that the volume of information requested is not
excessive, as has been incorrectly suggested. It has been
clearly established
that the scope is reasonable and manageable. Under the
Right to Information Act
I am entitled to receive the requested information in full, and I expect this to
be honoured accordingly.
review and refining referred to by the applicant relates to QPS’s attempts
to clarify the scope of the application so that
the application complied with
section 24(2)(b) of the RTI Act.
the above, I consider the applicant was afforded an opportunity to narrow the
scope of her access application, to re-frame
it into a form that QPS could
process during the external review. In giving this opportunity, I consider that
OIC has met the procedural
requirement that would ordinarily have applied to
QPS, under section 42 of the RTI Act.
accept QPS’s submission that the BWC recordings comprise over 700 minutes
of combined audio and video footage. The nature
of the recordings is such that
they contain information about, and discussions with, other individuals that
were involved in the
subject incidents, and/or QPS investigations of complaints
and alleged criminal activity. I consider it is reasonable to expect that
thorough examination of the footage would be required to identify, and then
redact, information that would be contrary to the public
interest to disclose,
eg. because it comprises sensitive personal and private information of other
individuals.
acknowledge that the public interest favours disclosure of the applicant’s
personal information that is held by QPS to
However, public interest
factors also operate to favour nondisclosure of third party personal
information, and I consider these factors
would be relevant for QPS to consider
when examining the recordings.
Also, given the information appears in a sensitive QPS complaint/investigation
context, it is not unreasonable to expect that additional
nondisclosure factors
and/or grounds for refusing access regarding prejudice to law enforcement
processes, would arise for consideration
when examining the BWC
recordings.
consider that QPS’s estimate of 177 hours, ie. approximately 25 business
days, for assessing/editing the recordings, is reasonable,
and arguably
conservative, given the particular nature of the information, the sensitive
complaint context in which it appears and
potential application of grounds for
refusing access, as alluded to in the preceding paragraph. This does not include
the time already
taken by QPS to conduct the searches, nor the additional time
which would be required to assess/edit the 40 pages and prepare a written
estimated time of approximately 25 business days to deal with the recordings
alone represents the entire processing time usually
allowed under the
RTI Act for processing an
application.
I am satisfied that
this estimate of time is sufficient to support a finding that dealing with the
application would
substantially
divert QPS’s resources.
am further satisfied the work involved in dealing with the complete application
would have a manifestly excessive impact on QPS
Right to Information and Privacy
Unit’s finite resources and its ability to perform its functions,
including dealing with the
hundreds of other access applications that QPS
receives each year.
significant volume of information access requests that QPS receives, and its
other administrative functions
consider it would exceed the bounds of reason to expect QPS to spend 25 business
days processing one application. I am therefore
satisfied that processing this
application would also be an
unreasonable
diversion of QPS’s
these reasons, I am satisfied that the work involved in dealing with the access
application would, if carried out, substantially
and unreasonably divert
QPS’s resources from their use in other QPS
Accordingly, I refuse
to deal with the access application under section 41(1)(a) of the RTI
the reasons set out above, I set aside QPS’s deemed decision. In
substitution, I find that dealing with the access application
substantially and unreasonably divert QPS’s resources from their use in
the performance of QPS’s functions, and
therefore, section 41(1)(a) of the
RTI Act applies to the access application. I refuse to deal with it on that
have made this decision as a delegate of the Information Commissioner, under
section 145 of the RTI Act.
Assistant Information Commissioner
Access application dated 26
April 2024.
On 1 July 2025 key
parts of the
Information Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2023
) came into force, effecting significant changes to the
RTI Act. References to the RTI Act in this decision are to the RTI Act
as in force prior to 1 July 2025
This is in accordance with
Chapter 7 Part 9 of the RTI Act, comprising transitional provisions requiring
that access applications
on foot before 1 July 2025 are to be dealt with as if
the IPOLA Act had not been
A revised scope was
agreed upon with the applicant on 24 July
Advised to the applicant
by deemed decision notice dated 30 August
External review
application dated 30 August
Submissions to OIC dated
13 February 2025.
Submissions
to OIC dated 9 May 2025.
Including the applicant’s external review application dated 30 August 2024
and email dated 5 March 2025.
Under section 41(1)(a) of the RTI
Section 39(1) of the
Section 14B of the
Macquarie Dictionary
Online accessed at
www.macquariedictionary.com.au
and Collins Dictionary, 3
Australian Edition
respectively.
Section 41(3)
of the RTI Act.
41(2) of the RTI Act. The word ‘or’ as it appears in this provision
indicates that a finding of a substantial
and unreasonable diversion of
resources can be made on the basis of one or some of the subsections alone
rather than having a cumulative
Davies and Department of
Prime Minister and Cabinet
[2013] AICmr 10
(22 February 2013) at
Section 42(1) of the
Sections 90(1),
95(1)(a) and 105(1) of the RTI
Deemed decision notice
dated 30 August 2024. The scope includes clarification sought by QPS and the
applicant’s responses to
Provided to OIC on 13
November 2024.
dated 13 February 2025.
Based on the estimate of 15 minutes for each minute of
At page 3 of
OIC’s letter dated 22 April
When QPS attends an
incident, each present officer will activate their BWC recording device and as
such, there can be multiple versions
of the same incident recorded by different
Submissions to OIC
dated 9 May 2025.
24(2)(b) provides that an access application must
‘give sufficient
information concerning the document to enable a responsible officer of the
agency ... to identify the document...’.
The application became
compliant with the application requirements on 23 July
Schedule 4, part 2,
item 7 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 3, item 3 and part 4, section 6(1) of the RTI
For example, schedule
4, part 3, items 13 and 16, and schedule 3, sections 10(1)(a) and (f) of the RTI
Though I note that
these components of dealing with the application would, standing alone, be
manageable. I also note that QPS had
indicated it would be willing to process
the application had it been limited to the 40 pages, but this proposal was not
to the applicant.
Section 18 of the RTI Act provides that the
processing period
application is 25 business days from the day the application is received. Whilst
this period can be extended in certain circumstances,
it is relevant to have
regard to it when considering whether the time involved in processing a single
access application will have
a substantial impact on an agency’s
2022-2023 financial year, QPS received a total of 1410 compliant RTI Act access
applications and 1843 compliant
Information Privacy Act 2009
(Qld) access
and amendment applications. See the
Right to Information Act 2009
Information Privacy Act 2009
Annual Report 2022-23
at page 8, accessed at
Reports | Right to Information and Information
responding to administrative access requests and subpoenas.
In reaching this decision,
and in accordance with section 41(3) of the RTI Act, I have not had regard to
the applicant’s reasons
for seeking access.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (391 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter