URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/62.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
J30 and Department of State Development, Infrastructure and Planning (Office of Industrial Relations) [2025] QICmr 62 (18 September 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
J30 and Department of State Development, Infrastructure and Planning
(Office of Industrial Relations)
[2025] QICmr 62 (18 September
Application Number:
Respondent:
Department of State Development, Infrastructure and Planning (Office of
Industrial Relations)
Decision Date:
18 September 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS -
CONTRARY TO THE PUBLIC INTEREST INFORMATION - request for information
investigation of a workplace complaint - information supplied to inspector -
personal information and privacy of other individuals
- prejudice flow of
information to a regulatory agency - whether disclosure would, on balance, be
contrary to the public interest
sections 47(3)(b)
Information Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied
to the Office of
Industrial Relations (
Right to Information Act 2009
for access to Workplace
Health and Safety Queensland documents relating to the investigation of a
psychosocial hazard complaint he
had made against his
located an Employer History Report
and Improvement Notices
the applicant’s employer relevant to the complaint and investigation. OIR
initially consulted with the applicant’s
employer to seek their views on
disclosure and the applicant’s employer
to the disclosure of
opinions provided to the Inspector during the investigation, as recorded in the
Employer History Report.
accepted the employer’s disclosure objections and
to release the Employer
History Report and Improvement Notices subject to the redaction of information
that OIR decided would, on
balance, be contrary to the public interest to
applicant applied
to the Office of
the Information Commissioner (
) for external review of OIR’s
decision and submitted
was particularly seeking access to information that the Inspector obtained from
two individuals.
making this decision, I have considered evidence, submissions, legislation and
other material as set out in these
I have also had regard
Human Rights Act 2019
), particularly the
right to seek and receive
information,
and in doing so,
have acted in accordance with section 58(1) of the HR
on the information available to me, and for the reasons set out below, I have
decided to affirm OIR’s decision that disclosure
of the information would,
on balance, be contrary to the public interest under section 47(3)(b) and 49 of
the RTI Act.
Refused information
information to which access was refused by OIR appears in four part pages of the
Employer History Report and two part pages of
Improvement Notices, and
(a) information/opinions/versions of events provided by two individuals to the
Inspector as part of the investigation, as recorded
by the Inspector in the
Employee History Report
Witness Statements
(b) names and signatures of individuals other than the applicant (
Third Party
Information
(c) signature and mobile phone number of the Inspector (
Information
Relevant law
the RTI Act, a person has a right to be given access to documents of an
However, this right of
access is subject to certain limitations, including grounds upon which access to
information may be refused.
RTI Act requires the grounds for refusing access to be interpreted narrowly, and
decisions on access to be made with regard to
the pro-disclosure
Relevantly,
access to information may be refused where its disclosure would, on balance, be
contrary to the public interest.
public interest’
refers to considerations affecting
the good order and functioning of the community and government affairs for the
well-being of citizens.
This means that in general, a public interest
consideration is one which is common to all members of, or a substantial segment
the community, as distinct from matters that concern purely private or
personal interests. There are, however, some recognised public
considerations that may apply for the benefit of an individual.
RTI Act explains the steps that the decision-maker must take in deciding the
public interest.
identifies a non-exhaustive list of factors in Schedule 4 that may be relevant
to deciding the balance of the public interest.
I have considered all these
factors, together with other relevant information in reaching my decision, and
discuss relevant factors
reaching my decision on each category of refused information, I have had regard
to the RTI Act’s pro-disclosure
and Parliament’s
intention that grounds for refusing access to information are to be interpreted
I have not taken any
irrelevant public interest factors into account in making this
(a) Witness Statements
is a public interest in OIR, as a regulator, being transparent and accountable
in how it deals with workplace health and safety
complaints and investigations.
The circumstances of this matter give rise to several pro-disclosure factors
relevant to enhancing
government accountability and
transparency
which I have
discussed below.
accept that disclosing information provided by witnesses to the Inspector would
provide the applicant with further insight into
the nature and extent of
information that was before the Inspector for the purpose of making decisions in
connection with the investigation.
It would also provide context to the
employer’s approach to management of risks in the workplace, and the
Inspector’s
findings regarding the Improvement Notices. However, I have
also taken into account that OIR have already released most of the Employer
History Report and that this sets out most of the steps undertaken during the
investigation, and the Inspector’s findings.
OIR have also released the
majority of the Improvement Notices which set out the Inspector’s findings
on the provisions contravened
by the applicant’s employer under the WHS
Act and the WHS Regulations. The disclosure of that information in my view, has
to significantly discharge the relevant accountability and transparency
factors by revealing how OIR managed the investigation and
OIR’s reasons
for deciding to issue Improvement Notices. For these reasons, I afford these
factors moderate weight.
small amount of the applicant’s personal information appears within the
Witness Statements. This is inevitable given the applicant
was the source of the
complaint. There is a strong public interest in a person obtaining access to
their own personal information
held by government and this factor is generally
afforded significant weight in favour of disclosure. Here, the references to the
applicant are closely intertwined with the personal information of other
individuals as they appear in the context of their versions
of events/statements
provided to the Inspector. For this reason, access cannot be given to the
applicant’s personal information
without disclosing the personal
information of those other individuals. While I acknowledge the significant
weight of this factor,
it must be balanced against the competing nondisclosure
factors discussed below.
applicant submitted he is entitled to access the Witness Statements as the
workplace health and safety acts have been breached...’
still on workcover 1.5 years
with psychological
issues and ha
not been able to start working’,
and as there
has been a breach of the fair work act’
criminal offence... lodged with Queensland
The applicant
has also submitted that his employer knew of the workplace health and safety
breaches, but did nothing to address them
prior to the Incident. Given the
applicant’s submissions I have considered whether disclosing the Witness
Statements could
reasonably be expected to advance the applicant’s fair
treatment and/or contribute to the administration of justice for him
personally,
or generally in relation to procedural
As set out above, the
Witness Statements contain the personal views of other involved individuals, as
expressed to the Inspector.
While I accept that they would supplement the
information already held by the applicant, aid his understanding of what was
to the Inspector, and may inform his pursuit of further processes (to
some degree), I do not consider these factors carry more than
low weight in
disclosure.
applicant advised OIC that he has lodged a complaint with Queensland Police
) about the assault that occurred during the Incident. As
such, I have also considered whether disclosure of the Witness Statements
reasonably be expected to contribute to the enforcement of the criminal
The applicant’s
complaint related to contraventions of the WHS Act and WHS Regulation and the
Witness Statements concern how
the employer manages workplace health and safety
concerns and background information leading up to the Incident, in an
administrative,
not criminal, context. While I accept that disclosure of the
Witness Statements under the RTI Act may provide the applicant with
information for him to convey to QPS in connection to his assault complaint, I
also note QPS has broad powers to obtain
information if it is relevant to the
investigation of a criminal offence. For these reasons, I afford this factor low
to nondisclosure factors, the RTI Act recognises that disclosing an
individual’s personal
information
to another person
can reasonably be expected to cause a public interest
There is also a
nondisclosure factor that recognises the public interest in protecting a
person’s right to privacy.
The concept of ‘
is not defined in the IP Act or the
RTI Act. It can, however, essentially be viewed as the right of an individual
to preserve their
‘personal sphere
’ free from the
interference of others.
consider these personal information and privacy considerations apply to the
Witness Statements.
am satisfied that the Witness Statements comprise the personal information of
individuals who engaged with the Inspector during
the investigation to provide
their versions of events on the Incident, and other background information. The
information ‘
contains opinions recorded by the attending inspector,
which may, if released, identify those
individuals’
provided in the sensitive context of a workplace investigation into a
psychosocial hazard complaint. Further, the individuals
have not consented
‘(either expressly or impliedly) to the personal information being
disclosed to the public
am satisfied that even if the names were redacted prior to disclosure, the
circumstances of the matter are such that the applicant
would still be able to
ascertain the identities of the other individuals. In this instance, I consider
that disclosure could reasonably
be expected to prejudice the protection of the
third parties’ right to maintain a level of privacy in relation to their
involvement
in a sensitive workplace
investigation.
reasons, I affirm OIR’s finding that these nondisclosure factors carry
significant weight.
factor favouring nondisclosure also arises where release of information under
the RTI Act could reasonably be expected to prejudice
the flow of information to
In this instance, the
individuals were cooperating with the OIR Inspector who was performing the
function of the workplace health
and safety regulator. Releasing this type of
information under the RTI Act, where there can be no restriction on its use,
dissemination
or republication,
could reasonably be expected discourage individuals from providing OIR with
relevant information and cooperating with OIR investigations
in the future.
This, in turn, could affect OIR’s ability to conduct its regulatory
functions. As such, I am satisfied that
disclosing the Witness Statements could
reasonably be expected to adversely impact OIR’s ability to effectively
conduct these
significant weight to this nondisclosure factor.
balancing the public interest factors, I have afforded moderate weight to the
accountability and transparency factors, noting that
OIR has already released a
significant amount of information to the applicant about the investigation
process. I have afforded significant
weight to the applicant accessing his
personal information and recognise that disclosure would contribute to the
enforcement of the
criminal law, advance the applicant’s fair treatment,
and contribute to the administration of justice and procedural fairness
generally, but only to a low degree, given the circumstances of the case and the
nature of the Witness Statements. On the other hand,
I have afforded significant
weight to the factors favouring nondisclosure regarding personal information and
and the flow of information to OIR in the context
of a workplace health and safety investigation.
balance, I am satisfied that the factors favouring nondisclosure outweigh the
factors favouring disclosure. Accordingly, I find
that disclosure of the Witness
Statements would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest and access to
that category of information
(b) Third Party Information
category comprises names and signatures of private individuals (associated with
the applicant’s employer) who participated
in the investigation. It does
not contain the applicant's personal
information.
discussed above,
public interest in disclosing information which demonstrates how OIR discharges
their regulatory functions under the WHS
I accept that disclosing
the Third Party Information would enhance accountability and transparency to
some extent as it would reveal
to the applicant who the Inspector engaged with
as part of the investigation, and who signed the Improvement Notices. However,
the extent of the released information about the investigation process,
including the role of the signatory on the Improvement Notices,
I am satisfied
that the information already disclosed has served to discharge the relevant
public interest factors by providing a
significant level of accountability and
transparency to OIR’s investigation process. Also, given the investigation
was in connection
with the applicant’s place of employment, it is
reasonable to conclude that he has some level of knowledge of the involvement
other individuals in the investigation process. For these reasons, I consider
the weight to be afforded to these factors as they
relate to the Third Party
Information is moderate.
the content of the Third Party Information – the names and signatures of
private individuals (not public sector employees)
involved in the investigation
of the applicant’s complaint – it inherently contains the personal
information of those
individuals. I am satisfied that disclosing the names and
signatures of those who were involved in the investigation could reasonably
expected to prejudice the protection of their right to maintain a level of
workplace investigation
into a psychosocial hazard
Further, I accept
OIR’s view that individuals who engage with OIR ‘
are entitled to
a legitimate expectation that personal information about them which concerns
their private affairs would be afforded
protection from unreasonable
disclosure’
consider that it would cause a public interest harm by disclosing their personal
information in a sensitive workplace health
On this basis, I agree
with OIR that significant weight should be afforded to these two nondisclosure
also consider that disclosing the personal information of private individuals
who have cooperated with an OIR Inspector could reasonably
be expected to
prejudice the flow of information to a regulatory
Similar to the Witness
Statements as discussed above,
routinely disclosing the personal information (such as names and signatures) of
individuals who voluntarily engage with such investigations,
could reasonably be
expected to erode confidence in the investigation process. This in turn would
prejudice the flow of information
from individuals who would otherwise provide
relevant information to the WHS regulatory authority. I am satisfied that it is
to expect that this would adversely impact OIR’s ability to
effectively conduct investigations. On this basis, I afford significant
to this nondisclosure factor.
respect to the Third Party Information, I have afforded moderate weight to
factors favouring disclosure concerning OIR’s
accountability and ensuring
transparency in its operations and decision-making. On the other hand, I have
afforded significant weight
to safeguarding the personal information and privacy
of other individuals and protecting the flow of information to OIR from
On this basis, I have found that the nondisclosure factors carry
determinative weight in relation to the Third Party Information.
On balance, I
am satisfied that the factors favouring nondisclosure outweigh the factors
favouring disclosure. Accordingly, I find
that disclosure of the Third Party
Information would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest and access to
it may be refused
(c) Inspector Information
category is limited to instances of the Inspector's signature and mobile phone
number as they appear in the located documents.
It does not contain the
applicant's personal
information.
discussed above, OIR released the large majority of the documents concerning the
investigation process and findings including the
name of the Inspector, and
their title. I accept that releasing the signature and mobile number of the
Inspector would provide the
applicant with a more complete version of documents
concerning his complaint. However, I do not consider disclosure would provide
any further information or background for OIR’s
nor reveal anything
further about the process undertaken by OIR in relation to its investigation of
the applicant’s complaint.
As such, I afford the accountability and transparency factor limited weight.
accept that the Inspector’s signature and mobile phone number appears in
the context of a public sector employee performing
their day-to-day work duties
and therefore, constitutes their routine personal work information. Such
information does not typically
attract high privacy considerations and the harm
arising from disclosure is considered to be
However, it is necessary to
consider the circumstances of each case.
have considered the duties, context and nature of the work performed by an OIR
inspector. Given the nature of the information (signature
and mobile number),
the sensitive environment in which OIR inspectors operate, and the fact that
there can be no limitation on further
disclosure of information released under
the RTI Act, I consider higher than usual weight should be afforded to
protecting the Inspector’s
personal information in the form of their
signature. I also consider higher than usual weight should be afforded to
protecting the
Inspector’s privacy, to the extent that releasing the
mobile number of the Inspector would allow them to be contacted directly
potentially outside of working hours. As such, in this instance I consider that
disclosure of the Inspector Information would
reveal some personal/private
information about the Inspector. I give moderate weight to these factors.
balancing the public interest, I am satisfied that the public interest in
accountability and transparency would only be served
to a limited degree by
disclosure of the Inspector Information. On the other hand, I consider
disclosure of the Inspector Information
would reveal personal and private
information and I have given moderate weight to those factors having regard to
the sensitive complaint
context and because there can be no control over further
dissemination of information released under the RTI Act. Accordingly, while
consider the prejudice to privacy and the public interest harm resulting from
disclosure of this personal information is not significant
in this case, I have
still decided to afford these factors moderate weight in favour of
nondisclosure. As such, I am satisfied that
disclosure of the Inspector
Information would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest and access
may, therefore, be refused
to it on that basis.
the reasons set out above, I
the reviewable decision
to refuse access to the remaining information under section 47(3)(b) of the RTI
Act on the basis that its
disclosure would, on balance, be contrary to the
public interest.
have made this decision as a delegate of the Information Commissioner, under
section 145 of the RTI
Assistant Information Commissioner
September 2025
Access application dated 25
September 2024.
OIR became part of the
Department of State Development, Infrastructure and Planning following machinery
of government changes on
18 December 2023.
On 1 July 2025 key parts of
Information Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2023
(Qld) (IPOLA
Act) came into force, effecting significant changes to the RTI Act and the
Information Privacy Act 2009
(Qld) (IP Act). References in this decision to the
RTI Act and IP Act, however, are to the those Acts as in force prior to 1 July
2025. This is in accordance with Chapter 7 Part 9 of the RTI Act and Chapter 8,
Part 3 of the IP Act, comprising transitional provisions
requiring that access
applications on foot before 1 July 2025 are to be dealt with as if the IPOLA Act
had not been enacted.
The applicant
confirmed this narrowed scope in correspondence to OIR on 25 October 2024. The
complaint related to bullying, harassment
and an assault in the workplace (the
A document outlining an
overview of the investigation conducted by the Inspector.
Notices provided to the
employer from OIR setting out the provisions of the
Work Health and Safety
Work Health and Safety Regulation
WHS Regulations
) contravened by the applicant’s
In correspondence to OIR
dated 18 November 2024.
On 18 November
26 November 2024.
On 31 May 2025.
Section 21 of the HR
OIC’s approach to the HR Act
set out in this paragraph has been considered and endorsed by the Queensland
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal in Lawrence v Queensland Police Service
Appearing throughout the
Employee History Report and Improvement Notices at pages 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and
Appearing at various
instances in the Improvement Notices at pages 5 and 8.
Section 23 of the RTI Act.
Section 47(3) of the RTI
Section 47(2)(a) and 44
of the RTI Act.
Sections 47(3)(b) and 49
of the RTI Act.
Section 49(3) of the
Section 44 of the RTI
Section 47(2)(a) of the RTI
Section 49(3) of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 2, item
1, 3 and 11 of the RTI Act.
Discussed at paragraphs [17]-[19] of these
Submissions dated
31 May 2025.
Schedule 4,
part 2, items 10, 16 and 17 of the RTI Act.
Given the information
already released to the applicant. See paragraph
Schedule 4, part 2,
item 18 of the RTI Act.
‘Personal information’ is ‘information or an opinion,
including information or an opinion forming part of a database,
whether true or
not, and whether recorded in a material form or not, about an individual whose
identity is apparent, or can reasonably
be ascertained, from the information or
– see definition in schedule 6 of the RTI Act and
section 12 of the IP Act.
Schedule 4, part 4, section 6(1) of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 3, item 3
of the RTI Act.
Paraphrasing the Australian Law Reform Commission’s definition of the
concept in ‘
For your information: Australian Privacy Law and
e’ Australian Law Reform Commission Report No. 108, Vol 1,
released 12 August 2008, at paragraph
Noted in OIR’s
‘Reasons for decision...Attachment A’ at page
As outlined in
OIR’s ‘Reasons for decision...Attachment A’ at page
Schedule 4, part 3, item
3 of the RTI Act.
4, part 3, item 13 of the RTI Act.
See FLK v Information
Commissioner
[2021] QCATA 46
Under sections 47(3)(b) and 49 of the RTI Act.
Accordingly, the factor
favouring disclosure at schedule 4, part 2, item 7 of the RTI Act does not
At paragraphs
[12]-[13] of these reasons.
Schedule 4, part 2, items 1, 3 and 11 of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 3,
item 3 of the RTI Act.
is, the information is used for the purpose that it was provided and disclosed
only for the purposes of the investigation. As
set out in OIR’s
‘Reasons for decision...Attachment A’ at page
Schedule 4, part 4,
section 6(1) of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 3, item
13 of the RTI Act. See Setschnjak and Department of Justice and Attorney-General
(Unreported, Queensland
Information Commissioner, 25 May 2012) at [24] and
Suskova and Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2015] QICmr 31
(27 November 2015)
at [27]-[28].
At paragraphs [18]-[19] of
these reasons.
Under sections 47(3)(b)
and 49 of the RTI Act.
Accordingly, the factor
favouring disclosure at schedule 4, part 2, item 7 of the RTI Act does not
Schedule 4, part 2,
item 11 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 2, item 1 of the RTI
See, for example,
O52 and Queensland Ombudsman
[2020] QICmr 31
(11 June 2020) at [66].
Under section 110(1)(a)
of the RTI Act.
Section 49 of the RTI Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (406 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter