URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCAT/2025/448.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Queensland College of Teachers v SKR [2025] QCAT 448 (10 November 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Queensland College of Teachers v SKR
[2025] QCAT 448
QUEENSLAND COLLEGE OF TEACHERS
(applicant)
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO:
MATTER TYPE:
Occupational regulation matters
DELIVERED ON:
10 November 2025
HEARING DATE:
On the papers
DECISION OF:
Member Kate Chapple, presiding
Member Noel Jensen
Member Robyn Oliver
ground for disciplinary action under
section 92(1)(h)
(Queensland College of Teachers) Act 2005
(Qld) (‘the Act’) is
established.
section 161(2)(a)
of the Act, take no further action in relation to the
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(Qld), other than to the parties to this proceeding, and until
further order of the Tribunal, publication is prohibited of any information
thing that may identify SKR, a relevant student or former student, complainant,
child, school, or sporting club other than to
the extent necessary to enable the
Queensland College of Teachers to meet its statutory obligations. SKR may
provide a copy of this
decision and reasons for decision to any regulatory
authority or employer in compliance with disclosure requirements.
respondent shall be anonymised in this decision and reasons for decision as
CATCHWORDS:
TEACHER DISCIPLINARY MATTER – where a young, inexperienced teacher
engaged in inappropriate and/or overfamiliar and/or sexualised
communications separately with two secondary school students – where the
teacher tried repeatedly to meet up with
one of the students – where there
was no physical contact between the teacher and students – where teacher
not employed
at schools students attended where the teacher acknowledged the
conduct, cooperated in the disciplinary process and expressed remorse
where teacher voluntarily surrendered his registration – where time
elapsed since suspension exceeds appropriate prohibition
TRIBUNAL POWER TO MAKE NOTATION ORDER – where teacher a former
approved teacher – where dissenting view among 3-member
NON-PUBLICATION ORDER – where no public interest to identify the
names of the teacher, students, school or sporting club
Education (Queensland College of Teachers) Act 2005
, Schedule 3
Human Rights Act 2019
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Cutbush v Team Maree Property Service (No 3)
[2010] QCATA 89
Health Ombudsman v Shermer (No 2)
[2019] QCAT 54
Queensland College of Teachers v Teacher BAM
[2012] QCAT 694
Queensland College of Teachers v EKR
[2023] QCAT 136
Queensland College of Teachers v IOP
[2022] QCAT 241
Queensland College of Teachers v KDH
[2024] QCAT 501
Queensland College of Teachers v NRR
[2021] QCAT 152
Queensland College of Teachers v REC
[2020] QCAT 178
Queensland College of Teachers v Teacher QKE
[2013] QCAT 548
Queensland College of Teachers v TSV
[2015] QCAT 186
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
This matter was heard and determined on the papers pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
REASONS FOR DECISION
respondent, SKR (‘the Teacher’) was granted teacher registration
with the applicant, the Queensland College of
Teachers (‘the QCT’)
on 6 December 2017. He was first employed from early 2018 as a teacher at a
state high school in
a rural town in south east Queensland, and from July 2021,
at a state secondary college in inner-city Brisbane.
September 2023, the QCT suspended the Teacher’s registration pursuant to
Education (Queensland College of Teachers) Act 2005
(Qld) (‘the Act’) and, in accordance with
section 50(5)
of the Act,
subsequently referred the continuation of the suspension to the Tribunal for
review. On 24 October 2023, the Tribunal
made orders continuing the suspension
of the Teacher’s registration and prohibiting the publication of any
information that
may identify the Teacher, any relevant complainant or child, or
any relevant school other than in limited prescribed circumstances.
[3] The Teacher
surrendered his registration and was removed from the register of teachers on 22
January 2024.
[4] On 31 May
2024, the Professional Capacity and Teacher Conduct Committee of the QCT
(‘the PC&TC Committee’) decided
pursuant to
section 115
Act to refer the matter to the Tribunal for disciplinary action.
November 2024, the QCT filed a Form 22 Referral – disciplinary proceeding
in the Tribunal together with a
Attachment annexing an affidavit of
Pamela Mary Skirving sworn on 14 November 2024 asserting (inter alia) that the
QCT had formed
a reasonable belief that grounds for disciplinary action exist
against the Teacher pursuant to
section 92(1)(h)
of the Act and particularising
those grounds (‘the Referral’).
[6] In 2021 and
2022, the Teacher was a coach at a football club north of Brisbane. During that
time, Student 1 and Student 2 played
football at the same club; neither was
coached by the Teacher, however both knew the Teacher as a coach at the club,
and Student
1 knew the Teacher as the coach of her older brother’s
Teacher’s conduct the subject of the Referral occurred between the latter
part of 2021 and early 2022 in relation to
Student 1 when she was in years 10
and 11, and on various dates during 2022 in relation to Student 2 when she was
in year 12. Student
1 and Student 2 attended different schools from one another,
did not attend the school where the Teacher was employed, and were never
direct student-teacher relationship with the Teacher.
[8] The QCT
seeks orders that the Teacher’s registration is cancelled, and the Teacher
is prohibited from reapplying for registration
as a teacher or permission to
teach for a period of two to three years. Further, the QCT seeks that, before
the Teacher’s registration
or permission to teach can be reinstated, the
register of teachers be endorsed with a notation that should the Teacher
reapply, the
application must be accompanied by an independent psychological
report addressing certain matters to the satisfaction of the QCT.
[9] The Teacher
does not oppose the orders sought by the QCT and, in addition, seeks a
non-publication order.
Legislation
[10] Schedule
3 of the Act defines “approved teacher” as a person who is a
registered teacher or holds a permission to
teach and defines “relevant
teacher” to include an approved teacher or a former approved teacher.
[11] Section
92(1) of the Act sets out the grounds for disciplinary action against a relevant
teacher, including the following:
(h) the person behaves in a way, whether connected with the teaching profession
or otherwise, that does not satisfy the standard
of behaviour generally expected
of a teacher;
section 111A of the Act, the PC&TC Committee may refer a matter to the
Tribunal where it reasonably believes that a
ground for disciplinary action
against a relevant teacher (an approved teacher or former approved teacher) may
exist. Section 115
of the Act sets out the functions of the PC&TC Committee
in relation to a practice and conduct matter, including the referral
of a matter
to the Tribunal.
[13] Schedule 3
of the Act defines “former approved teacher” as a former registered
teacher or a former holder of a permission
[14] Section
161(2) of the Act sets out the Tribunal’s powers in circumstances where it
decides that a ground for disciplinary
action has been established against a
former approved teacher. In summary, the Tribunal may:
(a) Decide to take no further action;
(b) Make an order that the teacher pay the QCT certain costs;
(c) If the Tribunal would have made an order cancelling the teacher’s
registration or permission to teach if the teacher had
been an approved
teacher—make an order prohibiting the teacher from reapplying for
registration for a stated period from the
day the order is made or
indefinitely;
(d) Make an order that a particular notation or endorsement about the teacher be
entered in the register.
Uncontested conduct allegations
[15] The Teacher
does not contest the conduct allegations the subject of the Referral and
particularised as grounds 1 to 4 set out
in paragraphs 3.1 to 3.4 of the Part C
Attachment.
[16] The conduct
the subject of the Referral can be summarised as follows:
(a) In relation to Student 1:
(i) On various dates between 13 September 2021 and 8 February 2022, the Teacher
engaged in inappropriate and/or overfamiliar and/or
sexualised electronic communication with Student 1 via social media platform
(ii) On various dates between 5 October 2021 and 14 February 2022, the Teacher
engaged in inappropriate and/or overfamiliar and/or
sexualised electronic
communication (both messages and images) with Student 1 via social media
platform Snapchat. The messages included
that the Teacher has a crush on Student
1, he is aroused by Student 1, and he would be happy to assist Student 1
sexually. The images
included an image of an erect penis, and an image
containing written text purporting to be an email the Teacher received from a
9 student he had taught.
(b) In relation to Student 2:
(i) On various dates during 2022, the Teacher engaged in inappropriate and/or
overfamiliar and/or sexualised electronic communication
with Student 2 via
social media platform Snapchat, including requesting to socialise in person,
stating that he wanted “to
see where things could go”.
(ii) On 14 February 2022, the Teacher had delivered and/or purported to have
delivered to Student 2 at her school a rose and balloon
for Valentine’s
Filed material
QCT’s submissions on grounds, sanction and non-publication order dated and
filed 14 March 2025.
Teacher’s submissions dated 1 April 2025 and filed 4 April 2025.
Consideration
are satisfied:
(a) The Teacher is a former approved teacher and therefore a relevant teacher.
(b) The Teacher’s conduct does not satisfy the standard of behaviour
generally expected of a teacher.
(c) The Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine the matter and make orders
pursuant to section 161(2) of the Act.
(d) The Teacher’s surrender of his registration renders a cancellation
order unnecessary.
[21] We note it
is well settled that the purpose of sanctions in a disciplinary action is not
punitive. Rather, the purpose is to
achieve the main objects of the Act, being
to uphold the standards of and maintain public confidence in the teaching
profession and
to protect the public, while providing specific and general
deterrence.
[22] We note in
determining the appropriate sanction, the Tribunal may have regard to various
factors, including:
(a) The teacher’s antecedents and experience.
(b) The nature of the teacher’s conduct.
(c) The level of insight of the teacher.
(d) The impact the conduct may have on students.
(e) Whether any remedial action has been taken by the teacher.
[23] We have
regard to these and other factors in weighing the mitigating and aggravating
circumstances of this case and considering
the overall gravity of the
Teacher’s conduct.
Mitigating circumstances
Teacher was aged 25 to 26 years and had been employed as a teacher for three to
four years at the time of the conduct the
subject of the Referral, and on that
basis, it is reasonable to consider him a somewhat young and inexperienced
teacher at the relevant
[25] The Teacher
was not at the relevant time, nor at any other time, employed at either of the
schools that Student 1 or Student
2 attended.
[26] There was
no direct student-teacher relationship between Student 1 or Student 2 and the
[27] There was
no physical contact between the Teacher and Student 1 or Student 2.
[28] The Teacher
agreed to participate in the QCT’s investigation.
[29] The Teacher
voluntarily surrendered his teacher registration, was removed from the teacher
register on 22 January 2024 and resigned
from his then teaching position
effective 28 January 2024.
[30] In January
2024, the Teacher accessed the Professional Boundaries web seminar and other
related material regarding communicating
safely on social media and engaging
with students. He submits that since this training he has a clearer
understanding of professional
boundaries outside the school environment and has
strictly limited his access to social media accounts.
Teacher’s cooperation in this proceeding has obviated the need for the
Tribunal to conduct an oral hearing of the matter
and make findings of fact
regarding his conduct.
[32] The Teacher
acknowledges in his material that his conduct breached professional boundaries
and impacted the students, their families,
the sporting community, and the
teaching profession. He expresses extreme remorse for his conduct and includes
specific apologies
to the students, the football club, the Department of
Education and relevant schools, and his former teaching colleagues, however
is not clear whether he has communicated the apologies to these parties. He
submits that whilst not an excuse, at the time of
the conduct, his relationship
with his then fiancé was breaking down resulting in stress and clouded
sound judgement. He further
submits that since that time, he has formed a stable
new relationship and matured greatly.
[33] We note
there is no direct evidence before the Tribunal of the impact of the
Teacher’s conduct on Student 1 or Student
suspension of the Teacher’s registration resulted in the suspension of the
Teacher’s Blue Card and the Teacher
being prevented from coaching,
volunteering, or working around football or sport, activities he has
participated in since he was
aged 15 years.
[35] The Teacher
submits that he has sought advice regarding an appropriate psychologist should
he seek to return to teaching in the
future and be required to provide a
psychological report.
[36] The Teacher
concludes his submissions stating that “he is fully committed to improving
personally and professionally and
will accept any orders imposed by the tribunal
as a result”.
Aggravating circumstances
Teacher’s conduct involved two students.
[38] The Teacher
was aware at the time of the conduct that both students were of secondary school
[39] The Teacher
made repeated requests of Student 2 to meet in person, which she declined,
telling him that she didn’t feel
comfortable about the age difference and
didn’t want to pursue anything.
[40] In the
main, the Teacher did not contest the conduct allegations, however in relation
to the delivery of the rose and balloon
to Student 2’s school on
Valentine’s Day 2022, he initially said he didn’t recall having done
so and that he told
Student 2 he had done so in an attempt to cheer her up. It
was only after the QCT investigator went to some lengths to verify the
allegation (obtaining the florist order and cross referencing it to the
Teacher’s mobile number and bank statement) and was
given a warning, that
the Teacher did not deny the allegation and accepted he had made a
Previous decisions
[41] Section
158(2) of the Act requires that in making its decision, the Tribunal must have
regard to any relevant previous decision
by a practice and conduct body of which
the Tribunal is aware.
[42] The QCT in
its submissions cite three
we will refer to as
in support of a sanction by way of a
prohibition on reapplication for teacher registration in the range of two to
three years.
involved a 38 year-old male teacher with around 16 years’ teaching
experience. Over five months, he sent overfamiliar messages
to a 16 year-old
student, including that he wanted her and wanted to catch up, and an image of
his penis, and on one occasion, touched
her leg. He did not teach the student;
she was the daughter of a family friend. The teacher admitted and acknowledged
his conduct.
He was prohibited from applying for teacher registration for two
years from the date of the decision and a psychological report notation
entered on the register.
involved a 39 year-old male teacher with around 16 years’ teaching
experience. Over two months, he engaged in intimate and/or
sexual communications
with three students including the exchange of images and references to drug,
alcohol, and steroid use. The
teacher acknowledged and took responsibility for
his conduct. He was prohibited from applying for teacher registration for two
and nine months from the date of his suspension and a psychological report
notation was entered on the register.
involved a 42 year-old male teacher with one years’ teaching experience in
Australia and some prior experience overseas. Over
six months, he engaged in
overfamiliar communication with a student, including saying he loved her, and
she made his day better.
He suggested it wasn’t necessary for her to tell
people, and on one occasion grabbed her hand and squeezed it. The teacher
acknowledged his conduct but showed little remorse and insight. He was
prohibited from applying for teacher registration for two
years from the date of
refusal of his registration and a psychological report notation was entered on
the register.
[46] We consider
these cases have some equivalence with the current case to the extent they
involved conduct of a similar nature with
female students of a similar age, two
of the teachers acknowledged and took responsibility for their conduct, and one
of the teachers
was not in a teaching relationship with the student. An
important difference however is the teachers were considerably more mature
and/or professionally experienced than the Teacher in the current case. Further
differences include:
involved physical contact, albeit
very limited;
involved three students and messaging about drug,
alcohol, and steroid use; and
each involved a teacher
in a teaching relationship with the student or students.
decision we will refer to as
the Tribunal in
its analysis of various previous decisions considered a teacher’s lack of
maturity and experience a mitigating
factor. The male teacher in that case was
aged 22 years and had been teaching for around 17 months. He had taught a year
one lesson of a physical education class and a year later came in
The teacher
sent naked pictures of himself to the student and encouraged her to do the same;
he received naked and near-naked pictures
of the student; he made comments about
her body; he commented about assisting her losing her virginity; he suggested
that communications
be kept secret; he attended the student’s home on two
occasions; and he kissed the student on the first occasion. There was
personal contact between the teacher and the student. The teacher showed deep
remorse for his conduct, apologised to a number
of affected people, and had
undergone a period of psychological counselling to address his mental health
issues. He was prohibited
from applying for teacher registration for 12 months
from the date he was removed from the register due to non-payment of fees and
psychological report notation was entered on the register.
[48] We consider
extends the lower end of the prohibition period range submitted
by the QCT.
Prohibition period
find that grounds for disciplinary action against the Teacher have been
established under section 92(1)(h) of the Act. As
the Teacher is a former
approved teacher, section 161 of the Act applies.
[50] Section
161(2)(c) of the Act requires the Tribunal to first determine whether, if the
teacher had been an approved teacher, we
would have made an order cancelling the
teacher’s registration. In this case, we determine that we would have made
order in relation to the Teacher.
[51] Section
161(2)(c) of the Act then empowers the Tribunal to make an order prohibiting the
teacher from reapplying for registration
or permission to teach for a stated
period (‘the prohibition period’) from the date the order is made or
indefinitely.
[52] The QCT
seeks a prohibition period in the range of two to three years. We consider
however the conduct in this case begets a
period of prohibition that positions
the Teacher’s conduct on a scale between
The Teacher was more mature and experienced than
by around three years; there was no physical contact with Student 1
or Student 2 however there were two students involved, not one,
and he persisted
in his attempts to meet up with Student 2 despite her repeatedly declining and
telling him she didn’t feel
comfortable about the age difference and
didn’t want to pursue anything; and whilst he has completed some online
professional
boundary training and expressed a willingness to seek psychological
QCT’s reapplication conditions in the future, whereas
self-initiated and undertook psychological counselling to address his conduct
soon after its occurrence.
[53] As already
noted, the Teacher voluntarily surrendered his registration and was removed from
the register of teachers on 22 January
2024, after first having been suspended
on 1 September 2023. It was not until May 2024 that the PC&TC Committee
decided to refer
the matter to the Tribunal, and not until November 2024 that
the Referral was filed in the Tribunal.
[54] We consider
the appropriate prohibition period in this matter is 21 months, however we find
it is not appropriate that the Teacher
serve the prohibition henceforth given
that it is now more than two years and two months since his registration was
suspended and
more than 21 months since he surrendered his registration.
Accordingly, pursuant to section 161(2)(a) of the Act, we determine to
further action in relation to the matter.
QCT seeks an order that a notation, specifically worded, be entered in the
register requiring that any reapplication by the
Teacher for registration or
permission to teach be accompanied by an independent psychological report to the
QCT’s satisfaction
addressing, in summary, whether the psychologist is
satisfied that the Teacher has adequately understood and addressed his
[56] Section
161(2)(d) of the Act empowers the Tribunal to make an order in relation to a
former approved teacher that a particular
notation or endorsement about the
teacher be entered in the register.
[57] Section
288(1) of the Act requires the QCT to keep a register about approved teachers
containing certain details including any
conditions of registration, any
suspension, and any notation/endorsement under a practice and conduct order.
Section 288(5) further
requires that the register contain details of any
cancellation of registration or permission to teach by the Tribunal under
56 of the Act or by the Tribunal under section 160 of the Act (which
empowers the Tribunal to make orders in relation to an approved
[58] Schedule 3
of the Act defines ‘register’ as the register of approved teachers
kept by the QCT under section 288.
[59] There is no
requirement under the Act that the QCT keep a register about former approved
teachers, other than as provided for
in section 288(5) of the Act. This
observation was also made in a recent decision we will refer to as
[60] In this
case, following the Teacher’s surrender of his registration, the Teacher
was removed from the register. Accordingly,
there is no practical means by which
a notation or endorsement about the Teacher can be entered on the register.
, the Tribunal determined that section 161(2)(d) of the Act cannot be
used as a means of imposing conditions in the form of a notation
or endorsement
on a teacher seeking reregistration. If the legislature had intended to give the
Tribunal such a power in relation
to a former approved teacher, it would have
included in section 161(2) an equivalent provision to section 160(2)(h), which
permits the Tribunal to impose conditions, and to leave the issue in
no doubt, an equivalent provision to section 160(2)(k), which
permits the
Tribunal to make another order it considers appropriate. However, section 161(2)
is absent these provisions.
[62] Accordingly,
the order sought by the QCT is refused.
[63] We endorse
the Tribunal’s comments in
at paragraphs [141] and [142]
stating the case for legislative amendment to ensure that all information
arising from practice and
conduct proceedings in relation to former approved
teachers is available on a public register.
Non-publication
[64] Pursuant
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(Qld) (‘QCAT Act’), the Tribunal may make an order
prohibiting the publication of any information that may identify a
has appeared before the Tribunal where the Tribunal considers the order
necessary for the reasons stated in the provision,
including any other reason in
the interests of justice.
exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion pursuant to section 66 of the QCAT
Act is informed by the principle of open
and the party seeking the
non-publication order must satisfy the Tribunal it is
parties have made submissions in support of an ongoing non-publication order.
[67] We are
satisfied it would be contrary to the public interest for information to be
published that would identify the Teacher,
Student 1 or Student 2, any relevant
complainant or child, or any relevant school or sporting club other than to the
extent necessary
for the QCT to meet its statutory obligations. We will order
accordingly.
Human rights considerations
question here is whether there are any relevant considerations under the
Human Rights Act 2019
(Qld) (‘the HR Act’).
[69] The HR Act
applies to courts and tribunals when they are performing functions that are
relevant to the rights protected under
the Act. This includes both the judicial
and administrative functions of courts and tribunals. Judicial functions include
and determining cases.
[70] The HR Act
requires that all legislation is to be interpreted in a way that is compatible
with human rights, to the extent that
it is consistent with the purpose of the
legislation. If legislation cannot be interpreted that way, it is to be
interpreted in a
way that is most compatible with human rights, to the extent
that it is consistent with the purpose of the legislation.
[71] ‘Compatible
with human rights’ means the legislation does not limit a human right or
limits a human right only to
the extent that it is reasonable and demonstrably
justifiable in accordance with section 13 of the HR Act. Relevant factors
the nature of the human right and the importance of the purpose of the
limitation.
[72] We find
that to the extent that the Tribunal’s orders in this matter may be
considered to limit in any way the Teacher’s
human rights, the limitation
is reasonably and demonstrably justifiable for the protection of the public and
upholding the standards
of and maintaining public confidence in the teaching
profession.
Tribunal’s power to make a notation order – Member
Jensen’s dissenting reasoning
I agree with the decision and reasons of the other members of the
Tribunal with one exception. The exception is whether the Tribunal
has the power
to order that a notation be entered in the register pursuant to section
161(2)(d) of the Act. In my view, the Tribunal
has power to make the order for
the reasons that follow.
Power to make an order
[74] Section
161(1) of the Act states that section 161 applies if the relevant teacher is a
former approved teacher.
[75] Section
161(2)(d) of the Act provides that if the Tribunal decides a ground for
disciplinary action against the relevant teacher
has been established, the
Tribunal may:
make an order that a particular notation or
endorsement about the teacher be entered in the register.
“relevant teacher” is defined in Schedule 3 of the Act to mean
either an “approved teacher” or a “former
[77] Because of
the use of the expression “relevant teacher” in both section 161(1)
and 161(2)(d), and the clear and unambiguous
wording of the provision, I am
satisfied that the Tribunal may make order that a notation or endorsement be
entered in the register
where the teacher is either an approved teacher or a
former approved teacher.
[78] In this
case, the relevant teacher is a former approved teacher.
The order can be put into effect
a proper interpretation, the Act allows for the Tribunal order made under
section 161(2)(d) to be put into effect (in relation
to a “former approved
teacher”) for the following reasons:
(a) Section 288 requires the QCT to keep a register about approved teachers.
(b) There is a definition of “register” in Schedule 3 which:
means the register of approved teachers kept by the college under s 288.
(c) The definition of “register” is of little assistance in the
interpretation of section 288 and how the provision is
meant to work because it
merely refers to the register kept by the college under section 288.
(d) The register must contain the details for each approved teacher listed in
section 288(3)(a)–(q) including subparagraph
(m), which allows an
endorsement or notation about the teacher entered in the register under a
practice and conduct order.
(e) Paragraph (m) carries into effect the order of the Tribunal made under
section 161(2)(d).
(f) The elements of a “practice and conduct order” as defined in
Schedule 3 are:
(i) an order made against
a relevant teacher (and a relevant teacher
includes a former approved teacher);
(ii) by a practice and conduct body;
(iii) under chapter 5, part 4 or chapter 6, part 2, division
(g) A “practice and conduct body” is defined in Schedule 3 to mean
the PC&TC Committee or the Tribunal when undertaking
disciplinary action
under the Act.
(h) A “disciplinary action” means action taken against a relevant
teacher by a practice and conduct body under chapter
6, part 2, division 2.
(i) The Tribunal order against the relevant teacher is made under section 161
which section falls within chapter 6, part 2, division
(j) An order made in relation to a former approved teacher is under section 161
and is therefore within section 288(3)(m).
teachers begin their careers as “approved teachers” and this is why
section 288(3) of the Act requires certain
details to be kept for each approved
teacher. The process of keeping a register begins with approved teachers.
[81] However, it
is not intended that the register kept under section 288 (register) be
restricted to contain details only of approved
teachers. It is the intention of
the legislature that the register be allowed to be developed over time by
including details about
a “former approved teacher” as follows:
(a) Section 288(3)(m) as discussed above;
(b) Section 288(3)(n) also allows for details of any other practice and conduct
order made against the teacher;
(c) Under section 288(5) the details of an “approved teacher” whose
registration is cancelled by the college under section
56(2) or by the Tribunal
under section 160 (and thereby becomes a “former approved teacher”)
are to be included in the
The process required by section 288(5) therefore involves entering details of a
“former approved teacher” into the register
kept under section 288.
(d) Section 288(1) provides the QCT must keep a register about (not of) approved
(e) The use of the word “about” in section 288(1) gives scope to the
contents of the register the QCT must keep.
[82] It is the
case that the details kept in the register under section 288(3)(j) in relation
to “any conditions of the registration
or permission to teach” can
only be contained in the register while the conditions are in force under
section 288(4). However,
this requirement relates to conditions of registration
or permission to teach and is no justification for reading down the operation
paragraph (m).
[83] It is also
a matter of common sense that the register kept under section 288 be developed
over time thereby having all the details
in the one single register and doing
away with the need for a separate register of “former approved
teachers”. As stated,
the register about approved teachers can be
developed as explained above.
[84] Allowing
the notation in relation to a former approved teacher is consistent with section
289 of the Act – inspection of
register. The registered notation is not
publicly available information as it falls outside the scope that is the
available part” under section 289.
[85] In my view
the notation requested by the QCT should be entered in the register. First, it
is a reasonable requirement given the
seriousness of the Teacher’s
actions. Second, the information required by the notation will assist the QCT in
assessing any
future application for registration or permission to teach. Third,
the Teacher does not oppose the order being
[86] I therefore
also order that a notation be entered in the register pursuant to section
161(2)(d) of the Act that should the Teacher
apply for registration or
permission to teach, the application must be accompanied by an independent
psychological report to the
QCT’s satisfaction providing an assessment as
to whether the psychologist is satisfied that the Teacher has adequately
and addressed the 13 matters listed in the QCT’s submission.
Queensland College of
Teachers v TSV
[2015] QCAT 186
Queensland College of Teachers v
[2022] QCAT 241
, [26]; the Act s 3.
Queensland College of
Teachers v Teacher BAM
[2012] QCAT 694
Queensland College of
Teachers v Teacher QKE
[2013] QCAT 548
Queensland College of Teachers v
[2021] QCAT 152
Queensland College of Teachers v EKR
[2023] QCAT
Queensland College of
Teachers v REC
[2020] QCAT 178.
Queensland College of
Teachers v KDH
[2024] QCAT 501.
Health Ombudsman v Shermer
[2019] QCAT 54
, [6] (Allen DCJ).
Cutbush v Team Maree
Property Service (No 3)
[2010] QCATA 89
The Act ss 130–168.
“former approved
teacher” is defined in Sch 3 to mean a “former registered
teacher”. A “former registered
teacher” in relation to a
disciplinary matter means a person who is no longer a registered teacher.
Respondent’s
submissions filed 4 April 2025, paragraph 1c.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (232 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter