URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2025/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brades Property Agnes Water Pty Ltd v Gladstone Regional Council [2025] QPEC 24 (24 October 2025)
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT
OF QUEENSLAND
Brades Property Agnes Water Pty Ltd v Gladstone Regional Council
[2025] QPEC 24
BRADES PROPERTY AGNES WATER PTY LTD
ACN 655 708
(Appellant)
GLADSTONE REGIONAL
(Respondent)
Planning and Environment
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning and Environment Court, Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
24 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
14-17 October 2025
Everson DCJ
Appeal dismissed
CATCHWORDS:
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT – APPEAL – appeal against refusal of
applications for reconfiguring a lot and a variation request
to create a
residential housing precinct.
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT – ASSESSMENT – compliance with
planning scheme – whether there is an overwhelming or overriding
and economic need for the proposed development – non-compliance with the
biodiversity code – weight to be given
to an existing approval over the
LEGISLATION:
Planning Act 2016
Planning Regulation 2017
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
Abeleda & Anor v Brisbane City Council & Anor
Brisbane City Council v YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
[2021] QPELR 987
Fabcot Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council & Ors
[2020] QPEC 17
[2021] QPELR
Landarch Properties Pty Ltd v Logan City Council & Anor
Palmer v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2023] QPEC 47
Yu Feng Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council
[2007] QCA 382
(2007) 156 LGERA 399
Zappala Family Co Pty Ltd v Brisbane City
[2014] QCA 147
(2014) 201 LGERA 82
E J Morzone KC and W D J MacIntosh for the appellant
M Rodgers for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Gantt Legal for the appellant
Holding Redlich for the respondent
Introduction
[1] This is an
appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse a development
application which was originally made for a preliminary
approval (including a
variation request) for a material change of use for a number of components and
for reconfiguring a lot at Lot
3 Tavern Road, Agnes Water (“the
site”). As a consequence of an order made on 8 November 2024,
the development application
has been changed and reduced in scope. The proposed
development comprises:
(a) a preliminary approval for a material change of use to establish a
low-density residential precinct over the site;
(b) a variation request to vary the effect of the Gladstone Regional Council
Planning Scheme 2015 (Version 2) (“the planning
scheme”); and
(c) a development permit for reconfiguring the site from one lot into 158
residential lots;
(“the proposed
development”).
[2] The site has
the benefit of an existing development approval for a Retirement Facility
(Manufactured Housing Estate) which was
approved by the respondent on
7 May 2019 (“the existing
approval”).
Pursuant to the
existing approval, a total of 360 dwellings were proposed to be created on small
It contemplates the
complete clearing of the site,
extensive earthworks.
[3] It is the
tension between the development rights conferred by the existing approval and
the non-compliance of the proposed development
with assessment benchmarks in the
planning scheme which lies at the heart of this appeal.
and the surrounding area
[4] The site is
undeveloped, irregularly shaped and has a total area of 18.26
It has a fall from the highest
point in the middle of the site to the lowest point in the south-western corner
of approximately
well vegetated with mature trees.
It is located to the south of a hub of local community
Adjoining land to the west
is being developed for 201 dwellings in a manufactured housing
Adjoining land
immediately to the east is also approved for 190 such
Adjoining land to
the northeast is part of a residential housing estate. To the south is a rural
residential area.
The balance
of the surrounding land is
undeveloped.
It is broadly
identified within the strategic framework of the planning scheme as within the
new neighbourhoods, urban centre and
strategic environmental areas and
It is shown as
suitable for urban development pursuant to the Agnes Water and Seventeen Seventy
Structure Plan.
[5] The site is
zoned emerging community pursuant to the planning scheme. It is subject to the
bushfire hazards overlay, the steep
land overlay and the biodiversity
The site appears
within the Our Environment and Heritage Strategic Framework map where it is
identified as an area of high ecological
significance and within a strategic
environmental area and corridor.
The proposed development
[6] The proposed
development involves a preliminary approval for a material change of use to
establish a low-density residential precinct
over the site coupled with a
variation request and a reconfiguration of the site to create 158 residential
lots. The variation seeks
“to establish a new residential enclave
providing a mix of residential types and styles conveniently located on serviced
with “road and pedestrian linkages to the broader
community.”
envisaged as “a predominantly low density area, characterised by low-rise
housing typologies including dwelling houses
occupancy”.
The planning
scheme is sought to be varied by assessment against the proposed Lot 3 Tavern
Road Development Code.
[7] The proposed
reconfiguration contemplates residential lots predominately between 600 m
[8] As was the
case for the existing approval, it is proposed that all vegetation be removed
from the site and that extensive earthworks
undertaken.
statutory assessment framework
[9] Pursuant to
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
(Qld) (“PECA”),
the appeal is by hearing anew,
and the appellants must establish that the appeal should be
of the PECA
addresses the nature of an appeal and relevantly provides:
Planning Act
applies for the P&E Court’s decision
on the appeal as if—
(a) the P&E Court were the assessment manager for the development
application; and
(b) the reference in subsection (8) of that section to when the assessment
manager decides the application were a reference to when
the P&E Court makes
the decision.
[10] As the
proposed development was impact assessable,
Planning Act
(Qld) (“PA”) provides that the assessment must be carried
out against the relevant assessment benchmarks in a categorizing
instrument for
the development which, in the circumstances before me, are the relevant
provisions of the planning scheme. It must
also be carried out having regard to
matters prescribed by regulation. In this regard,
Planning Regulation 2017
(Qld) (“PR”) states that I must have
regard to “any development approval for, and any lawful use of, the
or adjacent premises” and “the common
which includes
the properly made submissions. However, I may consider these matters
“only to the extent” I consider
“the matter is relevant to the
development”.
10 mainly adverse submissions, including a petition with 252
signatories.
Common themes in
the submissions were the ecological impacts of the proposed development and the
lack of infrastructure in the local
area to accommodate more
assessment may be carried out having regard to any other relevant matter other
than a person’s personal circumstances,
financial or
determining the appeal, the court is conferred a wide discretion pursuant to
of the PA to approve all or part of the application, impose
development conditions on the approval, or refuse the application. As
of Appeal observed, the ultimate decision of the court is “a broad
evaluative judgment”.
weight to be given to each of the factors in undertaking this assessment is a
matter for the
decision-maker.
appropriate principles for the construction of planning documents were
considered by the Court of Appeal in
Zappala Family Co Pty Ltd v Brisbane
City Council
notably that
the same principles which apply to statutory construction apply to the
construction of planning
and that such
documents need to be read as a whole in a way which is practical and intending
to achieve a balance between
variation request is subject to specific criteria set out in
PA, including “the consistency of the variations sought with the rest of
the local planning instrument that is sought
However, I must
also consider “the result of the assessment of that part of the
development application that is not the variation
context, the approach set out by McDonnell DCJ in
Palmer v Council of the
City of Gold Coast
appropriate. The assessment of the preliminary approval for a material change
of use is undertaken first, and if the development
application for the
preliminary approval is refused, then the variation request must be
disputed issues
[15] The extent
of the agreed list of issues in dispute narrowed considerably in the course of
the hearing of the appeal. At the
commencement of the hearing, shortcomings of
the proposed development in terms of infrastructure provision and the management
bushfire hazards were agitated by the respondent as grounds for the refusal.
This occurred in the context of aspects of the proposed
plan of development
being woefully inadequate. These issues have resolved by clarification of
aspects of the proposed development
in the course of evidence given at the
hearing of the appeal, and by the offering of additional conditions of approval
by the appellant.
[16] To the
extent that the respondent contends that the Lot 3 Tavern Road Development Code
permits development which has “low-medium
character”,
this does not
appear at variance with the new neighbourhoods designation of the site which
contemplates a “diverse range of
low-medium residential detached and
attached housing types” as being
appropriate.
[17] Having
regard to concessions made in oral addresses at the conclusion of the
the issues in dispute
remaining for determination can broadly be described as:
there is an overwhelming (or overriding) community and economic need for the
proposed development;
the proposed development will give rise to unacceptable ecological impacts;
weight to be given to the existing approval; and
there are other relevant matters justifying approval of the proposed development
despite non-compliances with the relevant
assessment benchmarks identified in
Exhibit 1A.
Economic and community need
s 3.4.1 of the planning scheme, strategic outcomes contemplate the
region’s urban footprint (including designated new
neighbourhoods) being
able to accommodate housing growth over the next 20
Subsequently it is
stated “Residential development within the region occurs where it can be
demonstrated that there is both
overwhelming community and economic
Thereafter in
s 3.4.2 it is stated:
The timely supply of land ensures that
new housing can be provided to meet these periods of growth without significant
adverse impact
on affordability and access to the necessary physical and social
infrastructure.
In instances of new house supplies, this timely delivery is to be
demonstrated through specific needs analyses which illustrate both
overwhelming
community and economic need.
Subsequently it is stated that this balance between greenfield and infill
development “ensures that the Gladstone region has
sufficient housing land
supply to last for at least 20
[19] The same
requirement for demonstrating “overwhelming community and economic
need” for new dwellings is set out in
the new neighbourhoods designation
in the planning scheme.
[20] The overall
outcomes in the emerging community zone include:
Development for the
purpose of new urban communities is undertaken only where there is overriding
community and economic need and
in accordance with a Plan of
development.
Subsequent performance outcomes in PO6 use this same
concepts of community need and economic need were the subject of unanimous
agreement by the need experts who gave evidence
Fabcot Pty Ltd v Cairns
Regional Council & Ors
where, in the context of a development proposal for predominately retail uses,
including a shopping centre, they stated:
We have proceeded on the
basis that:
(a) Community Need refers to an assessment as to the extent to which the
physical wellbeing of the community is improved. A range
of qualitative factors
are involved such as convenience, accessibility, choice, range, depth,
competition, price, service, shopper
amenity, etc;
(b) Economic Need refers to an assessment as to whether the extent of demand for
the proposal is sufficient to support it at a sustainable
level. This assessment
is typically more quantitative in nature;
The appellants submit that it is appropriate that I apply these definitions
although they were not the subject of evidence before
me. I accept the
appellant’s submission. Further, in
Yu Feng Pty Ltd v Brisbane City
, Williams JA observed:
There would almost be an infinite variety of facts which could impact upon
the decision whether or not there was an “overwhelming
need” for a
proposal under consideration.
suitably qualified experts gave evidence in respect of need: Mr Duane on behalf
of the appellant; and Mr Stephens on behalf
of the respondent. Curiously, in
calculating the supply of dwellings in the study area, they took into account
development approvals
for dwellings on other land but ignored the 360 approved
dwelling sites the subject of the existing approval. To its credit, Mr
KC who appeared on behalf of the appellant conceded that this was not
appropriate.
Their analysis was
of the need for dwellings in the study area, regardless of the type. Mr Duane
concluded that there is an economic
and community need for the proposed
development,
and Mr Stephens
concluded there is a modest level of economic and community need for the
proposed development.
the extent of the assessment of the relevant level of need by the experts.
While the drafting of the planning scheme is
sloppy – requiring the
demonstration of “overwhelming community and economic need” in the
relevant provisions of
the strategic framework but “overriding”
community and economic need in the emerging community zone code – it is
clear that something more than a modest level of need is required to be
demonstrated.
[23] I accept
the evidence of Mr Stephens that there is a modest level of community and
economic need for the proposed development.
Of course, when the approved
dwellings the subject of the existing approval are factored into the need
analysis, the need for dwellings
reduces further. The proposed development will
result in less dwellings in the study area, but more of a different type. The
need for different types of dwellings was not meaningfully analysed,
however. Although an extremely large number of manufactured
approved in the vicinity of the site, this is probably reflective of the fact
that residents of the study area are
significantly older and earn less income
than the Queensland average.
appellant has not demonstrated the requisite level of need for the proposed
development. The appellant argues that this
is not required as the proposed
development is not a new urban community contemplated by the relevant provisions
of the emerging
community zone code. This argument ignores both the provisions
of the strategic framework which contemplate the site as part of
a wider 20 year
land bank in the new neighbourhoods designation, and the fact that the variation
request clearly seeks to establish
[25] There is a
strong theme running through the planning scheme which seeks to protect places
with national and state environmental
significance, beginning in the strategic
It finds its most
precise expression in the biodiversity overlay code where numerous overall
outcomes seek to prevent ecological
destruction.
In particular are
requirements that development avoid adverse impacts on matters of state
environmental significance (“MSES”)
and matters of national
environmental significance (“MNES”) and their associated ecological
processes and diversity values.
If these impacts cannot be avoided, they are to
be minimised and an environmental offset is to be
Numerous performance
outcomes follow to achieve the overall outcomes referred to above. PO16
addresses environmental offsets, stating:
Where it is not possible
to avoid adverse impacts on MSES and development has minimised adverse impacts
to the greatest extent possible,
development provides an offset for any
significant residual impact in accordance with the
Queensland Environmental
Offset Policy 2014
[26] For the
sake of completeness, there are provisions of the reconfiguring a lot code which
seek to ensure that a reconfiguration
is responsive to topography, natural
drainage systems, vegetation and habitat corridors, and protects the landscape
character of
the locality.
provisions are also raised in the context of earthworks contemplated by the
proposed development failing to adequately minimise
impacts on the
uncontentious that the appellant has made no attempt to comply with the
assessment benchmarks identified above. This occurs
in the context of the site
being mapped as an environmental corridor in the strategic
Two terrestrial
ecology experts gave evidence: Mr Moffitt on behalf of the appellant; and Mr
Delaney on behalf the respondent.
They agreed the majority of the site is
correctly identified as Category B (Remnant) RE12.12.11
vegetation.
confirmed that the site had both MNES and MSES, providing habitat to native
wildlife species listed as threatened
Mr Moffitt expressed
the view that the MSES were “more clearly defined” while not denying
the existence of MNES present
Mr Moffitt asserted that
were it not for the existing approval, he would not support the proposed
development. He proposed an environmental
offset otherwise than in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the planning scheme. This is offered
effectively as a relevant
[28] I accept
the evidence of Mr Delaney that the proposed development makes no attempt to
avoid or minimise impacts to the biodiversity
values of the site which are
significant.
The site contains
a high abundance of large old growth trees and is likely to be of particular
importance to hollow dependant fauna
species within the broader
The proposed offset
is to be at Benaraby approximately 60 kilometres to the north-west of the site.
Apart from some fauna species
with wide ranges, such as flying foxes, it would
not be utilised by any of the individual fauna that are dependent upon the
contained within the
The proposed offset is
located in an industrial area adjacent to the Bruce
It is secured by a
deed which the owner of the offset site can cancel at his election within 21
days of receiving notice of the
reasons for judgment in this
An offset was offered
in similar circumstances in
Landarch Properties Pty Ltd v Logan City Council
where the court
[58] Proposing an environmental offset otherwise than in
accordance with the relevant planning policy is not to be encouraged. The
mapping of protected vegetation is an important responsibility of a local
government and to be respected. A proponent for a development
cannot simply put
forward a planting regime at a site several kilometres away to avoid the
obligation to comply with provisions in
the Biodiversity overlay
These observations are most apposite to the facts before me. I find the
proposed offset of negligible value when compared to the
extent of the
ecological destruction contemplated by the proposed development. It is offered
in somewhat conditional terms, and
in the context of the failure of the
appellant to even attempt to comply with the relevant assessment benchmarks
designed to protect
the ecological values of the site.
Existing approval
appellant seeks to overcome the non-compliances with the assessment benchmarks
in the planning scheme by submitting that
the existing approval should be given
determinative weight. It is uncontentious that it lapses at the end of the
currency period
on 3 April 2026.
Mr Brades, the sole director and secretary of the appellant, asserts that he
will proceed to develop the site in accordance with
the existing approval should
the appeal be unsuccessful. However, this needs to be seen against the
realities of what still needs
to occur within the very limited timeframe which
remains for doing so. Pursuant to condition 4 of the existing approval, a
of applications for operational works need to be made. These include
earthworks, roadworks, water infrastructure, sewer infrastructure
and stormwater
management works.
difficult to see how compliance could be achieved with s 85(1)(b) of the PA by
giving the plan for the reconfiguration under
the existing approval to the
respondent within what remains of the currency period. Should an attempt be
made to extend the currency
period pursuant to s 86 of the PA, the respondent is
permitted to consider any matter that it considers relevant in assessing and
deciding such extension
application.
In circumstances
where the existing approval was given without a proper appreciation of the
ecological values of the site, apparently
due to a deficient ecological
assessment,
such an application
would clearly be problematic for the appellant.
[30] Further,
the development of the adjoining site to the west appears to have resulted in
areas which were designated for a park
and for stormwater infrastructure
pursuant to the existing approval being built
This would appear to
necessitate the making of an application for a change to the development
approval in addition to the other
applications referred to above.
[31] I accept
that the appellant has the right to clear the site pursuant to the existing
approval. I find that this is so regardless
of Temporary Local Planning
Instrument 01/2024 which makes operational work in the biodiversity overlay
subject to code assessment,
and which commenced on 30 July
I am satisfied that the
clearing of the site comes within the definition of “exempt vegetation
clearing” pursuant thereto,
as it would be clearing in accordance with
“a current development approval for material change of use, reconfiguring
or other operational
Any such clearing
would amount to wanton destruction of an area of recognised environmental
significance without apparently advancing
the existing approval given my
observations above. The site is suitable for residential development at an
appropriate time, but
this needs to minimise the impacts on the identified
environmental values present on the site.
[32] In all of
the circumstances, the existing approval should not be given determinative
weight in the outcome of the appeal. It
has been given without a proper
appreciation of the ecological values of the site. The requisite level of need
for the proposed development
is not present. It is therefore unlikely that
there is a sufficient level of need to justify the development of the site for
dwellings in a manufactured home estate. This is even more so when there
appears to be something of an oversupply of such dwellings
in the immediate
vicinity of the site. The logistical hurdles to overcome within what remains of
the currency period also appear
such that it is unlikely that development in
accordance with the existing approval can occur in any
proposed development is in serious conflict with a number of provisions of the
planning scheme. A sufficient level of community
and economic need for the
proposed development has not been demonstrated. Further, the proposed
development makes no attempt to
address the significant biodiversity and
ecological values of the site.
[34] There are
no relevant matters or discretionary considerations which justify approving the
proposed development.
[35] The appeal
is therefore
Exhibit 7, para 15.
Exhibit 5(a), p 5.
Exhibit 2, p 15.
Exhibit 10, para 13.
Exhibit 5(a),
Exhibit 7, para 20.
Ibid, para 24.
Ibid, para 25.
Ibid, para 32.
Ibid, para 34.
Ibid, para 36.
Ibid, para 35.
Ibid, p 7, fig 1.
Ibid, para 56 and
p 15, fig 3.
Ibid, paras 64–65 and
p 18, fig 5.
Ibid, para 75.
Exhibit 2, p 8 and Exhibit
Exhibit 3(a),
Exhibit 2, p 9 and
Exhibit 8, para 6.
Exhibit 3(a), p 94.
Planning and Environment
Court Act 2016
s 45(1)(a).
Section 31(1)(f)
Section 31(2).
Exhibit 7, para 51.
Planning Act 2016
s 45(5)(b).
Brisbane City Council v
YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
[2021] QPELR 987
Abeleda & Anor v
Brisbane City Council & Anor
[2020] QR 441
at 458, [43].
[2014] QCA 147
(2014) 201 LGERA 82.
Ibid at [52].
Ibid at [56].
Section 61(2)(b).
Section 61(2)(a).
[2023] QPEC 47.
Ibid at [25].
Exhibit 35.
Exhibit 3(a), p 25,
Exhibit 4, p 45.
T4-18, ll 40–46
– T4-19, ll 1–20.
Exhibit 4, p 31,
s 3.4.1(2).
s 3.4.1(4).
Ibid p 138, s
6.2.19.2(1)(c).
Ibid p 139.
[2020] QPEC 17
[2021] QPELR 40.
Ibid at [29].
[2007] QCA 382
(2007) 156 LGERA 399
T4-53 ll 1–5.
Exhibit 8, para 94.
Ibid para 95.
Ibid, p 25, table 4.
Exhibit 4, p 50,
Ibid p 143, s
8.2.3.2(2).
Ibid, overall outcome
Ibid, p 149.
Ibid p 179, s 9.3.7.2(2)(b)
and p 181, PO5 and PO6.
Exhibit 1A, para 3.
Exhibit 10, p 27.
Exhibit 10, para 25.
Ibid, p 96.
T2-72 ll 10–25.
T2-83 ll 30–45.
Exhibit 21, para 19.
Ibid para 29.
Ibid para 28(e).
Exhibit 15, p 19.
Exhibit 18, p 6.
[2024] QPEC 47
Ibid at [58].
Written Submissions of
Appellant – Part B filed 17 October 2025 and T4-38 ll 35–40.
Exhibit 5(a) p 15.
Planning Act 2016
Exhibit 10, para 24.
Exhibit 23.
Exhibit 7, para 80.
Exhibit 4, p 261.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (270 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter