URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRAA/2003/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Railton, S.G. v South East Queensland Racing Association & Hatch, L.J. v South East Queensland Racing Association [2003] QRAA 1 (31 January 2003)
RACING APPEALS AUTHORITY
[2003] QRAA 01
: 31 January 2003
Graham Railton, Chairman of Stewards
APPEAL FROM
decision of the South East Queensland Racing Association Appeals Committee to
impose a penalty of five months suspension for a breach
of Rule 178.
Mr Lindsay James Alexander
APPEAL FROM
: A decision of the South East Queensland Racing
Association Appeals Committee to impose a penalty of five months suspension for
breach of Rule 178. TCO2.
APPEARANCES
: Mr Michael Pearson,
Legal Officer with Queensland Racing appeared on behalf of the
Mr Lindsay Hatch appeared on his own behalf.
REASONS FOR AUTHORITY’S DECISION
Mr Leo G Williams AO - Chairman
The Hon Sir James Killen - Deputy
Mr Dennis Standfield - Member
These are appeals on
penalty only by both the Licensed Trainer, Mr Lindsay Hatch and the Stewards
against the decision of the South
East Queensland Racing Association Appeals
Committee (SEQRA) to impose a period of five months suspension against Mr Hatch.
decision was on 6 January 2003 and varied the penalty imposed by the
Stewards on 23 December 2002 of five months disqualification
for a breach of
Australian Rule 178.
AR178 states:
“When any horse has been
brought to a racecourse for the purpose of engaging in a race and a prohibited
substance is detected
in any sample taken from it prior to or following its
running in any race, the trainer and/or any other person who was in charge
such horse at any relevant time may be punished.”
The imposition of
the five months disqualification by the Stewards concerned detection of an
elevated TCO2 level from a blood sample
taken from the horse Hugger Mugger. Mr
Hatch was the Trainer of Hugger Mugger and the blood sample was taken prior to
winning the Coastline Walls and Ceilings Handicap Class 3 being race 4
at the Gold Coast Turf Club on Saturday 7 December 2002.
certificate from the Racing Science Centre taken of the sample showed the total
plasma carbon dioxide concentration in one tube
of blood to be 38.4mmol/L and in
the second tube to be greater than 39.0mmol/L. These exceptionally high
readings of TCO2 were confirmed
in the confirmatory certificate from the
Australian Racing Forensic Laboratory which measured the TCO2 concentrations at
for one tube and greater than 39.0mmol/L for the second tube.
The analysis from the blood sample taken at the stable visit to Mr
Hatch’s Toowoomba Rob Street stables on 10 December 2002
showed the TCO2
concentration to be 29.6mmol/L.
When Senior Stipendiary Steward Mr John
Hackett advised Mr Hatch at the stable visit on 10 December 2002 of the
discrepancy with TCO2
levels, Mr Hatch could offer no explanation and indicated
that he doesn’t feed bicarb to Hugger Mugger. Mr Hatch did state
does saline his horses on Thursday afternoons before Saturday racing and that
the drench consists of approximately 50 grams
of Salkavite and Hemobuild.
At the Stewards inquiry of 23 December 2002 Mr Hatch again stated his
surprise at the elevated TCO2 readings from the pre race blood
sample. Mr Hatch
said the only possible explanation may have been that a young person who was a
potential apprentice of Mr Hatch
could have mistook the product dextrose for
bicarb when feeding the horses on the Friday night and Saturday morning feeds.
person was not called but nothing really turns on him not giving evidence
as this possibility was only given by Mr Hatch as what
may have occurred.
Furthermore this aspect is not particularly relevant for a breach of this rule
as the Stewards have not submitted
a case of administration but of
presentation.
Mr Hatch entered a plea of guilty at the Stewards inquiry.
In relation to penalty at the Stewards inquiry Mr Hatch advised the
Stewards that he has had a number of horses pre-race tested and
has never had
any previous problems. Mr Hatch stated that he has always co-operated with the
Stewards and that he had held a Trainer’s
Licence for three and a half
years in Toowoomba and for approximately four years in Cairns. Mr Hatch advised
the Stewards that he
has been in the industry and licensed since he was 15 years
of age and that he is a full time trainer with 16 horses in work and
his wife and newly born son. Mr Hatch and his wife are purchasing their own
property and Mr Hatch stated that he was negotiating
to buy the stables which he
was currently renting. Mr Hatch stressed with the Stewards that he will not
able to recover from a disqualification
and asked that a fine be imposed.
After considering the matter Mr Hensler the Chairman of the Stewards
Panel did at page 29 of the transcript state the Stewards reasons
for imposing 5
months disqualification as follows:
Mr Hatch, we have
considered the case very carefully, as you can tell by the delay. The stewards
have looked very carefully at a number
of issues - your record and the
submissions you have put forward.
We acknowledge the fact that you
have pleaded guilty to the charge and that you have cooperated at this inquiry
and with the stewards
and the Racing Science Centre staff at their
inspection.
On the other side of the coin it is a feature race
club, the Gold Coast Turf Club. It is a feature provincial meeting. The horse
has won the event, and there would appear to be bets to support the horse.
Whilst it wasn’t a favourite in the race, it was
the second favourite, and
the expectation of trainers and punters alike is that al horses race on a level
footing, drug free, and
that wasn’t the case on this occasion with Hugger
Mugger returning a positive to a prohibited substance.
taken into account also the submissions you put forward on your stable security.
We believe that it is lacking and your stable
We have taken into account all the submissions you put
forward, but your husbandry and practice at the stables is somewhat lacking
obviously needs to be looked at fairly urgently.
The penalty we
issue must be a deterrent to other participants in the industry, and as I
pointed out before, the stewards have been
consistent in their approach towards
TCO2 positives and that it is a serious charge. We believe that in the
circumstances - and
each case is treated on its merits - that with yourself a
disqualification should be imposed, and that is for a period of 5
Mr Hatch lodged a Notice of Appeal with SEQRA which
was heard on 6 January 2003 having received a stay to that date.
SEQRA Appeal Mr Hatch was represented by Mr Kevin Kelso of Counsel who stated
that the five months disqualification imposed
by the Stewards was manifestly
excessive. Mr Kelso submitted the Stewards did not properly consider Mr
Hatch’s 24 years in
the industry, his unblemished record, his employment
of 3 persons and that a disqualification will ruin him as a Trainer. Mr Kelso
further submitted that a substantial fine would be appropriate as it would still
be considered a deterrent. When asked by SEQRA
as to the amount of the fine Mr
Kelso indicated an amount of $10,000.
Stipendiary Steward Mr Hensler
when addressing the SEQRA Appeals Committee accepted that disqualification would
have a huge impact
on Mr Hatch but emphasised the need of the deterrent aspect
of penalties for elevated TCO2 readings. Mr Hensler referred to the
Thoroughbred Racing Board Appeals Panel of New South Wales decision of May 2000
in the matter of the appeal by Timothy Ross Martin
the comments of the Principal
Member the Hon. T.E.F. Hughes AO QC when dealing with penalty
The panel has given anxious consideration to the
question of penalty. We are of the view that a suspension would not be an
appropriate
penalty. We are of the view also that a fine would be even more
appropriate.
However, we take the view on reflection and after
considering all the matters that have been argued on the question of penalty,
is always a question the panel has to approach with anxiety and care, that
the appropriate penalty would be a disqualification for
a period of four (4)
months to date from today
Mr Hensler further advised last
season that of 13 TCO2 positives throughout Australia, six of those were from
Queensland.
The SEQRA Appeals Committee stated in varying the penalty
to five months suspension they felt compassion for Mr Hatch as a young man
the industry with a young family.
At the hearing Mr Pearson reaffirmed
the submissions of the Stewards at the SEQRA Appeal and referred the Authority
to its decision
of 12 December 2002 in the matter of Trainer Darryl Caldwell.
Mr Pearson stated that Mr Caldwell’s decision must be considered
lower end of the scale and as 6 of 13 positive results in Australia were from
Queensland that for a deterrent a disqualification
should be the appropriate
Mr Hatch submitted to the Authority that a lengthy
disqualification would ruin him. He presented his personal circumstances to the
Authority advising that he has been a licensed track work rider for some major
stables until he obtained his trainer’s licence
in Cairns. Mr Hatch is 39
years of age and supports a wife and a baby son. Mr Hatch has stated that since
6 January 2003 he has
not been back to the stables and does not attend race
meetings unless he has horses engaged. Mr Hatch stated that he currently has
employment as a labourer.
The Authority has considered the submissions
made at the Stewards Inquiry, the SEQRA Appeal and this hearing. While the
accepts that a disqualification will have a major impact on Mr Hatch
it cannot ignore that elevated TCO2 levels when compared on
a nation wide basis
are relatively prevalent in Queensland and the deterrent aspect of the penalty
from the viewpoint of the industry
is a significant factor to be taken into
consideration.
Although Mr Hatch has a good record during his time in the
industry there was no particular or exceptional submissions to his personal
circumstances or breach of Rule 178 which would warrant that there be a fine or
suspension in lieu of disqualification.
The Authority however believes
that a period of four months should have been the appropriate period of
disqualification. The Authority
therefore orders:
The appeal by Trainer LJA Hatch is
dismissed and his appeal fee is forfeited.
2. The appeal
by Mr Railton on behalf of the Stewards is upheld and the penalty is varied to
four months disqualification deemed to
have commenced from 6 January 2003. The
appeal fee of the Stewards is to be refunded.
Leo Williams AO
............................................................
Killen ............................................................
Standfield ............................................................
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (22.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter