URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBCCMCmr/2025/403.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Emerald Lakes - The Village Residential [2025] QBCCMCmr 403 (11 November 2025)
ADJUDICATOR’S ORDER
Office of the
Commissioner
for Body Corporate and Community
Emerald Lakes – The Village Residential
[2025] QBCCMCmr
Ian Hogan (
The Body Corporate for Emerald Lakes – The Village Residential
Emerald Lakes – The Village Residential CTS 37497
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 227(1)(b)
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation Module)
Regulation 2020
Accommodation Module
APPLICATION NO:
DECISION DATE:
11 November 2025
DECISION OF:
T Hendry, Adjudicator
CATCHWORDS:
APPLICATION FOR INTERIM ORDER – where the applicant is challenging
motions passed at the scheme’s annual general meeting
authorising repair
works – where the applicant seeks an order to suspend implementation of
the motions – whether the
interim order sought by the applicant is
warranted in the circumstances.
Act, ss 94, 100, 152, 270; Accommodation Module, s 170
INTERIM ORDERS
application for an interim order is dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
[1] Emerald
Lakes – The Village Residential CTS 37497 (
The Village Residential
is a 170-lot scheme situated in Carrara, Queensland. It is governed by the
Accommodation Module. The applicant, Ian Hogan, is the
joint owner of Lot 3309
in the scheme.
[2] I understand
the scheme buildings of The Village Residential have been affected by ongoing
water ingress issues. The applicant
says the body corporate engaged a specialist
engineering firm, Structural Waterproof Consulting (
), to provide a
report on the issues. The report from
identified several critical
defects in the scheme’s buildings. It recommended specific repairs to
address the various issues.
applicant says that instead of proceeding with the repairs recommended by SWC,
the body corporate committee engaged a carpenter
working as a sole trader to
carry out a raft of piecemeal repairs. The applicant says the repairs carried
out by this contractor
need to be reviewed by the Queensland Building and
Construction Commission (
) and qualified waterproofing engineers.
[4] In addition,
the applicant says the body corporate wants to engage Building Rectification
) to carry out other remediation works at the scheme.
However, the warranty for this work does not cover pre-existing structural
He says this indicates the proposed repair works are not designed to
rectify the underlying faults identified by SWC.
applicant seeks the following final orders:
1. Suspension of Non-Compliant Works
The body corporate is ordered not to implement or
commence any works approved under Motions 27, 28, and 29 passed at the Annual
Meeting on 2 July 2025.
2. Independent Engineering Assessment and Remediation
Within 21 days of this order, the body corporate must
engage SW Consult [SWC], or another suitably qualified and QBCC licensed
waterproofing engineering firm, to:
(a) Conduct comprehensive testing and assessment of the approximately $360,000
of rectification and remediation works carried out
(QBCC licensed trade contractor
- Carpentry), which were completed without written contracts and without
independent engineering
oversight, testing, or certification;
(b) Provide a detailed written report to the body corporate identifying: - The
adequacy and compliance of completed works with structural
waterproofing
standards; - Any deficiencies or non-conforming work requiring rectification; -
A comprehensive scope of works required
to restore the structural waterproofing
integrity of the buildings to a sound and compliant condition consistent with
the body corporate's
obligations under section 170 of the Accommodation
(c) Prepare tender specifications for the required remediation works and oversee
a competitive tender process to obtain at least
two fully priced proposals from
appropriately qualified and licensed contractors;
(d) Present the engineering report and alternative tender proposals to lot
owners at an Extraordinary General Meeting, at which meeting
a motion to
formally rescind Motions 27, 28, and 29 from the 2025 AGM will also be
considered.
3. QBCC Compliance Investigation
Within 21 days of this order, the body corporate must
formally request the Queensland Building and Construction Commission (QBCC)
investigate the works performed by [Mr S] for compliance with the
Building and Construction Commission Act 1991
and associated regulations,
including but not limited to the written contract requirements under section 67G
of the QBCC Act 1991,
scope of license compliance, and warranty provisions.
4. Disclosure of Engineering Report
Within 7 days of receiving the waterproofing assessment
report required under Order 2, the body corporate must:
(a) Provide a complete copy to the body corporate's insurance broker with full
disclosure of all material findings; and
(b) Upload the complete report to the StrataMax portal with read access enabled
for all lot owners and their authorised representatives.
5. Disclosure of QBCC Investigation Findings
Within 7 days of receiving the QBCC investigation report
or findings required under Order 3, the body corporate must:
(a) Provide a complete copy to the body corporate's insurance broker with full
disclosure of all material findings; and
(b) Upload the complete report to the StrataMax portal with read access enabled
for all lot owners and their authorised representatives.
6. Mandatory Document Disclosure and Records Access
Within 14 days of this order, the body corporate must
upload the following documents to the StrataMax portal with read access enabled
for all lot owners and their authorised representatives:
(a) All quality assurance reports, test reports, and certification documents
that have been provided to the insurance broker in relation
to building works
and structural waterproofing;
(b) All correspondence with the insurance broker regarding the status of
rectification of the structural waterproofing defects identified
in the 2023 SW
Consult [SWC] report, including any correspondence regarding policy coverage,
claims, or disclosure obligations;
(c) The complete Commercial Master Builders contracts (or any other executed
contracts) for works performed by: - BRS Pty Ltd - [Mr
S] - PM Concepts Pty Ltd,
and the additional 18 documents sent to the insurer, all of which were
referenced in item 2.2 of the Minutes
of the Formal Committee Meeting held on 10
September 2025.
7. Retraction of Misleading Statements Regarding Building
The body corporate must, within 14 days of this order,
issue a formal retraction and correction of any statements made in body
records, minutes, newsletters, or correspondence asserting or implying
that the buildings "cannot be made waterproof" or cannot achieve
structural waterproofing integrity. The retraction must:
(a) Acknowledge that such statements are inconsistent with the body
corporate's statutory obligations under section 170 of the Accommodation
to maintain common property in structurally sound condition;
(a) Confirm the body corporate's commitment to achieving full structural
waterproofing integrity in accordance with engineering
specifications and
statutory requirements; and
(b) Be circulated to all lot owners and uploaded to the StrataMax portal.
8. Retraction of Defamatory Characterisations of Lot
The body corporate must, within 14 days of this order,
issue a formal retraction of statements made in body corporate records
characterising
lot owners who have raised questions about building works,
requested transparency, or sought verification of insurance disclosure
"disgruntled owners" or as acting to harm the body corporate. The retraction
(a) Acknowledge that lot owners raising legitimate questions about
compliance with statutory obligations and fiduciary duties are
exercising their
rights under the BCCM Act and Accommodation Module;
(b) Acknowledge that such characterisations are inconsistent with the body
corporate's obligation under section 94 to act reasonably,
fairly, and in the
interests of all lot owners; and
(c) Be circulated to all lot owners and uploaded to the StrataMax
9. Prohibition on Defamatory and Derogatory
Communications
The body corporate and its committee members are ordered
to immediately cease and refrain from issuing any communications, including
not limited to committee emails, newsletters, minutes, or correspondence, that
contain derogatory, defamatory, or disparaging
assertions against lot owners
based on those lot owners holding or expressing views different from the
committee's position, including
(a) The adequacy or appropriateness of building works; (b) Compliance with
statutory maintenance obligations; (c) Transparency and
access to body corporate
records; (d) Insurance disclosure obligations; or (e) Financial management and
expenditure decisions.
This order does not prevent the body corporate from engaging in respectful
debate or presenting factual information supporting committee
decisions, but
prohibits ad hominem attacks, defamatory characterisations, or communications
designed to intimidate or discourage
lot owners from exercising their statutory
applicant is also concerned about further repair works which have been
authorised under Motions 27, 28 and 29 passed at the
scheme’s 2025 annual
general meeting (
). He says these works lack the necessary
engineering oversight to ensure compliance with the body corporate’s
statutory obligations
under section 170 of the Accommodation Module. He seeks
the following interim order:
Suspend implementation of building
works approved under Motions 27, 28, and 29 at the AGM on 2 July 2025, which
have not yet commenced,
pending final determination of this application.
[7] This is my
consideration of the applicant’s request for an interim order. The
applicant bears the onus to establish that
the interim order he seeks is
warranted in the circumstances.
Preliminaries
applicant lodged this application for adjudication on 7 October 2025. The
commissioner sought clarification on some aspects
of the application and the
application was amended.
commissioner referred the interim order request to department adjudication under
section 247(2)(b) of the Act.
[10] There is no
statutory requirement to obtain comments from a respondent or affected parties
before an interim order is decided.
However, in the circumstances of this case,
interim submissions were invited from the body corporate committee and it made
submissions on the dispute.
[11] I have
reviewed and considered all the submissions and materials submitted on this
dispute before coming to my decision on the
applicant’s request for an
interim order.
completeness, I note section 242(1) of the Act sets a time limit for an order
declaring void a resolution of a body corporate,
that being the application must
be made within 3 months of the general meeting where the motion was passed.
However, the Act also
provides that an adjudicator may, for good reason, waive
the non-compliance with the time limit for making an
application.
[13] For the
purposes of this interim order application, I have proceeded as if there is good
reason to waive non-compliance with
the applicable time limit. However, the time
limit will be a live issue where the applicant’s application for final
is considered.
Basis for interim orders
adjudicator may make an interim order if satisfied, on reasonable grounds, that
the order sought is necessary because of the
nature or urgency of the
circumstances to which the application
[15] In deciding
whether an interim order is warranted in the circumstances, adjudicators often
adopt the approach taken by courts
to considering interim injunction
applications.
Accordingly, to
determine if it is just and equitable to make the interim order sought by the
applicant, I must consider the substantive
issues in dispute, the nature and
urgency of the matter, as well as the balance of convenience between the
parties. I will explain
each consideration in more detail below.
[16] Firstly, I
must consider the substantive issues in dispute and be satisfied there is a
serious legal question to be answered.
At this stage, the applicant does not
need to satisfy me that, on the balance of probabilities, his legal position is
the correct
one to take in the case. However, I must be satisfied the
applicant’s case has a sufficient likelihood of success to justify
making of the interim order sought prior to a full investigation into the matter
being concluded.
[17] Secondly,
an adjudicator may make an interim order only if satisfied, on reasonable
grounds, that it is necessary because of
the nature or urgency of the
circumstances.
The applicant must
therefore establish that the circumstances warrant the interim order she has
sought. This may be where, for example,
the order is necessary to prevent
serious or irreparable harm from taking place or to stop something that cannot
be undone. I must
also balance the inconvenience of granting relief now if final
orders are ultimately refused, against the inconvenience of refusing
if final orders are ultimately granted.
The disputed motions
applicant is seeking an interim order restraining the body corporate from taking
any steps to implement the repair works
authorised under Motions 27, 28 and 29
passed at the scheme’s 2025
[19] Motion 27
was a group of same issue-motions. Motion 27a passed with 48 votes in favour and
2 votes against (2 votes were noted
as invalid). Motion 27a read as follows:
27.a. BELLA VUE ROOF & FACADE REPAIRS INCLUDING APARTMENT 3111,
3112, 3113 & 3115 INTERNAL REPAIRS BY BRS (COMMITTEE
RECOMMENDATION)
Ordinary Resolution
That the Body Corporate engage Building Rectification Services Contracting
Pty Ltd (BRS) to complete repairs to the Bella Vue rooftop,
facade and internal
repairs to apartments 3111, 3112, 3113, & 3115 as per quotation 15569d
(enclosed) at a total cost of $85,910.00
including GST, plus a contingency of
10%, being a total of up to $94,501.00 including GST.
And further that, the costs be paid from the existing Sinking Fund
[20] Motion 28
was also a group of same-issue motions. Motion 28a passed with 48 votes in
favour and 2 votes against (2 votes were
noted as invalid). Motion 28a read as
28.a. BELLA VUE FACADE AND INTERIOR REPAIRS TO BELLA VUE APARTMENTS BY
BRS (COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATION)
Ordinary Resolution
That the Body Corporate engage Building Rectification Services Contracting
Ltd (BRS) to complete repairs to the Bella Vue apartments 3041, 3051,
3063, 3071,
3081, 3085, 3088, 3091, 3092, 3093 and 3094 as per quotation
15568b (enclosed)
at a total cost of $164,010.00 including GST, plus a
contingency of 10%, being a
total of up to $180,411.00 including GST.
And further that, the costs be paid from the existing Sinking Fund
[21] Lastly,
Motion 29 was also a group of same-issue motions. Motion 29b passed with 46
votes in favour and 3 votes against (1 vote
was noted as abstain and 2 votes
were noted as invalid). Motion 29b read as
29.b. PORTO BELLAGO BUILDING REPAIRS BY [Mr S] (COMMITTEE
RECOMMENDATION)
Ordinary Resolution
That the Body Corporate engage [Mr S] to complete repairs in
Bellago to apartments 24, 26, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 44, 60, 69, 73, 74 and
Level 1 Hallway and B1 & Level 3 Hallway as per various enclosed
quotations at a
total cost of $116,720.31 including GST, plus a contingency
of 10%, being a total
of up to $128,392.30 including GST.
And further that, the costs be paid from the existing Sinking Fund
The body corporate’s obligations
[22] Section 152
of the Act sets out a body corporate’s duties about common property. It
provides that the body corporate must
administer, manage and control the common
property reasonably and for the benefit of lot owners; and comply with the
obligations
with regard to common property imposed under the regulation module
applying to the scheme.
[23] As set out
above, The Village Residential is governed by the Accommodation Module. Section
170(1) of the Accommodation Module
provides that the body corporate must
maintain common property in good and structurally sound condition. And, to the
extent that
lots included in the scheme are created under a building format
plan, the body corporate must maintain in good condition: (1) railings,
and balustrades on the boundary of a lot and common property( 2) doors, windows
and associated fittings situated in a boundary
wall separating the lot from
common property and (3) roofing membranes that provide protection for lots or
common property.
statutory duty to maintain common property has been considered extensively by
the courts.
It is clear from the
case law that a body corporate has a duty to maintain common property in good
condition and that it must do
so as soon as any of the building parts covered by
the duty fall into disrepair.
Failure to do so once aware of an issue would give rise to a breach of the body
corporate’s maintenance obligations.
addition, section 94 of the Act sets out a body corporate’s general
functions. Section 94(2) provides that a body corporate
must act reasonably when
carrying out its general functions, including making, or not making, a decision.
A decision of the committee
is a decision of the body
and a committee
acting on behalf of a body corporate must act reasonably in making a
[26] Numerous
judicial decisions have considered the test for reasonableness. The cases
emphasise that what is reasonable is a question
of fact for the decision-maker
to determine, and what is required is a careful weighing up of all the relevant
factors while not
taking irrelevant factors into
Ultimately, the
question is not whether a decision was the ‘correct’ one or whether
a better one could have been made.
Rather, it is about whether the decision was
objectively reasonable.
common thread that runs through the case law is that a decision-maker must take
into account all the circumstances of the case.
Consideration of
legal issues and likelihood of success
applicant says the body corporate committee rejects the notion that the body
corporate has an obligation to ensure the scheme’s
buildings are
watertight. He says the committee has abandoned the works recommended by SWC
which were designed to rectify the structural
waterproofing issues affecting the
scheme. He says instead, the committee has been authorising a carpenter to carry
out piecemeal
works to patch over the defects.
[28] In its
response to the application, the body corporate acknowledges the SWC report
identified major defects which are allowing
water penetration into internal
areas of the scheme buildings. The committee explains that at an extraordinary
general meeting (
) held on 22 November 2023, the body corporate
resolved to engage a contractor to carry out the first part of the works
recommended
by SWC, with SWC providing contract management services for the
project. However, it subsequently came to light that part of the
repair works
which had purportedly been authorised related to areas of the buildings which
are part of a different CTS. Accordingly,
the committee says it had to
reformulate a rectification proposal which related only to the scheme property
of The Village Residential.
committee acknowledges it has engaged a carpenter to carry out urgent repair
works around the scheme. Then, at an EGM held
on 16 April 2025, it says the body
corporate resolved to engage BRS to carry out repairs of the façades and
painting works
on two of the scheme’s buildings. However, it maintains the
body corporate has taken a measured and methodical approach to
addressing the
water ingress issues.
[30] I note the
applicant’s submissions that the committee has taken the position that the
scheme’s buildings cannot be
made watertight. However, I was unable to
find this statement in the materials provide by the applicant. In any event,
having reviewed
the evidence submitted by both the applicant and the committee,
I have come to the preliminary view that the body corporate has been
steps to address the water ingress issues. It seems to me it is only the
appropriateness of the repairs being carried out
to remedy the defects which are
in dispute.
[31] Accordingly,
I consider the key question for me to consider is whether the body corporate
– and its committee – have
acted reasonably in making decisions
to address the water ingress issues affecting the scheme and
what repairs should be carried out. For the purposes of this interim
have focussed on whether the body corporate acted reasonably in making the
decision to authorise the works proposed under
Motions 27a, 28a and 29b.
applicant says it is evident that the works authorised under the disputed
motions will not achieve the required outcome of
making the scheme buildings
watertight. He says some of the repairs which will be carried out under the
motions may require undoing
and redoing to properly rectify the structural
waterproofing defects. He says in proceeding with these works, the body
is not acting reasonably.
[33] The body
corporate says the applicant’s submissions in this regard are
demonstratable wrong in reference to his own materials.
It says the applicant
has provided a litany of documents including minutes of general and committee
meetings and numerous updates
to lot owners which show the body corporate and
committee have undertaken a considered approach to addressing the water leaks at
the scheme. It says despite the applicant providing nearly 700 pages of
documents, there is no evidence that the works authorised
by the disputed
motions would be non-compliant.
committee notes that both BRS and Mr S are licenced contractors. It further
states that the works carried out to date have
been checked and reported on by
another open-licenced builder, PM Concepts Pty Ltd (
PM Concepts
reported no problems with the repairs. In addition, it says due to the water
ingress issues, the scheme’s insurer
indicated that if steps were not
taken to address the issues, it would no longer be willing to provide insurance.
The committee says
the repairs carried out to date by BRS and Mr S have
satisfied the scheme’s insurer that the issues are being addressed and
insurer has extended the body corporate’s insurance coverage.
[35] I have
reviewed the report from SWC and the quotes for the works authorised under
Motion 27a, 28a and 29b. The SWC report states
that extensive remedial works are
required to reinstate the waterproofness of each of the scheme’s
buildings. SWC noted four
major defects and provided the following
recommendations to address the issues, namely:
windows and balcony doors where it has been identified that poor construction
and installation of these items is allowing
water penetration internally.
cavity flashing where leaks have been reported internally.
failed façade joints and complete a full building repaint.
drip trays below podium expansion joints where the waterproofing has
[36] SWC further
recommended completing the repairs on each of the scheme’s building one at
a time to allow for gaining a further
understanding of uncovered defects during
the works. It suggested the smallest scheme building with the least issues be
to first and it noted that the lessons learned from that project could
be applied in repairing the other buildings.
applicant says the body corporate has departed from the recommendations made by
SWC and that this is unreasonable. While
I acknowledge the body corporate does
not appear to be following the specific recommendations made by SWC, this does
not in itself
make the body corporate’s decision to pass the disputed
motions unreasonable. While the applicant argues that the works authorised
Motions 27a, 28a and 29b will not achieve compliance with the body
corporate’s maintenance obligations, he has provided
no evidence which
establishes this. I further note that the scheme’s insurer appears to be
satisfied with the repairs which
have been carried out by BRS and Mr S to date
and has increased the insurance term being offered to the body corporate from 3
applicant argues that the authorised repair works are being completed without
engineering oversight, testing or certification.
However, he has provided no
evidence that an engineer is required to supervise or ‘sign-off’
these works. I understand
the body corporate has engaged an open-licenced
builder, PM Concepts, to provide oversight and quality assurance for the repair
I note PM Concepts is aware of the SWC report and the defects it
identified. Based on the materials currently before me, the applicant
yet persuaded me that supervision of an engineer is essential for carrying out
the repairs.
applicant also argues that the repair works are being carried out without
written contracts. However, the body corporate
has provided copies of the
written quotes from BRS and acceptance in writing of the same. It also appears
that Mr S provided written
quotes via a software link and the body corporate has
provided copies of the written acceptance of the same. I am not yet satisfied
there is any merit to this argument.
applicant also raises concerns about the qualifications of Mr S and his
suitability to carry out the repair works. However,
he has provided no evidence
that Mr S is unable to carry out the works authorised under Motion 29b. I note
the applicant says Mr
S is a licenced carpenter operating as a sole trader with
a maximum revenue capacity of up to $800k. He says engaging Mr S seems
choice where the scheme buildings are insured for $158M. However, this does not
establish that Mr S is unable to carry out
the repairs.
[41] I note the
committee have indicated that Mr S explained he had voluntarily attended a
meeting with QBCC where he was questioned
The Village Residential. It appears QBCC was satisfied that the works Mr S had
been carrying
out at the scheme fell under the licence he held, including being
allowed to carry out maintenance works on all types of
The applicant has
provided no evidence from QBCC which establishes that Mr S would be working
outside the parameters of his QBCC
licence in carrying out the works authorised
under Motion 29b.
understand the applicant is concerned about the repair works and strongly
disagrees with the way the water ingress issues are
being addressed. However, I
note it is not an adjudicator’s role to decide whether a decision of a
body corporate is ‘correct’
or the ‘best’ decision that
could be made. In order to be successful in this application, the applicant must
the decision made by the body corporate is objectively unreasonable.
At this stage, the applicant has not yet met that burden.
Request for dismissal
[43] The body
corporate submits that the applicant’s application is misconceived and
entirely without substance. It requests
that the application be dismissed in its
entirety and an order for costs of $2,000 be made in favour of the body
corporate to partially
compensate it for the costs it has incurred in responding
to the application. It says the applicant’s arguments were simply
[44] Section 270(1)(c)
of the Act provides that the adjudicator may make an order dismissing the
application if it appears to the
adjudicator that the application is frivolous,
vexatious, misconceived or without substance. And, if an adjudicator makes an
under section 270(1)(c), they may award costs against the applicant to
compensate the respondent to a maximum of $2,000.
[45] For the
reasons provided above, the applicant has failed to persuade me that there is a
serious legal question to be answered
in relation to any of the grounds he has
raised. I have therefore given careful consideration to whether I should dismiss
this application
on the basis that it is misconceived and without substance. I
note an adjudicator has discretion as to whether or not to dismiss
application pursuant to section 270(1)(c) of the Act. At this stage, I decline
to exercise my discretion to dismiss it. However,
the applicant may wish to
carefully review his final application as this issue may be reconsidered in the
context of final orders.
dispute will now be referred back to the commissioner to progress under the
Report dated 12 May 2023.
Given the circumstances and
submissions made by the applicant, I considered it appropriate to anonymise this
contractor’s
name and have done so throughout this
Section 242(4)(b) of
Section 279(1) of
For general principles see:
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v O'Neill
[2006] HCA 46
SDW2 Pty Ltd v JLF
Corporation Pty Ltd & Ors
Section 279(1) of the
Section 170(2)(a) of
the Accommodation Module
Klinger & Anor v
Body Corporate for Costa D'Ora Apartments
[2007] QDC 300
Magog (No.15) Pty Ltd v
The Body Corporate for The Moroccan
[2010] QDC 70
Seiwa Pty Ltd v The Owner’s Strata
[2006] NSWSC 1157
In fact, the body corporate
ought to carry out proactive maintenance works to prevent defects from arising
where possible.
100(1) of the Act
100(5) of the Act
Luadaka v Body Corporate
for The Cover of Emerald Lakes
[2013] QCATA 183
Commonwealth
Bank of Australia v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade v Styles
Body Corporate for the Reserve v Trojan resorts Pty Ltd
(2 May 2017)
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
[1997] FCA 1311
SWC notes this defect,
while still major, is not a priority given that the other defects are allowing
water ingress into habitable
Item 2 of committee
meeting dated 5 February 2025.
Minutes of committee
meeting dated 10 September 2025.
Section 279(4) of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (323 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter