URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBCCMCmr/2025/409.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pacific Paradise Apartments [2025] QBCCMCmr 409 (14 November 2025)
ADJUDICATOR’S ORDER
Office of the
Commissioner
for Body Corporate and Community
Pacific Paradise Apartments
[2025] QBCCMCmr 409
Race Redomra, owner and occupier of Lot 1 (
The Body Corporate for Pacific Paradise Apartments
All owners (
affected persons
Pacific Paradise Apartments CTS 31002
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 227(1)(b)
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation Module)
Regulation 2020
Accommodation Module
APPLICATION NO:
DECISION DATE:
14 November 2025
DECISION OF:
T Hendry, Adjudicator
CATCHWORDS:
MAINTENANCE
where the applicant says she is experiencing
moisture and water ingress into her lot from failed waterproofing and inadequate
whether the orders sought by the applicant are warranted
in the circumstances.
, 331; Accommodation Module,
declare that the Body Corporate for Pacific Paradise Apartments is in breach of
its statutory maintenance obligations by failing
to rectify the water proofing
and drainage issues affecting scheme building A and allowing moisture and water
to ingress into Lot
3 months of the date of this order, the body corporate must carry out the
following works to address the issues:
a waterproofing contractor to add packing to the waterproofing substance
injected into the hole in the exterior wall of Lot
1 (packing to be carried out
both from inside and outside the lot).
the external area around the rear north wall of scheme building A to bring the
external ground level below the internal concrete
slab to prevent moisture
penetration into the walls of the building.
a spoon drain against the corner of the exterior wall outside the kitchen and
bedroom of Lot 1 to divert water away from the
external wall and to stop water
pooling in this area. Connect the spoon drain to an appropriate storm water
drain to ensure the water
is drained away.
application is otherwise dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
[1] Pacific
Paradise Apartments is a 26-lot scheme situated in Yorkeys Knob, Queensland. It
is governed by the Accommodation Module.
The applicant, Race Redomra, is the
owner and occupier of Lot 1 in the scheme.
applicant has been experiencing issues with rising damp and water pooling
against the exterior rear wall of Lot 1. There have
also been instances where
water has flooded into the lot during heavy rains. I understand these issues
have been ongoing for several
years and the applicant says the issues are
persisting despite previous repairs having been carried out. She says this has
to black mould growing in the lot.
applicant is seeking final orders that the body corporate:
the waterproofing by engaging a waterproofing contractor to add packing to the
waterproofing substance injected into the hole
in the wall from outside Lot 1 as
well as from inside the unit.
the drainage issue that has caused damage to the common area wall, rear of
building and unit interior by carrying out the works
that were recommended by
the most recent and previous building reports which include:
the north wall of building A to bring the concrete slab above ground level and
smooth over with concrete;
a builder install a spoon drain against the corner of the exterior wall outside
the kitchen and bedroom of Lot 1 where the water
pools and ingresses into the
spoon drain will need to meet the large council drain.
body corporate must provide appropriate and timely communication with updates on
any contractors who will be attending Lot 1.
applicant also sought an interim order that the body corporate
engage a waterproofing contractor to fix the
waterproofing in the wall of Lot 1. She requested that the contractor add
the waterproofing substance injected into the hole in the wall from
outside the unit [Lot 1] as well as from inside the unit. She
wanted this to be
completed within 21 days.
[5] On 16 June
2025 I dismissed the applicant’s request for an interim
While I was satisfied the
applicant had raised a serious legal question to answered which had a sufficient
likelihood of success,
I noted that making the interim order sought would
essentially be making a final determination on the matter at an interim stage.
Ultimately, I was not satisfied the balance of convenience weighed in favour of
granting the interim order sought.
[6] This is my
consideration of the applicant’s request for final orders. The applicant
bears the onus to establish that the
final orders she seeks are warranted in the
circumstances.
Preliminaries
Procedural matters
applicant lodged an application for conciliation on 28 February
The parties attended a
conciliation session but were unable to reach an
applicant lodged this application for adjudication on 23 May 2025. The
commissioner sought clarification on some aspects of
the application and the
application was amended.
applicant’s request for an interim order was referred to departmental
adjudication. The applicant’s request for
an interim order was dismissed
and the application was referred back to the commissioner to progress under the
commissioner invited submissions from the body corporate committee and all other
owners in the scheme. Only one other owner
in the scheme made a submission in
response to the final application.
applicant inspected the submission made in response and submitted a reply.
[12] A dispute
resolution recommendation was made referring the file to department
adjudication.
adjudicator may make an order that is just and equitable in the circumstances
(including a declaratory order) to resolve a
dispute, about (relevant to this
dispute): a claimed or anticipated contravention of the Act or the CMS, or about
the exercise of
rights or powers or performance of duties under the Act or the
am satisfied I have jurisdiction to determine this matter under the legislative
dispute resolution provisions.
adjudication application
applicant explains there is a drainage problem affecting the common area at the
rear of her building. She says in heavy rains,
water gathers at the rear of her
lot and saturates the building slab and walls of the structure. She says the
inadequate drainage
in this area has caused water to ingress into her lot on
several occasions.
applicant says the contractor engaged by the scheme’s body corporate
manager has attended the scheme on multiple occasions
to deal with the drainage
issue. However, no permanent solution has been provided. She says the body
corporate has obtained multiple
reports from contractors about the issue but has
failed to resolve it.
applicant explains that in or around 2024, waterproofing was applied to white
ant holes in the building’s exterior
wall outside of Lot 1. However, this
failed to resolve the drainage issue and in the first heavy rains after the
water proofing was
applied, Lot 1 was once again flooded.
applicant says she wants the issues to be fixed permanently, as soon as
possible. She says the continued saturation of the
building slab is worsening
black mould in Lot 1 and increasing the risks to her health and safety. She says
carrying out the work
recommended by experts, (which she has requested the body
corporate be ordered to undertake), will cost a fraction of the quote to
whole new drainage system.
Submission received from
[19] Only the
owners of Lot 26 made a submission in response to the final application. The
owners of Lot 26 say the applicant has
been uncooperative in allowing
independent experts to access Lot 1 to assess the reported issues. They say
despite repeated efforts
by the committee, professional contractors have been
unable to carry out an internal inspection of Lot 1 to assess the required
[20] In their
submission, the owners of Lot 26 have copied the wording of a purported email
from a contractor which they submit is
supporting evidence. In this purported
email the contractor states they have been out twice to inspect Lot 1 and no one
The purported email further states that both times the contractor had
attended during rain and there was no evidence of water penetrating.
[21] The owners
of Lot 26 say the committee has acted in good faith and taken all reasonable
steps within its authority to address
the concerns raised by the applicant. It
says unfortunately, the lack of cooperation from the applicant has prevented any
They ask for the applicant’s application to be dismissed.
a preliminary point, I note the applicant has formulated some of her submissions
as if the dispute is with the scheme’s
body corporate manager and it
failing to rectify the water ingress issues the applicant is complaining about.
However, it is the
body corporate and not the body corporate manager who is
responsible for maintaining common property in good and structurally sound
condition (see below). Accordingly, the key question in this dispute is whether
the body corporate has met its statutory maintenance
obligations.
The body corporate’s duty to maintain common
applicant says there have been long standing issues with drainage at the rear of
the building in which Lot 1 is situated.
She says water pools in this area
outside Lot 1 during rain causing the building slab to become saturated. She
says this has led
to rising damp and mould growth in Lot 1. Furthermore, the
applicant says that during heavy rains, the inadequate drainage of this
allows water to flood into Lot 1. She says this has happened on several
[24] The first
thing I need to determine is whether the moisture and water ingress issues the
applicant is complaining about are being
caused by something the body corporate
is responsible for. I understand a drain on the northside of the building Lot 1
is situated
in is inadequate and, this prevents excess water from being drained
away from the area. This leads to water pooling against an exterior
wall of Lot
[25] I have
reviewed the survey plan for Pacific Paradise Apartments and it is made up of
four buildings, namely buildings A, B, C
and D. Lot 1 is situated on the ground
floor of building A.
rear of building A is the northside of the building.
[26] Pacific
Paradise Apartments was created as a building format plan of
subdivision.
Where a scheme is
created as a building format plan of subdivision, boundaries are defined on the
survey plan by the structural elements
of a building, including, for example,
the floors, walls and ceilings.
And, where a lot is separated from another lot or common property by a floor,
wall or ceiling, the boundary is the centre of the
floor, wall or
Section 152
of the Act sets out a body corporate’s duties about common property. It
provides that the body corporate must administer, manage
and control the common
property reasonably and for the benefit of lot owners; and comply with the
obligations with regard to common
property imposed under the regulation module
applying to the scheme.
[28] Pacific
Paradise Apartments is governed by the Accommodation Module.
Section 170
Accommodation Module sets out that the body corporate is generally responsible
for maintaining common property in good and
structurally sound
And, where a scheme
is created under a building format plan of subdivision, the body corporate must
also maintain in structurally
sound condition (as relevant to this dispute): (1)
foundation structures; and (2) essential supporting framework, including load
bearing walls.
[29] From the
materials before me, I am satisfied the body corporate is responsible for
maintaining the exterior walls and foundation
structures of all its scheme
buildings. This includes ensuring these structures remain watertight and do not
allow water to ingress
into the interior of the buildings.
section 170(1)
of the Accommodation Module contains a note which
provides: “
for utility infrastructure included in the common property,
of the Act provides that
utility infrastructure is part of the common property unless it is solely
related to supplying utility services
to one lot; is within the boundary of the
lot; and is located other than within a boundary structure for the lot. All
three limbs
of the test must be met for infrastructure to fall under the
[31] The Act
sets out a definition for ‘utility infrastructure’ at Schedule 6.
This provides that utility infrastructure
means, (as relevant to this
dispute), pipes, sewers, drains and equipment by which lots or common property
are supplied with utility
services. Schedule 6 further provides that utility
service means, (as relevant to this dispute), drainage.
[32] Firstly, I
need to determine whether the infrastructure in question, that is the drain and
drainage system, is part of the common
property and therefore the body
corporate’s responsibility to maintain. I have reviewed the survey plan
and the images provided
by the applicant. On balance, it appears that the drain
in question is situated on common property. Accordingly, I am satisfied it
not fall within the exception set out at section 20(1)(b) of the Act and that
the drain is therefore the body corporate’s
responsibility to maintain.
addition, I am satisfied, on balance, that the body corporate is responsible for
ensuring the drains and drainage are functioning
correctly and are not allowing
water to pool against scheme buildings.
[34] I note the
statutory duty to maintain common property has been considered extensively by
the courts.
It is clear from the
case law that a body corporate has a duty to maintain common property in good
condition and that it must do
so as soon as any of the building parts covered by
the duty fall into disrepair.
Failure to do so once aware of an issue would give rise to a breach of the body
corporate’s maintenance obligations.
Is the body corporate
meeting its maintenance obligations?
applicant has provided a building inspection report she obtained dated 17 March
2025. The report noted the following about
the exterior of Lot 1:
Blocks/Bricks: North side. Damp Related Defect. External walls
below ground level show signs of moisture penetration. Contact a water
expert prior to provide advice on ways to seal walls from moisture penetration.
Advise the body corporate manager.
Paint: North side. Moisture Penetration Defect: Part/s of the paint finish
show signs of moisture penetration. Contact a licensed
painter to inspect
defects and repair/replace as required. Advise the body corporate manager.
Paint: Moisture Penetration Defect: Excess moisture detected by using an
electronic moisture metering device to the walls at the inspection.
findings about the interior of Lot 1 noted damp related defects including,
(amongst other things), excess moisture in the
walls below ground level,
moisture damage to parts of the wall surface, mould on the ceiling, wall linings
and flooring. It also
noted an installation defect where the internal floor
level is not higher than the external ground level which can be a moisture
findings for the site noted the following:
Surface Water: North side. Water Penetration Defect: The ground slopes
towards the building foundations. Additional drainage will
be required to divert
stormwater/surface water away from the building structure walls and foundations.
Recommend to contact a licensed
plumber and drainer to inspect the site and
provide ways to remove the surface water away from the external walls and
foundations
of the building. Advise the body corporate manager.
North side. Side drainage appears to be installed.
[38] The report
there are major defect
items including: internal walls below ground level, drainage items and excess
moisture noted in the walls
and mould noted.
applicant has also provided copies of various committee meeting minutes:
The minutes
dated 4 April 2023 note the applicant experienced water ingress into Lot 1 due
to drainage issues. A motion to engage
a contractor to replace drainage sections
was passed.
The minutes
dated 19 June 2023 note that a secondary issue has been identified with water
entering through the wall of Lot 1 and a
waterproofing contractor has been
The minutes
dated 1 November 2023 note the drain covers around Lot 1 on building A have been
screwed down to prevent tampering and
clogging. The minutes note this is
expected to alleviate the drainage issues around Lot 1 however there are still
other areas that
require drainage works to alleviate water build up. They also
note that a leak detection contractor has confirmed high moisture reading
walls of building A and this will be monitored.
The minutes
dated 26 February 2024 note that a quote had been obtained from a contractor for
additional drainage to alleviate water
pooling around Lot 1. They further note
that another contractor is scheduled to provide a second opinion and quote to
address the
drainage issues.
The minutes
dated 23 April 2024 note a resolution to carry out waterproofing to Lot 1
engaging a contractor to use a polyurethane
injection to alleviate the water
ingress issues Lot 1 experiences in heavy rains. The minutes also included a
resolution to follow
up remediation of the drainage issues.
[40] From the
materials before me, I am satisfied there are defects with the waterproofing of
the external walls of building A which
is allowing water penetration into the
internal areas of Lot 1. In addition, I am satisfied that drainage issues are
exuberating
the problem by allowing water to pool against the external rear wall
of Lot 1. I am further satisfied the body corporate is aware
of these issues and
has been taking steps to address them. However, it appears that any remedial
efforts to date have been unsuccessful.
[41] I note that
in response to the interim order application, the body corporate committee
provided a submission stating it had decided
to install an underground drain to
alleviate the flooding at the rear of Lot 1. It says this is a better solution
than the open concrete
drain (spoon drain) due to the already overloaded
original underground drainage system. The committee said several plumbers gave
advice to install an underground drain and none suggested the open drain which
has been requested by the applicant. However, it provided
no evidence to this
Appropriate orders
Waterproofing and drainage
[42] The first
and second orders sought by the applicant are a request for very specific
repairs the applicant says will address the
water proofing and drainage issues.
However, having carefully reviewed the submitted materials, the applicant had
not provided any
evidence which confirmed that the specific repairs she had
requested would remedy the issues.
October 2025, I wrote to the applicant noting she had not provided any evidence
in her application where a contractor had
specifically recommended the steps she
was seeking in her orders. I requested that the applicant provide a full copy of
or reports she had which recommend the specific works she is seeking
that the body corporate be ordered to carry out.
October 2025 the applicant spoke to a dispute resolution officer in this office.
She explained there were reports from
contractors with recommendations but these
had been sent directly to the body corporate and she does not have copies. The
highlighted the report she obtained from the building inspector and
said she felt this addressed the recommended works. The applicant
explained that some waterproofing had been carried out on the external wall of
Lot 1 but this had not resolved the water
ingress issues. The applicant said she
would send in some further information.
[45] On the same
day, the applicant sent an email to this office with some further information.
She explained she had many on site
meetings with contractors who gave her
recommendations in person. She says these contractors then reported back to the
body corporate
and did not provide her with any documentation.
applicant attached to her email, amongst other things, a further letter from the
building inspector she had engaged. The
letter is dated 27 October 2025. In the
letter, the inspector states he spoke with the applicant about how the north
side (rear)
of Lot 1 needs to be excavated to bring the external ground level
below the internal slab/floor to prevent moisture from penetrating
internal walls. In addition, he says water should be diverted away from the
external wall in this area to stop water pooling
and sitting against the wall in
wet weather events. He says the specific works the applicant is seeking align
with his report and
are an acceptable way to rectify the defects.
[47] I have
given consideration to the interim submission made by the committee that it has
decided to install an underground drain
as the best way to address the flooding
and pooling of water at the rear of Lot 1. However, it provided no evidence of
contractors
recommending the underground drain to alleviate the moisture or
water drainage issues the applicant is wanting addressed. It did
further submission on the final application when invited to do so.
applicant has provided evidence from a qualified building inspector that the
specific repairs she is seeking for the body
corporate to carry out are an
acceptable way to rectify the water proofing and drainage issues. On balance, I
am satisfied that in
the circumstances it is appropriate to make orders for the
body corporate to carry out the repairs as sought by the applicant.
Communication
[49] The third
and final order sought by the applicant is that the body corporate provide
appropriate and timely communication with
updates on any contractors who will be
attending Lot 1. I note she had detailed very specific requirements in her
application.
[50] In the
applicant’s most recent email to this office, she explains that this order
is an important part of her application
as she is being ‘bullied’
into providing access to her lot while she is either alone or not expecting
contractors. She
says all she wants is for an agreed time to be set for when
contractors will attend and to be given notice of the same so she can
her work schedule.
[51] I have
carefully reviewed the correspondence the applicant has provided between herself
and the body corporate manager about
contractors attending Lot 1. From the
materials provided, it appears certain contractors have not shown up when they
have said they
will or have been unable to attend at times the applicant is
available. While I can understand the applicant’s frustration
regard, there is no evidence in the materials that the body corporate itself has
not been communicating appropriately with
her. It seems the breakdown in
communication has been between the applicant and the attending contractor, or
the attending contractor
and the body corporate manager.
[52] In the
circumstances, I am not persuaded it is appropriate to make the third order
sought by the applicant.
light of the above, I have made orders that the body corporate carry out works
to waterproof the exterior wall outside of
Lot 1, that the external area around
the north wall of building A be excavated to make it lower than the building
slab, and that
a spoon drain be installed against the exterior wall outside the
kitchen and bedroom of Lot 1. I have otherwise dismissed the application.
completeness, I note a body corporate must comply with its statutory maintenance
obligations. If a body corporate requires
access to a lot in order to do so the
Act provides a mechanism under which the body corporate may enter a lot while it
is reasonably
necessary to (a) inspect the lot and find out whether work the
body corporate is authorised or required to carry out is necessary;
carry out work the body corporate is authorised or required to carry
Pacific Paradise
[2025] QBCCMCmr
Application reference
number: 0191-2025
Conciliation
certificate issued 13 May 2025
Section 248(3)(e) of the Act
Section 276(1)(a) and (b) of the
Section 331 of the
Section 48C
Title Act 1994
Section 49C
Land Title Act 1994
Section 170(1)
Accommodation Module
Section 170(2)(b)
of the Accommodation Module
Klinger & Anor v
Body Corporate for Costa D'Ora Apartments
[2007] QDC 300
Magog (No.15) Pty Ltd v
The Body Corporate for The Moroccan
[2010] QDC 70
Seiwa Pty Ltd v The Owner’s Strata
[2006] NSWSC 1157
In fact, the body corporate
ought to carry out proactive maintenance works to prevent defects from arising
where possible.
section 163 of the Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (217 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter