URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2002/39.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Spasevska, Trajanka v Studin, Domagoj & Auto J Mart Pty Ltd [2002] QPAMDT 39 (3 September 2002)
PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR DEALERS TRIBUNAL
[2002] QPAMDT 39
3 SEPTEMBER 2002
APPLICATION NO:
SPASEVSKA TRAJANKA
FIRST RESPONDENT:
STUDIN DOMAGOJ
SECOND RESPONDENT:
AUTO J MART PTY LTD
DATE OF HEARING:
30 JULY 2002 AND 21 AUGUST 2002
Spasevska, Trajanka v Studin, Domagoj & Auto J Mart Pty Ltd
REASON FOR DECISION:
This is an application by Trajanka
Spasevska (“Applicant”) under section 119(1) of the
Auctioneers
and Agents Act
1971 ("the repealed Act") claiming against the former fund on
the basis of an alleged contravention of the repealed Act by Domagoj
(“First Respondent”) and Auto J Mart Pty Ltd (“Second
Respondent”).
The claim arises in relation to a Honda
Prelude, Registration number 869 FJN which the Applicant bought for $10,500 on
11 February
2000. The vehicle was seized by the police as a stolen vehicle on
16 September 2000. The Applicant claims that the vehicle was
purchased through
the Respondents and that the Respondents failed to ensure good title to the
vehicle was passed to the Applicant
or that alternatively, the Respondents
misled the Applicant about the ownership of the vehicle.
The Applicant claims the amount of
$15,100 (being the cost of the vehicle ($11,000), legal fees expended ($1,100),
loss of time/work
and university fees wasted ($3,000) from the claim fund
arising out of a contravention of the repealed Act by the
Respondents.
The transfer of the claim
to the Tribunal
The claim by the Applicants has become a
claim against the claim fund under the
Property Agents and Motor Dealers
2000 (“the Act”) by virtue of section 604 of the Act which
Former fund
and liabilities of the former fund are taken to be the rights and liabilities of
the claim fund.
A claim that has been made against the former
fund, and not finished before the commencement, continues as if it were a claim
the claim fund.
The event giving rise to the claim
occurred on 16 September 2000 and a claim was lodged on 16 October 2000. This
was within the time
period allowed by section 119(5) of the repealed
The application had not been dealt with
by the Auctioneers and Agents Committee by 30 June 2001. The matter was
transferred to this
Tribunal by the Chief Executive under section 476 of the
The claim was heard by the Tribunal on 30
July 2002 (“first hearing date”) and 21 August 2002 (“second
hearing date”).
The Applicant and First Respondent
attended the hearing of this matter personally on both days. Neither party was
legally represented.
The Tribunal was satisfied that the
requirements of section 474 and section 475 of the Act had been satisfied.
While the Tribunal is to deal with this
application under the Act it is to determine the claim based on section 119 of
the repealed
Act which relevantly provided as
Application of fund
A&A Act 119.(1)
Subject to this Act, the fund shall be held and applied for the purpose of
reimbursing persons who may suffer pecuniary loss because
the contravention of any provision of
section 60,69, 70, 72, 73 or 74 of part 7, division 1 by a prescribed person; or
“prescribed person”
licensee, the licensee’s partner, employee, agent or any person having the
apparent charge or control for the time being
of the office or business of the
licensee.(s.119)
A person may claim against the
fund by giving the registrar written notice of the substance of the claim.
The notice must be given within—
(a) 6 months after the
person becomes aware that the person has suffered pecuniary loss; or
years after the commission of the breach that caused the person’s
pecuniary loss;
whichever occurs sooner.
11. In determining the
amount of any claim the Tribunal will also need to consider sub-sections 120(2)
and (7) of the repealed Act
which provided as follows:
Claims against
A&A Act 120.(1)
No person shall be
entitled to recover from the fund an amount greater than the balance of the loss
suffered by the person after deducting
from the total amount of such loss the
amount or value of all money or other benefits received or recovered or which in
the opinion
of the committee might, but for the person’s neglect or
default, have been received or recovered by the person from any source
than the fund in reduction of such loss.
shall be paid or be payable out of the fund as interest on the amount of any
judgment obtained or of any claim allowed against
12. Although this is a claim against the former fund the process for
deciding a claim against the fund is that set out in section
488 of the Act
which provides as follows:
Deciding claims other than minor
The Tribunal may allow the claim, wholly or partly,
or reject the claim.
However, the Tribunal may allow the claim
only if satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that—
(a) an event
mentioned in section 470(1) happened; and
(b) the claimant suffered financial
loss because of the happening of the event.
If the Tribunal allows
the claim, wholly or partly, the Tribunal must—
(a) take into account
any amount the claimant might reasonably have received or recovered if not for
the claimant’s neglect
or default;
(b) decide the amount of the
claimant’s financial loss; and
(c) name the person who is liable for
the claimant’s financial loss.
13. Because this is a claim against
the former fund, sub-section 119(1) of the repealed Act rather than sub-section
470(1) of the
Act applies.
The evidence
The details of the Applicant’s
claim were provided by oral testimony at the hearing. The following further
evidence was also
provided to the Tribunal:
A receipt for the purchase of the
vehicle dated 11 February 2000 signed by M. Gatti which states “Sold a
Honda Prelude for
$10,500 cash
11/2/2000”;
A document dated 14
February 2000 stating “On 14/2/2000 I gave Owen $1500 cash for commission
for Dom for selling Honda”
signed by T.
A Field Report from the Queensland
Police evidencing the seizure of the vehicle on 16 September
A copy of the relevant pages of the
“Personal Trading Post” for the dates 10 February 2000 – 16
February 2000 showing
an advertisement by Auto J
A copy of an account from Wheldon and
Associates for $1,650.00 in relation to the vehicle;
A copy of the Applicant’s bank
statement evidencing the drawing of a cheque which was cashed on 14 February
During the course of the hearings the
Applicant gave the following evidence:
The Applicant visited the premises of the
Second Respondent in response to an advertisement of the vehicle in the Trading
Applicant stated that she saw the advertisement on Wednesday 9
February 2000.
In response to the question
from the Tribunal “Did you visit the car yard in response to the
advertisement?” the Applicant
When the Applicant
arrived at the premises with her son on the morning of 10 February 2000, the
Applicant spoke with the First Respondent
and an employee of the Second
Respondent, Mr Owen Van Acker.
The Applicant
stated that during a conversation with the First Respondent it was stated that
the vehicle was for sale by the Second
Respondent.
In response to the question by the Tribunal
“Were you told that A1 Custom Body Works in fact owned the vehicle?”
the Applicant
replied “No.”
Applicant stated that she returned to the premises of the Second Respondent on
the afternoon of 11 February 2000 with her husband
to buy the vehicle. The
Applicant and her husband were advised by the First Respondent that the vehicle
needed to be taken to the
local BP service station to obtain a roadworthy
certificate.
The Applicant gave evidence
that she drove the vehicle from the premises of the Second Respondent to the
service station with Mr Van
service station the Applicant and her husband paid the amount of $10,500 to Mr
Mario Gatti by way of cash and a cheque. Mr
Gatti provided a receipt to the
Applicant for the money.
In response to the
question “Why did you pay the purchase money to Mr Gatti if you thought
you were purchasing the vehicle from
Mr Studin?”, the Applicant replied
that “Mr Studin had told me to pay the money in this
The Applicant stated that she
did not ask Mr Gatti or Mr Studin for evidence of ownership or whether there
were any encumbrances because
she trusted Mr
The Applicant claims that the First
Respondent received commission for the sale of the vehicle as evidenced by the
document dated
14 February 2000 signed by T.Gatti.
The First Respondent gave evidence at
the hearing and provided the following written evidence:
A letter from the First Respondent to
the Departmental Investigator, Mr Paul Martyn dated 24 January
A letter from the First Respondent to
the Departmental Investigator, Mr Paul Martyn dated 23 March
The First Respondent gave oral
testimony as follows:
The First Respondent admitted he was a
registered motor dealer at the time of the
The First Respondent stated that the
Applicant came to inspect the vehicle on the day it arrived on the premises,
which the Respondent
claims was Monday 7 February 2000. At the time, the
Respondent claims that the vehicle was being photographed for an advertisement
in the local paper.
The First Respondent
claims that he decided not to buy the vehicle from Mr Gatti and attempted to
cancel the advertisement. He states
that although he was successful in
cancelling the photograph, the advertisement was still run by mistake. The
First Respondent
confirmed that the advertisement in the Trading Post on 10
February 2000 was for the Honda Prelude purchased by the
The First Respondent states that
he told the Applicant at the time that he did not own the vehicle and he was
looking at it for his
Respondent alleges that at the time the Applicant returned to the premises the
car was not there and in fact it had only
been on the premises for one day.
Despite the fact the First Respondent was not selling the vehicle he offered to
arrange for the
Applicant to meet with the owner, Mr M Gatti to buy the
The First Respondent denies that
the Applicant drove the vehicle from the premises to the service
The First Respondent denies that he
at any time had the vehicle on consignment or that he received commission for
the sale of the
On the second hearing date Mr Spasevska
gave evidence to the Tribunal. Mr Spasevska confirmed that he visited the
premises of the
Second Respondent on Friday morning to view the vehicle. At
that time Mr Spasevska had a conversation with the First Respondent.
Spasevska stated that he asked why the kilometres on the vehicle were so low.
To which the First Respondent replied that the
vehicle had been in storage for 3
years. Mr Spasevska stated that he then asked why the engine was so white and
was told by the
First Respondent that it had just been
Mr Spasevska stated that he decided to
buy the vehicle at that time and returned on Friday afternoon to pay for the
vehicle and collect
The First Respondent was given the
opportunity to cross examine Mr Spasevska. During the cross examination Mr
Spasevska confirmed
that his wife drove the car from the premises of the Second
Respondent to the BP service station. Mr Spasevska’s evidence
the events leading up to the purchase were not queried.
The Tribunal was provided with an
investigation report by Mr Paul Martyn, A/Senior Investigations Officer date 26
March 2001. This
report confirms in substance the different versions of events
given by the Applicant and Second Respondent at the hearing.
Mr Martyn provided oral testimony to the
Tribunal at the second hearing and an Addendum to his report. Mr Martyn stated
Unknown to him at the time of the
investigation, the Second Respondent moved premises from Loganlea to Kangaroo
Point. Mr Martyn
asserts that this could have contributed to some of the
confusion and discrepancies in the
At the time of interviewing Mr and
Mrs Spasevska he did not have an interpreter present. This may have led to Mr
Martyn misunderstanding
some of the statements of Mr and Mrs
When Mr Martyn originally spoke
with Mr Spasevska, he referred to the premises of Mario Gatti, A1 Custom Body
Works. Mr Spasevska
knew Mr Gatti as “Toby” and it appears that Mr
Spasevska may have thought that Mr Martyn was referring to the employee
The report also refers to a conversation
with Mr M Gatti about the transaction. According to the report Mr Gatti
confirmed that the
vehicle was consigned to the Second Respondent and that
commission was paid to the First Respondent for the sale. The Report does
indicate that any investigation of Mr Gatti’s role in the transaction or
whether he was actually in the business of selling
motor vehicle was
Mr Gatti did not give evidence at the
The Report also refers to a conversation
with Mr Owen Van Acker, a previous employee of the First Respondent, and a
statement from
Mr Van Acker dated 17 August 2001 is annexed. This statement
confirms the Applicant’s version of events, however, Mr Van Acker
give evidence at the hearings.
Findings on
the Evidence
The Tribunal finds on balance that the
version of events stated by the Applicant should be preferred. The Tribunal
finds the Applicant’s
evidence to be credible and is persuaded in this
conclusion by the corroborating evidence of Mr Spasevska, the advertisement in
Trading Post, the investigator’s report and the statements of Mr Gatti
and Mr Van Acker stated therein, although only minimal
weight was given to these
statements.
The Tribunal finds however, that no
evidence was provided that the First or Second Respondents actually purchased or
consigned the
vehicle from the purported owner, Mr Gatti. Although Mr Gatti
indicated to the departmental investigator that commission was paid
to Mr Studin
for the sale, little weight can be given to this statement due to the fact it
was not given under oath or tested in
the Tribunal through cross-examination.
The Tribunal finds therefore that there
is no sustainable evidence that either the First or Second Respondent sold the
the Applicant.
The Tribunal finds that on the basis of
the evidence presented that the following facts are relevant to the claim before
the Tribunal:
The First Respondent placed an
advertisement for the vehicle in the Trading Post for the period 10 February
2000 – 16 February
advertisement was under the name of “Auto J Mart” and stated that a
1990 Honda Prelude was for sale for
The Applicant read the
advertisement and visited the premises of the Second Respondent to inspect the
vehicle on Thursday 10 February
Applicant was told by the Second Respondent that the vehicle was for sale;
The Applicant was not told that A1 Custom
Body Works in fact owned the vehicle;
Applicant believed at all times that the vehicle was being purchased from the
Second Respondent and acted in accordance with the
directions given by the First
Respondent;
After purchasing the vehicle it
was repossessed as a stolen vehicle.
contravention of the repealed Act been committed?
The Applicant claims that the Second
Respondent failed to provide good title to the vehicle in contravention of
section 60 of the
repealed Act or alternatively, that the Applicant was misled
in relation to the ownership of the vehicle.
Section 60 of the repealed Act
relevantly provides:
Auctioneers and Agents Act
This section applies
if a used motor vehicle is sold by or for a motor dealer to someone else
(“the buyer”);
The motor dealer must ensure
the buyer gains clear title to the motor vehicle at time of sale.
The motor dealer must on the day of, and before, the sale --
the buyer a security interest certificate for the vehicle issued on the day of
give the buyer an approved form stating --
particulars about the vehicle, including its identity and odometer reading
at the time of sale; and
that the dealer has ensured that the
buyer will gain clear title to the vehicle at the time of sale; and
ask the buyer to sign an approved form acknowledging receipt of the
documents mentioned in paragraphs (a) and (b); and
original of the form mentioned in paragraph (b) to the buyer and keep a copy of
Section 60(1) of the repealed Act
requires that a used motor vehicle be “sold by or for a motor
dealer” to another person.
As the Tribunal has found that there is
no evidence that either the First or Second Respondent sold the vehicle to the
there is no contravention of this section.
The alternative claim is that the First
and Second Respondents contravened section 72 of the repealed Act. Section 72
No auctioneer, real estate
agent, or motor dealer, or employee of an auctioneer, a real estate agent, or a
motor dealer, shall make
to any purchaser or prospective purchaser or publish or
cause to be published any statement or representation that is false or
(whether to the person knowledge or not) concerning any real or
personal property which the person, or as the case may be, the person’s
employer, has for sale by auction or as a real estate agent or as a motor
dealer, as the case may be.
Section 72 is contravened where a motor
dealer makes, publishes or
causes to be published
to any buyer or
prospective buyer any statement or
representation that is false or
concerning any vehicle the motor dealer has for sale. The
motor dealer does not need to know that the statement is
In the evidence given to the Tribunal,
the First Respondent who is a licensed motor dealer admitted that he caused an
advertisement
for the vehicle to appear in the Trading Post on 10 February
The clear representation made by the
advertisement is that the Second Respondent had the vehicle for sale at a
particular price.
The First Respondent gave evidence that the vehicle was not
for sale through the Second Respondent. The First Respondent, therefore,
that the advertisement was misleading. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of the
Applicant that the First Respondent did not
at any time indicate to the
Applicant that the vehicle was not for sale through the Second
Respondent.
On the basis of the evidence presented
the Tribunal finds that the Second Respondent, through the conduct of the First
has published a representation about the vehicle that is
misleading.
The Tribunal further finds that the
Applicant relied on the advertisement and has suffered loss because of the
misleading advertisement.
The Applicant is therefore entitled to make a claim
against the claim fund for a contravention of section 72 of the repealed
Amount of the Financial Loss
The Applicant claims $15,100 being the
contract price paid for the vehicle, legal fees paid in relation to the vehicle,
loss of time/work
and university fees.
Section 119 of the repealed Act provides
that the fund shall be applied for the purpose of “reimbursing persons who
pecuniary loss” because of a contravention of the repealed Act.
The Tribunal considers that the primary
measure of the loss suffered by the Applicant because of the contravention of
section 72 of
the repealed Act is the contract price of $10,500. The contract
price is evidenced by the receipt for the purchase of the vehicle
February 2000 signed by M. Gatti.
The Applicant has also claimed legal
expenses in the amount of $1,650. The amount of these fees is evidenced by the
account from
Wheldon and Associates. These legal fees were also incurred
because of the misleading advertisement and are recoverable.
The Applicant claims the value of time
and work wasted and the loss of university fees. No evidence of the value of
these items was
provided. In any event the Tribunal finds that these items are
not recoverable from the claim fund as they do not fall within the
category of
loss recoverable under section 119.
The Tribunal finds that the Applicant
has suffered a financial loss in the amount of
Reimbursement of the
The Tribunal finds, on the basis of the
evidence outlined above, that the Second Respondent as a licensed motor dealer
is liable for
the Applicant’s financial loss.
In this case the claim will be paid out
of the claim fund by virtue of section 604(2) of the Act but this amount can be
by virtue of section 604(1) of the Act which states as
The rights and liabilities of the former
fund are taken to be the rights and liabilities of the claim
This allows the Chief Executive to recover monies paid
out of the claim fund as a liability of the former fund under the provisions
The Tribunal must also consider the
liability of the First Respondent, if any, and in this regard it must consider
section 125 of
the repealed Act.
Under section 125 of the repealed Act,
the directors of the corporation, at the time when the act that gave rise to the
claim occurred,
shall be jointly and severally liable to compensate the fund in
respect of that payment. The Tribunal finds that this section applies
First Respondent.
The right of the former fund to recover
from the First Respondent is taken to be the right of the claim fund by virtue
604(1) of the Act. The fact that the former fund no longer exists is
irrelevant.
The monies are paid out of the claim
fund as if it were a claim against the claim fund and the claim fund, therefore,
can recover
this amount by virtue of that section acting under the provisions of
On the basis of the evidence, and
applying section 125 of the repealed Act, the Tribunal finds that the First and
Second Respondents
are jointly and severally liable to compensate the claim fund
in the amount of $12,150.00.
53. The orders the Tribunal may make on a claim hearing are set-out in
section 530 of the Act which provides as follows:
Orders Tribunal may make on claim hearing
Tribunal may make the following orders in relation to a claim against the
(a) an order allowing the claim, wholly or partly, or rejecting
(b) an order stating that a named person is liable for a
claimant’s financial loss and the amount of the loss;
(c) an order
(d) an order that
no amount is recoverable in relation to a claim.
54. In accordance
with section 530 of the Act the Tribunal orders:
that the Chief Executive of the
Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading pay from the claim fund to the
Applicant the sum of
twelve thousand one hundred and fifty dollars ($12,150);
(ii) that the First and Second Respondents are jointly
and severally liable for the loss of the Applicant; and
(iii) That the
First and Second Respondents reimburse the claim fund in the sum of twelve
thousand one hundred and fifty dollars
($12,150) in accordance with sections 490
and 491 of the
..........................................................
S A CHRISTENSEN - CHAIRPERSON
for the PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR
DEALERS TRIBUNAL
Sharon Christensen Barry Vickers Kate
Chairperson Member Member
GJU:E:\Case Management Files\2002\W -
Claim\W036-02\Decision\W036-02D03-09-02.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (77.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter