URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRAA/2002/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:50:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gympie Turf Club Inc. v Queensland Thoroughbred Racing Board [2002] QRAA 26 (10 December 2002)
RACING APPEALS AUTHORITY QUEENSLAND
[2002] QRAA 26
27, 28 November and 10 December 2002
Gympie Turf Club Inc.
APPEAL FROM:
A decision of the Queensland Thoroughbred Racing Board not to renew the
Appellant’s Licence.
APPEARANCES:
Mr P Callaghan instructed by Neilson Stanton & Parkinson Solicitors
appeared on behalf of the Appellant.
Mr J E Murdoch SC instructed by Mr M Pearson Legal Officer with
Queensland Racing appeared on behalf of the Respondent.
REASONS FOR AUTHORITY’S DECISION
Mr Leo Williams AO – Chairman
Mr Dennis Standfield –
This is an appeal by the Gympie Turf Club (the Club) against a
decision of the Queensland Thoroughbred Racing Board now Queensland
Racing (the
Board) which in effect withdrew the Club’s licence and ordered the Club to
be wound up and failed to register the
Club as a race club for the year
The grounds of appeal are stated as:
A breach of the rules of natural justice
happened in relation to the making of the decisions by the QTRB, in that inter
(a) Failure to invite the Appellant to show cause why it
should not be wound up; and/or
(b) Failure to allow the Appellant to respond
to the alleged deficiencies in the business plan submitted by the Appellant to
2. The making of the decisions was an important exercise of the
power conferred by the enactment under which it was purported to be
(a) There was a failure to take relevant considerations into account in
the exercise of the power; and/or
(b) The power was exercised in accordance
with a policy without regard to the merits of the case.
The matter was
heard by the Authority by way of re-hearing over a period of three days
commencing 27 November and terminating 9 December
Racing has a
long history in Gympie, going back over 130 years, starting at the time of the
Gold Rush. The Club has been racing at
or near its present location since the
mid 1880s and racing has been more or less continuous except for a period during
II. It set up in its present format in 1958 and until June 2002
conducted regular race meetings at the racecourse at Exhibition Road,
The President of the Club at the time of the Board’s decision was
Mr Barry Fitzhenry who has been a member of the Club since
1965 and of the
management committee since 1970. He and the Treasurer, Mr Gary Davison, have
served the Club in many positions on
an honorary basis. Mr Fitzhenry has
regularly contributed turf articles to the
Gympie Times
. He has been an
owner and breeder of racehorses and a delegate to the Country Clubs Association.
Their contribution has been continuous
and significant. They are representative
of a number of similar people who give their time on a voluntary basis to
country racing.
The Club occupies its present grounds as a co-lessee with
the Gympie District Show Society Incorporated on what is called “The
Reserve”. The Reserve is an area which the local authority, the Council of
the Shire of Cooloola, holds in trust from the Crown
pursuant to a Deed of Grant
in trust. There is a registered lease in favour of the lessees which expires in
The Reserve has modern facilities which in terms of the
evidence were “far superior to those on other country and provincial
tracks in the region”. There has been considerable investment by the local
council and the community including the racing industry
in the infrastructure on
the Reserve in and around the area of the racecourse.
In affidavit
evidence, the Mayor of the local authority, attested that horse racing was
considered an integral part of the local community
of the area and a contributor
to the local economy. A number of brochures were tendered in evidence from local
tourism magazines
promoting horse racing and the Club. Various people such as
the grain merchant and the farrier attested they were dependent on racing
Gympie for their livelihood in whole or in part.
The following statistics
were presented in evidence covering the last year:
Average attendance
excluding TAB meeting 300
Average number of starters per race in
Average number of races per meeting 5.2
Number of non
TAB meetings` 19
Percentage of non TAB races in South-East Queensland Country area which
comprises Bundaberg, Burran, Dowan, Eidesvlod, Gayndah, Kumbia,
Nanango, Wondai 33%
Number of TAB meetings 1
races in which Gympie trained horses competed 786
Amount paid in prize
money, prizes and trophies $351,000
Approximate amount paid in
jockey’s wages and percentages $94,000
Approximate amount paid to
trainers including prize money $30,000
Approximate number of horses
stabled at Gympie Racecourse 50 to 55
Approximate number of horses
trained at Gympie Racecourse 74
Number of apprentice jockeys who rode
Gympie Races 17
Number of senior jockeys 28
On-course TAB turnover
at both betting and racing meetings $526,704.50
On-course bookmakers
turnover for race days only $929,896.00
In December 2001, the Queensland Government disbanded the Queensland
Principal Club system and installed in its place firstly the
Thoroughbred Racing Board, then the Queensland Thoroughbred Racing Board to take
control of the industry with a view to incorporating
a company limited by
guarantee to manage the industry.
Apart from inheriting the powers of the Queensland Principal Club under the
Racing and Betting Act
the new body was specifically charged with certain
obligations pursuant to the newly introduced Section 11AA which provides
11AA Special responsibility of Thoroughbred Racing Board
(1) During the special responsibility period, the Thoroughbred Racing Board
(a) investigate establishing a company limited by guarantee as the control
body for thoroughbred racing in Queensland; and
(b) develop recommendations about establishing a company limited by
(2) The recommendation must –
(a) ensure the integrity of, and public confidence in, the thoroughbred
racing industry is maintained; and
(b) ensure the interests of country and regional racing are taken account of;
(c) state what is reasonably necessary to protect country and regional
(3) Within the special responsibility period, the board must give the
Minister a written report about its investigations, stating
its recommendations
and the reasons for them.
(4) In this section –
“special responsibility period” means the period of 18 months
starting on the commencement of this section.
The Queensland Thoroughbred Racing Board has changed its name to Queensland
Racing (the Board) and has been given a very difficult
role. It is common
knowledge that racing throughout Queensland is experiencing financial
difficulty. The evidence before this Authority
was that there are over 140 clubs
racing in Queensland, all of which are reliant for prizemoney on the money the
Board receives by
way of distribution from the TAB Queensland. TABQ
distributions in past years have been in the order of $70 million but the
before this Authority indicates that this amount is likely to decrease
because the distribution agreement provided for a change from
a fixed sum to a
percentage of wagering. The new agreement will come into effect in June 2003 and
the decrease in distribution is
considered to be around $3 million.
The Board has given notice as recently as early December that there is to be
rationalization of country racing throughout the State
because of the overall
lack of funds available to support the prizemoney.
In terms of the current appeal the Club was enjoying 21 meetings per annum
until it was ordered to cease. Public statements indicate
that the number of
non-TAB meetings throughout Queensland supported by prizemoney from the Board
will be cut from around 400 to 299.
The rationale is to reduce competition with
TAB meetings which will generate more revenue for the industry.
Nobody would deny that country centres are entitled to conduct their own race
meetings but The Club alone is a clear example of what
can happen to a country
centre. It has enjoyed the support of a small but extremely dedicated band of
worthy people who, despite
their best efforts and despite the fact that the
prizemoney for all their meetings is paid by the Board, have encountered
difficulties beyond their ability to cope. In the overall scheme of
things the debts they have run up are not of great magnitude.
They were however
enough to render the Club temporarily insolvent. In June 2002, the Club
approached the Board for assistance. The
Board asked the Club to submit a
business plan. After an examination of the Club’s financial records and
after some consideration
of a proposed business plan of the Club directed the
Club to cease operations and wind up.
It is important to note that the Board did not avail itself of the procedures
for withdrawing a licence set out in S.115U of the
Racing and Betting
The evidence from Mr Tyrrell from the Board is plain enough – that
racing in Bundaberg and Caloundra has benefited markedly
by the demise of the
Gympie Turf Club. Fields have increased as has betting turnover on the TAB.
It is easy to understand the Board’s decision. Charged with the onerous
task of putting the racing industry in Queensland on
a sound financial footing,
it is presented with a club which is at least temporarily insolvent and it takes
action by ordering it
to cease operations thus saving itself the $350,000 it has
to pay the Club annually. While it is easy to understand the Board’s
problem, the decision made by it is not the answer to country racing. The Club
has, since it first approached the Board, reorganized
itself and secured pledges
sufficient to liquidate its current indebtedness and to show it has some future.
It has promised to hold
a meeting, secure sponsorship and recruit people to the
committee with business backgrounds. Whether it can make good on all these
promises or not will determine whether it has any future at all.
In the wider scheme of things, it is this Authority’s belief that the
Club should not now be asked to sacrifice its own existence
for the benefit of
the whole of racing in Queensland. The Board has a statutory obligation to care
for country racing and must discharge
that obligation in a fair and even-handed
manner. It is easy to understand the motivation of an immediate saving in
prizemoney by
not renewing the licence of the Club but that seems to this
Authority to be in effect making one club pay the price for a state-wide
If there is to be a rationalization of racing throughout Queensland then the
cost should be shared equally amongst all those who participate.
To deny the citizens of Gympie access to racing in their own town seems harsh
with their long history of involvement. On the other
side of the coin for the
Club to get itself into the sort of trouble it has at the moment it is fair to
say that neither the Local
Authority nor the citizens have shown great interest
or support in the Club or its activities until racing was ceased. Thereafter
there was much hue and cry and support never in evidence until then was suddenly
forthcoming.
The power of the Authority to hear the appeal is to be found
in Section 115K1(b)
In the rehearing before the Authority there was
considerable evidence advanced which was not available to the Board at the time
its decision. The legal argument advanced by Mr Callaghan, Counsel for the
Club, were:
The Board lacked power to make the
order which it made and the direction pursuant to Section 11B(2)(r) of the Act
was ultra vires.
The argument was that because of the specific
provision of the Act dealing with registration and licensing of Club (Section
the procedures followed should have been those set out in Section
115U. The argument is that these procedures were simply not followed.
Section 11B(a) provides for
procedures to be invoked when a club does not comply with a direction under
S11B(2)(r) which in turn contains
cross reference to S 115U.
argument really is that the Board should have followed a show cause procedure
before deregistering the Club. It has to be conceded
that on any fair appraisal
of the evidence, the Board did not conduct any form of hearing coming close to a
show cause procedure.
It was approached by the Club with what was tantamount to
a request for help. The Club wrote to the Board on 19 June 2002 indicating
it was experiencing financial difficulties and sought the advice and assistance
of the Board. The Board dispatched Mrs Ryan,
a very competent young lady, who
went through the finances of the Club and recommended that the Club prepare and
submit a business
plan for consideration by the Board. At that stage, it does
not appear to have been in the contemplation of the parties that the
not be able to be re-registered for the 2002/2003 year. The Club plainly thought
that it was seeking advice and assistance
and hopefully some sort of financial
backing to enable it to continue its activities. The Board however charged as it
is with rationalisation
of racing throughout the State, particularly country
racing, saw in front of it a club that was at least temporarily insolvent and
not only did not renew its licence but ordered it would up. The Board appears to
have proceeded on the basis of a continued history
of financial loss, a lack of
confidence in the financial assumptions contained in the business plan and the
absence of any strategy
to repay the Club’s debts.
The Authority is of the view that the Club should have been given notice of
the likelihood of the Board’s decision and should
have been afforded the
opportunity of the show cause procedure.
There is a collateral issue relating to the annual licence issued by the
Board to the Club. During the period of its financial turmoil
the paid Secretary
of the Club departed without formally renewing the Club’s annual licence.
This became apparent to the honorary
members of the Committee a couple of months
after the licence was due and they sought to tender a cheque to renew the
licence which
was rejected by the Board.
This Authority takes the view that that was more in the nature of a clerical
oversight and orders that the time for renewal of the
actual licence be extended
until 28 January next.
Mr Murdoch SC for the Board respectfully argued that the power of the
Authority was solely confined under Section 115K1(a) to the
decision of the
control body to refuse to grant, failed to renew or revoke a licence. Mr
Murdoch’s argument was that this
power does not extend to a power to order
the allocation of dates to enable racing to take place.
The Authority is of the view that the power to order the allocation of dates
is an incidental power to the power to grant a licence
and while in this case
the Authority does not intend to make any order about dates it is of the view
that were it necessary the Authority
could order the Board do so.
The argument will be somewhat academic with the proclamation of the new
Racing Act where the matter appears to have been put beyond
Another argument advanced by Mr Murdoch was the question of time in respect
of the institution of the appeal. He argued that the appeal
was out of time.
Although dates have been allocated elsewhere it is hard to see prejudice in the
position of any of the parties affected
by the appeal and the Authority makes an
order that the time for the appeal be extended to the date of the filing of the
the Appeal to allow the appeal to be heard.
The insolvency
issue is important. As at this time the Club has outstanding creditors to the
tune of approximately $56,000. The Club
has procured pledges of support from the
citizens of Gympie which will enable it to liquidate this indebtedness, provided
its licence
is returned by the Board and it is allowed to resume racing. No
indication was given to the Club by the Board that their licence
was on the line
nor were the Club afforded the opportunity to address the issue in the light of
the fact that consideration was being
given to cancellation of their licence.
Mr Callaghan argued strongly that the way in which the Board dealt with
the matter constituted a denial of natural justice.
To the extent that
it is necessary it can be concluded from the evidence that the Club in this
particular instance was denied natural
justice in that it was given no idea by
the Board that consideration was being given to withdrawal of its licence nor
given the opportunity
to be heard prior to that decision being made. There are
procedures in the Act to cover this situation and they were not used.
However for present purposes it seems unnecessary to making a finding as
to whether the Board acted unlawfully or not. It is probably
sufficient for the
Authority to conclude that having heard all the evidence and given the
opportunity to the Club to present its
proposals in full, the Authority can take
the view that the decision of the Board was premature and wrong.
fair to observe that the whole of country and perhaps city racing is now on
notice that change is under way and the Board will
be making changes in the
interests of the industry as it sees them to be.
Much of the evidence
from the Club before the Authority is in the form of undertakings, promises and
proposals. Providing these all
can be translated into affirmative action then
the Club is not now insolvent and can continue to operate. The question is where
go from here. It does not seem appropriate that the Authority seek to
supplant the Board by ordering reinstatement of the licence
and reinstatement of
race dates previously allocated to the Club. The Board has formed the view and
let it be known that the industry
can no longer afford to support country racing
to the level it has enjoyed in the past and has publicly notified all interested
that the number of race days throughout Queensland country will be
reduced to 299. The Board has every right to do this.
The Authority
takes cognisance of the Board’s intentions in the interest of racing as a
whole. In this case the Authority takes
the view that one Club should not have
to pay the full price for the burden imposed on the Board by all country clubs.
It seems fair
and proper that the Club should be allowed to take its place in
the rationalisation process being undertaken by the Board. To arrive
point however it will have to meet all of the commitments and fulfil all of the
promises it has made in evidence before the
Authority specifically
The need to have a general meeting
and election of office bearers
on the pledges and offers of loan
its creditors in full
Reorganise its
financial affairs
Enter into good faith
negotiations with the Board about its future specifically in relation to the
number of race days it can legitimately
on the other hand should give the Club a fair hearing and allow it to take its
position in country racing on terms which
the Board after due consideration
regards as fair and proper.
In view of what has been set out above the
Authority makes the following orders:
That the decision of the Board on the
application for renewal of the licence of the Club for 2002/2003 year be set
aside and that
the licence be renewed subject to the following
conditions:
That the Club have a general
meeting and finalise the election of its office
That the Club have prepared and
passed at an annual meeting an audited set of financial statements including a
balance sheet and a
profit and loss statement as at 31 December
That the Club pay its creditors in
full on or before 28 February 2003.
decision of 8 August 2002 to direct the Club to cease operations and commence
action to wind up be set aside.
Board enter into negotiations with the Club in good faith before 1 March 2003 as
to the allocation of dates to the Club,
such allocation to remain in the proper
discretion of the Board.
The Appellant has made an
application for part of its costs for the hearing. The Authority does not
consider in the circumstances
of this matter that it is appropriate to award
costs. The appeal fee is forfeited.
Leo Williams
Dennis Standfield
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (53.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter