URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2006/172.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Logan City Shopping Centre Pty Ltd v. Retail Shop Leases Tribunal & Anor [2006] QSC 172 (23 June 2006)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Logan City Shopping Centre Pty Ltd v Retail Shop Leases Tribunal &
[2006] QSC 172
LOGAN CITY SHOPPING CENTRE PTY LTD
(ACN 106 116
(applicant)
RETAIL SHOP LEASES
(first respondent)
HAMSA PTY LTD (ACN 109 493
(second respondent)
BS 1089 of 2006
Trial Division
PROCEEDING:
Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
23 June 2006
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
6 April 2006
1. The Tribunal’s decision of 12 January 2006
be set aside
2. It is declared that upon its proper construction,
Retail Shop Leases Act
does not confer upon the
respondent, Hamsa Pty Ltd, the right to claim compensation against the
CATCHWORDS:
LANDLORD AND TENANT – RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL TENANCIES LEGISLATION
– JURISDICTION, POWERS AND APPEALS OF COURTS AND TRIBUNALS
respondent – where the respondent became the
lessee with the
applicant’s consent pursuant to an assignment in 2005 – where the
respondent claimed compensation for
damage allegedly suffered by it due to false
or misleading statements by the applicant or someone acting under the
applicant’s
authority – where the Retail Shop Leases Tribunal
allowed the respondent’s claim– whether the Retail Shop Leases
Tribunal has jurisdiction to award a compensation claim under
Retail Shop Leases Act
(Qld) (the Act) – whether
the Act allows a claim to be made against the landlord not only by the tenant to
whom the lease was originally granted but also
by a permitted assignee of that
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – JUDICIAL REVIEW – GROUNDS OF
REVIEW – JURISDICTIONAL MATTERS – where the Retail Shop
Tribunal allowed the respondent’s claim – where the applicant
applies for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
pursuant to
Judicial Review Act
(Qld) – where the applicant argues that
the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to award compensation under
Retail Shop Leases Act
(Qld) (the Act) – whether the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to award a claim for compensation under
Act to a permitted assignee of a lease
STATUTES – ACTS OF
PARLIAMENT – INTERPRETATION – STATUTORY POWERS AND DUTIES –
EXERCISE – GENERAL MATTERS
– whether the expression "entered into
the lease" in
Retail Shop Leases Act
includes a subsequent assignment of the lease
Judicial Review Act
Retail Shop Leases Act
Retail Shop Leases
Retail Shop Leases Amendment Act
Shop Leases Amendment Act
2006 (Qld), s 45
Retail Tenancy Act
Allina Pty Ltd v FCT
(1991) 99 ALR 295
Bradbun Pty Ltd v Bobo Nominees Pty Ltd
(1994) V ConvR 54-501
DFCT (SA) v Elder’s Trustee and Executor Co Ltd
[1936] HCA 64
Dileum Pty Ltd v J K Corporation Pty Ltd
(1988) 1 WAR 244
Grain Elevators Board (Vic) v Dunmunkle Corporation
[1946] HCA 13
, considered
Re Malsons Pty Ltd
[1991] 2 Qd R 61
, discussed
Taylor Farms
(Aust) Pty Ltd v A Calkos Pty Ltd & Ors
[1999] NSWSC 186
S P Fynes-Clinton for the applicant
R J Oliver for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Canning Weil MacGillivray Halligan for the applicant
Jon Kent Lawyers
for the respondent
The applicant leases a shop to the respondent Hamsa
Pty Ltd. They are in dispute in a number of respects in relation to that lease
and Hamsa has claimed compensation in the Retail Shop Leases Tribunal. In
particular it has claimed compensation because it became
the lessee because of
what it says were false or misleading statements by or on behalf of the
applicant. The legal basis advanced
for that cause of action, and for the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to award compensation for it, is
Retail Shop Leases Act
(Qld) ("the
"). The question for
determination in this application is whether, upon its proper interpretation,
applies to the facts as alleged in that claim. More specifically, it is
permits a claim to be made against a lessor, not only by the
lessee to whom the lease was originally granted, but also by its permitted
[2] The lease was granted in March 1999. Hamsa became the lessee pursuant to
an assignment in February 2005, to which the applicant
consented. The applicant
applied to the Tribunal to strike out (part of) Hamsa’s claim, arguing
could not apply because Hamsa was a lessee through an assignment.
By a written decision given on 12 January 2006, the Tribunal ruled
did apply, so that Hamsa’s claim should stand.
[3] The applicant applies for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
pursuant to
Judicial Review Act
(Qld). It seeks an
order setting aside that decision and a declaration that
does not give
Hamsa a right to compensation. Section 88 of the
restricts the bases for
review of the Tribunal’s hearing of a dispute, and of its orders, to those
of want or excess of jurisdiction
and a denial of natural justice. But the
applicant’s case is that in this dispute, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction
compensation under
, so that as Hamsa concedes, s 88 does not
preclude a review of this decision.
has been amended recently by the
Retail Shop Leases Amendment
2006. By the transitional provision to that
it is provided that the Act,
as in force immediately before the 2006 amendments, continues to apply to a
lease entered into before
that commencement as if the amendments had not been
made. Accordingly, the present question involves an interpretation of the Act,
and specifically s 43 within the Act, as it was before the 2006 amendments. I
will therefore discuss the Act in those (pre-amendment)
terms. There is a
distinct question of whether the interpretation of the Act in those terms is
nevertheless affected by the 2006
Act, to which I will return.
[5] Section 42 provides that a retail shop lease "is taken to include
sections 43 and 44". Section 43 provides that the lessor is
liable to pay to
the lessee compensation in certain circumstances. Subsection 43(2) provides, in
part, as follows:
"(2) The lessor is liable to pay to the lessee reasonable compensation for
loss or damage suffered by the lessee because
(a) the lessee entered into the lease, or a renewal of it, on the basis of a
false or misleading statement or misrepresentation
made by the lessor or any
person acting under the lessor's authority;
Section 44 provides for the assessment of that compensation by the Tribunal.
[6] Hamsa’s argument, which was accepted by the
Tribunal, was that on the facts alleged by it, it "entered into the lease" when
it became the lessee by the assignment to it of the lessee’s interest.
The lessor’s argument is that a lessee enters
into the lease, in the sense
used in s 43, only upon the original creation of the lease. It says that the
lease was entered into
upon its grant (in 1999).
[7] Within many of its provisions, the Act distinguishes between what it
calls an entry into the lease and what it calls an entry
into an assignment of a
lease. That distinction is employed particularly within Part 5, which is headed
"Preliminary Disclosures
Application of part
(1) This part does not apply to–
(a) a retail shop lease for a periodic tenancy or tenancy at will; or
(b) a retail shop lease entered into or renewed under an option
under a retail shop lease.
(2) Sections 22, 22A and 23 do not apply to an assignment of a
retail shop lease."
Section 22 requires the lessor to give a draft of the lease and a disclosure
statement "before a prospective lessee of a retail shop
enters into a retail
shop lease". Section 22A provides that "the prospective lessee must give the
lessor a disclosure statement"
in certain circumstances "before entering into a
retail shop lease". Then follow s 22B and s 22C which prescribe disclosure
obligations
in the context of an assignment of the lessee’s interest.
Section 22B requires the assignor/lessee to give a disclosure statement
prospective assignee and s 22C requires the lessor to give to the prospective
assignee "a disclosure statement and a copy of
the lease ... at least 7 days
before an assignment of a retail shop lease is entered into". It further
provides that if asked by
the lessor, the prospective assignee is to give a
disclosure statement to the lessor "before the assignment is entered
[8] Section 22D employs this distinction,
between its subsections (1) and (2), in these terms:
"22D Financial, and legal advice certificates
If a prospective lessee of a retail shop is the lessee of less than 5
retail shops in Australia, and uses each shop wholly or predominantly
carrying on 1 or more retail businesses, the prospective lessee, before entering
into the lease, must give the lessor
(a) a financial advice certificate; and
(b) a legal advice certificate.
If a prospective assignee of a retail shop lease is the lessee of
less than 5 retail shops in Australia, and uses each shop wholly
predominantly for carrying on 1 or more retail businesses, the prospective
assignee, before entering into the assignment of the
lease, must give the lessor
(a) a financial advice certificate; and
(b) a legal advice certificate."
The distinction is also clearly made within s 22E, which provides that the
Tribunal may be asked to order the provision of a disclosure
statement within a
period defined by s 22E(3) as follows:
relevant period" means –
"(a) for section 22A or 22D(1)--within 2 months after the lease is entered into;
(b) for section 22B, 22C or 22D(2)--within 2 months after the assignment is
entered into."
[9] And that
same distinction is also employed within s 43 itself, which provides in s 43(1)
as follows:
"(1) The lessor is liable to pay to the lessee reasonable compensation for loss
or damage suffered by the lessee because the lessor,
or a person acting under
the lessor's authority--
(e) does not have rectified as soon as is practicable--
(ii) any defect in the retail shopping centre or leased building containing the
leased shop, other than a defect due to a condition
that would have been
reasonably apparent to the lessee when the lessee entered into the lease or, for
a lessee by way of assignment
of the lease, when the lessee accepted the
assignment;".
[10] So by these many
provisions, the Act appears to consistently distinguish between an entry into
the lease and an entry into an
assignment of the lease, such that they are
mutually exclusive. This strongly indicates that the use of the expression
into the lease" in s 43(2) is intended to refer only to the original
creation of the lease and not to the occasion of an assignment
lessee’s interest.
[11] But Hamsa’s argument then refers to s 11 which provides:
"11 Application of Act – when lease entered into
A retail shop lease is entered into on whichever is the earlier of the following
(a) the date the lease becomes binding on the lessor and lessee;
(b) the date the lessee enters into possession of the leased
Hamsa argues that s 11 can be applied in the context of an assignment by reading
"lessee" as including an assignee of the lessee’s
interest and by
identifying the dates upon which the lease becomes binding upon the assignee and
the assignee enters into possession.
[12] The intended
purpose of s 11 is to define, when read with other sections, the scope of the
operation of this Act. Section 13
provides that the Act does or does not apply
in certain respects according to when the lease was entered into or renewed, and
s 13(2), Parts 5 and Part 6 (which includes s 42 to s 44) do not apply to
"existing retail shop leases". The term "existing retail
shop lease" is defined
by s 5 to mean:
"(a) a retail shop lease entered into or renewed before the commencement of this
section; or
(b) a retail shop lease entered into, or renewed, under an option under an
agreement that was entered into before the commencement
of this section; or
(c) a retail shop lease entered into under an agreement for lease that was
entered into before the commencement of this section;
(d) an assignment of a retail shop lease mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or
In the present case the lease was
originally granted in 1999 so that it is in no sense an "existing retail shop
lease" as defined.
However, the terms of that definition are relevant, because
they are another instance of the employed distinction between the entry
lease and the occasion of an assignment.
[13] The operation of s 13 would be problematical if Hamsa’s argument
that s 27 (which deals
with rent reviews) as in force immediately before the commencement of the
Retail Shop Leases Amendment Act
1999 continues to apply to a retail shop
lease "entered into before the commencement, and any extension or renewal of the
as if that Act had not commenced. Take the case then of a lease which
had been granted before that commencement. According to s
13(3), the former s
27 would continue to apply to that lease, or to any extension or renewal of it.
Yet upon Hamsa’s argument,
an assignment after the relevant date would
result in the lease being treated as having been entered into as and from the
assignment.
In that situation, which version of s 27 would apply?
[14] Section 11 does not provide any significant support for Hamsa’s
argument. It does not blur the distinction between an
entry into a lease and an
entry into an assignment. Its terms do not provide or suggest that the former
includes the latter.
[15] Hamsa’s argument heavily relies upon the judgment of Thomas J (as
he then was) in
Re Malsons Pty
which substantially
influenced the Tribunal. That case involved the interpretation of the
predecessor to this Act, which was the
Retail Shop Leases Act
Thomas J had to decide whether certain amendments of that Act applied to the
lease in question, having regard to a complicated
set of transitional
provisions. In 1987 that lease was granted on terms which permitted the
landlord to determine the lease, with
no compensation payable to the lessee, if
it required the premises for redevelopment. In 1988 the lease was assigned by
and in 1989 the assignee exercised an option to renew. In 1990 the
landlord gave a notice determining the lease, because of its
redevelopment. The lessee claimed that it was entitled to compensation upon the
basis of a section which by an amendment
which had come into force after the
original grant but before the assignment. The question was whether that
provision applied to
the then lease. One reason why Thomas J held that it did
was that the then lease was that arising from the exercise of the option
renew (which post dated the commencement of the
amendment).
But his Honour held
that it applied also because the amendment commenced prior to the assignment.
That involved a consideration
of a transitional provision which said that the
amendment would not affect rights or obligations provided for by a "lease
into" before the amendment.
Thomas J held that the application of that provision had to be by reference to
the parties whose rights or obligations were under
consideration, who were in
that case the lessor and the assignee from the original lessee. There were no
rights or obligations between
those parties until the assignment, and in that
lease was ‘entered into’ at that point. The
judgment is of limited relevance to the present question. Thomas J was
with the specific question of whether the legislation had a
retrospective operation by interference with existing
His Honour was not
interpreting the expression in a provision equivalent to the present s 43.
[16] Similarly, there is a limited relevance in certain judgments relied upon
by the applicant, again because they involve an interpretation
of a similar
expression but in a different statutory context. The applicant relies upon a
judgment of the Full Court of the Supreme
Court of Western Australia in
Dileum Pty Ltd v J K Corporation Pty
In that case,
particularly in the judgment of Kennedy
the distinction between the
creation of a lease and the assignment of the lessee’s interest, is
discussed in considering whether
an amendment to a statute governing retail shop
leases availed a lessee whose lease was created before the amendment but who
by an assignment subsequent to it. The Court rejected the assignee’s
argument that the assignment itself constituted a lease
for that statute. The
applicant also relies upon
Taylor Farms (Aust) Pty Ltd v A Calkos Pty Ltd
which bears yet a
closer resemblance to the present case. The question there was whether the
retail shop leases legislation of New
South Wales applied to a lease which was
created before but assigned after the commencement of the operation of the
statute, when
it provided that it did not apply to "leases entered into before
the commencement of this section". That statute contained a provision,
similar to s 11 of the present Queensland statute, that a lease was to be
considered as having been entered into "when a
person enters into possession of
the retail shop as lessee under the lease". It was held that the statute did
not apply because
the lease was "entered into" when the original lessee went
into possession, not when the assignee did so. Kirby J discussed
Re Malsons Pty Ltd
and a decision of the Supreme Court of
Bradbun Pty Ltd v Bobo Nominees Pty
where O’Bryan J had
held that under the
Retail Tenancy Act
1986 (Vic) a retail lease was
"entered into" when the assignee went into possession. Kirby J said he
preferred the reasoning in
Malsons Pty Ltd
Bradbun Pty Ltd
, and concluded that the New South
Wales Act did not apply to that lease. As he acknowledged
the question was one of
the interpretation of the particular statute, as it is here.
[17] It is unproductive to attempt some fine comparison of the various
statutes under consideration in these cases with the present
one. It may not be
possible to reconcile satisfactorily these decisions. Ultimately the present
question must be answered by reference
to the terms of this statute. The
judgment in
Re Malsons Pty Ltd
indicates but does not require a
particular interpretation of the critical words within s 43(2).
[18] In my view s 43(2)(a), in its reference to the entry into a lease,
refers to but one event which is the creation of the lease,
and not also to any
subsequent assignment. That conclusion is required by the distinction, which
is clearly and consistently employed
within this statute, between the notion of
an entry into the lease and that of the acquisition of an existing leasehold
by what is described as an entry into the assignment of a lease. And
as already mentioned, that distinction is employed within s
It follows that the
section does not provide Hamsa with a right to compensation, because its alleged
loss was not suffered by its
entering into the lease. Instead its loss was by
its acquisition of the lessee’s interest.
[19] It is argued for Hamsa that there is no obvious reason why a right to
compensation would be conferred upon the original lessee
but not upon a
subsequent lessee to whom the landlord has made a false or misleading statement
or misrepresentation. And it is pointed
out that s 22C requires the lessor to
give a prospective assignee a disclosure statement. But until the 2006
amendments, there was
no right to compensation for a false or misleading
disclosure statement given
the prospective lessee to the lessor.
[20] That leaves for consideration the 2006 amendments. As I have said, they
do not apply in the sense of changing the terms of the
statute as it must be
applied to this particular case. The question is whether the amendments affect
the interpretation of s 43
in those (unamended) terms. In some circumstances a
court is entitled to examine a later statute to interpret an earlier version
Grain Elevators Board (Vic) v Dunmunkle
Corporation
circumstances are limited, so that if the words of the earlier statute or
version of the statute are clear, little assistance
is to be gained from the
later statute, as the Full Federal Court said in
Allina Pty Ltd v
There was no
significant amendment to s 42 and s 43 by the 2006 Act. But it has inserted a s
43A, which provides for the payment
of compensation for a false or misleading
statement or misrepresentation in a disclosure statement given to someone else
by the lessee
or "the assignor or assignee of a retail shop lease". So the Act
now provides for a liability of an assignee to the lessor, raising
the question
of why there would not be a corresponding liability of the lessor to the
assignee, for which the source could only be
s 43(2). Possibly the legislature
has assumed an interpretation of s 43 contrary to my conclusion. In
(SA) v Elder’s Trustee and Executor Co
Dixon, Evatt and
McTiernan JJ adopted these propositions:
"An Act of Parliament does not alter the law by merely betraying an erroneous
opinion of it ... where the interpretation of a statute
is obscure or ambiguous
or readily capable of more than one interpretation light may be thrown on the
true view to be taken of it
by the aim and provisions of a subsequent
[21] For present purposes it
may be accepted that some regard can be had to the 2006 amendments as an aid in
the interpretation of
the unamended terms of s 43(2). But it is not clear that
the legislature has adopted a certain interpretation of s 43 in its amendment
other provisions. The amendments which provide a lessor with a right to
compensation for statements made to it by an assignor
or assignee, have to be
considered with another amendment, the insertion of s 50A, by which an assignor
is released from any liability
under the lease once the assignment takes effect,
as long as disclosure statements have been given. The (new) liabilities for
compensation
upon the assignor and the assignee could be seen as an intended
trade-off for that alteration to the common law. A further consequence
new s 43A is to make the assignor potentially liable also to its assignee for
statutory compensation. The intention may have
been that the assignee would be
able to look to its assignor for compensation, as distinct from the context of
the creation of the
lease, where the transaction would have been the subject of
negotiations between the lessor and lessee and for which there would
clearer purpose for a right of statutory compensation. Of course this is
speculative, but the relevant point is that it is
not so clear that the
legislature has assumed, in the 2006 amendments, that s 43 should be interpreted
as the Tribunal in this case
determined. In my conclusion, the proper
interpretation of s 43 is therefore not displaced by the content of the 2006
amendments.
[22] In the present case the Tribunal erred in holding that it had
be ordered that
the Tribunal’s decision of 12 January 2006 be set aside and it will be
declared that upon its proper construction,
Retail Shop
does not confer upon the respondent, Hamsa Pty Ltd, the
right to claim compensation against the applicant.
[23] I will hear the parties as to costs.
Retail Shop Leases Act
[1991] 2 Qd R 61
[1991] 2 Qd R 61
The terms of the transitional
provision being set out at
[1991] 2 Qd R 61
[1991] 2 Qd R 61
(1988) 1 WAR 244
(1988) 1 WAR 244
[1999] NSWSC 186
(1994) V ConvR 54-501
And another judgment, being
a decision of the County Court of Victoria
[1999] NSWSC 186
Section 43(1)(a)(ii)
[1946] HCA 13
(1946) 73 CLR 70
(1991) 99 ALR 295
in a passage set out in Pearce & Geddes
Statutory Interpretation in
ed) at [3.31]
[1936] HCA 64
(1936) 57 CLR 610
in a passage set out in Pearce & Geddes
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (101 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter