URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRAT/2009/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:50:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Thornbury v Queensland Racing Limited [2009] QRAT 2 (12 March 2009)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
NOTICE OF DECISION
: 12 March 2009
Mr Shane Michael Thornbury
: Queensland Racing Limited
APPEAL FROM
: Appeal against the decision of the Stewards to impose a
penalty of 6 months disqualification for a breach of Rule AR175(n). Appeal
against finding and penalty.
BREACH OF RULE
: Rule AR175(n)
: Appeal upheld.
APPEARANCES
: J E Murdoch SC appeared on behalf of the Appellant.
Mr W R Birch, Acting Chief Steward, appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Mr Brock Miller - Deputy Chairman
Mr Dennis Standfield - Member
The Appellant Mr Shane Michael Thornbury is a licensed trackwork rider. On
the morning of Wednesday 4 February 2009 at Eagle Farm
Racecourse, one of the
horses which Mr Thornbury was working was the 4 year old mare Je Ne Sais Pas
which is trained by Miss Cherie
An incident occurred with Je Ne Sais Pas which was referred to the Stewards
by the Racecourse Manager Mr Bill Shuck. That incident
is best described in the
statement provided that morning by the Trackwork Supervisor, Mr Sean Ehlers to
the Stewards which was Exhibit
2 at the Stewards Inquiry of 9 February 2009.
The statement reads:-
“Statement in regard to incident at Track-work
February 2009
At approximately 6.00am this morning I observed the horse in question.
This horse has proven to be a problem horse in the past. Yesterday
it proved difficult to work off from the
1800metre gap. It wiped around several times and caused problems to other
horses working
on the Dirt track.
This morning Wednesday 4
the same horse again
proved difficult to get on the track. On its return the horse wiped around
several times on the gap and adjacent
the track-work hut. The next time I
observed the horse the rider had dismounted near Rob Bradshaw’s tie-ups
and was hitting
the horse over the head with his whip. I yelled at the rider to
stop hitting the horse to which he continued hitting it around the
observed the rider striking the horse around the head at least 5 times.
I informed both the trainer Cherie O’Neill and the rider Shane
Thornberry that the horse would be restricted to the bull-ring
only till its
manners improved. I also spoke to Shane Thornberry regarding his actions and
informed him that his actions were un-acceptable
at Eagle Farm. Several
licenses complained to me about the incident.
I reported the matter to the Racecourse Manager.
Sean Ehlers.”
The Stewards rightly carried out investigations concerning the incident and
that same day the Veterinary Officer of Queensland Racing
Dr Martin F. Lenz
examined Je Ne Sais Pas at Miss O’Neill’s stables with Steward Mr
Paul Gillard. Dr Lenz prepared a
report of his examination of the horse which
was Exhibit 10 at the Stewards Inquiry which stated:
“4 February 2009...
...The above mare was examined at her training yard on the morning of 4
February 2009. When first examined the mare was standing
with her off side eye
held slightly closed compared to the near side eye. Closer examination of the
eye revealed mild blepharospasm
(eye lids being held closed), mild
conjunctivitis and mild localised corneal oedema (bluish discolouration in the
normally transparent
front part of the eye) in the off side eye. The near side
eye was normal. These clinical findings are indicative of an eye that is
inflamed. This clinical presentation would be consistent with the eye having
received a blow (for example from a riding whip).
In my opinion, it is unlikely
for there to remain any permanent eye damage with correct treatment.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if I can provide any further
information...”
Mr Paul Gillard obtained the Pro Cush whip used by the Appellant and took
photographs of the horse’s off side eye.
On the following morning, Senior Steward Mr Bevan Turner interviewed the
following Licensees regarding the incident:-
Trainer Paul Dawson, Trainer Kelso Woods, Trainer Dwain Schmidt, Trainer John
Flemming, Jockey Patricia Gesler, Apprentice Mitchell
Transcripts of those interviews with the Licensees were obtained and on
Monday 9 February 2009 the Stewards convened an Inquiry with
respect to the
incident. The Appellant and Trainer O’Neill were called to the Inquiry.
Prior to the commencement of the Inquiry the Appellant was provided with
transcripts of the interviews taken by Steward Mr Turner.
Those transcripts
together with a letter from Mr Shuck, the letters from Mr Ehlers and Dr Lenz,
the photographs of the horse and
the whip were tendered as exhibits at the
The Chairman of the Stewards Inquiry was Mr Birch and when submitting
the letters from Mr Shuck and Mr Ehlers he did ask the Appellant
whether there
were any questions of them and the following exchange occurred (Stewards Inquiry
Transcript (SIT) Page 7 from Line
“THE CHAIRMAN: No. Do you have any questions of them? In regards to
their evidence?
MR THORNBURY: Well, they are not here sir, so it is hard to question
THE CHAIRMAN: Well, they are available by telephone if you wish to
question them in regards to anything contained in their letters?
MR THORNBURY: No, I do have questions of all the witness’
statements though because none of them coincide with each other.
They were all
THE CHAIRMAN: Alright. So you have questions of the witnesses that gave
MR THORNBURY: Yes Sir.
THE CHAIRMAN: Alright, which witnesses would you like to
MR THORNBURY: I’d actually like to talk to all of them, because
from viewing points people have said that they have seen the
incident and
exactly where I was hitting it and all that, it would be almost impossible for
most of them to see what they have apparently
seen, because John Flemming was
over at his stalls and the way the track and stalls are set up and I was out the
front of Mr Bradshaw’s
stalls down between the railing and Mr
Bradshaw’s stalls, there is a brick, ah, wooden walls between us. So from
to here, to see exactly where I was hitting that horse would be near
impossible. Trish and Mr Kelso Wood was also up inside stalls,
which are around
the back and around the other side and never really viewed perfectly what was
Mr Mitchell Wood was actually – I could even – I don’t
know what, what he actually seen or what he actually –
fantasy story. For a start his horse went round when I was actually coming in on
the horse and took off just as –
after I turned into the stalls,
that’s when his horse went round and took off. Right? He was going away
from me and he apparently
seen all this stuff happen.
THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Well you have heard what has been alleged
When asked how he would like to respond to the allegations the Appellant
stated not guilty and further went on to give his version
of the incident (SIT
Page 8 from Line 23) as:
“MR THORNBURY: Well, this particular incident, the mare had been
whipping around as they all started out on the track and working
round; she had
actually worked round with me. Ran into the rail a couple of times, near the
half mile, actually interfered with
Jackson Morris who was working one of
Lindsay Gough’s horses, and he said “I’d stop and help you but
because this is a colt” and I said that the least thing I
wanted was more horses around me. And then she played up all the
way in, still
playing up on the concrete. She played up as I went past Sean and he actually
sort of hunted her from behind, she
spun around and carried on all the way up
with Mr Schmidt and Chris following me.
As I got up to the end of the rail, where I normally walk through and
then walk up the inside of the rail up to our stalls, she started
whipping round
half rearing. There’s a rail there, it’s the end of the rail where
the post and that is.
She almost hung herself on that, like, on three occasions, which then I
had to dismount because I was concerned that she was going
to put herself up
over the rail and hurt herself. When I dismounted and gone to walk her,
she’s pulled back, so then yes,
I do admit to hitting her, but I did not
hit her on the head. I was on the near side of her and holding the bridle in
Right? And I hit her on the neck and the shoulder. I probably hit
her – probably – I’d say probably five or six
would say. And then Mr Dawson had said something from the other side of the
wall and I probably hit her once or
twice after he’s said something. And
then she stopped running backwards so I grabbed – then I just pulled her
and we walked up to the stalls and I tied her up.”
The Appellant then went on to state that he could not have hit the horse on
the off side eye because of the way in which he was holding
contending throughout that he only hit the horse on the near side.
It is clear from the Appellant’s statements that he disputes the
transcripts presented to him by the Licensees and while admitting
to hitting the
horse on the near side near the neck, denied hitting the horse on the off side
or in her head.
The Stewards then proceeded to call by telephone the Licensees who provided
statements. The Licensees that they telephoned were Trainer
Mr Paul Dawson,
Jockey Ms Patricia Gesler and Apprentice Mitchell Wood.
In the telephone calls with these Licensees the Appellant questioned them
with regard to the evidence they presented in their statements.
In his written
submissions to the Tribunal, Mr Murdoch has summarised the evidence presented by
these Licensees which the Tribunal
finds are correct summaries and those
summaries state with respect to the Licensees who were called by telephone:
Paul Dawson
, trainer, initially said that he had seen
the mare struck on the head and that Thornbury was on the mare’s offside.
it appears that he was looking from the stables at Eagle Farm where he
ties up his horses and that he was looking through panels
of timber. As to the
area of the head that was struck, he said it was the side of the face. He
believed it was the offside.
cross examined by Thornbury, Dawson conceded that he had difficulty seeing
completely, but that he thought Thornbury was hitting
the horse with the whip.
He appeared to concede that he may have been wrong in recounting what he had
seen. He explained this by
qualifying that it was a “bit difficult”
for him to see.
, trackwork rider, was sitting on a horse in a stall three stalls away
from the incident. She did not have a clear view. There was
wood “you can
kind of see through them”. She was of the view that the horse was struck
over the head.
jockey M Wood
gave a statement to the effect that Thornbury was
“kicking the horse in the guts and bashing it uncontrollably”. When
cross examined he said there were between two and four kicks. Apprentice Wood
was on a horse going in the opposite direction, he
had his back turned but said
he turned around. When asked if the whip went anywhere near the horses eye, he
said it was towards
the head and towards the “sort of neck end of the
head”. He couldn’t really tell whether it went near the eye or
Wood’s versions are unreliable because he was on a horse heading in the
opposite direction and his version of the
horse being kicked in the guts and
bashed uncontrollably, is inconsistent with the other versions.
version given by Apprentice Wood that describes Thornbury kicking the horse two
or three times in the belly is difficult to accept
in the circumstances.
Thornbury would have needed ninja like agility to hold the rein with his left
hand just behind the bit, use
the whip with his right hand and simultaneously
kick the horse which was pulling backwards, at the same
The Stewards went on to charge the Appellant with a
breach of AR175(n) which states:-
A.R.175. The Committee of any Club or the Stewards may
(n) Any person who in their opinion commits or commissions an act of cruelty
upon a horse, or is in possession or control of any article
or thing which, in
their opinion, has been made or modified to make it capable of inflicting
cruelty upon a horse.”
The particulars given by the
Stewards (SIT Page 38 from Line 35) were:-
“The specifics of the charge being that on the morning of the
of February 2009 at the Eagle Farm race course Mr
Shane Thornbury you did commit an act of cruelty upon a registered race horse
ne sai pas by way of repeatedly striking the horse in the head area with
your whip when dismounted.”
After being charged, the Appellant reaffirmed his plea of not guilty and
stated that he did not strike the horse in the head. He did
(SIT Page 39 Line
“I did hit it more than I should have and that – but there
was no – I did not strike it in the head and I did not
attack the horse or
be totally cruel to the horse or anything like that. Okay. I probably – I
was – frustrated at the
time and I have probably vented a bit of anger
towards the horse for her action and how she has been for the last three or four
But in my opinion I have caused the horse no harm in any sort of way. I
didn’t hurt its eye – or any of that –
or as I’ve been
accused of hurting the eye – or hitting it on the right side of the horse
or anything like that or striking
it around the head. I hit it on the top of
the neck. That’s all.”
The Stewards deliberated on the matter and when finding the Appellant guilty
did state (SIT Page 39 from Line 46):
“...The evidence of several witnesses interviewed independently and
the evidence given before the stewards today satisfies us
that you did strike Je
Ne Sai Pas in the head with your whip and that, in our opinion, constitutes and
act of cruelty.”
The Stewards then went on to consider penalty and imposed as a penalty a six
month disqualification period.
With the matter now before the Tribunal it is incumbent on the Tribunal
pursuant to Section 172(3) of the
Racing Act 2002
to make its decision on
the material before the Tribunal.
There is no doubt that the issue before the Tribunal is whether the evidence
it has before it reaches the required standard of proof
that the Appellant
repeatedly struck the horse in the head with his whip. While there were
photographs taken of the off side eye
of the horse with the inference being that
this was caused by the Appellant, the Stewards did not specifically state that
as specific
of the charge. The Stewards have referred to the “head”
while the Appellant states that he hit the horse on its “neck”.
While the difference to lay people may seem minor, there is a major difference
to those in the industry where the striking of the
neck can be considered as
discipline with no lasting effects where if a horse is hit in the head, it could
be cruelty and cause injury
to a horse.
The question which the Tribunal has to consider is whether the evidence
presented at the Inquiry by those who stated they observed
the incident should
be accepted as sustaining a breach of the Rule. In addition to the Licensees
Paul Dawson, Patricia Gesler and
Mitchell Wood, there were statements from Kelso
Wood, Dwain Schmidt and John Flemming. Although the Appellant contested what
said in the transcripts of their statements, those Licensees were not
The charge before the Appellant is a serious charge. If found to have
breached the Rule it will lessen his standing in the industry
and his likely
future employment. There is no doubt that the evidence required to satisfy a
breach of Rule is at the higher end of
the “reasonable satisfaction”
standard as enounced by the High Court in
Brigginshaw v Brigginshaw (1938) 60
. The Tribunal cannot rely on those untested statements when they are
disputed. The Tribunal fails to see why the Stewards did not
witnesses available. While they may not have been able to be contacted by
telephone, in such a serious matter as this
the Inquiry could well have been
adjourned. Indeed, even the act of calling the witnesses by telephone when there
is such a serious
charge is of concern to the Tribunal. While the
practicalities of having evidence received this way is often acceptable, when
are serious charges witnesses should be available in person to be
questioned rather than rely on written statements. The Tribunal
simply cannot
accept the statements of Trainers Wood, Schmidt and Flemming as reaching the
required standard of proof as evidence
of the matters stated therein. With
respect to the evidence of Trainer Dawson, Jockey Gesler and Apprentice Mitchell
Wood, the inconsistencies
in those statements as previously referred to are such
that the Tribunal also cannot accept those statements as satisfying its standard
of proof required.
The other evidence before the Tribunal is the evidence of Mr Sean Ehlers
previously referred to. While Mr Ehlers stated that he observed
the incident,
his statement was not able to be challenged by the Appellant at the Inquiry
because Mr Ehlers was not available. While
in the statement there is reference
to “hitting it around the head” there is no specific identification
of where in the
head it was hit and it may well have been in the neck area as
contended by the Appellant. Again, the Tribunal is unable to rely
The Tribunal is not satisfied on the evidence before it that a breach by the
Appellant of Rule AR175(n) can be sustained and upholds
the Appeal with respect
to a finding of a breach of the Rule.
As the Appeal with respect to finding is upheld, it is not necessary for the
Tribunal to consider the matter of penalty.
The Tribunal therefore orders:
deposit fee be refunded to the Appellant.
Miller ............................................................
Deputy Chairman
Standfield ............................................................
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (89.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter