URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QChCM/2010/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department Child Safety v SB & Ors [2010] QChCM 1 (27 April 2010)
MAGISTRATES COURTS OF QUEENSLAND
Dept Child Safety v SB & Ors
DEPARTMENT OF CHILD SAFETY
(applicant)
CCM6592/02(7)
Childrens Court of Queensland (Magistrate)
PROCEEDING:
Application to revoke and make another Child Protection Order
ORIGINATING COURT:
Childrens Court of Queensland at Mareeba
DELIVERED ON:
27 April 2010
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
MAGISTRATE:
The order made by me on the 19th of February 2007 is
Pursuant to Section 61 I make an order granting long term
guardianship of KP to JP, Grandmother of KP. This order to remain in force
KP attains the age of 18.
Pursuant to Section 61 I make an order
granting long term guardianship of SP to JP. This order to remain in force
until SP attains
the age of 18.
CATCHWORDS:
CHILD WELFARE – GUARDIANSHIP – long term guardianship order
– suitable person
Child Protection Act 1999
SOLICITORS:
[1] On 19 February 2007 in response to an application by Janelle McNamara, a
Child Safety Office of the Department of Child Safety
I made a Protection Order
in respect of KP and SP granting guardianship to the Chief Executive for a
period of two years to expire
on 18 February 2009. The Applicant had sought a
long term guardianship order. Although I was satisfied that a protection order
should be made I was not persuaded to make a long term order and stated the lack
of relevant matter and the conflict between the
Department and JP for my reasons
for doing so.
[2] In that decision I determined that KP and SP were children
in need of protection and that a Child Protection order was appropriate
desirable to ensure the protection of the children and that their protection was
unlikely to be assured by an order on less intrusive
terms. I was also
satisfied that the recognised entity had expressed its views in respect of the
application although those views
were inconclusive. I was satisfied that there
was no parent able and willing to protect the children within the foreseeable
I found that the applications had been discussed with the children and
that a comprehensive case plan had been developed. I also
ruled that KP was not
a parent nor was I satisfied that KP was a member of the children’s family
as paternity was an issue.
[3] Mr Mark Gallagher, an authorised officer under
Child Protection Act
, now applies to revoke the order which I made on 19
February 2007 and seeks an order granting long term guardianship of the children
to the Chief Executive.
[4] SB and PP were both served with copies of the
application and sometimes appeared at the mention of the matters. The matter is
to be determined on the evidence filed by the Applicant and the submissions of
JP made to the court pursuant to
Section 113
Child Protection Act
at a disadvantage in these proceedings in that she is allowed to make
submissions only. JP has not been able to file any
affidavit material. Neither
of the parents has filed any material in the proceedings.
[5] In determining
the matter I have regard to the –
application of
Mark Gallagher filed on 18 February 2009
the affidavit of
Mark Gallagher sworn on 18 February 2009
the affidavit of
Mark Gallagher affirmed on 6 July 2009
the affidavit of
Mark Gallagher affirmed on 12 October 2009
the affidavit of
Scott Giles affirmed on 22 April 2010
the submissions
lodged by NQ Women’s Legal Service Inc. on behalf of JP dated 5 October
submissions
filed by JP on 18 February 2010
materials and
the decision on the court file relevant to the 2007 decision.
[6] On 19 October 2009 I gave an interim decision in respect of the submissions
put forward on behalf of JP in particular I found
was not a parent as defined by
for the purpose of
Section 108
JP was not a
parent for the purposes of
(Child Protection Orders) of the
[7] The relevant provisions of the Act for my consideration are –
definition of ‘child protection order’ contained in the Schedule 3
dictionary.
– provision about Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children.
– what is ‘harm’.
– who is ‘a child in need of protection’.
– meaning of ‘parent’ in
– application for child protection order.
– making of child protection order.
– types of child protection orders.
– duration of child protection orders.
Section 122
– statement of standards.
Section 9 of the
Child Protection Regulation – suitable person.
[8] It is now accepted by all parties that PP is the father of the
[9] The court may make a child protection order only if satisfied
of the matters set out in Section 59.
[10] I have previously found that the
children are in need of protection as that term is defined in Section 10. As
with the previous
application the Applicant’s material is not as
comprehensive as it could be and does not set out to address with specific
the elements which the court must give consideration to. An example of
this is in respect of this threshold question to be determined;
whether the
children are children in need of protection. The children KP and SP have been
in the care of JP since 2000 and 2002
respectively. This placement was made by
the Department and continues until this day. Other then for some allegations of
inappropriate
language towards KP (affidavit Gallagher 6 July 2009 paragraph 9)
an allegation that JP had hit SP with a shoe (affidavit Gallagher
6th of July
2009 paragraph 7) and an allegation that KP and SP had been left alone and
unsupervised at home for approximately 6 hours
(affidavit Gallagher 6 July 2009
paragraph 8) there are no allegations that the children have been, or are at an
unacceptable risk
of suffering any harm whilst in the care of JP. However, it
must be accepted of course that the status quo (of the children living
is as a consequence of the orders of the court with the effect that the children
have been under the care of the Department
for many years and not in the care of
either of their parents particularly SB who it would appear is totally incapable
of providing
a safe environment for the children. PP is also, I accept, not
capable of providing a protective environment for the children.
[11] I am prepared to find that the children are children in need of protection
as defined by Section 10 in that they would be, in
the absence of a suitable
placement, at an unacceptable risk of suffering harm and that neither SB nor PP
are able or willing to
protect the children from harm.
[12] I am satisfied
that an order is appropriate and desirable for the protection of the
[13] In the process of bringing this application to a conclusion
the parties have been involved in a number of meetings including
a court ordered
conference held on 10 December 2009, that conference was attended by the
following –
Valastro Court Co-Ordinator Department of Child Safety
Mark Gallagher Child Safety Officer Department of Child Safety
Belinda Saal Team Leader Department of Child Safety
JP Paternal Grandmother and carer
SB Mother of the Children
PP Father of the Children
Mrs Yow-Yeh Recognised Entity
[14] Unfortunately no agreement was reached at the court ordered
conference.
[15] A case plan has been prepared and filed in respect of the
children. The plans are appropriate for meeting the children’s
protection and care needs, particularly as the case plans do not envisage
reunification with either of the parents. The
case plans in fact support
“long term out of home care”, which I believe means placement with
someone other than the
[16] Mr Gallagher at paragraph 21 of his
affidavits of 6 July 2009 and paragraph 15 of his affidavits of 12 October 2009
to depose to the wishes and views of the children. Mr Gallagher advises
the court that SP is too young and it was not possible to
obtain her views and
wishes. Mr Gallagher is able to advise the court that KP participated in a
meeting and was able to give views
on her wellbeing, academic performance and
extra curricular activities. Unfortunately Mr Gallagher has not addressed the
wishes or views as is required by Section 59(1)(d) or if he has
he has not, at least in respect of KP made those wishes or views
known to the
court. In the process of giving consideration to this matter I have had
reference to the material filed in support
of the application of Janelle
McNamara filed on 21 August 2006 and determined by me on 19 February 2007. In
that matter Ms McNamara
was able at paragraphs 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 of her
affidavit affirmed on 9 October 2006 to set out with sufficient clarity and
particularity
the discussions that she had had with the children in respect of
their wishes and views. For the purpose of Section 59 SP’s
views have not been able to be ascertained. It would appear from the evidence
that KP’s wishes or views have likewise
been unable to be
ascertained.
[17] Section 59 provides that the court may make a child
protection order only if it is satisfied amongst other things that the
sought to be achieved by the order is unlikely to be achieved by an
order under this part on less intrusive terms.
[18] Mr Gallagher has applied for an order granting long term guardianship of
the children to the Chief Executive, that order to
remain in force until the
children turn 18. The question which poses itself to me is that if I should
think that there are other
less intrusive means of providing for the care and
protection of the children as in an order granting custody, should the
application
for guardianship fail or can the court in those circumstances make
an order for the custody of the children. After the court has
considered all
the material placed before it if it is considered that the child is in need of
protection and the provisions of Section
59 have been complied with the court
may make any of the child protection orders set out in Section 61 that it
considers to be appropriate
in the circumstances. I would therefore be able to
make an order granting custody of the children if I was not satisfied that an
order for guardianship as applied for was appropriate.
[19] The children
have pursuant to my order of 19 February 2007 been subject to a guardianship
order in favour of the Chief Executive.
The children have been living with JP
for some years. I have previously found (my decision of 19 October 2009 on the
interim application
on behalf of JP) that JP did not have and did not exercise
parental responsibility in respect of the children. If upon this application
order was made in respect of the custody of the children only, then those
matters over and above the rights imposed by a custody
order in particular
matters relating to decisions about the long term care, welfare and development
of the children, would pass to
the parents. I have given consideration to
whether a short term guardianship order might be appropriate. The Applicant has
indicated why a short term guardianship order would not provide the desired
protection to the children. The case plans do not contemplate
reunification of
the children with one or both of the parents. There is nothing in the material
to suggest that either parent will
in the short term, or at all, be capable of
providing the necessary level of care and protection to the children. The
children deserve
some stability and certainty in their lives.
[20] It is not
appropriate for the court to anticipate what the future circumstances might be
and make an order to meet those anticipated
circumstances, e.g. it would not be
appropriate to make a short term guardianship order followed by a supervision
order to commence
at the end of the guardianship order. The court cannot guess
at what the future may hold, particularly in respect of JP’s ability
care for the children. One of the difficulties to be considered is that the
court is only able to make (so far as a guardianship
order is concerned) a short
term order, or a long term order. A short term order may only be made for two
years and in favour of
the Chief Executive; the court has no discretion to make
the order for a longer or lesser period. A long term order may only be
until the child turns 18 and may be made in favour of someone other than the
Chief Executive. In fact the court must not make
a long term guardianship order
in favour of the Chief Executive if the court can properly grant guardianship to
another suitable
person. (Sections 61(f); 59(5)).
[21] I am satisfied that
the protection sought to be achieved by the order is unlikely to be achieved by
any other order under Part
4 of the Act on less intrusive terms.
the Applicant’s case that an order for long term guardianship should be
made in favour of the Chief Executive and
not in favour of JP as she is not a
suitable person as defined by Section 9 of the Child Protection Regulations.
The Applicant relies
particularly on Section 9(1)(b).
[23] In arguing the
Applicant’s case Mr Valastro refers me to Section 122 of the Act
(Statement of Standards) particularly sub-section
(1)(d), (g), (j) and (k) and
sub-sections (2) and (3).
[24] The Applicant has failed to present evidence
to address these submissions.
[25] There is no evidence that JP as carer of
the children has not acted in accordance with the Chief Executive’s
directions. There is no evidence of any direction being given to
[26] The evidence is quite silent on just what the Department’s
involvement with the children on a daily, weekly, monthly or
regular basis has
[27] There is no evidence by which the court can gauge the actual level
of participation in the case plan by JP or in fact of the
direct participation
of the Department with the children during the course of the order made by me on
19 February 2007.
[28] Where is the evidence of what the Department has been
doing to address the concerns it has about JP’s ability to provide
children? The Department continues the placement of the children with JP as a
kinship carer. What assistance has the Department
given to JP to address issues
of concern, particularly cultural relationships.
[29] The Applicant relies on
the affidavits of Mr Gallagher. Mr Gallagher’s affidavit affirmed on 18
February 2009 does not
appear to address JP’s suitability as guardian at
all. In fact in paragraphs 17 and 20 Mr Gallagher deposes to the fact that
placement with JP has been a stable placement for the children and that they
have had the opportunity to have contact with their
extended family.
Valastro however particularly refers me to sheet 6 of Mr Gallagher’s
affidavit affirmed on 6 July 2009. I expect that
is a reference to paragraph 19
which would be relevant to a consideration under Section 122(1)(d). The concern
is that JP has not
been properly addressing the children’s Aboriginal
culture. JP does address this somewhat in the submissions which she has
the court. It is I think rather inappropriate and unfair of the Applicant to
make and rely on statements such as those contained
in paragraph 19. As JP has
pointed out when she made verbal submissions to me on 22 February “is she
expected to go traipsing
around the desert looking for unknown relatives?”
According to JP the children do have contact with culturally appropriate
As far as she is aware the only indigenous relative in Mount Isa is
[31] Presumably the Applicant is unable to provide any additional
information or support in identifying or locating the indigenous
connections thought to be from the Mount Isa area.
[32] Mr Valastro submits
that JP is not a suitable person to take on the responsibility of guardian of
the children as she has not
shown enough compliance in attending medical
appointments, she does according to the guidance officer show a lack of insight
KP’s emotional needs. KP obviously suffers a number of challenging
conditions.
[33] I note that the report provided by Andrea Malfliet dated 25
June 2009 speaks of a number of positive aspects in KP’s life
particularly
that she is now meeting the year level expectations in numeracy, reading
fluency and spelling. As well there have
been no toileting issues at school
over the past year; and her school attendance and being late for school has
improved out of sight
in 2009 compared with 2008. Ms Malfliet also advises that
“JP has a strong commitment to parenting KP and SP”.
Applicant relies on his affidavit affirmed on 6 July to examine the
“suitability of JP to be appointed as long term
guardian for KP and
[35] Paragraph 7 of Mr Gallagher’s affidavit contains an
allegation that JP hit SP with a shoe. Although an investigation was
out no evidence relevant to the event has been placed before the court. The
Applicant, and all officers bringing such applications,
must realise that the
court requires evidence not simply bland statements. It is the court’s
role to examine the evidence
and to determine the application based on the
evidence and the relevant legislation. If the Applicant does not present
to the court, the court is not able to fill in the gaps or read between
the lines on behalf of the applicant.
[36] Paragraph 8 of Mr
Gallagher’s affidavit contains an allegation that the children were acting
inappropriately and had been
left unattended for an extended period. There does
not appear to have been an investigation of this event.
[37] Paragraph 9 of
Mr Gallagher’s affidavit contains an allegation that JP spoke
inappropriately to KP. There does not appear
to have been an investigation of
this event.
[38] Concerns are also raised that JP has not initiated contact
with a sibling brother in Gympie and that JP is not acting in the
best interest
of KP by insuring she receives appropriate medical assessments and treatments.
[39] I am not sure how old the sibling brother is however I note the
Department apparently did not take any steps to ensure a regular
arrangement was
[40] It is of concern that it is alleged JP may not take
appropriate notice of medical specialist’s requirements. The Applicant
refers to Dr Heazlewood (paragraph 12), Dr Stalewski, and Dr Underhill. A one
page report from Dr Underhill dated 4 March is the
only medical report put
forward in the evidence. Once again the Applicant has not fleshed out these
concerns. The Applicant whets
the reader’s appetite for information
relevant to the issue or concern, and then leaves the reader high and
[41] The Applicant it should be remembered carries the burden of
establishing the grounds of the application.
[42] The Applicant also relies
on concerns regarding education and behavioural issues, (Paragraph 13 and 14).
Ms Malfiet (State School
Guidance Officer) recommends that “KP and
SP’ needs would be best served by remaining in the guardianship and
of the Department of Communities”. As I have already commented
there is no evidence of the Department’s role in the
guardianship or
monitoring of the children who are in the care of JP.
[43] A concern is
raised that on 1 May 2009 JP failed to pick KP up from school. This is of
concern. It appears JP failed to make
appropriate arrangements with the after
school carers for transportation.
[44] The Applicant also raises an issue
that the recognised entity is concerned that the children are not being given
appropriate
exposure to indigenous family members. Ms Akee of the recognised
entity also expressed the view that JP is “too old”.
matters I have referred to appear to be the concerns of the Applicant in respect
of JP’s ability to fulfil the role
of guardian of the
[46] These concerns have been properly, if inadequately, raised.
[47] The Department has not been so concerned by these issues to make a
different placement of the children.
[48] Mr Gallagher in his affidavit
affirmed on 12 October 2009 confirms the content of the case plan and advises
the court that the
children continue to reside in the care of JP and that
“it is the view of the Department that this placement provides KP/SP
a safe environment”. (Paragraph 10). Paragraph 7 of the affidavit of
Scott Giles affirmed on 22 April 2010 is in similar
[49] At paragraph
6 of Mr Gallagher’s affidavit of 12 October, he confirms that
“Previous case plan outcomes for KP/SP
were met. KP/SP was placed in a
safe and secure home environment, enrolled in schooling and provided with
medical and dental services
as required. And KP/SP continued to have contact
with her parents and other members of her extended family”. Paragraph 5
the affidavit of Scott Giles affirmed on 22 April 2010 is in similar
[50] The Applicant relies on the support of the recognised entity
which is deposed to, in each of Mr Gallagher’s affidavits
supported by the oral submissions of Mrs Yow-Yeh made to me on 22 February 2010.
The concern being that there has been a
lack of cultural connection between the
children and the indigenous family members from the maternal side.
must be concerned by allegations that JP has not taken appropriate notice of
specialist medical appointments and that JP did
not make appropriate
arrangements for KP’s after school care on the one occasion. However, the
concerns raised by the Applicant
are no more severe then concerns which might be
raised in a normal family, and do not amount to cause to find that JP is not a
[52] The elephant in the room is JP’s age as raised by
the recognised entity.
[53] JP is I believe 70 years of age. I have given a
lot of thought to this and had been contemplating an order in favour of JP for
period in excess of 2 years but less than the time that is required until the
children turn 18. The Act does not allow for this.
[54] When I decided the
application in 2007 I did not have to decide the contest between JP and the
Applicant, as I found that JP
was not a member of the children’s family,
as there were issues surrounding paternity of the children.
Applicant had previously made an application for long term guardianship. I was
not prepared to make that order I believe
having in mind that paternity might be
determined, in fact I said “... hopefully this question of paternity will
out. I haven’t closed the door” and “it seemed to
me that the best thing to do was to maintain the status quo
for at least the
next 2 years and see what happens”.
[56] I have had available to me the
files from the previous applications including my decision of 19 February 2007.
In my previous
decision I referred to the support given to JP by Dr Panter. As I
said then Dr Panter’s support was a powerful recommendation
respected medical practitioner. Dr Panter has now retired. I have not been
provided by the Applicant with any evidence from
the children’s general
practitioner.
[57] When looking to assess the evidence I have been looking
for fresh allegations made to discredit JP since 2007. The issues raised
appear to be:
[58] Mrs Akee raises her age, I assume this was in April of
2009 although the year is not referred to and made clear in the
[59] The incident with the shoe is said to have occurred in October
[60] The concern about contact with the sibling brother appears to be a
historical matter in which the Department intervened in 2007;
[61] The issue
raised about not attending appointments with Dr Stalewski is from
[62] The guidance officer reports relied upon are from 2006 and
[63] KP was not picked up from school on 1 May 2009;
concern that JP is not providing appropriate contact with indigenous family
connections is presumably on going.
[65] The other significant change in the
family is the acknowledgement by everyone that PP is the children’s
[66] The provisions of Section 59(3) do not apply to these
applications.
[67] I am satisfied that there is no parent able and willing to
protect the children within the foreseeable future. I also believe
children’s need for emotional security will be best met in the long term
by making the order.
[68] Section 59(5)(b) is of the upmost relevance in this
[69] The question remains is JP a suitable person?
[70] JP should
not be discriminated against because of her age. Her age is nevertheless a
relevant factor in this matter. JP is
70 years of age. KP is almost 12, SP is
almost 8. JP presents as an energetic, dedicated Grandmother. It is not
unusual these
days for Grandparents to be heavily involved in the upbringing of
their grandchildren.
[71] KP suffers special difficulties.
[72] Although
JP’s health and ability to care for the children may fail tomorrow, I
cannot base my decision on the “what
ifs” of the future.
has been caring for KP for 10 years, and SP for 8 years. She and the children
live with the spectre of the order in favour
of the Chief Executive hanging over
their heads. They deserve security.
[74] Is JP a suitable person?
Valastro says she is not and relies on Section 9(1)(b) of the Regulations and
Section 122(d), (g), (j) and (k) of the Act.
[76] I do not believe the
evidence is sufficient to find that JP is not a suitable person.
[77] As well
I assume that the Department has determined under Section 9(3) that JP is a
suitable person to be an approved kinship
carer. The only difference between
Section 9(3) and Section 9(1) is the inclusion in Section 9(1) of sub-section
(b); “is able
and willing to care for the child in a way that meets the
standards of care in the statement of standards”.
[78] Section 82
provides that the Chief Executive may place a child in the care of “an
approved kinship carer”.
[79] Section 122 states:
“(1) The chief executive must take reasonable steps to ensure a child
placed in care under section 82 is cared for in a way
that meets the following
standards”.
[80] Thereafter a list is set out, which is the same list Mr Valastro has
referred me to and relies upon to establish that JP is
not a suitable person to
have guardianship of the children.
[81] So, although Section 9 (3) does not
refer to the standards of care, a combination of Section 9(3), Section 82 and
Section 122
means that the Chief Executive must take reasonable steps to ensure
that a child placed with an approved kinship carer is cared for
in a way that
meets the standards (a) to (k) set out in Section 122. As the Chief Executive
has placed the children with JP as a
kinship carer it is reasonable for me to
assume that the Chief Executive has had regard to Section 122 in making and
continuing that
[82] It is abhorrent that the Chief Executive
would on the one hand make a placement under Section 82, Section 9(3) and
Section 122,
and then submit that the reason the court should not make an order
in favour of the kinship carer is because of the carer’s
inability to meet
the Section 122 requirements.
[83] I am satisfied JP is a suitable
[84] Pursuant to Section 59(5)(b) I am unable to make an order in
favour of the Chief Executive.
[85] The order made by me on 19 February 2007
is revoked.
[86] Pursuant to Section 61 I make an order granting long term
guardianship of KP to JP, Grandmother of KP. This order to remain in
force until
KP attains the age of 18.
[87] Pursuant to Section 61 I make an order
granting long term guardianship of SP to JP. This order to remain in force
until SP attains
the age of 18.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (112 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter