URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBCCMCmr/2025/390.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Raby Bay Quays [2025] QBCCMCmr 390 (4 November 2025)
ADJUDICATOR’S ORDER
Office of the
Commissioner
for Body Corporate and Community
Raby Bay Quays
[2025] QBCCMCmr 390
John Isaacs, co-owner of Lot 13 (
Body Corporate for Raby Bay Quays (
Keith Teagle, co-owner of Lot 1 (
affected person
Raby Bay Quays CTS 46213
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 227(1)(b)
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation Module)
Regulation 2020
Accommodation Module
APPLICATION NO:
DECISION DATE:
4 November 2025
DECISION OF:
I Rosemann, Adjudicator
CATCHWORDS:
INTERIM ORDER – whether an interim order is warranted.
INTERIM ORDERS
application for interim orders is
REASONS FOR DECISION
application is about the approach to redeveloping the established gardens at the
applicant indicates a garden subcommittee (
) was formed in 2023 and
developed a plan (the
2023 garden plan
). The applicant says the 2023
annual general meeting (
) approved a budget with $235,000 over 3 years
for a garden project,
but that the
2023 garden plan and budget were not put to owners as a project for approval.
The applicant says when work started
and some changes were made, concerns were
raised and the project stopped.
[3] A new plan
2024 garden plan
) was put to the 2024 AGM. Motion 11 approved the
‘attached garden project to continue to improve’ the gardens and
a maximum of $50,000 over 2 years with approval by the committee or
general meeting subject to individual spending costs. The applicant
2024 garden plan sought to keep as much of the existing garden as possible.
They say the committee tasked the GSC with
implementing the 2024 garden plan
without change but after 12 months there has been no progress.
[4] At the 2025
AGM on 30 September a new or amended plan was proposed (the
2025 garden
). Motion 13 proposed
‘That the body corporate confirms
approval of the attached update to the Garden Plan’.
The explanatory
note indicated enhancements were proposed to the garden plan to allow more
flexibility with plant selections and allowing
for consultation based on
recommendations from the GCS and external expert advice. A document entitled
‘Raby Bay Quays Garden Update Plan 2024 – (2025 Enhancement
was included in the AGM notice. Motion 13 passed with 26
votes for and 11 against.
The applicant questions the 2025 garden plan,
its cost, and the process by Motion 13 was submitted. They question if the
the changes was explained and if owners understood what they were
applicant seeks to invalidate the process for presenting the 2025 garden plan
and the associated motion and budget; withdrawal
of the motion, budget, and
plan; reinstatement of the 2024 garden plan; acknowledgement of legislative
breaches; and acknowledgement
that the 2023 garden plan was illegal. In the
interim, the applicant wants to stop work on a temporary basis. At this time,
will consider whether an interim order is warranted.
Preliminaries
Bay Quays community titles scheme 46213 (
Raby Bay Quays
) is a 56-lot
scheme at Cleveland. The community management statement (
) shows the
Accommodation Module applies. The scheme is registered as survey plans 152011,
106800, 198509, and 102683.
application seeks an interim order:
An interim order to halt any
work is sought on a temporary basis. An order for a short time pending an
interim decision would be a
good outcome. Many residents on site want work to
start and have been convinced that there are no problems with the Garden
Sub-Committee
or the process to get a vote on the 2025 Garden Plan. An order
that lasts for months until a final decision is made will not be well
and will be perceived as another obstruction.
application then seeks the following final orders:
the process of presenting the 2025 Garden Plan, including the associated motion
and budget, to residents for voting be recognised
as invalid.
the 2025 motion, budget, and plan itself be withdrawn in their entirety.
the 2024 Garden Plan be reinstated as the approved and active plan forming the
basis for any gardening or landscaping works within
the scheme.
a number of breaches of legislation are acknowledged.
the 2023 Garden Project be acknowledged as illegal as this is the original basis
of much of the dispute.
adjudicator may make an order that is just and equitable in the circumstances to
resolve a dispute about a claimed or anticipated
contravention of the Act or the
CMS, or the exercise of rights or powers or performance of duties under the Act
or the CMS.
Notably, an
adjudicator may make an interim order if satisfied on reasonable grounds it is
necessary due to the nature or urgency
circumstances.
I am satisfied I
have jurisdiction to decide this
Proceedings
applicant initially applied for conciliation in September
I understand the
Commissioner’s delegate sought further information about that application
but that it has subsequently been
withdrawn by the applicant.
application was then lodged on 23 October, seeking interim and final orders. As
permitted under the Act, the Commissioner
referred this application to me to
decide whether the nature or urgency of the circumstances warrant an interim
notwithstanding that notice
of the application has not yet been given to the respondent or owners.
[12] There is no
statutory requirement to obtain comment from a respondent or affected persons
before an interim order is decided.
However, given the circumstances, I gave
the committee with a limited opportunity to respond to the application.
chairperson on behalf of the committee requested an extension of a month for the
committee to make a considered response.
In doing so, they said:
primary concern is that the applicant seeks an interim order on a temporary
basis and, although not further defined, appears to
seek an order prior to an
interim order.
committee feels the interim order would unfairly and materially disadvantage the
new resident unit manager in fulfilling their
duties. They say it would be
unfortunate if the resident unit manager was not invited to make a submission on
the interim order.
are no works scheduled that relate to the implementation of the 2025 garden
plan. Any works relating to that would not be undertaken
until around March
committee meetings approximately every quarter and the next committee meeting is
scheduled for 20 November.
garden enhancement project began before November 2007, well before any
involvement of the current committee including the applicant.
committee believes a thorough investigation of all garden decisions by the body
corporate, committee and resident unit manager
should be be made available to
enable a fair and transparent outcome in line with the voting of the
addition, I asked the applicant for copies of the 2023, 2024 and 2025 AGM
minutes and notices or other material considered
at those meetings. These and
other documents were provided. I asked the applicant when the works they sought
to stop were to occur,
but the applicant said that information ‘may be
difficult to obtain’.
applicant also provided an email sent to the committee on 1 November which
referred to the need to discuss process. They
referred to discussions about
tree removals in August and advice from an arborist. The applicant notes that
some plant removals
may be necessary but there was a need to follow process and
comply with regulations. The chairperson responded that they should
garden related discussion until the next committee meeting.
[16] Given the
information provided to date, I do not consider it necessary to delay this
matter by giving further time for a committee
submission at this stage. I
decline the extension request.
only issue at this time is whether an interim order is warranted. However, it
is necessary to consider the substantive issues
in dispute to decide whether to
make an interim order.
Basis for an interim order
[18] Any order
granted must be just and equitable.
An interim order will not be granted unless it is necessary due to the nature or
urgency of the circumstances.
adjudicator must be satisfied an application raises serious legal questions and
that the balance of convenience between the parties
justifies injunctive relief.
That means an adjudicator must balance the inconvenience of granting relief now
if final orders are
ultimately refused against the impact of refusing relief now
if final orders are ultimately granted. Of particular relevance is
evidence an
interim order is necessary to prevent serious or irreparable
Serious legal issue
[19] It appears
the applicant disagrees with the body corporate’s decision on Motion 13 at
the 2025 AGM, opposes the 2025 garden
plan, and objects to the process by which
the 2025 garden plan was put to the AGM. It appears the applicant prefers the
2024 garden
plan and opposes the 2023 garden plan. However, the legal basis for
an adjudicator to make the orders sought is not clear from the
application.
adjudicator cannot intervene in body corporate decisions simply because someone
disagrees with them. One of the objects of
the Act is to
“balance the
rights of individuals with the responsibility for self management as an inherent
aspect of community titles
In light of
this objective, a body corporate decision will only be overturned if it is
unreasonable or otherwise unlawful. To do
otherwise would be
“unwarranted interference in the ability of the body corporate to make its
own decisions, and to independently manage its affairs
as contemplated in the
secondary objects of the
[21] At this
preliminary stage, I will note some legislative provisions that appear relevant
to the current dispute. I will then
comment on the orders sought by the
Body corporate decision-making
[22] The primary
way a body corporate makes decisions is in general meetings. General meetings
are the principal forum for owner
consultation.
committee decision will also be a decision of the body corporate unless it is on
a restricted issue.
committees undertake the day-to-day administration of the body corporate, and
must implement the lawful decisions of
[24] The body
corporate and its committee must act reasonably in making
[25] There is no
reason why a committee cannot a appoint subcommittee to assist it with its
duties. But a subcommittee would have
no legislative standing or authority.
The body corporate cannot delegate its
So a subcommittee
cannot make decisions itself; it could only make recommendations for decisions
to be made by the committee or
at a general meeting. Because a subcommittee has
no formal role or authority, it would be a matter for the committee to decide
would be a member of any subcommittee and the subcommittee’s remit.
regulations include detailed provisions about the conduct of committee and
general meetings, including the giving of notice
of those meetings and the
production of minutes.
[27] In regard
to general meetings, the committee can submit a motion for consideration at a
general meeting at any time.
The committee must prepare the agenda for each general meeting, and that agenda
must include the substance of motions submitted
by the committee and
Normally a committee
must specifically resolve to submit motions.
Works on common
[28] One of a
body corporate’s general functions is to administer the common property
for the benefit of all owners.
A body corporate has a statutory obligation to maintain common property in good
and structurally sound
However, on the
limited information provided, it may be that at least part of the intent of the
various garden plans is to make
improvements to common property rather than
merely maintaining the existing
legislation provides for a body corporate to decide to make improvements to
common property.
The type of
resolution required to approve improvements to common property will depend on
the cost of the improvements. If associated
improvements form a single project,
the relevant financial limits for this purpose will relate to the cost of the
entire project.
committee can approve improvements if the cost of the entire project is not more
than the basic improvements limit for the scheme.
That limit is $300 times the
number of lots (that is, $16,800 in this scheme).
ordinary resolution at a general meeting is required if the cost of the entire
project is within the ordinary resolution improvement
range, and the body
corporate has not previously passed an ordinary resolution on that basis in the
financial year. That range is
an amount above the basic improvements limit for
the scheme but not more than $2,000 times the number of lots (so, between
and $112,000 in this scheme).
the improvements must be authorised by special resolution or (if reasonably
necessary for health, safety, and security)
by an adjudicator’s
addition, the general provisions regarding the control of spending
A committee cannot incur
incurring expenditure above its committee spending limit except in certain
circumstances.
If a series of
proposals forms a single project, the cost of carrying out any one of the
proposals is taken to be more than the
committee spending limit if the cost of
the proposal as a whole would
The relevant limit for
committee spending at this scheme will be $11,200 unless the body corporate has
passed a resolution to change
spending above the major spending limit, the body corporate or committee (as
applicable) must usually circulate and consider
at least two
In this scheme, the
major spending limit will be $10,000 unless the body corporate has resolved a
general meeting to change
facie, it appears the garden plans approved at the 2024 and 2025 AGMs set out
the intended approach of the body corporate
with regard to the redevelopment of
the gardens. It seems the 2024 resolution proposed an approach, and the 2025
resolution amended
[33] The 2024
resolution agreed to a total budget for the project and the 2025 resolution does
not appear to have altered that budget.
[34] However, it
is not clear the body corporate has considered quotes or specifically approved
spending for the total project or
any component of it. If it intends to spend
up to $50,000 (or more) on a project to improve the gardens at the scheme,
the body corporate would need to consider quotes and approve specific
expenditure on the project, or any component thereof. Depending
on the total
project cost, that may need to occur at a general meeting.
applicant wants the process of presenting the 2025 garden plan, including the
associated motion and budget, to be ‘recognised
as invalid’.
Although the application is unclear, I infer the applicant is asserting the
committee did not validly submit
2025 AGM Motion 13.
applicant refers to GSC documents circulated to committee members and the
committee’s consideration of gardening works
at its meeting on 19 August
2025. It is evident a motion proposing an AGM motion to allow variations to the
approved 2024 garden
plan was passed at the committee meeting with 5 votes for
and 2 against or abstained.
applicant says draft minutes were issued on 4 September with final (more
detailed) minutes issued on 22 September, outside
the 21-day period. The
applicant has not provided evidence of when the final committee minutes were
disseminated. But if they were
issued outside the 21-day timeframe, the
applicant has not explained why that defect would of itself warrant the
invalidation of
Motion 13 or the process by which Motion 13 was submitted.
applicant says the committee minutes included content that was not said at the
meeting and the wording of the motion proposing
the AGM motion was different.
The applicant questions the reference to previously circulated documents and to
getting final approval
of the circulated documents in writing. They say nothing
was sent to the majority for written approval and the plan in the AGM notice
not presented to the whole committee for consideration.
applicant has not provided evidence that their version of the motion the
committee voted on was correct, rather than the
minuted version. If the minuted
resolution was different to the wording of the motion discussed, the applicant
has not explained
the significance of the difference. Prima facie, both
versions indicate an intent on the part of the committee to put an updated
different version of the garden plan to owners to vote on at the AGM.
[40] Neither
version of the committee motion includes the wording of the proposed AGM motion.
At this stage, the applicant has not
established that Motion 13 did not reflect
the intent expressed in either version such that it could be said the committee
agree to submit Motion 13.
unclear if the entire committee considered or agreed to the contents of the plan
included in the AGM notice. If necessary,
the committee could ratify the
inclusion of that document. But where a majority of owners approved Motion 13
based on the document
in the AGM notice, the apparent approval by owners
arguably has overtaken the approval by the committee.
[42] At this
stage, the applicant has not provided sufficient evidence of defects in
committee processes to establish that the committee
majority did not validly
agree to submit Motion 13.
Final order 2
[43] Next, the
applicant wants the 2025 motion, budget, and plan to be withdrawn. As Motion 13
has already been voted on and passed,
it is not clear how it could now be
withdrawn. However, the resolution passed could potentially be invalidated if
it was determined
that there were procedural defects in the submission or
consideration of the motion, or the body corporate failed to act reasonably
deciding the motion, or if the resolution was unlawful for some other reason.
This may be what the applicant seeks.
applicant raises a variety of matters, including:
GSC refers to the 2025 garden plan being in line with the 2024 garden plan, but
it will look significantly different to the one
approved in 2024.
a garden plan was approved in 2024, owners would not have expected a new plan to
be proposed at the 2025 AGM. Residents would
not have understood that the 2024
garden plan was not being implemented but was being completely revised.
2024 garden plan had a clause providing for flexibility in the selection of
plant species, and the GSC is interpreting this as
allowing for all plants to
change. The GSC has developed its own guidelines for plant selection. The
clause does not allow for
the substantial removal of existing plants.
2025 garden plan shows details of proposed changes in 4 of 32 areas. They query
whether the remaining areas will be left unchanged.
owners purchased lots with its existing tropical theme.
2024 budget of $50,000 was based on keeping much of the existing garden. The
budget has simply been rolled over, but the cost
of plants and labour has
increased, and the budget does not provide for extensive removals or
replacements. Although it is difficult
to cost the 2025 garden plan based on
the details provided, it has to cost more. They query what happens when the
budget is used
before the work is complete.
[45] While the
body corporate approved the 2024 garden plan, it can change its mind. If a body
corporate no longer wishes to proceed
with a resolution as passed, it can decide
to revoke or amend that resolution by passing another motion of the same
The body corporate is not
bound to the 2024 garden plan just because it was approved in 2024.
preliminary view from the submitted material is that 2025 garden plan is not
invalid simply because it is different to the
2024 garden plan or is different
to the current look or style of the garden. If the 2025 garden plan was validly
approved, it supersedes
the previous plan. At this stage, the applicant has not
established that the body corporate could not resolve to adopt an amended
entirely new garden plan.
applicant questions whether the motions fully explain the extent of the changes
owners were voting on. Although not explicitly
stated by the applicant, this
could give rise to a question of whether there was adequate notice of the
meaning and effect of Motion
[48] There is an
obligation to give proper notice of what is to be considered at a
The District Court has
noted the need for a complainant to ‘identify with some precision’
what was not disclosed that
meant there was a failure to make full and fair
disclosure.
A party would need
to establish what was misleading or inaccurate, how it was misleading or
inaccurate, and how that was material.
Of particular relevance will be evidence
that voters were actually confused or misled by the notice.
[49] In this
case, the explanatory note for Motion 13 described the basis for the updated
plan, and the AGM notice included a 10-page
document describing the plan. I
also note the application includes a 2-page document detailing the alleged
meaning of the 2025 garden
plan and urging owners to vote no, which the
applicant and another committee member distributed to all owners. Other
committee members
circulated a response to that document, alleging inaccuracies
in it. At this stage, the applicant has not evidenced that any owners
in favour of Motion 13 misunderstood the meaning or effect of the motion or
would have voted differently if they had been
given further or different
information.
[50] In regard
to the applicant’s concerns about the budget, the applicant speculates but
does not yet substantiate that the
2025 garden plan will cost more than the
budget approved at the 2024 AGM. However, it is not clear that any specific
expenditure
has actually been approved for either the 2024 garden plan or the
2025 garden plan. And if the body corporate wants to increase
the estimated
budget for the project, it can submit a motion to that effect.
[51] At this
stage, the applicant has not satisfied me there are genuine issues to be
determined about the validity of AGM Motion
Final order 3
applicant then wants the 2024 garden plan reinstated and for it to be the basis
for gardening and landscaping works within
the scheme.
[53] It does not
appear that the validity of the 2024 AGM motion that approved the 2024 garden
plan has been challenged. To the extent
that it was a valid resolution, the
committee were required to implement the resolution (subject to any required
approval of specific
spending). But that does not mean the body corporate could
not change or replace the 2024 garden plan.
[54] On its
face, 2025 AGM Motion 13 had the effect of amending 2024 AGM Motion 11. Unless
Motion 13 is invalid, Motion 11 no longer
has any effect in the form that was
originally resolved. Accordingly, unless final order 2 was warranted, the body
corporate would
need to revoke or amend Motion 13, or pass a new motion, to
reinstate Motion 11.
[55] At this
stage, the applicant has not established that the body corporate has a statutory
obligation to deal with its gardens
in the manner outlined in the 2024 garden
plan such that an order requiring that plan to be reinstated would be
Final order 4
[56] Next, the
applicant wants ‘a number of breaches of legislation’ acknowledged.
However, the application is unclear
as to how the applicant asserts the
legislation has been breached and why any such breaches would warrant the orders
applicant says the committee must act in the interest of all residents, citing
sections 100(5), 100(6) and 145 of the Act.
In this regard:
code of conduct for voting committee members says a member must act in the best
of the body corporate in performing their duties,
unless it is unlawful to do
But the application does
not explain how any individual committee member failed to act in the best
interests of the body corporate.
And there is no indication the applicant has
pursued an alleged breach of the code against any individual.
100(5) of the Act says the committee must act reasonably in making a decision.
But it is not clear what committee decisions
the applicant is asserting were
unreasonable, and the applicant has not sought to invalidate any committee
is no section 100(6) of the Act.
145 of the Act relates to the termination of a letting agent’s
authorisation and so has no apparent relevance to this
[58] Next, the
applicant says minutes do not give an accurate record of events and were late,
citing section 54(2) of the Accommodation
Module, and sections 202 and 204 of
the Act. The applicant also refers to sections 50 and 148, although I am
unclear if the reference
is to those sections in the Act or the regulation, or
the issue with those sections. However, I note:
54 of the Accommodation Module is about attendance of non-voting committee
members at committee meetings and its relevance
to this dispute is not apparent.
50 of the Accommodation Module provides for owners to submit motions to the
committee, but any dispute here is about a committee
submitted motion.
204 of the Act provides for rolls, registers, and records to be kept, given, or
disposed of in the way provided for under
the regulation module. It does not
impose an obligation that could have been breached.
202 of the Act relates to a mortgagee enforcing a mortgage. Section 50 of the
Act is about the adjustment of lot entitlements.
Section 148 of the
Accommodation Module is about the occupation of common property by a service
contractor. Section 148 of the
Act is about the criteria for reviewing a
letting agent’s service contract. None of these appear relevant to this
[59] Section 63
of the Accommodation Module is relevant to committee minutes. It provides that
the committee must ensure full and
accurate minutes are kept of committee
meetings, and full and accurate records are kept of motions resolved outside a
committee meeting.
The minutes and records must be given to committee members
and owners within 21 days. The requirements for full and accurate minutes
records are detailed in the regulation. There is no requirement for minutes to
include the detail of discussions.
applicant indicates various issues with committee minutes, presumably for the 19
August meeting. It is not necessary for
present purposes to discuss the detail
of those. It is not entirely clear how the issues raised are alleged to
constitute breaches
of the requirements for minutes. Moreover, if there are
deficiencies in those minutes, the applicant has not explained why those
warrant the substantive orders sought. The applicant has not sought orders to
invalidate any committee resolutions or for
amended minutes to be issued.
[61] It may be
the applicant is suggesting defects in the minutes meant owners were not
properly informed of the issues when voting
on AGM motions. But it was the AGM
notice that was the primary vehicle for notifying owners of the meaning and
effect of the AGM
applicant also refers to conflicts of interest when voting, citing section 151.
Section 151 of the Accommodation Module
is about adjusting budgets and section
151 of the Act is about bank accounts. But section 58 of the Accommodation
Module relates
to conflicts of interest. It provides that a committee member
must disclose to a committee meeting if they have an interest in an
issue being
decided by the committee and that interest would conflict with the
member’s performance of their duties. If a
committee member must disclose
a conflict of interest, they cannot vote on the motion. However, it is not
clear from the grounds
to the application how the applicant says this provision
has been breached, if that is the assertion.
[63] Accordingly,
while there could potentially be procedural defects relating to the matters in
dispute, it is currently not clear
what actual legislative breaches the
applicant is alleging.
[64] Moreover,
the applicant does not explain what utility there would be in a general order
stating or ‘acknowledging’
that the legislation has been breached,
if in fact it has. Adjudicators have broad powers to make orders to resolve the
in an application. It is open to an adjudicator to make a declaration
law suggests that a
bare declaration that some legal obligation has been contravened may only be
appropriate if it would serve to
redress the harm brought about by the
contravention and would produce some foreseeable
consequences.
Final order 5
[65] Finally,
the applicant seeks that the ‘2023 Garden Project’ be
‘acknowledged as illegal’. I am unclear
as to the meaning or
purpose of this order.
[66] If the 2023
garden plan proposed improvements to common property or expenditure that were
not properly approved by the body corporate,
then the body corporate would have
no authority to implement the plan until such approval was given. If works were
taken on common
property, or expenditure incurred, in reliance on a plan that
was not approved in the required way, those particular works would
unauthorised.
[67] But that
does not mean any concepts or proposals formulated in 2023 are necessarily
‘illegal’. Prima facie the body
corporate could choose to pursue
that plan, or a variation of that plan, at any time if it passed appropriate
resolutions authorising
it to do so.
[68] In any
event, the body corporate has approved subsequent plans twice since. So, it is
not apparent that it is seeking to implement
the 2023 garden plan. Accordingly,
it is not clear what utility there is in orders about the 2023 project, even if
the applicant
was to substantiate a legal basis for such an
Balance of convenience
[69] An interim
order is usually made to preserve the status quo or the interests of the
applicant or others until the substantive
issues in dispute in the application
can be determined. If there is a genuine question about the validity of
approval of work, it
may be appropriate to make an interim order to stop such
work until the substantive legal question can be determined.
[70] In this
case, the applicant wants to stop work on a temporary basis. They say if work
starts, established plants could be removed
and lost forever, which has occurred
in the past. They say owners who voted for the 2024 garden plan to keep the
existing look will
be disadvantaged if work starts and is later found to be done
without proper authorisation.
[71] But the
applicant says they only want to stop work for a short time and not until a
final decision is made. They say it would
be ‘a good outcome’ to
stop the work pending an interim decision but do not appear to want the work
stopped on a longer-term
basis because they say that will not be well received.
The applicant may misapprehend the interim order process. The purpose of
interim decision is to determine whether an interim order is warranted. That
begs the question as to what the utility of the
interim order is, if it is not
in place until the determination of any substantive legal issues in the
application. Simply delaying
work for a short period would not prevent the body
corporate then proceeding before it can be decided whether the work is validly
authorised (if there is a genuine issue to determine in that regard).
[72] In any
event, at this stage the applicant has not identified any specific works the
body corporate is planning that they want
to stop, or when any such work is
scheduled for. The committee indicates no works are scheduled relating to the
2025 garden plan
and it will not be implemented until around March 2025.
Moreover, it appears further discussion is planned.
[73] Also, the
very broad nature of the interim order sought, to stop unspecified
‘work’, would impede the ability of
the body corporate to undertake
general maintenance on the common property gardens or undertake specific work
that has been expressly
and validly authorised. A vague and unspecified order
of that nature would not be appropriate.
applicant bears the onus of establishing there are genuine legal issues to be
determined and that the nature or urgency of
the circumstances would warrant
interim relief.
[75] There may
be questions about whether the body corporate has yet resolved to undertake any
specific work on the body corporate
gardens or particular approved the
expenditure for that work, rather than simply agreeing to an approach to the
gardens. But at
this time the applicant has not raised questions about the
validity of 2025 AGM Motion 13 or the 2025 garden plan that are likely
warrant the particular final orders the applicant has sought.
[76] Furthermore,
the applicant has not substantiated that the current circumstances warrant the
interim order sought. I have dismissed
the application for interim orders.
application for final orders remains. I will refer the application back to the
Commissioner to progress under the dispute
provisions.
applicant may wish to review the application having regard to the matters
outlined above.
[79] If the
application proceeds, I propose recommending to the Commissioner this
application be referred to conciliation to see if
the parties could reach an
agreement in respect of any of the issues in dispute. Although the application
primarily relates to a
general meeting resolution, it seems much of the conflict
relates to committee’s decision-making processes and disagreements
the committee. It may be that mediation between the committee members guided by
a trained conciliator could assist the whole
committee moving forward with the
approach to garden improvements in a constructive manner.
[80] If the
dispute is not otherwise resolved, the Commissioner is likely to invite
submissions in respect of the final orders from
the committee and all owners.
It appears the sinking fund
budget submitted to the 2023 AGM included $67,000 for landscaping for 2023-2024.
A professional sinking
fund forecast obtained in 2023 included amounts totalling
$204,057 over 6 years for ‘gardens – upgrade’. It appears
that forecast was adopted at the 2023 AGM to provide ‘guidance’ but
it does not appear to have been approved as a
Section 276 of the
Section 279(1) of the
Sections 227, 228, 276 and
schedule 5 of the Act
Conciliation application
Section 247 of the
Section 276 of the Act
Section 279 of the Act
Section 4(a) of the
Adjudicator K Ryan in
Massey Lodge
[2004] QBCCMCmr 356
, paras 13-
Section 100 of the
Section 101 of the
Section 94(2) and 100(5)
Section 97 of the
Section 76(1) of the
Accommodation Module
83 of the Accommodation
Section 94(1)(a) of
Section 170 of the
Accommodation Module
the definition of ‘improvement’ in schedule 6 of the
Section 176 of the
Accommodation Module
Sections 162-164 of the Accommodation
Section 162 of the
Accommodation Module
162(2) of the Accommodation
Noting the definition
of ‘relevant limit for committee spending’ in schedule 1 of the
Accommodation Module
Sections 163 and 164 of the Accommodation
Noting the definition
of ‘relevant limit for major spending’ in schedule 1 of the
Accommodation Module
106 of the Accommodation Module
McGill DCJ in
Corporate for Palm Springs Residences CTS 29467
J Patterson Holdings
[2008] QDC 300
Scholer Pty Ltd as Trustee v Gowland and
[2021] QCATA 119
Body Corporate for Palm
Springs Residences CTS 29467
J Patterson Holdings Pty Ltd
, para 62, 71-72 and citing
NRMA Holdings Ltd
(1995) 55 FCR 452
Section 3 of the
Code of conduct for committee voting members
in schedule
1A of the Act.
Truth About Motorways v Macquarie
Ainsworth v Criminal Justice Commission
Section 279(4) of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (217 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter