URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:24:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wang v Workers' Compensation Regulator [2025] ICQ 20 (23 September 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF
Wang v Workers’ Compensation Regulator
[2025] ICQ 020
YUEHAI WANG
(appellant)
COMPENSATION REGULATOR
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Application
DELIVERED ON:
23 September 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
30 July 2024
Davis J, President
application to adduce evidence on appeal which was not before the Commission is
Registrar shall allocate a date for hearing of the appeals.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES –
ADMISSION OF FURTHER EVIDENCE – GENERAL – where
the appellant
claimed to be injured when struck by a car walking home from his place of
employment – where the
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation
(Workers’ Compensation Act) provides that a claim for
workers’ compensation must be made within six months of the date
entitlement to compensation – where the appellant lodged his application
late – where the Workers’ Compensation
Act allowed the insurer to
waive the time limit – where the Workers’ Compensation Act provided
that the entitlement to
compensation runs from the date 20 days before the claim
was made – where the Workers’ Compensation Act provides that
insurer may extend the period of cover – where the insurer waived the time
limit – where the insurer did not extend
the period of cover – where
the appellant sought review of the insurer’s decision not to extend the
period of cover –
where the respondent set aside the insurer’s
determination extending time for the claim – where the respondent decided
that the appellant did not have a valid and enforceable claim – where the
appellant appealed to the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission –
where the appellant sought to adduce fresh evidence – where the Commission
refused that application –
where the Commission dismissed the appeal
– where the appellant appealed to the Industrial Court of Queensland
the appellant sought to adduce further evidence on the appeal
– where the appellant sought to take other steps before the hearing
appeal – whether the further evidence ought be admitted on appeal –
whether further steps need to be taken before
the hearing of the
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld), Chapter
Industrial Relations (Tribunals) Rules 2011
(Qld), r 61
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Carlton v Simon Blackwood (Workers’ Compensation
[2015] ICQ 029
Church v Simon Blackwood
(Workers’ Compensation Regulator)
[2015] ICQ 031
, considered
Gerlach v Clifton Bricks Pty Ltd
(2002) 209 CLR 478
[2002] HCA 22
Kim v Workers’ Compensation Regulator
[2019] ICQ 14
Lawless v The Queen
(1979) 142 CLR 659
[1979] HCA 49
Local Government Association of Queensland Ltd v Queensland Services
Industrial Union of Employees and Ors
[2017] ICQ 002
Katsidis; ex parte Attorney-General (Qld)
R v Young (No 2)
[1969] Qd R 566
Ratten v The Queen
(1974) 131 CLR 510
[1974] HCA 35
Regan v WorkCover Queensland
(2003) 174 QGIG 1009
[2003] ICQ 55
Shrimpton v The Commonwealth
(1945) 69 CLR 613
Turay v Workers’ Compensation Regulator
Wang v Workers’ Compensation Regulator
[2023] QIRC
Wang v Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 163
Wang v Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No
[2023] QIRC 164
Wang v Workers’ Compensation
Regulator (No 4)
[2023] QIRC 187
Workers’ Compensation
Regulator v Glass
(2020) 4 QR 693
The appellant appeared for himself
S P Sapsford for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
The appellant appeared for himself
Worker’s Compensation Regulator
briefed Mr Sapsford directly
appellant, Yuehai Wang, seeks to adduce evidence in his appeals which was not
before the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission
at first instance. He
also submits that further steps should be taken before the appeals are ready for
[2] Mr Wang was
employed as a mechanic in Cairns.
[3] He claims
that on 28 August 2019 he was walking home from his place of employment when he
was struck by a car. An injury sustained
by a worker when travelling to or from
work and their home is, relevantly, an injury which is compensable under the
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
[4] Mr Wang
suffered a foot injury and other injuries, and was taken by ambulance to the
Cairns Hospital where he was treated.
entitlement of Mr Wang to compensation arose on 28 August 2019.
[6] On or about
23 April 2021, Mr Wang lodged an application for worker’s compensation
with the insurer, WorkCover Queensland,
pursuant to the provisions of the WCR
That application was out of
[7] Section 131
of the WCR Act limits the time for applications but enables the insurer to
extend time. It provides:
131 Time for applying
An application for
compensation
valid and enforceable only if the application is lodged by the claimant within 6
months after the entitlement to
compensation
If an application is lodged more than 20 business days after the
entitlement to
compensation
the extent of the insurer’s liability to pay
compensation
limited to a period starting no earlier than 20 business days before the day on
which the valid application is lodged.
(3) Subsection (2)
does not apply if death is, or results
from, the injury.
(4) An insurer must waive subsection (1)
for a particular
application if it is satisfied that special circumstances of a medical nature,
decided by a medical assessment tribunal,
an insurer may waive subsection (1)
particular application if—
it is satisfied that a doctor, nurse practitioner or dentist has assessed
resulting in total or partial incapacity for work
the claimant lodged the application within 20 business days after the
first assessment under paragraph (a).
An insurer may waive subsection
for a particular application if the
insurer is satisfied that
a claimant’s failure to lodge the application
(b) the claimant’s absence from the State; or
a reasonable cause
.” (emphasis added)
[8] If the time
for lodgment of Mr Wang’s application was extended, then, by
s 131(2), Mr Wang’s entitlement to compensation
was, subject to
s 131(6), limited to the period commencing 20 business days before 23 April
[9] Therefore,
the fact that Mr Wang’s application was filed out of time raised two
matters which required the exercise of discretion
by WorkCover,
(a) whether WorkCover should waive non-compliance with the six months’
time limit for lodgement of the
(b) whether WorkCover should waive the effect of s 131(2) and assess the
entitlement to compensation for a period starting earlier
than 20 business days
prior to 23 April 2021.
[10] WorkCover
exercised both discretions. It:
(a) waived non-compliance with the time limit prescribed by s 131(1);
(b) did not extend the period of cover beyond the period commencing 20 business
days before 23 April 2021.
[11] Mr Wang
sought review of WorkCover’s decision not to extend the period of
That review was conducted
by the respondent, the Workers’ Compensation Regulator.
Regulator considered Mr Wang’s application for review, set aside
WorkCover’s decision to waive the time limit
prescribed by s 131(1) and,
therefore, concluded that Mr Wang did not have a valid and enforceable claim for
compensation. Given
the Regulator’s reversal of WorkCover’s
decision to accept the claim, Mr Wang’s complaints about the exercise of
discretion under s 131(2) became irrelevant.
[13] From the
Regulator’s decision, Mr Wang appealed to the
Commission.
In due course, the
hearing was listed to commence before Deputy President Merrell in Cairns over
two days, being 7 and 8 March 2023.
[14] Before the
hearing, Mr Wang issued an attendance
directed to solicitors who
Mr Wang had consulted about his accident. Upon the return of the attendance
notice, it became clear that
the solicitors did not have the documents which Mr
Wang was seeking, and the Deputy President set the attendance notice
I shall call that decision
Wang’s appeal against the Regulator’s decision was heard on 7 and 8
March 2023 in Cairns.
Mr Wang gave evidence himself and he called a
doctor, Robert Pozzi, an orthopaedic surgeon who gave evidence and was cross
As later discussed, Mr Wang seeks to adduce further evidence from Dr
Pozzi on the appeals to this Court.
[16] The Deputy
President reserved judgment but before his decision could be delivered Mr Wang
filed two applications, one on 13 March
2023 and one on 27 March 2023.
On 11 April 2023 Mr Wang also filed a request for an attendance notice to be
issued to the Commissioner of the Queensland Police Service
for the production
of documents said to be relevant to the police investigation of Mr Wang’s
[17] In the
Deputy President’s reasons for dismissing the
applications,
which I will call
”, the Deputy President described the orders sought
in the application filed on 13 March 2023 and the reasons for seeking them
“[6] By Application in existing proceedings filed on 13
March 2023, Mr Wang seeks orders that:
a medical report
of Dr Angus Nicoll, Orthopaedic Surgeon, dated 20 May 2020 be admitted into
evidence; and
an order that
his injuries be examined by specified registered persons or a Medical Assessment
Tribunal and that WorkCover Queensland
pays the costs of the examination
(‘the 13 March Application’).
[7] The reasons Mr Wang
gives for the orders he seeks in the 13 March application are:
the injuries he
suffered on 28 August 2019 resulted in his total or significant incapacity for
work for more than two and a-half years
and possibly resulted in his permanent,
partial incapacity for work, which he claims is relevant to his appeal;
the evidence of
Dr Nicoll proves that his circumstances satisfied s 131(5) of the Act, such
that it was ‘unreasonable’
for the Regulator to apply s 131(1) of
the Act; and
the evidence of
Dr Nicholl is evidence that Mr Wang’s previous lawyers discriminated
against him in that his lawyers allegedly
never advised him to make a claim for
workers’ compensation despite his financial and employment difficulties
caused by the
injuries he
sustained.”
[18] As to the
application filed on 27 March 2023 the Deputy President described the orders
“[9] By Application in existing proceedings filed
on 27 March 2023, Mr Wang seeks orders that the following documents be admitted
into evidence for the reasons stated:
A letter of Dr
Robert Pozzi, Orthopaedic Surgeon, to Mr Wang’s General Practitioner dated
7 July 2022, so as to correct an alleged
mistake made by Dr Pozzi, when he (Dr
Pozzi) gave oral evidence on behalf of Mr Wang at the hearing in Cairns;
A Work Capacity
Certificate, issued by Dr Pozzi dated 23 September 2021, because while Dr Pozzi
gave oral evidence that he completed
such a Work Capacity Certificate, he did
not give the date he issued the Work Capacity Certificate;
the report of
the Queensland Police Service and the ‘... CCTV screenshot for the 28
August 2019 accident, to correct the Respondent’s
allegation that the
Appellant was stand [sic] on the street when the car hit him’; and
Respondent’s ‘... official email ‘Reviewing the decision
– time for applying’, to correct the Respondent’s
statement in
the hearing that the Respondent did not consider the [sic] 131(5) of the
‘Act 2003’ for the Appellant’s
application’ (‘the
27 March application’).
[10] Mr Wang also seeks an order that
the identity of Mr Wang’s previous lawyer, who he claims told him that
do [sic] not have a ‘Workers’ Compensation and other
Commission.”
[19] As already
observed, by the time the applications were filed, the Deputy President had
heard Mr Wang’s appeal from the
Regulator’s decision.
Deputy President, rightly in my view, concluded that in order to proceed with
the applications Mr Wang must obtain leave to re-open
his case. He treated the
applications as applications to re-open the
If Mr Wang was
successful, the documents the subject of the applications would then be tendered
in the appeal.
[20] As also
already observed, Mr Wang’s applications were
[21] On 5 June
2023, the Deputy President dismissed Mr Wang’s appeal from the
Regulator’s decision.
will call that decision “
dismissing the appeal the Deputy President made directions for the exchange of
written submissions on costs.
In due course, submissions were exchanged
and on 20 June 2023 the Deputy President ordered that Mr Wang pay the
Regulator’s
costs of the appeal fixed in the sum of
I will call that
The course of the
[23] On 22 June
2023, Mr Wang filed an appeal from
. That appeal’s file
number is C/2023/25.
[24] The orders
sought on the
appeal are described in the application to appeal
“1. Leave to appeal on grounds other than those in s
557(1) and pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 2016
appellant have leave to adduce fresh evidence in support of the appeal.
Industrial Court allow the appeal from the decision of the learned Commissioner
who confirmed the Respondent decision dated 2
December 2021; Overturn that
decision and vacate orders made by the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission dated 5 June 2023.
Industrial Court order the Respondent to pay the Appellant costs for this
application and the application made to the Queensland
Industrial Relations
Commission.”
[25] The grounds
of appeal are expressed as:
“1. The Commissioner erred in
failing to appropriately consider the interests of persons immediately concerned
with the appeal,
pursuant to s 531(3) of the Industrial Relations Act 2016(Act
2016) in relation to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits
case required. Because on the Commissioner decision dated 5 June 2023, the
Commissioner failed to appropriately consider the
following are facts:
a). On 28 August 2019, the Appellant sustained a significant work-related
injury; the majority injuries are left foot, left ribs
and Trapezius injury.
b). On 20 May 2020, Dr. Angus Nicoll, the Independent Medico-legal Expert
assessed that the Appellant’s injuries sustained
on 28 August 2019
resulted 8% of Whole Person permanent impairment.
c). On 30 June 2020, Evelyn Ross, the Occupational Therapist assessed that the
Appellant is precluded for pursuing further work
as Motor Mechanic and Service
Engineer which the Appellant experienced or trained because of the injuries
sustained on 28 August
d) On 18 March 2021, the Appellant’s work-related injuries were
deteriorated and Dr. Robert Pozzi performed a surgery for the
Appellant’s
left foot, which resulted the Appellant in total or significant incapacity for
work for more than 12 months.
e). On 21 April 2021, the Appellant obtained the 1st “Work Capacity
Certificate” which issued by Dr. Yelena Krasnova,
and the certificate
lodged to Workcover Queensland on 23 April 2021.
f). On 12 August 2021, WorkCover Queensland has accepted the Appellant’s
application for compensation for Lisfranc injury
to left foot, left rib injury,
Trapezius injury they sustained on 28 August 2019. In addition, Workcover
Queensland accepted liability
from 26 March 2021.
g). On 21 August 2021, the appellant lodged “Application for claim
review” to the Respondent to review to waive the
limited of period for
starting pay compensation, which relevant the s 131(2) and the s 141(5) of
the Workers’ Compensation
and Rehabilitation Act 2003(Act 2003).
h). On 2 December 2021, when the Respondent made a decision and added s 131(1)
of the Act 2003 to reject the Appellant’s Workcover
compensation, the
Appellant was still in total incapacity for work.
July 2022. The work-related injuries resulted the Appellant did the left foot
surgery again and it resulted the Appellant in
total or significant incapacity
for work for some months again.
j). Until to the date of the hearing on 8 March 2023, the Appellant’s
work-related injuries:
i. Were still not stable sand stationary.
still are some percentage of permanent impairment after the
iii. The injuries may deteriorate again.
Commissioner erred in failing to appropriately consider the Appellant’s
Affidavits as evidence, pursuant to s 531 (2) of
the Act 2016.
Commissioner erred in failing to determine that the Appellant satisfied the s
131(5) of the Act 2003.
Commissioner erred in failing to appropriately consider the evidence which
provided by Dr. Robert Pozzi and make a decision in
favour to the
Commissioner erred in failing to determine that the Respondent provided untrue
statements in the Respondent’s submission.
Commissioner erred in failing to consider the evidence, which provided by
Queensland Police Service according to the Attendance
Notice which the
Commission approved on 20 Feb 2023.
Commissioner erred in failing to determine that Maurice Blackburn Lawyers did
not comply the Attendance Notice which Commission
approved on 10 Feb 2023.
Commissioner erred in failing to consider that the Respondent failed to provide
the evidence to prove the Appellant’s previous
lawyers provided correct
Workcover compensation legal advices to the Appellant.
Commissioner erred in failing to allow the Appellant to provide some evidence in
the hearing.
Commissioner erred in failing to allow the Appellant to submit additional
medical evidence at any time before or after the start
of the hearing.
Commissioner erred in failing to allow the Appellant to correcting defects in
proceedings at any time before or after the start
of the hearing.
Commissioner erred in failing to determine that the Respondent’s decision
was invalid and erred in the law.
Commissioner erred in failing to appropriately consider to waive the s 131(1)
and (2) of the Act 2003 due to mistake and a reasonable
[26] On 27 June
2023, Mr Wang filed an appeal from
. That is appeal C/2023/26.
[27] The orders
sought in the
appeal are expressed in the application to appeal
“1. Leave to appeal on grounds other than those in
s 557(1) and pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 2016
appellant have leave to adduce fresh evidence in support of the appeal.
Industrial Court order to overturn the cost order made by the Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission dated 20 June 2023 and
order the Respondent to
pay the Appellant costs for this application and the application made to the
Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission.”
[28] The grounds
of appeal are:
“1. The Commissioner erred in failing to
appropriately consider that the Respondent admitted that the Appellant sustained
work-related
injuries on 28 August 2019 and entitled to compensation from and on
28 August 2019 pursuant to the Act 2003.
Commissioner erred in failing to appropriately consider the Appellant’s 28
August 2019 injuries are compensable within
the meaning of the Act 2003 and the
Appellant received compensations for $4619 from Workcover Queensland in 2021
Commissioner erred in failing to determine that the Appellant have lodged a
valid and enforceable application for workers’
compensation to Workcover
Queensland on 23 April 2023.
Commissioner erred in failing to appropriately consider that work-related
injuries permanent reduced the Appellant’s work
and earning capacity, it
caused the Appellant’s life difficult for many years.
Commissioner erred in failing to appropriately consider that since the
Appellant’s started a casual work on end of November
2022 until 12 June
2023, the Appellant’s income and expenses just balance.
Commissioner erred in failing to appropriately consider there are obvious living
risk for the Appellant, because currently the
Appellant is still in partial
incapacity for work and the work-related injuries may deteriorate again and the
Appellant’s work
Commissioner erred in failing to appropriately consider the Appellant’s
sufferings, the Work capacity, medical condition
and permanent
impairment/disabilities to exercise its discretion in favour to the Appellant
for no cost order.”
[29] In both
appeals, Mr Wang seeks to adduce evidence that was not before the Commission.
Applications were filed by Mr Wang on
the appeals on 27 July and 4 August 2023.
Those applications sought information and documents, and other orders. Those
applications
came before Vice President O’Connor on 9 August 2023 and Mr
Wang withdrew both.
[30] Despite Mr
Wang’s withdrawal of the applications which came before the Vice
President, it became apparent that Mr Wang
sought to adduce further evidence on
the appeals and also wished to take further steps before the hearing of the
February 2024, I made orders that Mr Wang identify the further evidence sought
to be adduced and explain how the evidence
was relevant to issues on the appeal.
Mr Wang was also directed to identify any further steps that ought to be taken
before the hearing
of the appeals. Those directions were complied with.
[32] The matter
came before me on 30 July 2024 to determine the application to adduce further
evidence and to determine what further
steps (if any) needed to be taken. On
that day, the Regulator’s counsel called Kim Louise Cavanagh, who is a
solicitor and
director of Hede Byrne and Hall, Lawyers of Toowoomba. They acted
for WorkCover. She identified affidavits that she had sworn and
she was made
available for cross-examination by Mr Wang. He cross-examined her. I shall
refer to her evidence
[33] Before
turning to consider the admission of the further evidence, it is necessary
firstly to consider what was decided in
and then identify the
new evidence sought to be led. I do not intend to analyse
The cost orders made in
follow the event of
The further evidence, if admitted, would need to be relevant to the matters
, and if so, would then be admitted on
, the appeal from which will no doubt primarily be determined by the
outcome of the appeal from
[34] Deputy
President Merrell directed himself as to the nature and extent of the review to
be undertaken by the Commission on an
appeal from a review decision made by the
Regulator. He followed
Church v Simon Blackwood (Workers’ Compensation
which he took as
authority for the following propositions:
(a) the review by the Commission was one that is conducted
(b) what is heard “
” are the issues which were before
the Regulator.
[35] The Deputy
President went on to hold:
(a) Mr Wang relied on ss 131(5), 131(6) and 36A of the WCR Act to ground
his appeal seeking a waiver of the time limit prescribed
by s 131(1);
(b) as Mr Wang did not rely on either ss 131(5) or 36A of the WCR Act in
his review to the Regulator, the only issue before the Regulator
was whether the
time for lodgement of the claim for compensation should be waived by force of
(c) as Mr Wang did not seek to rely upon s 131(5) in the review by the
Regulator, s 131(5) was not in issue before the Commission;
(d) Mr Wang sought to rely upon s 36A but as that was not raised in the
review by the Regulator, consideration of it was also not
in issue before the
Commission.
[36] Section
131(5) was referred to by the Regulator in the review reasons. However, the
Regulator mentioned a CTP insurance medical
certificate issued by Dr Mulcahy on
29 August 2019 as excluding any reliance upon s 131(5).
[37] Section 36A
of the WCR Act provides:
This section applies if a person
is diagnosed by a doctor after the commencement of this section as having
a latent onset injury; and
applies for compensation for the latent onset injury.
(2) The following questions are to be decided under the relevant
compensation Act as in force when the injury was sustained—
(a) whether the person was a worker under the Act when the injury was
(b) whether the injury was an injury under the Act when it was sustained.
Section 131 applies to the application for compensation as if the
entitlement to compensation arose on the day of the doctor’s
(4) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), this Act applies in relation to the
person’s claim as if the date on which the injury
was sustained is the
date of the doctor’s diagnosis. ...” (emphasis added)”
(emphasis added)
[38] Section 36A
raises the notion of “latent onset injury”. In such a case, the
date of injury, and, therefore, the
date from which time begins to run under
s 131(1) is the date of diagnosis of the injury.
[39] The term
“latent onset injury” is defined in the WCR Act as “means an
insidious disease”.
[40] The Deputy
President held that, in any event, s 131(5) did not avail Mr Wang. Mr
Wang’s case under s 131(5) was that he
was assessed as totally or
partially unfit for work by General Practitioner Dr Krasnova on 21 April 2021.
The application was lodged
two days later, well within the 20 day time limited
by s 131(5)(a).
[41] Section
131(5) raises discretionary considerations. The subsection provides that an
insurer “may waive subsection (1)”
where the claimant has lodged the
application for compensation within 20 business days “after the first
assessment” that
the injury has resulted in total or partial incapacity
for work. The Deputy President observed that by the time of Dr Krasnova’s
certificate, Mr Wang had Dr Moore’s for about 18 months. The reference to
Dr Moore’s certificate is probably a mistaken
reference to Dr
witnessed by Dr Moore. The certificate opined him to be unfit for work until 2
September 2019. Dr Pozzi had operated on
Dr Wang’s foot in March
Wang’s case before the Regulator under s 131(6) was that he had
failed to lodge the claim within time due to
“a reasonable
Wang’s submissions to the Regulator in reliance upon s 131(6) and the
Regulator’s reasons for rejection of these
submissions were stated by the
Regulator as:
“I acknowledge your submission that your
solicitor failed to act on your behalf, nor advise you of your potential
compensation rights. However, I am unable to substantiate on the
evidence available to me that this in fact occurred. There is no
available to suggest you were provided with incorrect legal advice and relied on
that incorrect advice, nor that any steps
were taken to lodge an application by
either yourself or a legal representative, that may amount to a mistake.
Further, I am unable
to substantiate that any omission of your previous legal
representative to advise you of your workers’ compensation rights
fact the reason for you not lodging the application within time. I consider
there are multiple reasons you have submitted
as causing the delay in lodging
your application and accordingly, given the definitions set out in the case law
above, I am unable
to substantiate that the delay in lodging your application
was due to a mistake.”
“I acknowledge your submission that you were unaware of the six month
time period in which to lodge an application under section
131(1) of the Act.
The decision in
Mayne Group Limited v Q-COMP
is authority for the
proposition that a workers’ unawareness as to their rights or obligations
under the Act does not amount
to a reasonable cause for a failure to lodge an
application within the required time period.
I also acknowledge your submission that you reported your injury to your
employer and that your employer failed to report an injury
to WorkCover, in
accordance with section 133 of the Act. I have had regard to the decision in
Alan Russell Wiley v Q-COMP
where it was considered that an omission of
the employer to inform WorkCover of an injury does not take away the
responsibility to act in a reasonable time, unless there are
circumstances beyond the worker’s control which make the worker
of lodging a claim for compensation. I do not consider the available evidence
proposes a circumstance beyond your control
which made you incapable of lodging
an application within the relevant time period.
Further, I consider the case law suggests it is the worker’s
responsibility to take action to apply for workers’ compensation
accordance with the six month time period under section 131(1) of the Act. I am
satisfied a decision was made to manage your injury
outside of the
workers’ compensation scheme. Accordingly, I do not consider the available
evidence suggests a circumstance
existed that amounts to a reasonable cause for
the six month time limit to be waived under section 131 (6) of the Act.
Upon consideration of the evidence in its entirety, I am not satisfied a
reasonable cause has been established to waive the time period
for applying for
compensation. Therefore, I have determined the failure to lodge your application
within the six month time period
was not due to a reason set out in section
131(6) of the Act.”
Regulator rejected Mr Wang’s submission that there was a relevant
“reasonable cause”
was made out either by Mr Wang’s ignorance of the six month time period or
that Mr Wang’s employer had failed to report
the injury.
[45] The Deputy
President summarised Mr Wang’s case on review to the Commission on
s 131(6)(a) and (c) as follows:
“• the doctors at
the Cairns Hospital, where he was admitted on 28 August 2019 after he was struck
by the vehicle, mistakenly
did not determine his injury was one under the Act
and did not issue him a Work Capacity Certificate;
his General
Practitioner, whom he consulted on 2 September 2019, mistakenly did not
determine his injury was one under the Act and
did not issue him a Work Capacity
Certificate;
Dr Pozzi, whom
he consulted on 3 February 2020 and who performed (left) foot surgery on him on
18 March 2021, mistakenly did not determine
his injury was one under the Act and
did not issue him a Work Capacity Certificate on 3 February 2020 or on 18 March
his employer,
Juicy Love Pty Ltd, did not report his injury to WorkCover Queensland after he
informed it of his injury by way of email
and WhatsApp; and then his employer
dismissed him on 2 March 2020;
the lawyers he
consulted soon after sustaining his injury, Maurice Blackburn Lawyers, between
29 August 2019 and December 2020, did
not provide him with correct advice about
workers' compensation;
other lawyers he
consulted, Magoffin Law, originally agreed to provide him with help in relation
to his claim for worker's compensation
but did not provide him with help, rather
they tried to misguide him;
realise the seriousness of his injury until he was assessed and operated upon by
Dr Pozzi in March 2021;
because of his
injuries, he was not in the mental state to be able to lodge his application for
workers' compensation within the prescribed
time frame;
because he had
been (allegedly) the victim of domestic violence, that had a causal connection
with his inability to lodge his application
for workers' compensation within the
prescribed time frame; and
until April
2021, he did not know how to get a Work Capacity Certificate and did not know
how to make a WorkCover
[46] The Deputy
President rejected all those
He found that the
doctors at Cairns Hospital had no obligation to advise either Mr Wang or the
authorities of the possibility of
Similarly, there were no
obligations upon the General Practitioners or Dr Pozzi to advise Mr Wang or the
authorities of the possibility
[47] The Deputy
President observed that Dr Pozzi gave no evidence that Mr Wang had told him he
was injured while travelling home from
and there was no evidence
that any of the General Practitioners were told that the injury occurred while
Mr Wang was returning home
[48] The Deputy
President found that there was no evidence that Mr Wang’s employer was
told that the accident occurred while
Mr Wang was travelling from
and that, in any event, the
failure of the employer to discharge its obligations under s 133 did not excuse
Mr Wang of his obligations
to make his claim within
The Deputy President
found no evidence that Maurice Blackburn were told by Mr Wang that the accident
occurred while he was returning
from work and Mr Wang
himself accepted that he told Maurice Blackburn that he was injured standing on
a street corner.
[49] A complaint
made in October 2020 to the Queensland Legal Services Commissioner against
Maurice Blackburn was a detailed complaint
but did not allege that Maurice
Blackburn had failed to advise Mr Wang of his rights to make a Workers’
Compensation Claim.
Law was only instructed by Mr Wang in February 2021; well after the time limit
[50] The Deputy
President found that even if Mr Wang did not realise the seriousness of his
injury until he was operated on by Dr
Pozzi, that fact had no causal connection
with his failure to make his application on time because he emailed Magoffin Law
April 2021 and stated that he had no idea that he could make an
application for Workers’ Compensation until he read the
[51] As to the
claims based on Mr Wang’s mental state, the Deputy President observed that
there was no medical evidence to support
and Mr Wang was in a
sufficient state to give instructions to Maurice
If Mr Wang did not
know until April 2021 how to obtain a Work Capacity Certificate and make a
WorkCover claim that was, the Deputy
President held, a mistake of law on Mr
Wang’s behalf and ignorance of the law is not “reasonable
for admitting further evidence
explained in
Turay v Workers’ Compensation
an appeal from
the Commission about a decision made under the WCR Act lies pursuant to Chapter
13 of the WCR Act, not Chapter 11
Industrial Relations Act
except to the extent
that provisions of the IR Act are incorporated by s 561(2) of the WCR
[53] Section 561
of the WCR Act provides:
561 Appeal to industrial
(1) A party aggrieved by the industrial magistrate’s or the industrial
commission’s decision may appeal to the industrial
Relations Act 2016
applies to the appeal.
The appeal is by way of rehearing on the evidence and proceedings
before the industrial magistrate or the industrial commission, unless
orders additional evidence be heard.
(4) The court’s decision is final.” (emphasis added)
unnecessary to consider what powers are bestowed upon the Court through
s 561(2) on appeals under the WCR Act as s 561(3)
clearly gives a
discretion to receive additional evidence on appeal.
[55] The common
law drew a distinction between “fresh evidence” and “new
evidence”. Fresh evidence is that
which was either not in existence at
the time of the trial or, if it was in existence, was not reasonably
discoverable by the party
seeking to lead it on
A relatively broad
discretion arises for the admission of fresh evidence.
evidence” is evidence which does not comply with the two prerequisites to
qualify as “fresh evidence”
but where its admission is necessary in
the interests of justice, usually because the evidence is likely to change the
such a case, the evidence may be
[57] As already
observed, the discretion here is a statutory one by force of s 561(3). The
width of the discretion is determined
not by common law principles but upon the
proper construction of the provision and it being exercised consistently with
its statutory
[58] However,
the fact that there is statutory discretion to admit further evidence on appeal
does not extinguish the policy considerations
behind the reluctance of the
common law to allow the widening of issues on appeal. That was the view of
President Hall in
Regan v WorkCover
where his Honour
“I accept that the statutory power to hear
‘additional evidence’ is constrained only by the proper exercise of
and is not to be exercised only in those cases in which ‘fresh
evidence’ would be received in a civil matter at common
law, compare
Chalk v WorkCover Queensland
[2002] QIC 100
(2002) 171 QGIG 327
at 328. However, I can
see no reason why the accumulated wisdom of the common law should be ignored.
Having regard to the desirability
of finality in litigation, the upset and cost
of litigation after a trial is completed and the need to encourage litigants to
for trial in a proper way, I can see no justification for exercising the
statutory discretion to let in additional evidence which
might, by the exercise
of reasonable diligence, have been discovered by the appellant prior to the
[59] Section
561(3) does not admit of a set principles that evidence ought not be admitted on
appeal from a decision of the Commission
on a Workers’ Compensation matter
unless the evidence is fresh. However, I accept that the public policy
considerations identified
are factors which assist in informing
the exercise of the discretion under s 561(3) of the WCR
The further
[60] Much of the
further evidence seems to be in support of Mr Wang’s claims under
s 131(5) and 36A. As earlier observed, the
Deputy President ruled those
grounds for waiver of the time limited by s 132(1) were not for consideration by
the Commission on the
authority of
Church v Simon Blackwood (Workers’
Compensation Regulator)
In my view, there may be some doubt about the correctness of that
[61] Mr Church
sought to claim compensation for a back injury sustained during his work as a
spray painter. WorkCover refused to
waive the time limit for making a claim
under s 131(1) of the WCR Act.
[62] On review,
the Regulator decided:
(a) the time limit should be waived so that the claim was valid and enforceable;
(b) Mr Church had not sustained an “injury” within the meaning of
s 32 of the WCR Act.
[63] Mr Church
appealed the Regulator’s decision to the Commission. On that appeal the
Regulator sought to defend its decision
to reject the claim on the basis that it
had been made out of time. The Commission accepted that submission and rejected
the appeal.
Mr Church then appealed successfully to this Court.
[64] On appeal,
Martin P observed that on a hearing
the Commission sat in the
position of the Regulator and decided the case afresh. There can be no doubt
His Honour held “The ambit of such a hearing is
determined by the case which was before the Regulator. It is also determined
any specific statutory provision which impinges upon the boundaries of the issue
to be determined”.
decision by the Regulator to waive the time limit, Martin P observed,
became a decision of WorkCover and while, by s 549,
a claimant may appeal
that decision, an insurer
His Honour went on to
find then that the “issue” taken on appeal to the Commission did not
include any issue arising
under s 131(1).
[66] Church
may not be authority for the proposition that a claimant who only relied upon
s 131(6) before the Regulator cannot rely upon ss 131(5)
appeal to the Commission. It is unnecessary to decide that issue now. I will,
when considering the admission of further
evidence on appeal, assume that
Mr Wang could, both before the Commission and this Court, rely upon ss
131(5) and 36A.
[67] Mr Wang
proposes to call further evidence from Dr Pozzi.
[68] What is
proposed to be lead from Dr Pozzi is that Mr Wang suffered neck
injuries as well as left foot, left ribs and trapezius
injuries, and that the
neck injuries were accident related.
evidence is said to have arisen after the Commission hearing in March 2023.
be relevant to a claim for a latent offset injury pursuant
to s 36A of the WCR Act. However, there is no report from Dr Pozzi.
There is no particularisation of what evidence he will actually give. There is
insufficient potential substance to justify admitting
the evidence on
[71] Mr Wang
also intends to lead from Dr Pozzi that the incapacity which Mr Wang
suffered in April 2021 “was as a result of
his recovery from the left foot
surgery and as a direct result of any injury he suffered on 28 August
2019”. This relates
to the findings at paragraphs [34] and [35] of
“[34] Mr Wang then contends that he then
had no medical treatment in respect of his injuries until 3 February 2020 when
consulted Dr Pozzi and that on 18 March 2021, he had '... left foot Lisfranc
fusion surgery'. Dr Pozzi confirmed that he conducted
that surgery on Mr Wang's
left foot on that date. Mr Wang then contends the '... surgery hugely changed
the Appellant's working and
life living circumstances.' On these statements of
fact by Mr Wang and the other evidence to which I have referred, which were not
disputed by the Regulator, a reasonable inference to draw is that any incapacity
Mr Wang suffered in April 2021 was as a result of
his recovery from the left
foot surgery and not as a direct result of any injury he suffered on 28 August
[35] In those circumstances, it is unlikely that s 131(5) of the Act could
have any application to Mr Wang's circumstances as a result
of the Work Capacity
Certificate issued by Dr Krasnova dated 21 April 2021. Further, as I stated in
Wang v Workers’ Compensation Regulator (No. 2)
, the Work Capacity
Certificate issued by Dr Krasnova dated 21 April 2021 was not tendered into
evidence. This was because I upheld
an objection made by the Regulator to the
tender of that document because Mr Wang attempted to tender that document in his
submissions in the absence of Mr Wang calling Dr Krasnova to give
Pozzi’s evidence is, as can be seen from paragraph [35] of
, made relevant by Dr Krasnova’s Work Capacity Certificate, dated
21 April 2021. There is no report by Dr Krasnova. Mr Wang
seek to call her on the appeal and so calling Dr Pozzi on this issue is
[73] Dr Michael
Breitkreutz would be called by Mr Wang to give evidence similarly to that
proposed to be given by Dr Pozzi, namely
that the neck injuries emerged
after March 2023 and that the incapacity in April 2021 was a direct result of
the injuries suffered
on 28 August 2019. Again, there is no report of
Dr Breitkreutz and no proper explanation of exactly what he would say in
of Mr Wang in April 2021 relates to the Work Capacity Certificate
Dr Krasnova and there is no evidence from her.
[74] Mr Wang
complains that WorkCover failed to comply with s 544 of the WCR Act and
wishes to explore that in evidence on the appeal.
Section 544
Decision-maker must give information
to Regulator
(1) The Regulator may, by written notice, require the decision-maker to give
the Regulator—
(a) within 5 business days after receiving the notice—
(i) all relevant information and documents in relation to the application that
is in the decision-maker’s possession; or
(ii) the information asked for by the Regulator; or
(iii) if the Regulator believes on reasonable grounds that the reasons given by
the decision-maker for the decision-maker’s
decision have not addressed
the matters prescribed under a regulation for
section 540
(4)—reasons
for the decision that address those matters; or
(b) within the period stated in the notice, any further information the
Regulator needs to decide the matter.
(2) The notice may state the way the information, documents and reasons must
(3) The decision-maker must comply with the notice.
(4) The decision-maker must pay the cost of obtaining the further
information.”
[75] There are
no particulars provided by Mr Wang as to how Workcover has failed to comply
with its obligations under s 544.
[76] As already
observed, Ms Cavanagh was called and cross-examined before me on
30 July 2024.
[77] Mr Wang
established, through Ms Cavanagh, that WorkCover accepted
Mr Wang’s claim and that his employer was notified
accordingly.
That fact is not
contentious. The Regulator set aside that acceptance and it is the
Regulator’s decision which is the subject
of the present appeal.
[78] Mr Wang
then established that his employer paid the claim excess to
The payment of the
excess is irrelevant to the current appeal. The payment was a step that was
taken in reliance upon WorkCover’s
decision before that decision was
reversed by the Regulator.
[79] Mr Wang
established that a WorkCover officer, Sophia Dunnell, telephoned him on
5 May 2021.
Ms Cavanagh was aware of a note of that conversation. The note records
Mr Wang’s assertions that the injury occurred while
he was travelling
from work and explained that the delay in lodging the claim was as a result of
bad advice from lawyers. Ms Cavanagh
said that she had a full recording of
the telephone conversation and that the note did not reflect all of it. She
said that the
recording was disclosed to Mr Wang on 23 March 2022 and
also disclosed to the Regulator. At best, the conversation evidences a
by Mr Wang which is broadly consistent with his case. The
recording was available to him before the hearing before the Deputy
[80] Mr Wang
then established in cross-examination of Ms Cavanagh that WorkCover received a
request for attendance notice, issued
on 19 January
Ms Cavanagh said that to
the best of her knowledge WorkCover had complied with the attendance notice.
[81] There were
then assertions made by Mr Wang that he had attempted to tender documents
to the Deputy President, who had refused.
Whether it was appropriate or
otherwise to refuse to receive the documents is a question as to their
admissibility, not whether
the evidence is fresh or otherwise.
[82] There are
no documents or categories of documents that have been identified as having not
been disclosed by WorkCover to the
[83] Mr Wang
submits that an investigating police officer, Lincoln Pullar, should be called
to give evidence. It is anticipated that
he would produce documents relevant to
his investigation of the accident on 28 August 2019. It has not been made
clear by Mr Wang
what evidence the police officer would give, except that
he had conversations with Mr Wang where Mr Wang said things
consistently
with the injury being suffered in the course of his employment.
[84] Mr Wang
seeks to tender a report prepared by members of the ambulance service. He says
that he attempted to tender the report
to the Deputy President. If that is
so and the failure to receive the evidence is a ground of appeal then the
documents can be produced
at the appeal and argument had as to whether the
Deputy President ought to have accepted them into evidence.
[85] There is,
in my view, no utility in the receipt as further evidence of anything that
Mr Wang has identified.
Further steps in the appeal
[86] Mr Wang
says that various further steps should be taken before the appeal can be heard.
He submitted that documents which were
produced by the Queensland Police Service
should be added to the “exhibit list”. This is in effect an
application to
adduce further evidence. It is said by Mr Wang that the Deputy
President refused to admit the documents.
[87] As already
observed, if the Deputy President refused to admit admissible evidence then that
may be a ground argued at the appeal.
[88] Secondly,
Mr Wang says that documents produced by Maurice Blackburn Lawyers pursuant to a
notice to produce should be added to
the exhibit list. This complaint is of the
same nature as the first and the answer is the same.
[89] Thirdly, Mr
Wang wants the “initiating documents” added to the exhibit list of
the appeal. The application to appeal
and the written submissions will be
before the Court on the hearing.
Wang’s submission that the Regulator has had sufficient time to answer the
grounds of appeal is misplaced. The Regulator
has filed written submissions
answering the appeal.
[91] Mr Wang
considers that various documents which were before the Commission namely lists
of documents and statements of facts and
contentions should be before the Court
on appeal. They will be.
[92] Mr Wang
says that all documents tendered to the Commission ought to be before the Court
on appeal. That is correct, but Mr Wang
considers that exhibit 3 is incomplete.
Mr Wang can take up with the Registrar any problems concerning the management of
the exhibits.
[93] Lastly, Mr
Wang says that exhibits 4, 5 and 6 ought not to have been admitted. Provided
that alleged error is reflected in a
ground of appeal, argument about that can
be had at the hearing of the appeals.
Conclusion and
application to adduce further evidence ought be dismissed. As no further steps
need to be taken, the parties should liaise
with the Registrar to obtain a date
for the hearing of the appeal.
[95] I will
reserve the costs.
ordered that:
application to adduce evidence on appeal which was not before the Commission is
Registrar shall allocate a date for the hearing of the appeals.
Workers’ Compensation
and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Workers’ Compensation
and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Section 131(3)
Section 131(1)
, (4), (5) and
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
, Chapter 13, Part 2.
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
, Chapter 13, Part 3, Division
Industrial Relations
(Tribunals) Rules 2011
, Division 1, Subdivision 7, r 61.
Wang v Workers’
Compensation Regulator
[2023] QIRC 071.
Wang v Workers’
Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 163.
At [6] and [7].
At [9] and [10].
Wang v Workers’
Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 163
Wang v Workers’
Compensation Regulator (No 2)
[2023] QIRC 163.
Wang v Workers’
Compensation Regulator (No 3)
[2023] QIRC 164.
Wang v Workers’
Compensation Regulator (No 4)
[2023] QIRC 187.
See paragraphs [76] to [80]
of these reasons.
[2015] ICQ 031.
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
and Schedule 6.
See paragraph [36] of these
Wang v Workers’
Compensation Regulator (No 3)
[2023] QIRC 164
Section 131(6)(a).
Section 131(6)(c).
Section 131(6)(a).
Section 131(6)(c).
Wang v Workers’
Compensation Regulator (No 3)
[2023] QIRC 164
, shown by the various headings
appearing between paragraphs [47]-[97].
Wang v Workers’
Compensation Regulator (No 3)
[2023] QIRC 164
At [84]-[87].
[2023] ICQ 13.
Compensation Regulator v Glass
[2020] QCA 133
(2020) 4 QR 693.
Lawless v The Queen
[1979] HCA 49
(1979) 142 CLR 659
at 674-676; and
Ratten v The Queen
[1974] HCA 35
(1974) 131 CLR 510
at 516-517.
R v Young (No 2)
[1969] Qd R 566
; and see generally, the judgment of Jerrard JA in
Katsidis; ex parte Attorney-General (Qld)
[2005] QCA 229
Shrimpton v The Commonwealth
[1945] HCA 4
(1945) 69 CLR
at 629-630; and
Gerlach v Clifton Bricks Pty Ltd
(2002) 209 CLR 478
at [69]-[70] per Kirby and Callinan JJ in dissent on other points.
(2003) 174 QGIG 1009.
was followed
Workers’ Compensation Regulator
[2019] ICQ 14
Carlton v Simon Blackwood (Workers’ Compensation
[2015] ICQ 029
Local Government Association of
Queensland Ltd v Queensland Services Industrial Union of Employees and Ors
[2017] ICQ 002
[2015] ICQ 031.
The decision that Mr Church
had not sustained an “injury” was made after the decision to waive
the time limit. The claim
had been remitted to WorkCover to determine whether an
“injury” had been suffered, WorkCover decided it had not, and
Regulator affirmed that decision on review.
Transcript, 30 July 2024,
T1-14; and Exhibit 12.
T1-15 to T1-18; and Exhibit
The file note made by Ms
Dunnell is Exhibit 16.
Exhibit 17.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (340 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter