URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2020/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
2PL Superannuation Pty Ltd v Skilton [2020] QLAC 5 (9 September 2020)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF
2PL Superannuation Pty Ltd v Skilton
[2020] QLAC 5
Superannuation Pty Ltd
(applicant)
Gerald Skilton
(respondent)
Land Court No MRA201-19
Land Appeal Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
Application for leave to appeal
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
9 September 2020
DELIVERED AT:
Not applicable
Not applicable
FY Kingham, President of the Land Court
Isdale, Member of the Land Court
Application refused.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL – APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL – whether the
applicant can reasonably explain delay – where the delay
business day – where the applicant held genuine belief appeal could be
lodged electronically – where the applicant
did not provide reasonable
explanation for the delay.
APPEAL – APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL
– Whether the respondent could reasonably consider an appeal unlikely
after appeal
period finished – whether the respondent suffered prejudice
as a result of the delay – where the Court has power to extend
the time to
bring an appeal.
APPEAL – APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL –
whether the application has any prospects of success on appeal – whether
the submissions on the prospects of success were competently made – where
the applicant did not demonstrate a prospect of
success if leave granted –
where the respondent’s submissions did not address the prospect of success
– where the
Court found no indication of a prospect of success if leave
APPEARANCES:
Not applicable
I agree with the reasons and order proposed by Member Isdale.
I agree with the reasons and order proposed by Member Isdale.
: Mr Gerald David George Skilton has a 15-year mining lease on
“Rolfe Creek,” a rural property located to the west of
Clermont. It
is an aggregation of two lots, one owned by 2PL Superannuation Pty Ltd and the
other by Patrick and Prue Lonergan, the
directors of that company. The miner and
the owners were unable to agree on the compensation payable to the owners, so
was decided by the Land Court pursuant to
Resources Act 1989
[4] The Land
Court heard the matter on the papers and delivered its decision on 14 February
[5] The Land
Court determined what compensation should be paid to the
Orders were made in favour
of the company only. No issue has been raised in relation to this.
[6] An appeal
from the decision of the Land Court may be brought as provided by
Mineral Resources Act 1989
(Qld). The materially relevant parts of that
section are in the following
“282 Appeal against Land Court’s determination upon
compensation
party aggrieved by a determination of the Land Court made under
section 281
within 20 business days of the date of that determination or within such further
period as the Land Appeal Court, on the application
of that party in that behalf
prior to the lodgement of the appeal, considers appropriate in any particular
circumstances, appeal
against the determination to the Land Appeal Court.
appeal shall be instituted by, within the time and in the manner
prescribed—
in the Land Court, written notice of appeal which shall include the grounds of
appeal; and
copies of the notice of appeal on the chief executive and each other
[7] It is not in
dispute between the parties that the prescribed time for lodging an appeal
expired on Friday 13 March 2020.
[8] The Registry
is open until 4pm for such business as is presently relevant, absent any
direction to the contrary.
direction occurred here.
[9] At 3.59pm on
that day, a notice of appeal with an annexure was emailed to the Registry.
[10] At 4.22pm,
the Senior Registrar, Court Management, sent a reply email pointing out that the
appeal could not be filed by email
and that a filing fee was
prospective appellant, presently the applicant, is stated in the Notice of
Appeal to be the company and Ms Prue Lonergan
has signed as a director.
[12] The appeal
was not lodged as required by
section 282.
applicant then engaged another agent to lodge the appeal, which was accomplished
on the next business day, Monday 16 March
[14] The Court
made orders on 18 March 2020 for the progress of the matter, requiring the
applicant to lodge an application to extend
the date for filing of the appeal.
It is that application which is now before the Court.
[15] The Court
orders provided for the matter to be determined on the filed materials without
an oral hearing.
The submissions of the applicant
applicant submits that leave to extend the date for filing the appeal should be
granted. The Court notes that it would only
be necessary to extend the time by
one business day, to 16 March 2020.
applicant asserts that the respondent has not been disadvantaged. The applicant
has filed an affidavit and exhibits “explaining
the reasons for failing to
file the Notice of Appeal in
two-page affidavit of Prue Madelaine Lonergan, sworn and filed on 19 March 2020
contains only 9 clauses. It sets out that
she is self-represented, acting as an
agent for the company 2PL Superannuation Pty Ltd.
[19] In clause
2, Ms Lonergan
“It was very challenging to complete the complex Notice of Appeal and
Annexure within the timeframe and I was working on it
up until the last day. I
have been able to file all other material in the original matter via email and
expected to be able to do
the same for this.”
affidavit goes on to set out the sending of the email at 3.59pm on 13 March
2020, the reply from the Registry to the effect
that the appeal could not be
lodged by email and that a filing fee was required.
[21] It goes on
to state that as the applicant lives in Clermont it was not possible to remedy
the shortcomings and to achieve the
required timeframe. The Court notes that the
Registry was open until 4pm for the business involved so the defect could not
remedied in the time required since the original email was sent one
minute before the Registry closing time.
affidavit goes on to describe the filing of the Notice of Appeal and payment of
the fee “at the earliest opportunity”
which was the next business
day, Monday 16 March 2020.
[23] The steps
taken to serve Mr Skilton are set out. It is pointed out that he responded by
email at 9.51 am on 17 March 2020. It
is claimed that he has not been
disadvantaged by the lateness of the process, the email to him having been sent
at 12.51pm on 16
March 2020. It is noted that Mr Skilton, is his email, objected
to the appeal on the basis that it was not lodged within the time
explanation of the delay
[24] In her
affidavit, Ms Lonergan states at clause
“8. I made every effort to file the application in time and genuinely
held the mistaken belief that I could file the Application
via email on the day
it was due.”
[25] Clauses 2
and 8 of the affidavit sworn by Ms Lonergan on 19 March 2020 contain the bulk of
what is submitted on behalf of the
applicant. In essence it is said that:
It was very
challenging
Ms Lonergan was
working on it up until the last day
As she had been
able to file material in the Land Court matter by email, she
“expected” to be able to do the same for
an appeal to the Land
Appeal Court.
She believed
that what she did was sufficient (clause 3 of the affidavit)
learned of the incorrectness of her belief from the Registry’s email at
4.22pm on 13 March 2020.
She then acted
promptly to address to problems
Mr Skilton was
not disadvantaged by the delay of one business day.
[26] The essence
of the situation is that the applicant’s agent, Ms Lonergan, had an
expectation that an appeal could be lodged
by email and genuinely held this
mistaken belief. The original defects were rapidly responded to.
[27] This puts
the case for the applicant as favourably as possible. The Court must act fairly
to both parties and notes that this
is a simple error of law. The relevant legal
requirements for lodging an appeal were published and knowable to all, including
operative requirements were ascertainable by anyone in the position of the
prospective appellant. The 20-day time limit set
of the Act was never
in doubt, Ms Lonergan was well aware of it and working to achieve that
requirement. Equally, the prescribed
fee was a matter of public record as was
the fact that no provision for lodging a Notice of Appeal by email has been
[29] The Court
accepts the uncontradicted statements of Ms Lonergan in her affidavit of the
existence of her expectation and belief,
genuine but mistaken.
subjective holding of an erroneous belief as was the case here is not the end of
the matter. In order to secure fairness
to both parties, the Court must look at
the circumstances objectively.
[31] In this
regard it is observed that, in relation to the requirement to pay a filing fee,
there is nothing in the material provided
which asserts that there was any
belief held, far less any basis for doing so, that there was either no fee to be
paid or it could
somehow be paid electronically. At best, it might be inferred
from the material that the matter of a filing fee was simply not
considered.
however, like all aspects of the matter under consideration, must be looked at
objectively to see how reasonable such a
belief would be in the present
Lonergan’s signature appears on page 3 of the Notice of Appeal, the
document which she “was working
On the same page as her
signature, the following words appear:
– PROCEDURE FOR FILING
The Notice of
Appeal may be filed, together with the prescribed fee:
The Registry
Land Court and Tribunal Registry
Level 8, 363 George
The Registrar
Land Court and Tribunal Registry
BRISBANE 4001
The Notice of Appeal must then be served on the Respondent to the
[34] Viewed
objectively, a person in the position of the appellant’s agent could be
expected to apply reasonable skill and attention.
Doing so, however, could not
reasonably lead to holding and maintaining a belief as set out in the affidavit
of Ms Lonergan. The
clear words of
of the Notice of Appeal leave no
room for it.
Conclusion regarding the delay
[35] The Court
is not persuaded that there is a reasonable explanation for the delay. This
conclusion exists independently of the
length of the delay which, while brief,
does not operate to remove the failure to comply with the time provision.
[36] Also, the
inferred belief that no fees would be payable is not reasonably explained.
Simple inattention to the wording of
of the Notice of Appeal form does
not provide a reasonable explanation for failure to meet the requirements for an
The question of prejudice
[37] As has
already been referred to, there was prompt action by the applicant’s agent
once the deficiencies were pointed out
by the Senior Registrar in the email of
4.22pm on 13 March 2020. Subsequently, Mr Skilton was sent an email by
“Pat and Prue
Lonergan” at 12.51pm on Monday 16 March 2020. It
attached the Notice of Appeal and an annexure with the grounds of appeal and
orders sought. Mr Skilton’s email sent at 9.51am on Tuesday 17 March 2020
shows that he was aware of the situation by that
time at the latest.
[38] There is,
effectively, one business day of delay and this is, in itself, minor. It must be
considered in view of the relatively
brief 20 business-day period allowed for
bringing an appeal.
The submissions of the respondent
[39] Mr Skilton
claims that he has suffered prejudice. His email of 9.51am on 17 March 2020
objects that the applicant failed to lodge
the appeal within the 20 business
days allowed. He was keenly aware of the appeal period. He referred to other
appeals and alleged
the current action to be an abuse of process and
[40] The Court
must also consider this submission objectively. The applicant claims that Mr
Skilton has not been disadvantaged. For
his part, he claims the applicant has
delayed and frustrated the progress of the case.
opposing claims must be looked at in view of the factual material provided to
the Court and the relatively brief delay of
one business day.
[42] Mr Skilton
submits that:
“On numerous occasions the applicants have continually left things to
the very last minute to offer argument or prosecute their
case. I truly believe
they did that to delay and frustrate the progress of this whole case. This time
however they had a clear time
frame of 20 days to appeal according to the MRA.
They failed to appeal in that time frame. For this reason alone I request the
now before your honours be dismissed. In their affidavit they claim the
lateness does not disadvantage me ... in fact this and every
other appeal has
disadvantaged me in loss of time and ability to plan and get on with my
[43] Like the
applicant, Mr Skilton is not legally represented. His belief concerning the
motives of the applicant is no doubt genuinely
held. The Court is however
required to consider objectively the material before it. The conclusion of
deliberate delay drawn by Mr
Skilton has not been sufficiently supported by
factual material to be capable of being drawn by the Court. Mr Skilton sets out
chronological information which shows his dealings relating to his mining
activity, but this does not provide a sound basis for the
Court to arrive at the
same conclusions which he has.
Skilton’s submissions are not of assistance in deciding whether a
reasonable explanation was provided for the delay.
For that reason, his
submissions did not need to be addressed prior to drawing that conclusion, which
was made inevitable by the
fundamental deficiency in the applicant’s
[45] Likewise,
Mr Skilton’s material does not demonstrate the existence of conduct
calculated to delay and frustrate the progress
of the case. Nor does it support
a conclusion that he has suffered prejudice by the delay beyond the irritation
caused by it.
[46] The wording
, which allows the Court to extend the time period for an appeal,
precludes a person in Mr Skilton’s position from holding a
expectation that no appeal within the 20 days means no appeal. It does mean that
an appeal will become less likely.
[47] This Court
has so far considered:
(a) the extent of the delay – one
business day
(b) the question of whether the applicant has a reasonable explanation for
the delay – it has concluded that the applicant has
not got such an
explanation.
(c) the aspect of prejudice to the respondent – there is limited
prejudice which has been identified.
[48] The Court
must also consider the prospects of success on
[49] Were the
parties legally represented, their failure to address this consideration would
justify a conclusion that there was no
wish to urge anything in respect of it.
In this case, however, both parties are not legally represented.
[50] In order to
provide the fullest opportunity to both parties, the Court made orders on 15
July 2020, providing them an opportunity
to address this aspect.
applicant was required to file, and serve on the respondent “it’s
written submissions on its prospects of succeeding
submissions made on behalf of the applicant by its agent, Mrs Lonergan, are
brief, containing 11 clauses. Reference is made
to a decision of the Land Court
in support of the concept of the entitlement of a land owner to be compensated
fully and fairly for
Reference is provided to paragraph [8] of the judgment of his Honour Member
Cochrane in support of that proposition.
paragraph is in the following form:
“The application does not
identify in any summary way the length of the access but the attachment which
gives a metes and bounds
description of the access can be calculated to show a
distance of 12570.64 m and the access way is described as being 10 m
[54] Paragraph 8
provides no support for the proposition which is submitted to be found there.
Additionally, it does not assist in
addressing the purpose for which submissions
were required, the applicant’s prospects of succeeding in the appeal. The
may have been intended to be to paragraph 48 of his Honour’s
judgement, where there is a passage quoted from the speech of
Lord Nicholls in
Director of Buildings v Shun Fung Ironworks Ltd
[1995] 1 All ER 846.
There his Lordship stated that a claimant is entitled to be compensated fairly
and fully for his loss (at 852). If this is the intended
reference, it still
fails to address the purpose of the submissions.
submissions refer to the entitlement to compensation and how the Court will
approach its task. It is submitted that the principles
have not been
applied “holistically” and that no value was determined for the
No submissions have been
provided concerning why, for instance, these comments might be supported and
could, if successfully demonstrated,
provide prospects of succeeding in the
submitted that:
“The Grounds of appeal are not the
Applicant’s Submissions in the Appeal and the Appeal cannot be decided on
of them, however they provide sufficient detail and breadth to show
reasonable prospects of
concluded that:
“10. The Grounds for Appeal are detailed and reasonable and provide
more than adequate support for reasonable prospects of success
11. The Appeal Application is bona fide and in the absence of evidence to
the contrary, the court should proceed on the basis that
the claim has a
reasonable prospect of
assertion that grounds of appeal are detailed, reasonable and provide the
support claimed does not make this so. The submissions
made do not provide any
sufficient basis upon which this Court could be satisfied that prospects of
success have been shown, or even
that the matter has been properly
respondent’s written submissions on the applicant’s prospects of
success in the appeal were filed on 10 August
2020. They provide no support for
the applicant and focus on failure to lodge the appeal within the time allowed
and the submission
that no error has been shown in the decision of the Land
respondent also states a desire to “make a cross
and contends that
compensation should be reduced from the level found by the Land
It is not necessary to
consider this for present purposes.
submissions made by the respondent in the matter of the applicant’s
prospects of success in the appeal do nothing to
assist the applicant. Neither
do they weigh against the applicant’s submissions. The applicant’s
submissions themselves
fail to provide any effective support for the view that
the applicant has shown prospects of success in the appeal, were it to
decision of the learned Member is logical and comprehensive. Quite apart from
the shortcomings of the applicant’s material,
a consideration of
everything that is before the Court does not indicate the existence of any
realistic prospects of success of the
proposed appeal.
[63] The Court
must conclude that the applicant has not demonstrated prospects of success in
the appeal.
[64] The delay,
brief though it is, and causing only limited prejudice to the respondent, has
not been the subject of a reasonable
explanation. Additionally, the applicant
has not demonstrated prospects of success on appeal if it were to proceed. For
the reasons
which have been given, the application to grant leave must be
[65] As neither
party was legally represented, no issue of professional costs
Application refused.
Skilton v 2PL
Superannuation (No 2)
[2020] QLC 8
Skilton v 2PL
Superannuation (No 2) [
2020] QLC 8.
Land Court Rules 200 r 50.
Land Court Regulation 2010
Schedule 1, Fees. The prescribed fee is $188.10.
Applicant’s written
submissions, filed 26 March 2020, para 4.
Exhibit “PML-04”
to the affidavit of Prue Madeline Lonergan sworn 19 March 2020.
Affidavit of Prue Madelaine
Lonergan, March 19 2020, Clause 2 of 9.
Affidavit of Mr Gerald David
George Skilton, sworn or affirmed on 14 April 2020. Clause 1.
Ibid. clause 7 Mr Skilton
“I want to get on with my life!”
Buttcroft Pty Ltd v
[2011] QLAC 7
(2011) 32 QLCR 278
Order 1 of the Land Appeal
Court orders made 15 July 2020.
Shimrad Pty Ltd and Anor
v Collins & Ors
[2017] QLC 17.
Applicant’s
submissions dated 28 July 2020, clause 5.
Ibid, clause 8.
Ibid, clauses 10, 11.
Respondent’s
submissions filed 10 August 2020, clause 10.
Ibid, page 6 of 8, clause
Ibid, Page 8. Conclusion.
The last sentence.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (242 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter