URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTBCCM/2009/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Biddlecombe and others listed in the application lodged 24 June 2009 v The Body Corporate for The Mews Bowen Hills CTS 33016 [2009] QCCTBCCM 38 (11 September 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
BIDDLECOMBE AND OTHERS V THE BODY CORPORATE FOR THE MEWS BOWEN HILLS CTS
[2009] CCT KA005-09
BIDDLECOMBE Tim and others
THE BODY CORPORATE FOR THE MEWS BOWEN HILLS CTS 33016
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
11 September 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
2 September 2009
DECISION OF:
Mr K D Dorney QC
CATCHWORDS:
Application for stay of order under appeal – futility of stay –
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 289
Body Corporate and Community Management
(Accommodation Module) Regulation 2008
sections 139
REPRESENTATION:
Ms Virginia Downton, self-represented
RESPONDENT:
Mr Stephen Dacey, secretary, and Ms Nicholle Edwards, treasurer
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
originating application in this proceeding was filed on 24 July 2009. It is an
appeal pursuant to
section 289
Body Corporate and Community Management
”), as facilitated by
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act 2003
application is brought by numerous owners of lots in the Community Titles Scheme
known as “The Mews Bowen Hills” Community
Titles Scheme 33016
(“CTS”). The respondent is the relevant Body Corporate for the CTS.
appeal is against the second of two orders that had been made by Adjudicator R
Miskinis on 17 June 2009. The first order had
authorised expenditure for the
purposes of repairing 4 out of 7 non-functioning lifts; and the second
“order” was to
the effect that, for the purposes of meeting
“this unscheduled expenditure”, the Body Corporate was
to raise a special levy in the sum of the amount of the
sum authorised to be expended and that such levy was payable by way of 3
monthly instalments commencing 1 August 2009.
the appeal, an order was sought for a stay of that second order, pursuant to
section 291 of the
. The hearing of the stay was set down for 2
September 2009, when the Tribunal heard that interlocutory application.
Tribunal has decided that it will refuse the application for the stay for the
reasons that are set out below.
Legislation
289(2) of the
provides that the relevant aggrieved person may
appeal to the Tribunal “but only on a question of law”. Since there
is no dispute in this case that each of the applicants is a “aggrieved
person” or that the appeal body is the Tribunal,
it is unnecessary to
consider this provision any further.
deals with a stay of the operation of an order,
stating, in section 291(1), that the appeal body may stay the order appealed
“to secure the effectiveness of the appeal”. Section 291(2)
then states that a stay –
given on conditions the appeal body considers appropriate;
(b) operates
for the period stated by the appeal body; and
revoked or amended by the appeal body.
291(3) of the
states that the starting of an appeal affects the
order appealed against, or the carrying out of the order, “only if it is
original application before the Adjudicator was brought pursuant to
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation
Module) Regulation 2008
Accommodation Module
there is no appeal against the actual exercise of the power under that order
and, consequently, no application to
stay with respect to it, it is unnecessary
to address it further.
in order to understand the second order of the Adjudicator, it is necessary to
consider further provisions of the
“dispute” is defined by section 226 by reference to section 227. In
turn, section 227(1) defines a dispute as
being a dispute between 9 identified
groups of disputants. It is unnecessary to address those groups further at this
stage. Section
227(2) states that an application by a person mentioned in
section 227(1)(a) to section 227(1)(h) (inclusive) “for a declaratory
order” about the operation of the
is “also” a
“dispute” even if there is no respondent or affected person for the
application. An example
given of this is an application by a body corporate for
an order declaring the financial year for the body corporate.
section 276 deals with the power to make orders. By section 276(1), an
adjudicator to whom a relevant application is referred
may make an order that is
“just and equitable in the circumstances” (including a declaratory
order) to “resolve
a dispute”. By section 276(3), the adjudicator
may make an order mentioned in Schedule 5, although that does not limit the
width of section 276(1) or section 276(2). Schedule 5 contains nothing directly
relevant to a power to make an order such as the
second of the
Adjudicator’s orders, although paragraph 11 of Schedule 5 permits an order
reducing or increasing a contribution
levied on lot owners in certain
circumstances but only if that has been levied by the body corporate.
section 284(1) states that the adjudicator’s order may
“contain” “ancillary and consequential provisions”
adjudicator considers “necessary or appropriate”. Further, section
284(4) states that the adjudicator’s order
may provide that the order is
to have effect as a resolution without consent, a special resolution or an
ordinary resolution.
section 301(3) contains what appears to be the only express power given to an
adjudicator to levy a special contribution
against the owners of lots included
in a community title scheme – but that is clearly inapplicable here as it
deals with orders
made on the appointment of an administrator.
is unnecessary to state much of the detail that surrounds the application to the
Adjudicator. In essence, as a result of unseasonal
rainfall in May 2009
localised flooding caused the basement of the complex which is situated on the
scheme land to be itself flooded
with consequential damage to the sewerage
pipes, the power supply, the fire service apparatus and all 7 lifts (which were
inoperative).
application by the Body Corporate for an order of a specialist adjudicator was
made 15 June 2009 and the orders were made, as
already noted, on 17 June
the Adjudicator’s Reasons, although section 284(1) is mentioned as part of
the relevant legislation, in making the second
of the two orders, the
Adjudicator did not further consider the width of that power.
Opposing contentions
articulated in writing by the applicants, it is contended that the second order
was not made in accordance with the
(for reasons set out in an
attached letter dated 22 July 2009). Additionally, a further ground for seeking
the stay was that the
first instalment for the special levy was due on 15 August
2009 and a decision on the appeal was “unlikely to be made before
attached letter of 22 July 2009 refers to the legislation dealt with above,
contending that: first, that there was never any
relevant “dispute”
concerning the payment of the special levy; secondly, that where, as here, no
administrator has been
appointed, section 301 is irrelevant; and, thirdly, that
the ancillary and consequential powers pursuant to section 284 are not
sufficient to support an order as to such a levy. The applicants raise a
subsidiary point concerning the absence of relevant facts
which would support a
satisfaction as to whether it was either “necessary” or
“appropriate”.
its part, the Body Corporate, as respondent, contends that section 227(2) is
sufficiently broad in the circumstances to support
the exercise of the power by
the Adjudicator in making the second order and, further, that since section
149(1)(c) of the
Accommodation Module
refers to an authorisation under an
“order made under the dispute resolution provisions” the
established and the dispute resolution provisions of
apply. As to the second and third grounds relied upon by
the applicants, while acknowledging that section 301 is inapplicable, the
respondent relies upon section 276 and the power to make an order that is
“just and equitable”. Lastly, as to section
284(1), it disputes
that the second order made was not “both necessary and appropriate”
and contends that section 139(2)
Accommodation Module
sufficient basis for justifying the second order made.
Relevant legal principles
Dunne v Koala Palms Body Corporate & Landtel Pty Ltd T/A Gold Key Body
Corporate Management
[2008] CCT KA010-08, the Tribunal considered such
principles: at [19] – [20]. Relevant parts of those principles here
an important
aspect of the principles is that a stay can be granted “to prevent the
exercise of rights of appeal being rendered
futile” or to prevent
“their exercise in circumstances where restoration of the status quo
cannot be achieved”;
however, it will
not be appropriate to grant a stay unless a sufficient basis is shown to
outweigh the considerations that the judgment
under appeal should not be treated
as merely provisional;
the fundamental
justification for stay orders pending appeal is to ensure that the orders which
might ultimately be made are fully
effective; and
prospects of success are not so strong as to overwhelm the importance of the
consideration that the impedance of the enforcement
of orders should only be so
far as is necessary to ensure that ultimate orders can be given effect without
leaving a residue of injustice,
attention can be directed to the appeal being
rendered nugatory or to whether there would be irremedial prejudice.
Consideration
the interlocutory hearing, an issue having arisen as to what occurred at a later
EGM of the relevant Body Corporate concerning
the very levy that was the subject
of the second order of the Adjudicator, the respondent tendered, and the
Tribunal accepted for
tendering, a copy of the Minutes of an Extraordinary
General Meeting of the Body Corporate held on 30 June 2009. Although those
Minutes were neither signed nor dated, given the width of power that the
Tribunal has pursuant to section 47(4) of the
– being not
bound by the rules of evidence and being able to inform itself in any way it
considers appropriate – the
Tribunal accepted the assurances of the
representatives of the Body Corporate that the document so tendered was a true
and correct
copy of the Minutes.
the applicants’ representative was unable to give any rational reason why
the Tribunal should not accept that those Minutes
(being Exhibit 1) were not a
true and correct record, the Tribunal has proceeded on the basis that they are.
It is clear from those
Minutes that there was a resolution passed by the Body
Corporate at that EGM to the effect that the Body Corporate resolved that
raise a special levy in the sum of $183,680.00 gross (plus GST) to fund the
costs associated with the fixing of the 4 relevant
lifts. Moreover, the
resolution stated that the levy would be paid in 3 instalments with appropriate
due dates and amounts for each.
It reflected exactly the effect of the second
of the Adjudicator’s orders.
minutes showed that the resolution was “CARRIED”.
that there is no basis that has been shown as to why that resolution was not a
valid resolution (for instance, by an attack
on the steps taken to call the
EGM), the Tribunal, at least for the purposes of the stay application, is faced
with a “later”
apparently valid determination by the Body Corporate
pursuant to a power expressly given to the Body Corporate in general meeting,
where that power is correctly exercised by reason of an ordinary resolution.
That is, it is clear from section 139(2) of the
Accommodation Module
the Body Corporate can by ordinary resolution satisfy paragraphs (a), (b) and
(c) in circumstances where it can be properly
argued that a liability had arisen
and that there was “no provision, or inadequate provision” made in
the budget for
it. While the applicants contest that there was no inadequate
provision, the representative of the applicants was unable to point
specific provision that was made in the budget for such a liability, in
circumstances where the written submission of the
applicants merely referred to
the fact that there was some money in the sinking fund which might be used to
fund the required work.
On any reading of the evidence before the Tribunal, it
is clear that even if there was, perchance, some evidence of some provision
being made in the budget, it was clearly inadequate. In any event, the appeal
is limited to questions of law only; and such evidence
as there is would permit
the factual conclusions necessary to be reached. As to the amount that has been
raised, that is not a relevant
factor for this Tribunal to consider because no
application has been filed which contests the resolution concerning the levying
the special contribution by the EGM on 30 June 2009. As a survey of the
legislation conducted earlier shows, it is possible under
Schedule 5, in an
appropriately brought application, for a specialist adjudicator to make an order
pursuant to paragraph 11 of Schedule
5. But this does not arise for
consideration here.
fact that the Body Corporate has made what on the face of it is a valid
resolution to fix a levy which is in exactly the same
terms as the second order
of the Adjudicator must inevitably lead to the conclusion that the granting of a
stay of that second order
would be futile (within the meaning of that term as
decided on relevant principles). Expressed in the terms of the relevant
principles,
since it is open to grant a stay to prevent the exercise of rights
which might otherwise be rendered futile, if those rights have
been rendered
futile by external events, then the basis for such a stay is unable to be
established.
means that it is unnecessary to consider in any detail the submissions
concerning the possible success of the attack on the legality
of the second
order made by the Adjudicator. Even if it was so strong that the second order
should be impeded from being enforced,
there would be no utility in this
circumstance of futility. Hence, it is also unnecessary to consider either the
nugatory question
or the question of irremedial prejudice.
that, the Tribunal does express the view that the ancillary power that section
284(1) of the
contains does not seem to be sufficiently powerful
to make an “order” that is otherwise justifiable only under a
provision of the relevant module, being here the
Accommodation
. The mere fact that there is another provision in the
Accommodation Module
which permits the actual spending to be authorised
under an order made under the dispute resolution provisions, while undoubtedly
bringing into effect section 284(1), does not broaden the interpretation that
should be given to section 284(1) when considering
the orders to be made.
Further, the “just and equitable” power under section 276(1) is one
exercisable only in accordance
with the law: see
Body Corporate for Palm
Springs Residences CTS 29467 v J Patterson Holdings Pty Ltd
[2008] QDC 300
– [95]. It does not reflect any notion of “palm tree”
it is undoubtedly an order that is directly connected with the actual spending,
it should be understood that, first, section
Accommodation
deals with spending by the Committee of the Body Corporate only
– which would make it extremely unlikely that any authorisation
only be made by the Body Corporate in General Meeting by an ordinary resolution
would be within the ambit of an adjudicator’s
power under section
149(1)(c) - and, secondly, in such a context, both “ancillary” and
“consequential” should
be interpreted as merely facilitative and not
substantive.
summary, the Tribunal is of the view that it may well have been beyond the
powers given to the Adjudicator here to make the second
order. The nature of
the “order” made potentially takes it out of any characterisation as
being a “declaratory
order about the operation” of the
within the meaning and terms of section 227(2). But if it were to be
characterised as “declaratory”, then the “entitlement”
declared would not operate to effect an order for an actual levy. The failure
to fall within either section 227(1) or section 227(2)
with reference to the
levying may also mean that there was a lack of jurisdiction to deal with the
issue of a levy.
although it may well have been reasonably arguable that the Adjudicator had
neither the jurisdiction nor the power to make any
order with respect to the
special levy, the fact that there appears to have been a valid resolution by the
Body Corporate within
the meaning and terms of section 139(2) of the
Accommodation Module
which effected exactly the same thing as that
seemingly done by the second order of the Adjudicator must mean that it is
irrelevant,
in practical terms, that the Tribunal might well at the end of the
hearing of this proceeding set aside the second order of the Adjudicator.
any event, given the obvious high emotions that surround this issue of the
“levy”, it is preferable in these circumstances
(given the above
conclusions) that there be seen to be no conflict (ever if apparent only)
between the resolution of the EGM on 30
June 2009 and any other circumstance
involving the levy – which could potentially occur if a stay order were to
be granted.
consequence, the application for the stay will be refused.
the circumstances of both parties being unrepresented, in the absence of
significant legal complexity there is no need for any
consideration to be given
to any order for costs.
______________________________
MR K D DORNEY QC
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (796 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter