URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTBCCM/2009/34.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chesterton v Body Corporate for Kiwi Court CTS 12925 [2009] QCCTBCCM 34 (26 August 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
CHESTERTON v BODY CORPORATE FOR KIWI COURT CTS 12925
CHESTERTON Raymond
BODY CORPORATE FOR KIWI COURT CTS 12925
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
26 August 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
27 July 2009
DECISION OF:
Ms C Heyworth-Smith
CATCHWORDS:
Body Corporate and Community Management – Adjustment of Contribution
Schedule Lot Entitlement – Adjustment of Interest
Schedule Lot Entitlement
REPRESENTATION:
Self-represented
RESPONDENT:
Mr John Hunt for and on behalf of the Body Corporate for Kiwi Court CTS
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
an application filed on 17 February 2009 the applicant sought an adjustment to
the contribution lot entitlement schedule for the
respondent Body Corporate
pursuant to
Body Corporate and Community Management Act
as facilitated by
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal
correspondence dated 11 March 2009 directed to the Commercial and Consumer
Tribunal and copied to the Secretary of the respondent,
the applicant amended
his application to include an application for adjustment of the interest
schedule of the Respondent.
respect to the application to alter the contribution schedule lot entitlement,
the Applicant disputes that the current contribution
schedule, whereby his lot
entitlement is twice that of any of the other lots, is “just and
equitable” within the meaning
section 48(6)
of the Act. The interest
schedule lot entitlements for lots in this Body Corporate are identical to the
contribution schedule lot
entitlements as the scheme (or, more precisely as it
was then known, “the group title”) was established before the
commencement
Body Corporate and Community Management Act
therefore prior to there being a requirement for the two schedules. I
understand from the material placed before me by the parties
that this is the
first time that an adjustment to the schedules has been proposed since the group
title was first created in 1976.
respondent wishes to retain the contribution lot entitlement schedule as it is
on the basis that, notwithstanding the fact that
it is not equal, it is just and
equitable within the meaning of
section 48(6)
of the Act. It disputes the
adjustment sought by the Applicant to the interest schedule lot entitlements on
the basis that the applicant
would, if the adjustment was made, be required to
pay only 25% of the insurance premium on the building, whereas his share of the
total building is 39%.
Legislation
Body Corporate and Community Management Act
establishes
the general principles for the application of lot entitlements to a community
titles scheme. A contribution schedule
lot entitlement is the basis for
calculating the lot owner’s share of amounts levied by the Body Corporate
unless the extent
of the lot owners’ obligation to contribute to a levy
for a particular purpose is specifically otherwise provided for in the
section 47(2)(a).
It is also the basis for calculating the value of the lot
owner’s vote for voting on an ordinary resolution if a poll is conducted:
section 47(2)(b).
section 47(3)
, the interest schedule lot entitlement is the basis for
calculating the lot owner’s share of common property, the lot
interest on termination of the scheme including the lot
owner’s share of body corporate assets on termination of the scheme,
the unimproved value of the lot for the purposes of a charge, levy, rate or tax
that is payable directly to a local government,
the commissioner of land tax or
other authority and that is calculated and imposed on the basis of unimproved
schedule is used to calculate liability of the owner for the supply of a utility
service to the lot if the amount of the utility
service is capable of separate
measurement and the owner is billed directly:
section 47(4).
establish the mechanism for the adjustment of a lot entitlement
schedule. An application may be made by an owner of a lot pursuant
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act
section 48(2)
Body Corporate and Community Management Act
, the Body Corporate must
be the respondent to the application. By
section 48(5)
the order that may be
made by the Tribunal must be consistent with
section 48(6)
if the order is about
the contribution schedule or
section 48(7)
if the order is about the interest
schedule. It is worth setting out those sub-sections in full:
“48(6) For the contribution schedule, the respective lot
entitlements should be equal, except the extent to which it is just
equitable in the circumstances for them not to be equal.
(7) For the interest schedule, the respective lot entitlements should
reflect the respective market values of the lots included in
the scheme when the
specialist adjudicator or the CCT makes the order, except to the extent to which
it is just and equitable in
the circumstances for the individual lot
entitlements to reflect other than the respective market values of the
provides guidance in terms of the criteria to be used by the Tribunal for
deciding what is just and equitable in the circumstances
of each case. Without
limiting the matters to which the Tribunal may have
sections 49(4)
and (5) provide as follows:
“49(4) The specialist adjudicator or the CCT may have
regard to –
(a) how the community titles scheme is structured; and
(b) the nature, features and characteristics of the lots included in the
scheme; and
(c) the purposes for which the lots are used.
specialist adjudicator or the CCT may not have regard to any knowledge or
understanding the Applicant had, or any lack of
knowledge or understanding on
the part of the Applicant, at the relevant time, about –
lot entitlement for the subject lot or other lots included in the community
titles scheme; or
purpose for which a lot entitlement is used.”
section 49(6)
the “relevant time” means the time the applicant
entered into a contract to by the subject lot.
provisions where considered by the Court of Appeal in
Fischer & Ors v
Body Corporate for Centrepoint CTS 7779
[2004] QCA 214.
Chesterman J said,
“That question, whether a schedule should be adjusted, is
to be answered with regard to the demand made on the services and
provided by a body corporate to the respective apartments or their contribution
to the costs incurred by the body corporate.
A more general consideration of
amenities, value or history are to be disregarded. What is at issue is the
“equitable”
distribution of the costs.”
considering the explanatory notes to the legislation and to the second reading
speech, his Honour continued, at [30]:
“These materials make it tolerably plain that the Act is
intended to produce a contribution lot entitlement schedule which divides
corporate expenses equally except to the extent that the apartments
disproportionately give rise to those expenses or disproportionately
services. That determination can only be made by reference to factors which
have a financial impact or consequence on the
body corporate. It cannot be
affected by factors which go to an apartment’s value or
amenities.”
“Kiwi Court” CTS 12925 came into existence on the commencement of
Body Corporate and Community Management Act
. Prior to the
commencement of the Act it had existed as a result of the registration of
Building Units Plan 2204 on 16 August
freestanding building consisting of 5 units: 2 on the ground floor, 2 on the
first floor (these 4 being towards the front
of the building) and unit 3 which
has 2 floors and is toward the back of the building. Unit 3 is comprised of the
original house
standing on the lot which was constructed on a date unknown to
the parties but possibly in about 1966. The 4 units at the front
constructed in 1976 and as a consequence, on 16 August 1976 the Building Units
plan was registered to create the group title.
registration of the Building Units Plan the schedule of unit entitlement
appeared as follows:
Entitlement
original BUP 2204 reveals that the floor areas of the 5 lots are as follows:
Lot 1 – 55m
Lot 2 – 55m
Lot 3 – 155m
on Level A and 84m
Lot 4 – 55m
Lot 5 – 55m
aspect of the case which has been the cause of some disputation between the
parties is that the BUP 2204 as registered includes
the patio and balcony of lot
3 as part of the area of the lot and yet the patios around units 1 and 2 and the
balconies above that
patio around units 4 and 5 as part of the common property.
At some time in the past, fences or gates have been erected between the
area outside unit 1 and unit 2 and the balcony area outside unit 4 and unit 5
giving the impression that those areas are part
of those lots, respectively, or
have been the subject of exclusive licences granted to the owners of the those
lots. A body corporate
may grant an exclusive licence with respect to an area
of the common property in the way, and to the extent, authorised under the
regulation module applying to the scheme:
section 154(2).
Body Corporate
and Community Management (Small Schemes Module) Regulation
this scheme and, by
regulation 95
, the Body Corporate may grant a licence for
more than 3 years of part of the common property if authorised by resolution
dissent or for less than 3 years if authorised by special
resolution.
of the parties placed material before me to suggest that any such exclusive
licences have ever been granted to the owners
of the those lots. I have some
sympathy, however, with the applicant’s evidence of exclusive usage of
those patio and balcony
areas by the owners of the lots and I would, indeed, be
surprised if the owners of lots 1, 2, 4, and 5 regularly used each others
and balconies without invitation or consent of the owners of those units,
respectively. It is not necessary, however, for
me to determine that
lots 2 and 3 on the ground level is a laundry which is common property. The
applicant has given evidence that he does not
utilise the laundry but, I
understand that he does not assert that he is not entitled to do so.
lot owners have each been allocated a carparking space towards the rear of the
lot. Lot 1’s space is 13m
. The remainder are
Chesterton, the applicant, gave evidence on his own behalf. He said that his
unit does not consume twice the resources and incur
twice the expenditure of the
Body Corporate than the other units. For example, he said that the painting of
unit 3 does not require
twice as much paint, nor does it require twice as much
time. Whilst more surface area of the external walls of unit 3 require paint,
it does not have as many “fiddly” areas to be painted such as the 19
downpipes which must be painted around the rest
of the building and the meter
boxes and facia. He also noted that there was a large stucco wall at the front
of unit 4 which would
also require painting.
Chesterton gave evidence that the square meterage figures used by the respondent
and, indeed, his expert with respect to the size
of the roof above his lot
versus the other lots was too great. He formed this view on the basis that
either the other lots’
patios and balconies should be treated as part of
their lots or that his should not. I have dealt with this point above and do
accept Mr Chesterton’s conclusion in this regard although I can
readily understand how he reached that conclusion.
considerable amount of cross-examination was taken up with the question of usage
of the laundry, balconies, the turning area in
front of the carports and the
application of termite protection. Save for the issue concerning the
expenditure on termite treatments,
these points are not relevant to the
determination which must be made in this case.
Chesterton gave evidence that he had only been able to find one termite bait on
the common property and disputed that the construction
material of his unit
required greater expenditure on protection from termites than the remainder of
the building.
applicant relied on a report from Craig Brennan of QBS Strata Management dated 9
Brennan had been commissioned to provide a survey of the contribution
entitlements applicable to the Body Corporate and to furnish
a report on the
appropriate contribution lot entitlements. In doing so, Mr Brennan adopted a 3
step methodology. The first step
involved arriving at the typical annual
expenditure incurred by the Body Corporate. This was expressed in tables 3 and
report in respect of both the administration and sinking funds. I do
not understand the respondents to have taken any issue with
his performance of
this step save that they do not agree that the repainting that occurred in 2006
should have been removed from
the equation. I accept Mr Brennan’s
evidence on this point that including the same would have made no effective
to his conclusions.
second step was to categorise the costs incurred by the Body Corporate based on
the underlying principle in
Fischer & Ors v Body Corporate for
Centrepoint CTS 7779
[2004] QCA 214.
This requires that all costs are
shared equally between the lots except where it can be shown that a lot
disproportionately gives
rise to those expenses or disproportionately consumes
services. I accept that this is the correct course to take and note that in
doing so Mr Brennan has adopted the methodology approved of by the Court of
Appeal in that case. He has done so as follows:
“We divide categories of costs according to the following
Method A – Costs shared equally.
Costs which have not been caused directly, or disproportionately, by a
particular lot, are to be shared equally in compliance with
the general
principle stated above.
These would include, for example, administration costs, banking fees and
normal repairs and maintenance costs not particularly linked
to a lot. The
general principle is that these costs are costs where no particular lot or lots
disproportionately give rise to the
costs or disproportionately consumed the
We have also included the balustrading costs under this category. On our
inspection of the scheme land we noted that lot 3 has balustrading
on the upper
level only and so in our view it is fair to say that each lot should equally
contribute to the balustrading expenses.
Method B – Costs shared on the basis of internal lot
Certain costs are properly to be shared on the basis of the internal lot
area of each lot and these are reflected in the calculations
under Method B. We
note that the internal lot area has been surveyed by Landsurv and have utilised
these areas.
Method C – Costs shared on the basis of total lot
Certain costs are to be allocated with regard to the total are of the lot
which include rooftop costs.
Method D – Costs shared on any other basis
We do not believe there are any other categories of costs
third step was to calculate the appropriate contribution entitlements for the
scheme which followed on from the categories set
Brennan’s conclusions in this regard are set out in table 1 to his report.
They give rise to the following calculation:
Current Entitlement
Proposed Entitlement
relation to the alteration in the interest schedule lot entitlements, Mr
Chesterton tendered a valuation report from Nathan Cobb
of Herron Todd
The date of
the valuation was 2 June 2009.
Section 48(7)
requires that I consider the
respective market values of the lots included in the scheme when I make the
order in relation to this
application. The respondent did not require Mr Cobb
for cross-examination. It accepts that if market valuations are to be used,
valuation provided by Mr Cobb was reasonable at the current time. The
respondent contends, however, that such an allocation
would rise to an inequity
when the nature of the units are taken into consideration as the applicant would
be required to pay only
25% of the insurance premium of the building whereas his
share of the total building (according to the Respondent) 39%. The respondent
goes on to say that if the building were to be destroyed, the applicant would
receive replacement insurance to the extent of only
64% of his rebuilding costs.
I do not have evidence before me as to the terms of the insurance policy and
without the same cannot
accept that that would be the outcome however I am not
required to determine the same for the purposes of this application.
Cobb has set out market values and corresponding interest entitlements in his
report as follows:
Market Value
Current Entitlement
Proposed Entitlement
respondent tendered a letter signed by Mrs J.M. Couch as secretary of the Body
Couch, Mr John Hunt and Mr David Hansen, all owners of lots in the Body
Corporate, were present in Court and agreed amongst
them that Mr John Hunt was
the appropriate witness for the respondent as he had the greatest knowledge of
the matters referred to
in the respondent’s statement/reply. He agreed
that there may be areas about which he did not have any direct knowledge and
would bring that to the Tribunal’s attention. A couple of such matters
did arise but they are not germane to the determination
of the matters in issue
in this application.
the apparent level of contention between the parties, when one considers the
statements and evidence in detail, there is not,
in fact, a great deal of
disputation on the evidence. The main points in issue have related to the
roofing costs, painting and the
termite treatment and control. The level of
expenditure with respect to the roofing costs will turn on the areas of roof in
As mentioned earlier, Mr Brennan of QBS Strata Management gave
evidence that the difference between the parties really made no difference
the ultimate allocation of entitlements for the purposes of the contribution lot
entitlement schedule. Mr Hunt agreed that this
would probably be the case and I
accept that it is the case.
to the painting, those on the applicant’s side of the record contended
that the more difficult and time consuming elements
of the painting of lots 1,
2, 4 and 5 would give rise to the same consumption of Body Corporate resources
as the greater area requiring
to be painted in respect of unit 3. Those on the
respondent’s side of the record assert to the contrary. None of the
called by any of the parties was a qualified or experienced painter.
I note that the applicant contends that the respondent did
not take into account
the painting of the 19 downpipes which would effect the front part of the
building nor the painting of the
meter boxes or the painting of the large area
of stucco on the front of the unit block. I am not satisfied that the painting
respect to unit 3 would consume resources above and beyond the allocation
given by Mr Brennan in his report.
respondent contends that the nature, features and characteristics of unit 3
dictate that it consumes greater Body Corporate resources
in respect of termite
treatment and control. Mr Hunt has given evidence that termite baits were
placed at 4 to 5 metre intervals
around the exterior of the building. Mr
Chesterton noted that he had not been able to find more than one such bait.
Again, this
point is not, of itself, relevant to the determination of the
matters in issue between the parties. Without expert opinion on the
question of
the need for termite control I am not prepared to accept that unit 3 consumes
Body Corporate resources to an extent greater
than that allocated to it in Mr
Brennan’s report.
the reasons mentioned above, I am of the view that it is just and equitable in
the circumstances of this case, and taking into
account how the community titles
scheme is structured, the nature, features and characteristics of the building
and the purposes
for which the lots are and have been used, that the
contribution lot entitlements should not be equal. I also, however, accept that
the level of inequality as between the lots as currently reflected in the
contribution schedule is not appropriate and is not just
and equitable. I find
that the apportionment given in Mr Brennan’s report is just and equitable.
section 48(7)
of the Act, in considering the application for the adjustment
of the interest schedule, the Tribunal must consider whether and to
that it is just and equitable in the circumstances for the individual lot
entitlements to reflect other than the respective
market values of the lots.
The point raised against the use of the market values by the respondent is that
lot 3 is larger than
the other lots and would cost more to reinstate. There is
no evidence before me, and I am not prepared to accept, that this factor
requires a departure from the use of the market values of the lot for the
purposes of making this determination. I am not,
in any event, satisfied that
any such difference would not be taking up with the fact that the proposed
interest entitlement for
lot 3 is 4/16ths as opposed to 3/16ths for the others.
adjustments to the contribution schedule lot entitlements and the interest
schedule lot entitlements in favour of one lot owner
necessarily prejudices the
others as their contributions will increase, the spirit and purpose of the
legislation in this regard
overrides any such concerns of sympathy for the other
lot owners, as does the fact that the applicant has been paying levies and
making contributions at a rate higher than is required by the legislation for
the last 12 years.
the conclusions I have reached above, I order that:
contribution schedule lot entitlement for Kiwi Court CTS 12925 be adjusted such
that the entitlements be as follows:
Entitlement
(2) The interest schedule lot entitlement for Kiwi Court CTS 12925 be adjusted
such that the entitlements be as follows:
Entitlement
are governed by
sections 70
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal
. Pursuant to those provisions the “main” purpose of
division 7 of that Act is to have the parties pay their own costs
interests of justice require otherwise. In this case neither party has been
represented by a lawyer but I note that the
applicant would have incurred
considerable outlays in terms of the costs of the expert witnesses. I note the
great deal of time
and attention paid to the case by the respondent and that
their sensible approach with respect to some of the matters in issue has
the time that this case might otherwise have taken. I am minded to order that
the respondent pay the costs of the applicant
in relation to the expert
witnesses but not otherwise, however I am mindful that the parties may have a
different view. To that
end, I make the following orders:
applicant provide to the Tribunal and to the respondent a schedule of costs
incurred in respect of expert witnesses together
with copies of the supporting
documentation as to those costs by, 4:00pm on 10 September 2009.
(4) The parties
have leave to file with the Tribunal and serve on each other a copy of any
submissions they wish to make as to costs
by, 4:00pm on 17 September 2009.
Respondent’s Obligations
required by
section 48(10)
, once the Tribunal orders an adjustment of a lot
entitlement schedule the respondent, as the relevant Body Corporate, must
quickly as practicable” lodge a request to record a new
Community Management Statement reflecting the adjustment ordered.
B(1) to the Respondent’s
Exhibit 3 – Report of Barrie Green, Landsurv Pty Ltd dated 2 June
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (879 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter