URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2011/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Buttcroft Pty Ltd v Edgar [2011] QLAC 7 (12 September 2011)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Buttcroft Pty Ltd v Edgar
[2011] QLAC 0007
Buttcroft Pty Ltd
(Applicant)
Jeffrey Ridgway Edgar
(Respondent)
Land Appeal Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
Application for leave to appeal
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
12 September 2011
DELIVERED AT:
Rockhampton
HEARING DATE:
On the Papers
Member PA Smith
Member WL Cochrane
The application is refused.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL – APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL – extent of delay
– whether the applicant can reasonably explain delay
APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL – whether the applicant has any prospects
of success on appeal
Land Court Act
Resources Act 1989
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission v Rich and Another
[2005] NSWSC 149
Buttcroft Pty Ltd v
[2010] QLC 0139
Coulton v Holcombe
[1986] HCA 33
(1986) 162 CLR
Director General Department of Transport v Hibiscus Holdings Pty
[1995] 15 QLCR 408
Fox v Percy
University of Wollongong v Metwally (No 2)
(1985) 59 ALJR
SOLICITORS:
Mr L Coleman, as agent for the applicant
Rees R & Sydney Jones, for the respondent
[1] THE COURT: The applicant, Buttcroft Pty Ltd, seeks an extension of time in
which to institute an appeal against a decision of
the Land Court. That
application is opposed by the respondent, Jeffrey R Edgar.
The Proceedings
[2] The proceedings concern the determination of compensation for the
further renewal of a Mining Lease 5856 under the provisions
Resources Act 1989
(Qld) (“MRA”). The applicant is the miner and
the respondent a grazier and the landowner on which the mining is to be
conducted. The issue relevant on appeal between the parties is the compensation
payable for loss of the use of surface area for
grazing. The Land Court
determined that the miner pay to the landowner the sum of $1,638 per annum as
compensation for loss of possession
of the surface area plus $163.80 per annum
in advance “being the 10% allowance in recognition of the compulsory
nature of the
process” provided by
s.281(4)(e)
Mineral Resources
Relevant Matters
[3] It is well established that the relevant
matters to consider on an application for extension of time to lodge an appeal
(a) the extent of the delay;
(b) whether the applicant has any reasonable
explanation for the delay;
(c) any prejudice to the respondent;
prospects of success on appeal.
[4] The determination was made on 12 November 2010.
Section 282(1)
of the MRA provides that “a party aggrieved by a determination of the Land
Court made under
section 281
may within 20 business days of the date of that
determination or within such further period as the Land Appeal Court, on the
application
of that party in that behalf prior to the lodgement of the appeal,
considers appropriate in any particular circumstances, appeal
against the
determination to the Land Appeal Court”.
[5] Thus the applicant had
until 10 December 2010 to lodge its appeal. Notice was first given to the
respondent and to the Court
of an intention to appeal when the applicant
purported to file a Notice of Appeal on 18 February 2011. Hence the delay is in
order of two months and whilst that is a significant delay it is not
inordinate.
The Explanation for the Delay
[6] The applicant contends that
it did not become aware of the determination being handed down until 17 January
2011, long after the
appeal period had expired. Hence its delay in commencing
an appeal. It then thought that it had 42 days in which to lodge an appeal
because of a reference to that period on the Court’s website. The website
in fact reads: “A party intending to appeal
against a decision of the
Land Court must, within 42 days (unless otherwise specified in legislation)
after the court's decision
is given to the party, serve notice of appeal”
(underlining added). Here another period is specified in the legislation.
reference was not made to the legislation.
[7] If it be accepted
that the applicant did not learn of the decision until 17 January, there is a
reasonable explanation for the
delay at least until then and for a reasonable
period thereafter to enable some response to be filed. A failure to examine the
legislation
to be aware accurately of one’s rights is not reasonable.
Hence no reasonable explanation attaches to at least some weeks
of the delay.
[8] The respondent submits that the Court should reject the claimed delay in
the provision to the applicant of the Land Court’s
determination. That is
so because the Court records show that a letter enclosing the decision was sent
out to each of the parties
on 12 November 2010. The respondent duly received
his copy about 5 days later. Why the applicant did not receive its copy is
unexplained.
[9] In our view the applicant’s explanation for the delay
should be accepted. That is so for three reasons. First there is
affidavit as to when the letter for the Court was received. We would be
reluctant to make a finding of deliberate perjury
effectively on the papers.
Secondly, there are markings on the envelope that to some extent support the
claim that the letter was
not processed by Australia Post until late December.
Thirdly, the floods in Queensland certainly disrupted services of all types
through late December - early January and so the claimed late delivery is not
inherently improbable.
[10] No prejudice is alleged.
Prospects of Success
[11] Those being the relevant considerations,
despite the lengthy delay and some part of it being the fault of the applicant,
grant the application to extend time provided that the appeal had some
reasonable prospect of success. The lack of prejudice and
the relative
shortness of the period of delay that can be attributed to the fault of the
applicant require that approach.
[12] As best can be determined from the
applicant’s material the grounds of the appeal are:
(a) the Member failed to take into account that the respondent “had
admitted that in the 20 years he had not withdrawn his
cattle and therefore
suffered no loss of production”;
(b) the respondent admitted he
accepted compensation payments in that 20 year period and hence made a
(c) “the statutory minimum (10%)” (presumably the 10%
provided for in
s.281(4)(e)
Mineral Resources Act 1989
(d) The witness Mr Hamilton was biased and “cannot be accepted
as an expert witness” as he had had business dealings with
respondent;
(e) The MRA “does not state that the land owner should
profit only compensation.”
[13] To understand those grounds and to assess their prospects it is necessary
to consider the findings below.
The Findings Below
[14] No witnesses were
called on behalf of the miner. The respondent gave evidence and called a Mr
Noel Peter Hamilton, a livestock
agent and salesman with 40 years experience in
this work. Mr Hamilton gave evidence by telephone and was cross-examined. The
findings were:
“[13] The evidence of Mr Edgar, supported by
that of Mr Hamilton, was that the land the subject of this mining tenure would
conservatively carry, in the long term, 14 weaner heifers during the 39 weeks of
each year that the paddock is used. It is spelled
for the remainder of the year
to allow the grass to recover.
[14] The landowner is not asking for any
compensation for the 13 weeks in a year when the land would normally not be used
for grazing.
[15] The weaners are, on average, about 200 kg in
[16] The evidence of carrying capacity was tested in
cross-examination but did not change.
[17] The evidence was that agistment of
cattle such as those normally "backgrounded" in this paddock would cost $3 per
head per week.
Doing the maths of 14 cattle at $3 per week for 39 weeks per year
for 5 years yields $8,190 which is contended for as the cost of
not being able
to use the land once it has been fenced off for mining.
[18] Although it was
suggested on behalf of the miner that in the past the land had been grazed while
subject to a mining tenure,
the evidence is that the land will be fenced so that
stock will be excluded.
[19] The evidence by and for the landowner provides
a cogent basis for the claim of $8,190 being attributable to loss of the use of
the surface area. I am satisfied that the evidence of the use of the relevant
area is reliable and having seen the demeanour of Mr
Edgar in the witness box
and heard his evidence, and heard the evidence of Mr Hamilton, I accept their
evidence as witnesses of truth.
No contrary evidence was given or called by or
on behalf of the
Consideration
relevant provisions of the MRA that govern the determination of compensation by
the Land Court in the circumstances that
prevail here are contained in
provide, inter alia:
281 Determination of
compensation by Land Court
(1) At any time before an agreement is made pursuant to
section 279
person who could be a party to such agreement may apply in writing to the mining
registrar to have the Land Court determine the
amount of compensation and the
terms, conditions and times of payment thereof.
(2) The Land Court is hereby authorised to hear and determine matters
referred to in subsection (1).
(3) Upon an application made under subsection (1), the Land Court shall
settle the amount of compensation an owner of land is entitled
compensation for—
(b) in the case of compensation referred to in
section 280
(i) diminution of the value of the land of the owner or any improvements
(ii) diminution of the use made or which may be made of the land of the owner
or any improvements thereon;
(iii) all loss or expense that arises;
as a consequence of the grant or renewal of the mining lease.
(4) In assessing the amount of compensation payable under
subsection (3)—
(a) where it is necessary for the owner of land to obtain replacement land of
a similar productivity, nature and area or resettle
himself or herself or
relocate his or her livestock and other chattels on other parts of his or her
land or on the replacement land,
all reasonable costs incurred or likely to be
incurred by the owner in obtaining replacement land, the owner’s
resettlement
and the relocation of the owner’s livestock or other chattels
as at the date of the assessment shall be considered;
(b) no allowance shall be made for any minerals that are or may be on or
under the surface of the land concerned;
(c) if the owner of land proves that the status and use currently being made
(prior to the application for the grant of the mining
lease) of certain land is
such that a premium should be applied—an appropriate amount of
compensation may be determined;
(d) loss that arises may include loss of profits to the owner calculated by
comparison of the usage being made of land prior to the
lodgement of the
relevant application for the grant of a mining lease and the usage that
be made of that land after the grant;
(e) an additional amount shall be determined to reflect the compulsory nature
of action taken under this part which amount, together
with any amount
determined pursuant to paragraph (c), shall be not less than 10% of the
aggregate amount determined under subsection
[16] The principles that govern this appeal are set out in
which provides, so far as is relevant:
“(1) A party aggrieved by a determination of
the Land Court made under
section 281
may, within 20 business days of the date
of that determination or within such further period as the Land Appeal Court, on
the application
of that party in that behalf prior to the lodgement of the
appeal, considers appropriate in any particular circumstances, appeal
the determination to the Land Appeal Court.
(3) The Land Appeal Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine an
appeal under this section.
(4) In deciding an appeal, the Land Appeal Court must consider the things
relevant to the appeal that the Land Court was required
to consider when making
the decision appealed against.
(5) Upon hearing an appeal under subsection (1) the Land Appeal Court
(a) vary the determination of the Land Court in such way as it thinks just;
(b) disallow the appeal and confirm the determination of the Land Court;
and may make such order as to costs of the appeal as it thinks fit.
(6) The Land Appeal Court shall not admit further evidence upon an appeal
from a determination of the Land Court under subsection
(1) unless—
(a) it is satisfied that admission of the evidence is necessary to avoid
grave injustice and there is sufficient reason that the evidence
previously adduced; or
(b) the appellant and respondent agree to its admission.”
[17] No submission is made that the Land Court applied any wrong principle in
making the determination save in respect of his application
With respect, in that regard it is plain that the Land Court had no
discretion in the matter. The legislation provides that an
additional 10%, at
least, is to be allowed over and above the amount of compensation determined
under subsection (3) – no amount
was allowed under paragraph (c) and so
that part of the subsection is irrelevant. That additional component is to
the compulsory nature of action taken under this part”.
The applicant’s complaint about the application of the provision
have any prospect of success. It is statutorily mandated.
[18] That leaves
for determination the issues that the applicant agitates concerning the
determination of compensation under subsection
(3). We turn then to those
remaining complaints.
[19] There are at least two difficulties in the way of
the first two grounds that concern what had occurred over the past 20 years.
The first is the non sequitur that a failure to withdraw cattle equates to no
loss of production. The second and more fundamental
point is that the question
for the Land Court was not what had happened in the past but rather what was
likely to happen in the future
given the mining intended to be undertaken, the
impact on the landowner’s use of his land and the reasonable steps that
be taken to minimise that impact. Whether the landowner had been over or
under compensated in the past was irrelevant to that question.
To complain that
the Land Court failed to consider irrelevant matters does not assist the
[20] Here there was an express finding made, based on the
evidence, that because of the mining activities intended to be pursued,
in question would need to be fenced off and hence not accessible by the
landowner. That indeed was the applicant’s
case. It was not in issue.
The assessment then depends on the acceptance of the use made of the land and of
the agistment and carrying
rates adopted. While the applicant may not accept
the claimed use or those rates there was no evidence led to the contrary in
of those matters. Not only that, there was an express acceptance by the
Land Court that “the evidence of the use of the relevant
reliable”, and he based that assessment on his observations of the
witnesses. As he observed in his reasons: “having
seen the demeanour of
Mr Edgar in the witness box and heard his evidence, and heard the evidence of Mr
Hamilton, I accept their evidence
as witnesses of truth”.
Court’s ability to interfere with such findings is circumscribed. As is
apparent from the legislation fresh evidence
is not normally to be admitted. No
application has been made to admit fresh evidence under
attempt made to demonstrate any grave injustice if this Court proceeds on the
basis of the present evidence.
[22] Whatever be the true nature of the appeal
under the MRA,
where, as here, the appeal is
to be decided on the basis of the evidence adduced below, with the Court having
no opportunity itself
to assess the witnesses, the applicant faces a difficult
task in overturning findings of fact. It may be that the appeal is not
a rehearing. We do not decide the issue. But assuming in the applicant’s
favour that the appeal is in the way of
a rehearing it faces significant
[23] The relevant principles were examined by the High Court in Fox
In the joint judgment of Gleeson CJ,
Gummow and Kirby JJ in that case, after examining the nature of appeals
determined on the basis
of the record below and the limitations that necessarily
imposes, they said:
“[28]...However, the mere fact that a trial judge
necessarily reached a conclusion favouring the witnesses of one party over
of another does not, and cannot, prevent the performance by a court of appeal of
the functions imposed on it by statute. In
particular cases incontrovertible
facts or uncontested testimony will demonstrate that the trial judge's
conclusions are erroneous,
even when they appear to be, or are stated to be,
based on credibility findings.
[29] That this is so is demonstrated in
several recent decisions of this Court. In some, quite rare, cases, although the
short of being ‘incontrovertible’, an appellate
conclusion may be reached that the decision at trial is ‘glaringly
improbable’ or ‘contrary to compelling inferences’ in the
case. In such circumstances, the appellate court is not
relieved of its
statutory functions by the fact that the trial judge has, expressly or
implicitly, reached a conclusion influenced
by an opinion concerning the
credibility of witnesses. In such a case, making all due allowances for the
advantages available to
the trial judge, the appellate court must ‘not
shrink from giving effect to its own
conclusion’.”
[24] We have
examined the record below. There are certainly no “incontrovertible facts
or uncontested testimony” that
would justify any interference with the
crucial findings. Nor were the conclusions reached "glaringly improbable" or
"contrary to
compelling inferences". Quite to the contrary. Not only was there
evidence to support those findings, and evidence which the Land
Court member
found credible he having had the advantage of having seen and heard Mr Edgar,
and heard Mr Henderson, but there was
no evidence to put against the
[25] In those circumstances the applicant faces an insurmountable
hurdle on appeal. It is not merely that the applicant faces the
legal burden
identified in Fox v Percy. It is that there is nothing to put against the
evidence on which the Land Court member based
his findings.
remains the complaint that the witness Henderson was biased. The submission
appears to be that because of that alleged
bias his evidence should not have
been admitted.
[27] The bias of a witness is not a reason, without more, to
exclude his or her evidence. The presence of bias, or a risk of it,
course, influence the Court in its acceptance of the testimony. But that is not
the same as excluding the testimony entirely.
And, once admitted, it is for the
Court to weigh up the evidence and determine whether it is worthy of weight and
ought to be accepted.
[28] Austin J explained the law in the following
terms in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich and
, a decision concerning the receipt of
forensic accounting evidence:
“[334] According to the preponderance of Australian authority, the fact
that an expert is aligned to the party engaging him
or her, and biased or not
independent, is not a bar to the admissibility of the expert's opinion evidence,
though it may go to the
weight of the
reason, as explained by Pagone J in
Fagenblat v Feingold Partners Pty Ltd
[2001] VSC 454
, is that the evidence of the witness can be tested in
adversarial proceedings, and so the possibility that the witness may be biased
does not infect the impartiality of the Court. The ability of the Court to give
biased evidence little or no weight ensures that
there is no inherent unfairness
to the other party in admission of the evidence. Indeed, the presence of a risk
of bias (unconscious
or otherwise) is not of itself a reason to exclude evidence
of an expert either on grounds of admissibility or in the exercise of
discretion...”
[29] Hence the evidence was properly admissible.
[30] The complaint then
can only be about its acceptance. Here the applicant faces the considerable
difficulty that no allegation
of bias was made against the witness at the
hearing, nor was his expertise challenged. A court of appeal will not entertain
not raised below if “evidence could have been given which by any
possibility could have prevented the point from succeeding”:
That is so because, as was pointed
out in University of Wollongong v Metwally (No
: “It is elementary that a party is
bound by the conduct of his case. Except in the most exceptional circumstances,
be contrary to all principle to allow a party, after a case had been
decided against him, to raise a new argument which, whether
deliberately or by
inadvertence, he failed to put during the hearing when he had an opportunity to
[31] The fact that Mr Henderson had conducted some business
with the respondent over the years was revealed. But that of itself does
connote bias. Nor does it follow that he lacked the necessary expertise to
assist the Land Court. If the point had been squarely
raised in the Court below
it is undeniable that evidence might have been able to have been led that could
have defeated the point.
That being so this Court should not entertain the
argument on appeal.
[32] Even if that were not so the point has no prospect
of success. The contention of the applicant on the appeal must be that this
Court should reject the evidence of the witness despite no relevant attack being
made on him below, and there being no other evidence
to indicate that he was in
fact biased or otherwise even incorrect in any evidence that he gave to the Land
Court. The principles
discussed above and explained in Fox v Percy apply.
There is simply no basis shown on which this Court could come to any different
conclusion to that of the Land Court.
[33] None of the identified grounds of
appeal have any prospect of success. In the circumstances it would be futile to
allow the application
for leave to file the appeal out of time. The application
is refused.
MEMBER OF THE LAND COURT
MEMBER OF THE LAND COURT
Pty Ltd v Edgar
[2010] QLC 0139 at [13]-[19]
As to the nature of the appeal see the judgment of this Court in
General Department of Transport v Hibiscus Holdings Pty Ltd
[1995] 15 QLCR
at 421 concerning an appeal under the
1962 but where there
was a similar provision regarding the admission of fresh evidence.
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
At [28]-[29]
[2005] NSWSC 149
J cited in support: Heydon, JD,
Cross on Evidence
(looseleaf), at
[29080]; Odgers, S,
Uniform Evidence Law
(6th ed, 2004), at [1.3.4340];
Ritchie's Supreme Court Practice
at [36.13C.4]; Heydon, JD, "Comments on
May LJ's Paper", Supreme Court of New South Wales Annual Conference, 22 August
2003, pp 6-8
and 10-12; and generally, Sperling, HD,
"Expert Evidence: the
Problem of Bias and Other Things"
, Supreme Court of New South Wales Annual
Conference, 3 September 1999; Spigelman JJ
"Forensic Accounting in an
Adversary System"
(2003) 41 Law Society Journal 60.
we have omitted the extensive citation of authority: see
Li v The Queen
[2003] NSWCCA 290
(2003) 139 ACrimR 281
per Ipp JA, Whealy and Howie JJ; see also
SmithKline Beecham (Aust) Pty Ltd v Chipman
[2003] FCA 796
(2003) 131 FCR 500
Weinberg J;
Jarrama Pty Ltd v Caltex Australia Petroleum Pty Ltd
per Crennan J.
[1986] HCA 33
(1986) 162 CLR 1
(1985) 59 ALJR
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (185 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter