URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2009/72.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:38:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RAB, Re [2009] QGAAT 72 (28 September 2009)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL,
[2009] QGAAT 72
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Application for the Appointment of a Guardian
Application for the
Appointment of an Administrator
In the matter of RAB
MATTER NUMBERS:
GAA2583-09 GAA2584-09
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal.
DATE OF HEARING:
29 July 2009
DATE OF ORDER:
29 July 2009
DATE OF REASONS:
28 September 2009
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
E Morriss Presiding Member
CATCHWORDS:
CAPACITY-ADMINISTRATORS-Where presumption not rebutted for personal
matters-Where adult’s property at risk without appointment-Where
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
GUARDIANSHIP
the application for the appointment of a guardian for RAB is dismissed.
ADMINISTRATION
The Public Trustee of Queensland is appointed as administrator for RAB for
managing all financial matters.
administrator is to provide a financial management plan to the Tribunal within
four (4) months.
Tribunal directs the administrator to provide accounts to the Tribunal when
the Tribunal orders otherwise, this appointment remains current for two (2)
NOTICE OF INTEREST IN LAND
the administrator shall within three (3) months:
by way of a search of the records held by the Registrar of Titles or other
means, any interest in real property registered
in the name of RAB (“the
with the Registrar of Titles a copy of this order and a notice notifying the
Registrar of any interest in land held by the adult
which is subject to this
administration order.
to the Tribunal:
(i) a copy of the search of records held by the Registrar
of Titles referred to above and;
(ii) a copy of the lodgement summary with the dealing number showing
lodgement of the order in respect of any interests in land held
by the adult
which is subject to this administration order.
if any change is made in an interest in land held by the adult which is the
subject of this administration order or if there
are any further dealings in
land on behalf of the adult by the administrator, the administrator shall lodge
with the Registrar of
Titles within 14 days of the finalisation of such interest
a copy of this order and a notice (in a form prescribed by the Registrar
Titles), concerning such changes or dealings.
the administrator pay, from the adult’s funds, any fee associated with the
above notices.
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
[1] This matter came to the attention of the Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal on 5 May 2008 when an application was received
regarding RAB. The
application indicated that RAB had recently been a patient in hospital and that
he had dementia which was related
to a combination of previous mild strokes and
old age. It referred to a neuropsychological assessment which had deemed RAB
competent”.
[2] The application expressed concerns that in regard to financial decisions,
RAB seemed capable of managing simple personal purchases
and pension income. He
had not put arrangements in place regarding payment of bills etc when he was
hospitalised in 2008. He was
noted to get confused easily and that he had memory
difficulties. In regards to personal decisions he was described as not making
rational decisions relating to food or hygiene and making decisions that were
not always in his best interests. Examples were given
of putting deadlocks on
the front door without giving family a key, and their concerns about his risk of
falls and therefore their
ability to assist him. The application proposed that
HJ (daughter), RR (son), and WC (daughter) be appointed as his guardians and
administrators.
[3] A hearing was scheduled and heard on 29 July 2009. Present at the hearing
were RAB (the adult), NP (defacto/partner), WC (daughter),
HJ (daughter) and CC
The Issues and the Legislation
[4] The issues for the Tribunal are:
(a) Does RAB have capacity
for the matter?
(b) Is there a need for a Guardian? If so, who should be appointed? and
(c) Is there a need for an Administrator? If so, who should be appointed?
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
deals with appointments which can be made.
12 Appointment
The tribunal may, by order, appoint a guardian for a
personal matter, or an administrator for a financial matter, for an adult if
tribunal is satisfied—
(a) the adult has impaired capacity for the matter; and
(b) there is a need for a decision in relation to the matter or the adult
is likely to do something in relation to the matter that
involves, or is likely
to involve, unreasonable risk to the adult’s health, welfare or property;
(c) without an appointment—
(i) the adult’s needs will not be adequately met; or
(ii) the adult’s interests will not be adequately protected.
The appointment may be on terms considered appropriate
by the tribunal.
The tribunal may make the order on its own initiative or
on the application of the adult, the adult guardian or an interested
[6] The Tribunal is also bound by the appropriateness considerations found in
of the Act which provide as follows:
Appropriateness considerations
In deciding whether a person is appropriate for
appointment as a guardian or administrator for an adult, the tribunal must
the following matters (
appropriateness
considerations
(a) the general principles and whether the person is likely to apply
(b) if the appointment is for a health matter—the health care
principle and whether the person is likely to apply it;
(c) the extent to which the adult’s and person’s interests are
likely to conflict;
(d) whether the adult and person are compatible including, for example,
whether the person has appropriate communication skills or
appropriate cultural
or social knowledge or experience, to be compatible with the adult;
(e) if more than 1 person is to be appointed—whether the persons are
compatible;
(f) whether the person would be available and accessible to the
(g) the person’s appropriateness and competence to perform functions
and exercise powers under an appointment order.
The fact a person is a relation of the adult does not,
of itself, mean the adult’s and person’s interests are likely
Also, the fact a person may be a beneficiary of the
adult’s estate on the adult’s death does not, of itself, mean the
adult’s and person’s interests are likely to conflict.
In considering the person’s appropriateness and
competence, the tribunal must have regard to the following—
(a) the nature and circumstances of any criminal history, whether in
Queensland or elsewhere, of the person including the likelihood
the commission
of any offence in the criminal history may adversely affect the adult;
(b) the nature and circumstances of any refusal of, or removal from,
appointment, whether in Queensland or elsewhere, as a guardian,
administrator,
attorney or other person making a decision for someone else;
(c) if the proposed appointment is of an administrator and the person is
an individual—
(i) the nature and circumstances of the person having been a bankrupt or
taking advantage of the laws of bankruptcy as a debtor under
Bankruptcy Act
(Cwlth) or a similar law of a foreign jurisdiction; and
(ii) the nature and circumstances of a proposed, current or previous
arrangement with the person’s creditors under the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
or a similar law of a foreign jurisdiction; and
(iii) the nature and circumstances of a proposed, current or previous
external administration of a corporation, partnership or other
entity of which
the person is or was a director, secretary or partner or in whose management,
direction or control the person is
or was involved.
In this section—
(a) an attorney under a power of attorney; or
(b) an attorney under an advance health directive or similar document
under the law of another jurisdiction.
power of attorney
(a) a general power of attorney made under the
Powers of Attorney Act
(b) an enduring power of attorney; or
(c) a power of attorney made otherwise than under the
Powers of Attorney
, whether before or after its commencement; or
(d) a similar document under the law of another jurisdiction.
The Evidence
[7] In addition to the written material contained on the Tribunal file, all of
the parties attending the hearing were given the opportunity
to express their
views. These views, where specifically relied upon by the Tribunal, are
discussed below.
[8] The Tribunal had available a number of health professional reports,
regarding RAB’s medical conditions and capacity.
[9] An assessment report was completed by SC (Clinical Neuro-psychologist). RAB
was seen on 12 December 2008. RAB had been admitted
to hospital related to a
fall in a local scrap yard and injury to his right knee. He was referred for
assessment due to staff concerns
Specific concerns were noted with his understanding and acceptance of
orthopaedic instructions,
unhappiness regarding his admission, and episodes of
verbal abuse toward family and staff.
[10] The report noted RAB’s previous medical history from hospital
including a history of transient ischaemic attacks (TIAs),
recurrent deep vein
thrombosis (DVT), a right cerebrovascular accident (CVA) in June 2006 with
subsequent carotid endarterectomy.
He also had had multiple falls resulting in
fractures, right knee replacements, and hemicolectomy for diverticulitis.
[11] SC’s interview with RAB revealed reduced insight into his cognitive
decline and care needs. He stated his main problems
were related to the right
leg fracture and constipation. He reported the cerebrovascular accident and that
he had short term memory
loss but he “minimized” the impact on his
daily functioning. He did not believe he had dementia.
[12] A range of psychological tests were administered. The Mini-Mental Status
Examination (MMSE) score was 20/30 with disorientation
for year, date and ward,
and difficulty with memory and spatial manipulation. His score was suggestive of
mild to moderate cognitive
dysfunction. SC’s report indicated reduced
insight, poor compliance with medical advice, behavioural issues, tangentiality
in conversation, and memory impairments – specifically mild registration
and encoding deficits and severe retention deficit
with significant forgetting
over time. He was also noted to have other cognitive deficits with moderate
visuo-constructional planning
deficit, mild visual assimilation deficit and
severe visuo-perceptual organization deficit.
[13] RAB showed intact functioning in attention, processing speed,
comprehension, expressive language function, abstract/conceptual
conceptual shifting, and calculations.
[14] SC indicated that her assessment results were consistent with the
cerebrovascular accident in 2006. His reduced insight, poor
compliance with
medical advice, reduced medication compliance, behavioural issues, tangential
thinking were suggestive of prefrontal
lobe dysfunction. His memory loss
suggested temporal lobe dysfunction. His results overall were patchy and
consistent with a mild
vascular dementia.
[15] In regards to an Enduring Power of Attorney (EPA), RAB had some
understanding but confused his will with an EPA. He believed
his daughter, HJ
was his EPA but this was not the case. He did not want any of his children to be
his EPA and there was conflict
between them and his defacto/friend NP.
[16] SC’s view was that RAB’s deficits would negatively affect his
judgement and that he did not have the capacity to
make competent lifestyle,
health and financial decisions.
[17] A Health Professional Report was also received from Dr P from Hospital.
This report indicated that RAB had a history of a cerebrovascular
accident (CVA)
which had had some impact on short term memory but that he had been functioning
at home with family support. In regards
capacity, Dr P indicated it was
complicated due to family circumstances and that while there was some degree of
cognitive impairment
it did not extend to requiring full substituted decision
making. His view was that RAB was capable of making complex health and
lifestyle/accommodation
decisions but that he “didn’t know”
[18] A letter was also considered from Dr G (Consultant Psychiatrist) who saw
RAB on 29 June 2009. Assessment on the MMSE indicated
a score of 23/30. He noted
“some improvement” in cognitive functioning but that RAB had
continuing deficits in orientation
and short term recall.
[19] The views of RAB were sought. He indicated that he was capable of making
all of his own decisions. He denied the difficulties
described in the reports.
He indicated that he lived alone in his own house, and attended to his cooking,
cleaning and bill payment
with minimal assistance. In regards to his
accommodation, he indicated that he planned to stay in his home for as long as
He was aware that his daughters wanted ramps and other safety measures
in place but he didn’t want them “meddling”.
He indicated that
he received some assistance with cleaning and shopping (through Department of
Veterans Affairs – he could
not name the service provider) and could call
on NP for assistance as well. In regards to his health issues, he reported
General Practitioner regularly and that he had regular blood tests
for his warfarin levels. He knew that consistency of his medication
and regular
blood tests were important. He also was to receive some assistance from an
Occupational Therapist from Department of
Veterans’ affairs in regards to
his bathroom (rails etc).
[20] RABfelt he had good recollection of long term information, but conceded
that at times his had poor memory. He denied difficulties
related to falls or
paying bills on time. He did indicate that he had left the stove on a couple of
times at home because he had
forgotten to turn it off. He felt his difficulties
were not unusual for his age. He indicated that he had recently bought and
some furniture because he had changed his mind about what he wanted and
that he did spend some money on trips with NP which he enjoyed,
and that he also
enjoyed going out and betting on the races. He gave NP money for car expenses as
she lived some distance away from
him. On Tribunal questioning, RAB showed good
recall for long term information (e.g. his bank account number) but confusion
his day to day finances, and specifically details regarding his
income, savings and debts. The Tribunal attempted to simplify information,
he became more confused. He could not explain where his money went after his
fortnightly expenses were accounted for.
[21] NP indicated that in her view RAB had some short term memory loss, but
otherwise felt that he was “OK” and could
make his own decisions. In
a letter to the Tribunal she referred to a “mild dementia”. When
discussing his medical circumstances
and living arrangements, she did indicate
that he required some assistance. She indicated that she was aware of his
cerebrovascular
accident in 2006 but had never seen him have a transient
ischaemic attack. NP also described disagreements between herself and
[22] HJ and WC indicated that they had noticed a progressive change in
RAB’s functioning, particularly related to his memory.
He was noted to
forget arrangements, plans and decisions. He would deny that he had agreed and
become argumentative. He had shown
behavioural changes with irritability,
grumpiness, swearing and aggression, all out of character for him. They were
concerned that
despite his health issues and mobility problems, especially
falls, he would not accept practical suggestions or assistance (e.g.
a ramp, extra household help). They spoke of numerous trips to hospital from the
General Practitioner’s office.
They reported that bills were not always
paid on time, and were concerned about his ability to maintain his home and
continue to
live independently. They were concerned that he was not thinking or
planning ahead to simplify his finances. They were concerned
installing a lock on the door, as if he had a fall they could not assist him.
They were concerned about his reasoning and
judgement and insight about his
DOES RAB LACK CAPACITY FOR THE MATTER?
[23] The view of RAB and NP was that he could manage all of his personal and
financial affairs and did not require a decision maker
to be appointed for him.
The views of family (orally and in writing) were that RAB had memory, cognitive
and behavioural changes
and lacked insight regarding his condition and care
needs. They were concerned that he required assistance with decision making.
[24] The health professional reports available indicated that whilst RAB had
shown some small improvements since his admission to
hospital (a MMSE of 23/30
on 29 June 2009 compared to 20/30 on 12 December 2008), he continued to have
difficulties with orientation
and memory. The neuropsychological assessment of
SC indicated a range of memory and cognitive impairments, and her view was that
these deficits were consistent with RAB’s history of vascular problems (a
cerebrovascular accident in 2006 and transient ischaemic
attacks) and likely
suggestive of mild vascular dementia. The Tribunal placed some weight on this
report as it considered very carefully
RAB’s medical history, his
presentation in hospital and in the assessment, behavioural issues and also the
results of objective
psychological assessments and provided the view that these
impairments would impact on his decision making. The report was also consistent
with the views of Dr G, with the report of family and with RAB’s
difficulties in the Tribunal hearing.
[25] In regards to personal matters, for example accommodation, health care and
services, the Tribunal acknowledges that there have
been some concerns expressed
regarding RAB’s insight and acceptance regarding medical diagnoses and the
need for assistance.
This was also evident to some degree at the Tribunal
hearing, where he demonstrated limited insight into his difficulties and the
likely consequences of his medical conditions and cognitive impairments. The
Tribunal view however, was that currently RAB showed
basic understanding of his
health and medication requirements, and that he was attending regular medical
appointments, and having
regular blood tests to manage his medication. He had
accepted some assistance and services (shopping, cleaning, and Occupational
Therapy from Department of Veterans Affairs). The Tribunal also considered that
should RAB’s circumstances change he had people
in his life, for example
NP and his three children, who would be interested to ensure that he was well
supported and received the
assistance that he required.
[26] In regards to financial matters, the Tribunal considered that RAB’s
cognitive and memory deficits were affecting his understanding
of his financial
affairs. Although he had a general idea of his finances and income (using mainly
his long term memory), he easily
became confused and could not accurately give
information about his current financial responsibilities. He also showed very
insight regarding the impact of his memory impairments and the need to
have arrangements in place to ensure his interests were protected.
He was unable
to look to the future in regards his financial needs and demonstrated limited
forward planning.
[27] The Tribunal found that the presumption of capacity for personal matters
was not sufficiently rebutted by the evidence available.
The Tribunal considered
that RAB currently also had sufficient supports available to him to ensure that
his interests would be protected
and his needs met. The application for the
appointment of a Guardian for RAB was therefore dismissed.
[28] Taking all of the above evidence into account, including the oral evidence,
medical and health professional reports, the Tribunal
considered that RAB did
not have capacity for financial matters.
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF AN ADMINISTRATOR?
[29] The application before the Tribunal proposed that the RAB’s children
be appointed as his administrators. RAB expressed
strong views that he did not
want any of his children managing any of his finances. In particular, he
expressed the view that his
son RR had issues of alcohol dependence and also had
problems paying his own debts. He objected to his daughters trying to
his life. The Tribunal accepted that he did not believe he
required any assistance to manage his finances.
[30] RAB’s daughters, HJ and WC indicated that whilst they were willing to
be appointed, they accepted that RAB had strong
views and that he did not want
any of his children managing his finances. They wanted only what was in his best
interests to ensure
he could continue to reside in his own home with needed
support. They wanted his financial matters to be “simplified”.
considered that the appointment of the Public Trustee might be more appropriate
and would be an independent option to ensure
that finances were managed, and
bills were paid and his needs met in the future.
[31] In regards to RAB’s finances the Tribunal was aware that he had a
Department of Veterans Affairs Pension of approximately
$1,000/fortnight. He had
also reported some small savings with Westpac bank (amount unclear at the
hearing). He owned his own home
in Annerley which could be worth as much as
$600,000 and sundry personal items. The home had a small mortgage (unable to be
at the hearing from RAB), and would likely require ongoing
maintenance and repairs. RAB was no longer able to attend to all of the
cleaning, maintenance and yard work and would need sufficient funds to ensure
that this was possible and his home was safe (particularly
given previous
mobility issues and falls).
[32] The Tribunal considered that RAB has income and expenditure requiring
management and an asset (his own home) which requires
protecting for his benefit
and well-being. There were regular expenses (electricity, gas, phone, rates,
insurance, maintenance and
the like) which required management in a consistent
way with a view to his long term needs. The Tribunal considered that RAB’s
medical circumstances, particularly the persisting cognitive and memory
difficulties and limited insight were such that he required
the assistance of a
financial administrator to assist him. The Tribunal was concerned that RAB
himself has limited understanding
of alternative arrangements to ensure his
interests were protected, particularly should his health situation further
[33] The Tribunal considered, and all parties confirmed, that there was lack of
agreement and communication in RAB’s informal
supports (between NP and his
children) and that there had been conflict. It was therefore the view of the
Tribunal that it was not
appropriate to appoint family members to act as
administrators.
[34] The Tribunal considered that there was a need to appoint an administrator
and that the most appropriate appointment to ensure
RAB has independent and
professional support was The Public Trust of Queensland. The Public Trustee was
therefore appointed to manage
all financial matters. They were asked to provide
a financial management plan within four months, and the appointment was for two
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (163 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter