URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QChCM/2007/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department of Child Safety v SB & Anor [2007] QChCM 1 (19 February 2007)
MAGISTRATES COURTS OF QUEENSLAND
Department of Child Safety v SB & Anor
[2007] QChCM 1
DEPARTMENT OF CHILD SAFETY
(applicant)
(respondent mother)
(respondent father)
CCM6592/02(7)
Childrens Court (Magistrate)
PROCEEDING:
Application for Child Protection Order
ORIGINATING COURT:
Childrens Court at Mareeba
DELIVERED ON:
19 February 2007
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
22 January 2007
MAGISTRATE:
I make a protection order in respect of the children granting
guardianship to the Chief Executive for a period of two years from
CATCHWORDS:
CHILD WELFARE – GUARDIANSHIP – guardianship order –
whether a paternal ‘relative’ can be granted custody
if paternity is
J McNamara for applicant
SOLICITORS:
Applicant on own behalf
[1] An application by Janelle McNamara, child safety officer of the department
of Child Safety in respect to the children KP, born
1998, and SP, born 2002, for
orders granting long-term guardianship of the children to the Chief Executive.
The respondent parents,
SB the mother and PP the father, have not appeared in
the proceedings. They were served with the application on 21 August 2006. JP
claims to be the children's paternal grandmother. The children have been placed
in her care by the department for the last six years
approximately.
December 2006 I allowed JP to make submissions in respect of the applications.
She is not a respondent. The provisions of
the Act relevant to the application
are the definition of child protection order, section 6 - which is to the effect
that the Court
must have the regard to the views of the recognised agency,
section 54, section 56, section 59, section 62, section 10 and section
[3] JP does not submit that no order be made. She submits pursuant to
section 61(d) and (f) that she be granted custody and long-term
guardianship of
the children. I need to determine that the children are children in need of
protection and the order is appropriate
and desirable for the protection of the
children, that there is an appropriate case plan for the children, and that
there is no parent
able and willing to protect the children within the
foreseeable future or that the children's need for emotional security will be
best met in the long term by making the order, that the provisions of section 6
have been complied with, that the Court must not
grant long-term guardianship of
the child or children to the Chief Executive if the Court can properly grant
guardianship to another
suitable person.
[4] The material is set out in the
applications of 21 August 2006, the affidavit of Janelle McNamara affirmed on 9
October 2006, the
affidavit of Janelle McNamara affirmed on 18 August 2006, the
affidavit of JP, undated, filed 20 November 2006, the affidavit of
JP sworn on
11 December 2006, the affidavit of Janelle McNamara affirmed on 15 December
2006, the affidavit of Janelle McNamara affirmed
on 21 December 2006, incomplete
undated submissions from JP, and submissions of JP dated 22 January
[5] I have regard to the material and the provisions of the Act. JP
seeks an order that she have custody and guardianship of the two
children. The
department seeks a revocation of the order of 23 August 2004 and the granting of
guardianship to the Chief Executive.
When the matter was last before the Court
on 22 January 2007 Ms Varley, from the department, informed the Court that if an
was made granting guardianship of the children to the department that the
department would - that the children would remain with
[6] I am satisfied
that the children are children in need of protection and that a child protection
order is appropriate and desirable
to ensure the protection of the children and
that their protection is unlikely to be assured by an order on less intrusive
Section 6 has been complied with and the views of Wuchopperen Health
Service are expressed in the affidavit of Janelle McNamara affirmed
on 9 October
2006. Those views were, for the reasons expressed, inconclusive.
satisfied that there is no parent able and willing to protect the children
within the foreseeable future. The applications
were discussed with the
children, as referred to in the affidavit of Janelle McNamara affirmed on 9
October 2006, at paragraphs 7,
8, 9, 10 and 11. A comprehensive case plan was
developed at a family group meeting at which neither respondent appeared but JP
[8] Should the existing order, which expires on 22 August 2006, be
revoked and a long-term order be made and, if so, should that be
made in favour
of the Chief Executive or JP? As I have found that the children are children in
need of protection I am satisfied
that an order should be in place. The previous
order has expired. I revoke that previous order.
[9] Should the order be made
in favour of the Chief Executive or JP? The welfare and best interests of the
children are paramount.
JP claims to be the grandmother of the children. She is
67 years of age. She has had the care of the children in KP's case since
2000 and SP since June 2002. KP is eight years of age and SP is four years of
age. The placement with JP has been a steady placement
for the children and
provides them with the opportunity to maintain contact with their mother, PP and
the extended family.
[10] KP suffers from what JP describes as an impounded
bowel and psychological problems. The letter from the Mareeba State Primary
School identifies a number of physical, developmental and behavioural problems.
Of greatest concern to me is the statement that JP
has struggled to meet KP's
needs. Pursuant to the Department of Child Safety policy number 296-2, KP meets
the eligibility criteria
for high support needs as she presents levels of need
that are demonstrably higher than those presented by a child or young person
alternative care.
[11] JP advises that SP was born prematurely. The material
appears to concentrate on KP's needs and JP's problems in coping. Very
information has been provided in relation to SP. Ms McNamara does, in her
affidavit of 15 December 2006, say that KP and SP
have been assessed as
requiring a higher level of support, energy and responsiveness to their
developmental needs than children in
the general community.
[12] Dr Martin
Panter provided a number of documents including a statement of 14 October 2006
where he stated that he had never had
any reason to doubt JP's commitment or
abilities in looking after the two children. He confirmed that he had looked
after the children
for the last few years. This is a powerful recommendation
from a respected medical practitioner. Dr Panter reconfirmed his opinion
unsigned document dated 27 October 2006. Dr Panter, however, does not give any
indication of the extent of his observations,
only that JP brings the girls
regularly for medical checks. Dr Panter confirms that both girls are in good
health. I think that I
must read this statement in light of KP's obvious ongoing
problems to mean that the children are well, subject to their underlying
permanent problems.
[13] Dr Panter also strangely attacks the department. He
says, "I do not believe children's services have any cause whatsoever, apart
from malicious hearsay evidence, to doubt either her integrity or her ability."
Dr Panter has not expanded on why he would make such
a statement. The department
presents evidence from many sources: records, teachers, doctors, et cetera.
These people would have no
reason to provide material to the Court other than in
a professional and objective way.
[14] JP supports her application with
personal testimonials from Carolina Miline and Thelma Peebles, Leslie Whyte, and
of the parents PP, which is undated, and SB were filed in support of
the application by JP. JP also relied upon affidavits of Mr
Charlie, undated,
and Ms Schaeffer. Mr Charlie's affidavit was of little assistance other than to
confirm that he has helped to teach
them dance and the importance of Aboriginal
culture. Ms Schaeffer's affidavit was meaningless and in paragraph 7 appeared to
that JP's age mitigated against an order being made in her
[15] The support affidavits do not provide a great deal of assistance
in determining the issues here. They do confirm that JP provides
adequately for
the children. Of course, that has to be viewed in light of the fact that the
department has had the guardianship of
the children during the placement with
JP. The affidavit of Lesley Whyte would appear to be at odds with the bulk of
departmental
material regarding KP's behaviour. I note that Ms Varley advised
the Court that if an order was made in favour of the department
Department would continue the placement of the children with JP. This is no
doubt an acceptance by the department that the
interests of the children are
best met by the kinship placement, but cannot be interpreted as an acceptance by
the department that
an order should not be made in favour of the Chief
[16] The Department’s attitude is that it is in the
children's long-term interest to remain in the care of JP with the support
the department. It is a shame that there appears to be some degree of friction
between JP and the department. It is clear that
KP suffers from a number of
challenging conditions. The question is whether ultimately an order granting
guardianship of KP to the
department will be in her best interests. Does JP need
the support of the department in coping with KP's problems?
[17] There is
also the question of whether different orders should be made in respect of SP.
The affidavit of the applicant Janelle
McNamara, affirmed on 15 December 2006,
raises issues of concern relating to JP's ability to properly care for the needs
of the children
without departmental support. JP's opinion of the department, as
expressed in her material, may be partly responsible for the departments
comment. But I must determine if JP has the underlying ability to care for the
children. I must try to look through the emotions
and determine what is in the
best interests of the children.
[18] The department's concerns are that KP
requires a higher level of support, that JP has on occasion expressed that she
coping, that JP has been observed to be not coping, that JP had been
non-compliant with requests from the Department. There is also
an advice that a
notification was received by Atherton Child Safety in relation to JP's alleged
breach of section 122 standards of
care of the
Child Protection Act 1999
information whatsoever relative to this allegation has otherwise been
[19] I must say that I have been somewhat disappointed by the
material filed by the department. Just what is the frequency and level
support given by the department to KP, SP and JP? What resources have the
Department utilised to provide for them? What happened
referred to in the case plan? Is there evidence that clearly demonstrates that
JP is struggling with her responsibilities?
Something over and above what might
occur in any family.
[20] Significant issues of paternity have also been
raised in respect of the children. According to the affidavit of Ms McNamara of
15 December 2006 PP has denied that he is the father of both children. His name
does not appear on either birth certificate. FD thinks
his son FM may be the
father of KP, GP thinks he may be KP's father and HL thinks that both children
[21] JP was allowed to make submissions to the Court in this matter.
The material filed by her goes beyond mere submissions. Regrettably,
material is more defensive and aggressive towards the Department than positive
and informative. She confirms on page 17 of her
latest submission that she has
no confidence in the Department. She uses the submission to make broad,
irrelevant statements about
behavioural problems within the broader community.
The Court cannot be prudish or precious in its approach to the question at hand
and acknowledges that no family is perfect.
[22] I have previously ruled that
JP is not a parent. She has again raised this issue and relies on
sections 11
defines who a parent is.
deals with the
making of a child protection order.
is the Court's power to make
interim orders on adjournment and
section 117
deals with appeals. The correct
statutory process is to look at the definitions section, schedule 3, under
"parent", refer to chapter
section 52.
the meaning of parent under
of the Act, child protection orders. JP is
not a parent of the children for the purposes of this application. JP's
submission in
that regard has no merit.
[23] I have already expressed my
disappointment at the standard of the material put before me by both parties.
This has no doubt been
brought about in part because there are no appearances by
the respondents. JP was allowed to make submissions only and the matter
determined on the papers. At the end of the day I find that I do have to decide
the contest between the Department and JP, unfortunately
for JP, on technical
legal grounds. The relevant statutory provisions are
Child Protection Act
Section 61(d)
and (f) is to this effect: "The
Childrens Court may make any of the following child protection orders it
considers to be appropriate
in the circumstances. (d) An order granting custody
to the child to (1) a suitable person other than a parent of the child who is
member of the child's family or (2) the Chief Executive." And (f) "an order
granting long-term guardianship of a child to (1) a
suitable person other than a
parent of the child who is a member of the child's family or (2) another
suitable person other than
a member of the child's family nominated by the Chief
Executive or (3) the Chief Executive."
sub 5 is to the effect that
is the making of a child protection order, sub 5, "Further, the Court
must not grant long-term guardianship of a child to (a) a person
who is not a
member of the child's family unless the child is already in custody or
guardianship under a child protection order or
the Chief Executive if the Court
can properly grant guardianship to another suitable person."
[24] So the
Court must not grant guardianship to a person who is not a member of the child's
family or the Court must not grant guardianship
to the Chief Executive if the
Court can properly grant guardianship to another suitable person. A person who
is not a member of the
child's family is excluded by
section 59(5)(a).
Court cannot grant custody or guardianship to a person who is not a member of
the child's family subject to the other provisions
section 61(d)
[25] The net effect of that is that the Court must not grant long-term
guardianship to the Chief Executive if the Court can properly
grant guardianship
to another person, and the Court cannot grant guardianship to a person who is
not a member of the child's family
subject to the exact provisions of
. JP claims to be the grandmother of the children, her son being the
children's father. I have already touched upon the confusion
[26] The two case plans indicate that the question of paternity
was to be determined. I have not been given any evidence of paternity.
shown as the father on the birth certificates. PP does not depose to being the
father of the children. In fact, in his
statement he says that he has known the
children for many years. He does say at one point that he is a good father. SB,
in her affidavit,
refers to PP as the father of the children.
[27] Because of
the provisions of the Act that I have referred to and the state of the material
as to paternity I am unable to make
any order other than in favour or to the
Chief Executive. I cannot be satisfied that PP is the father of the children and
consequently
that JP is a member of the child's family as required by
[28] I am satisfied that a protection order should be made. The Chief
Executive has not nominated JP. In that regard refer to
section 61(f)(ii).
Because of the state of the material, that is the lack of relevant matter and
the conflict between the department and JP, I am not
prepared to make an order
granting long-term guardianship. Accordingly, I make a protection order in
respect of the children granting
guardianship to the Chief Executive for a
period of two years from today. The child protection orders will continue in
force until
the - now, actually I had not thought of this, whether the order
runs from when the other one expired or whether it runs from today.
has been extended. I assume it would run from today. The order will therefore
expire on 18 February 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (101 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter