URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QChCM/2011/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Purcell v NS [2011] QChCM 1 (16 June 2011)
CHILDRENS COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Purcell v NS
[2011] QChCM 1
JACINTAL PURCELL
(applicant)
(respondent)
CCM464/10(4)
Childrens Court (Magistrate)
PROCEEDING:
Application for Short Term Guardianship Order
ORIGINATING COURT:
Childrens Court at Toowoomba
DELIVERED ON:
16 June 2011
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
On the papers
MAGISTRATE:
A short term guardianship Order in favour of the Chief Executive in
respect of the child, NE to expire on the 16th June 2013.
CATCHWORDS:
CHILD WELFARE – GUARDIANSHIP – short term guardianship order
– whether child in need of protection – whether
a parent is willing
and able to protect child
Child Protection Act 1999
Norendez for the applicant
Respondent on her own behalf
Wiid as separate representative for the child
SOLICITORS:
Introduction
[1] This is an application by Jacinta Purcell, Child Safety Officer, for a short
term guardianship order for a period of two years
in respect of the child NE who
was born on 29 September 2009. The application is made pursuant to
Section 61(e)
Child Protection Act 1999
, “the Act”.
[2] The application
is supported by Lyrenệ Wiid, Separate Representative for NE and is opposed
by his mother, NS.
[3] The matter came on for trial on 4 April 2010. The
applicant was represented by Ms Norendez of counsel. NS was unrepresented. She
did not call or give evidence. I have therefore decided to determine the matter
“on the papers”. The matter was adjourned
to 16 June 2011 on which
date I will give my judgment.
Family Details
[4] NS was born on 4 October
1988 and is the biological mother of NE.
[5] OT, date of birth 24 December
1969, is NS’s mother and the maternal grandmother of NE.
[6] NT is the
sister of NS.
[7] NE’s father has not been identified. NS has variously
referred to NE’s father or Luke or Scott, but has not provided
evidence of identification to the Department.
[8] NS’s contact with the department prior to the birth of NE is
summarised in Exhibit C to the affidavit of Ms Hohn of 7 January
[9] The matter initially came before the Court by way of an application
by Lisa Hohn, authorised officer, for a two year custody order
in respect of NE
in favour of the Chief Executive. That application was filed on 7 January 2010.
The grounds of that application
(a) NE was then three months
old and having regard to his age, vulnerability, dependency and inability to
protect himself, he was
at a higher risk of harm than otherwise would be the
(b) NS was identified as struggling to cope with caring for NE. NS had not
utilised supports available to her including family, Child
Health Services and
other services to help her manage in caring for the child and to aid in
decreasing stress levels.
(c) NS had demonstrated a lack of insight and acknowledgment of the
significance of the Child Protection concerns despite departmental
involvement,
thereby increasing the likelihood of future harm to NE.
(d) During the assessment phase, NS had displayed behaviour that indicated
she was not willing to engage with services, supports or
the Department to
address child protection concerns.
(e) NS had informed officers of the Department and TACT that she believed
there were no concerns and her son was healthy as at the
date that he was
removed from her care.
(f) Department Officers suspected that NS was suffering from mental health
(cognitive) concerns as evidenced by her speech, continuously
staring into
space, lack of understanding and acknowledgement of information provided, and
the number of times she had to be told
the same information. NS had a history of
mental health concerns although it was unknown at that time how these impacted
on her ability
(g) It was assessed that NS was not a parent willing and able to care for NE
as evidenced by her lack of insight and acknowledgement
of child protection
concerns, limited parenting skills, lack of supports and level of cognitive
functioning.
[10] On 24 November 2009 NE was removed from NS’s care following which
various interim orders were made.
[11] On 13 January 2010 NS’s mother,
OT, was granted kinship carer status in respect of NE and he has been in her
since. On the same date NS was informed that NE would move into the
care of his maternal grandmother, OT, and that all further contact
visits would
have to be conducted at the Toowoomba North office of the Department. NS was
informed that if she wished visit OT then
arrangements would need to be made for
NE not to be present at the home. NS became angry. She started yelling and using
language towards departmental staff. She used threatening language
towards NE. Contact was suspended until 14 April 2010 when it
resumed and
thereafter until September 2010 NS had supervised contact with NE for one hour
[12] On 13 September 2010 NS was advised that supervised contact
with NE would increase to two visits per week of one hour each.
October 2010 NS attended the office of the Department to engage in supervised
an incident a few weeks
earlier, swearing and yelling would not be tolerated. NS became upset and
started yelling and using offensive
language and was swearing at departmental
staff. At once stage she threatened to kill departmental staff. NS was asked to
the room and she continued to shout and swear. She was informed that her
[14] As at the date of the trial the Department had not approved
formal contact between NS and NE although, at the hearing, NS informed
that she had had informal contact with NE at a shopping centre on a few
occasions. She further informed the court that
she had been living in
Rockhampton for some months.
[15] On 10 February 2011 Ms Purcell sent a
letter to NS advising that the Department had reassessed current child
protection concerns
in relation to NE and it had been decided that his best
interests would be served if the application to the court was changed from
year custody order to a two year guardianship order. The reasons for this change
are as follows:-
December 2010 the Department was informed that NS had relocated to Rockhampton.
She had moved on several occasions during
her involvement with the Department
and had not informed the Department of her then current place of abode.
(b) NS had refused to participate in Family Group Meetings.
(c) NS had engaged in inappropriate conduct with departmental workers on several
occasions, had made verbal threats towards staff,
and had presented as
irrational and hostile when approached by departmental staff.
(d) NS had exercised limited contact with the Department. The last contact had
been 13 October 2010. The Department had experienced
difficulty in contacting
her throughout the interim period to inform her of NE’s progress,
development and health issues.
(e) NS’s limited engagement in NE’s case plan dated 7 April 2010.
She had continued to refuse to acknowledge or address
the child protection
concerns and this illustrated her lack of willingness to engage with the
Department.
Relevant Statutory Provisions
of the Act provides that the main principle for administering
the Act is that the safety, well-being and best interests of a child
defines a child as an individual who is under 18
defines harm as:-
to a child, is any detrimental effect of a significant nature on a child’s
physical, psychological or emotional well-being.
(2) It is immaterial how the harm is caused.
(3) Harm can be caused by –
(a) physical, psychological or emotional abuse or neglect; or
(b) sexual abuse or exploitation”
is in these terms:
“10. Who is a child in need of protection?
child in need of protection
is a child who –
(a) has suffered harm, is suffering harm, or is at unacceptable risk of
suffering harm; and
(b) does not have a parent able and willing to protect the child from
“What is effect of custody?
(2) The Chief Executive, or other person granted custody of the child, has -
(a) The right to have the child’s daily care; and
(b) The right and responsibility to make decisions about the child’s
daily care.”
“ What is effect of guardianship?
If the Chief Executive or
someone else is granted guardianship of a child under a Child Protection Order,
the Chief Executive or other
person has—
(a) the right to have the child’s daily care; and
(b) the right and responsibility to make decisions about the child’s
daily care; and
(c) all the powers, rights and responsibilities in relation to the child that
would otherwise have been vested in the person having
parental responsibility
for making decisions about the long-term care, wellbeing and development of the
[22] Section 59(1), (3) and (4) of the Act are in these terms –
“(1) The Children's Court may make a Child
Protection Order only if satisfied –
(a) the child is a child in need of protection and the order is appropriate
and desirable for the child’s protection; and
(b) there is a case plan for the child –
(i) that has been developed or revised under Part 3A; and
(ii) that is appropriate for meeting the child’s assessed protection
and care needs; and
(c) if the making of the order has been contested, a conference between the
parties has been held or reasonable attempts to hold a
conference have been
(d) the child’s wishes or views, if able to be ascertained, have been
made known to the Court; and
(e) the protection sought to be achieved by the order is unlikely to be
achieved by an order under this part on less intrusive terms
(3) When deciding whether a case plan is appropriate under subsection
(1)(b)(ii), it is not relevant whether or not all persons who
participate in the
development or revision of the plan agreed with the plan.
(4) The Court must not make a Child Protection Order unless a copy of the
child’s case plan and, if it is a revised case plan,
a copy of the report
[23] Section 61(e) is in these terms:-
“The Children’s Court may make any 1 or
more of the following Child Protection Orders that the Court considers to be
appropriate
in the circumstances –
order granting short term guardianship of the child to the Chief
Executive;”
[24] Section 105 is in these terms:-
“105 – Evidence
(1) In a proceeding, the Children’s Court is not bound by the rules of
evidence, but may inform itself in any way it thinks
appropriate
(2) If on an application for an order, the Children’s Court is to be
satisfied of a matter, the Court need only be satisfied
of the matter on the
balance of probabilities.”
Documents Relied Upon:-
(a) Application for a two year custody order in favour of the Chief Executive
dated 7 January 2010
(b) Affidavit of Lisa Hohn of 7 January 2010
(c) Affidavits of Jacinta Purcell of 23 February 2011, 14 March 2011 and 21 of
(d) Affidavit of Kaye Smyth of 8 January 2010
(e) Affidavit of Cheryl Pickering of 14 March 2011
(f) Affidavit of Debbie Anderson of 15 March 2011
(g) Affidavit of Dianna Russell of 28 September 2010
(h) Affidavit of OT sworn 6 May 2011
(i) Affidavit of Bobbie Zanlorenzi sworn 8 June 2011
Authorised Officer
[25] I am satisfied that Jacinta Purcell is an authorised officer for the
purpose of Section 54 of the Act and may therefore apply
to the Children’s
Court for a Child Protection Order in respect of NE.
[26] They are as follows:-
As at 7 January 2010, was NE a child in need of
protection, ie had he suffered harm, was he then suffering harm or was he at an
unacceptable
risk of suffering harm, and did he have a parent who was willing
and able to protect him from harm? Is the order sought by the applicant
appropriate and desirable for the protection of NE?
Has a case plan been developed or revised for NE that is appropriate for
meeting his assessed protection and care needs and has it
been filed in the
Has a conference been held between the parties or have reasonable attempts
been made to hold such a conference?
Have NE’s wishes been ascertained?
Has a review report been prepared as required by Section 51(v) of the Act
and filed in the Court in accordance with Section 59(4)
of the Act?
Is it likely that a Protection Order sought by the application can be
achieved by an order on less intrusive terms than that which
is the subject of
the application.
RESOLUTION OF THE ISSUES
Was NE a child in need of protection as at 7 of January 2010 and is he
still a child in need of protection?
Secondly, did he have a parent willing and able to protect him from
Thirdly, is the order sought appropriate and desirable for the protection
[27] In my view, NE was a child in need of protection as at 7 January 2010. The
reasons therefore are as follows:-
(i) I accept the evidence of Lisa Hohn at paragraph
17 of her affidavit of 7
January 2010 that prior to 24
November 2009 the department had received advice that NS was not properly caring
for NE. She was screaming
and yelling at him, showing little or no patience
towards him, hitting him to make him cry, and handling him roughly. NS had been
offered support from her family but she refused to accept such support. She had
not taken NE to the child health nurse and was threatening
to move away to
Western Australia in January 2010.
(ii) I accept Ms Hohn’s evidence at paragraph 18 of her affidavit that
police had been called to NS’s home on 8 November
2009 due to concerns
(iii) I accept Ms Hohn’s evidence at paragraph 19 of her affidavit of
24 November 2009 that child safety officer, Bobbie Zanlorenzi,
and Ms Hohn
attended NS’s home. NS’s cousin, Ms Taylor, her sister, NT, and her
mother, OT, were present. On arrival
police were present due to a disturbance at
the household between NS, NT and Ms Taylor. Family members advised Ms Hohn and
Ms Zanlorenzi
inter alia:-
(a) NS was observed to throw NE into a pram in a rough manner and then storm
(b) There had been an ongoing dispute between family members about
NS’s care of NE and concerns as to what she would do with
had been observed to be patting NE on his back while he was in the cot. When
family had walked away they’ve heard a loud
thump and NE screaming
(d) OT stated that she had heard NS standing over NE telling him to,
“Shut the fuck up”.
(e) OT stated that NS was abusive and that
when she comes over to visit, NS has told her to “fuck
(f) OT said that NS wanted to use tap water in the bottle for
(g) OT said that she was worried about NE because NS was making threats
to throw him against the wall and drown him.
(h) OT indicated that she was
concerned about NE being in the care of NS and indicated that she would care for
(i) In the presence of NS, OT stated that she could not care for
both NS and NE due to NS’s perpetrating violence in the household
violence towards OT’s 16 month old son.
(j) When undressing NE, NS was
observed to roll him over by grabbing his arm and using his arms to slide him up
the bed. This was
observed to be undertaken but not in a careful manner.
[28] I accept Ms Hohn’s evidence at paragraph 19(q) of her affidavit that
despite over one hour of negotiations in an attempt
to work with NS in order to
prevent the child coming into the care of the Department, NS presented as unable
to acknowledge the information
being provided to her. She was observed to change
her mind in relation to cooperating with the Department. As part of the safety
plan she agreed and then reneged, then retreated to her bedroom. She was then
observed to yell abuse at police, was unreasonable
and appeared to display a
complete lack of understanding of the identified child protection concerns. She
would not engage in a safety
plan with the Department to allow NE to reside with
her mother despite this being the least intrusive measure. OT explained to NS
over and over again as to the reasons she was unable to stay with NE at her
(OT’s) home.
[29] I accept Ms Hohn’s evidence at paragraphs
19(r), (s) and (t) that at approximately 8.15pm on 24 November 2009 NE was taken
into care under Section 18 of the Act. During this time NS was observed to be
quite unreasonable and irrational. She was observed
to be presenting as confused
and refusing to understand that NE was being taken into the care of Department.
NS was detained by police
for an emergency examination order (EEO) due to her
distressed mental state.
[30] I accept the evidence of Ms Hohn at paragraph
20 to 23 of her affidavit that on the evening of 24 November 2009 NS was taken
to the Mental Health Unit at the Toowoomba General Hospital for assessment of
her mental health condition and was released that evening.
[31] I accept Ms
Hohn’s evidence at paragraph 25 of her affidavit that following NS’s
assessment she was advised by staff
at the Mental Health Unit at the Toowoomba
General Hospital as follows:-
had a long chequered history of antisocial behaviour.
(b) NS was assessed to have an external locus of control.
(c) NS was a loving mother during the first week of NE’s life but began
to exhibit reported behaviours about a week after giving
(d) NS reported as having a “Jekyll and Hyde” personality, ie. in
that she can be vindictive and then sweet and kind.
(e) NS is quite verbal, rude and demanding.
(f) NS exhibited an “I centered” approach suggesting that her
capacity to give love and nurture to NE would be minimised.
(g) When she presented to the hospital NS was observed to be erratic and
turning this behaviour on and off. This persisted at the
hospital whilst NS had
an audience and when there was no audience she would turn off the behaviour.
(h) She was observed to display the following behaviours, ie. calm,
cool, collected, lying, minimising, denying drug use and minimising illegal
activities.
(i) NS did not enquire or ask any questions about NE.
(j) NS was given a “full tick of health” in that there was no
suicidal, homicidal or depressive symptoms and no mental
health issues
classified as acute. She was assessed as having strong antisocial personalities
present. She had no respect for authority
(k) NS indicated to staff that she did not feel that community health
concerns were warranted in relation to NE as he was healthy
and interference was
not necessary.
(l) NS presented as serene, not as though she was innocent in losing her two
month old son.
(m) NS informed hospital staff, police and her mother that her phone had been
smashed and would not provide her contact number.
[32] I accept Ms Hohn’s evidence at paragraph 28 of her affidavit that on
26 November 2009 she and Ms Zanlorenzi met with NS
and the following were
discussed:-
(i) Ms Hohn enquired about a domestic violence
incident recorded by police on 8 November 2009. NS advised that she could not
details of the incident and guessed it was just her yelling at her
(ii) NS stated that she was moving in with a boy who “may be”
NE’s father. She said his name was Luke and that she
did not know his
surname. When questioned why she had not provided the department with the
father’s name when first asked,
NS said that she was not sure why she had
(iii) Ms Hohn enquired of NS as to why she did not allow her family to help
her. NS replied that her family was not there to help
her. They were there to
cause trouble. She appreciated her mother visiting and providing good
(iv) Ms Hohn enquired as to why NS was not engaging with Child Health. She
replied that she was meant to be going to the baby clinic
but had been trying to
sort out things with Luke and had been heaps busy so she had not gone. She
further stated that she did not
know Luke’s address and only had his home
phone number.
(v) NS asked why NE could not come home if she was living with Luke. She
stated that she had never done any parenting. No-one had
ever said that she had
to and that she would do this when NE came home.
[33] I accept the evidence of Kaye Smyth, Child Safety Support Officer, in her
affidavit sworn on 8 January 2010 that she supervised
on 26, 27 and 30 November 2009, 2, 7, 11, 14, 16, 18, and 21 December 2009. She
observed NS to handle NE
in a rough manner and not support his head. She
constantly jiggled NE on her legs notwithstanding that she had been told on a
of occasions not to do this. NS did not interact appropriately with NE.
She exhibited limited verbal contact with NE and was observed
not to be using
comforting and soothing words when communicating with him. She did not exhibit
much in the way of nurturing gestures
towards NE. She did not appear to be fully
attentive to his needs and provided minimum affection during the contact
[34] I accept the evidence of Ms Purcell at paragraph 37 of her affidavit of 23
February 2011 that Ms Smyth supervised contact between
NS and NE on 13 January
2010 when NS was informed that OT’s application for kinship carer status
had been approved. NS was
further informed that if she wished to visit OT then
arrangements would need to be made for NE not to be present at the home. After
some prompting NS eventually acknowledged that she understood this direction.
After a short period of nursing NE on her lap, NS became
angry and started
yelling at other persons in the room, “you’re fucking interfering in
my life”. Ms Smyth advised
NS to calm down. NS continued to yell and
stated, “I’ll fucking kill him (NE) at 3 months.” NS was
informed that
the contact would be terminated. She left the contact centre
yelling at her mother, “I’m going to the fucking police
you kidnapped my kid, you fucking dog. You’re a fucking cunt, get out of
my way.” As OT drove away NS walked
past Ms Smyth and yelled,
“You’re a fucking dog.” Contact was not resumed until April
[35] I accept the evidence of Cheryl Pickering, Child Safety Support Officer, at
paragraph 22 of her affidavit of 14 March 2011.
She supervised contact between
NS and NE on the 13th October 2010. OT was also present. During the contact Ms
Pickering asked NS
if she understood Ms Pickering’s role to which NS
replied, “I don’t fuckin’ like you. You don’t
understand what it is like coming in here.” Ms Pickering
explained that her job is to help NS with parenting NE to which NS
“So you’re saying I’m a fuckin’ failure?” OT
attempted to calm NS down. NS shouted that she
did not want to see NE ever again
and that OT could keep him. NS was shouting and swearing. She was asked several
times to leave
the contact centre. She replied, “I’m not
fuckin’ leavin’ until I see my son.” While picking up
things and shoving them forcefully into OT’s bag, NS shouted,
“I’m goin’, hunt yous all down and kill yous.”
this incident contact was again suspended.
[36] I accept the evidence of Ms Purcell at paragraph 88 of her affidavit of 23
February 2011 that on the 19 February 2010 NS informed
Child Safety Officer, Ms
Chongnee, that she was moving up north to live with NE’s father.
[37] I accept Ms Purcell’s evidence at paragraph 89 of her affidavit of
the 23 February 2010 that OT contacted her and informed
her, inter alia, that NS
had informed her (OT) that she was then living in Rockhampton.
[38] I accept Ms Purcell’s evidence at paragraph 93 of her affidavit of 23
February 2011 that on 21 January 2011 she contacted
OT who informed her, inter
alia, that NS was residing at Denham Lodge, Rockhampton, that NS contacted OT
every two or three weeks
but rarely enquired after NE.
[39] I accept the evidence of Ms Purcell at paragraphs 90 to 96 of her affidavit
of 23 February 2011 that on 8 December 2010 and
23 December 2010 she attempted
to contact NS on her mobile phone which had been switched off. She also
attempted to contact NS on
24 January 2011, 1 February 2011 and 10 February 2011
and the phone calls were not answered.
[40] I accept the evidence of Ms Purcell at paragraph 46 of her affidavit of 23
February 2011 that on 12 May 2010 she and acting
team leader, Ms Steel, met with
NS to discuss incidents that had occurred the previous week during family
at paragraphs 46(e) and (f) that when NS was
advised that swearing was unacceptable and not age appropriate for a child of
age, NS said words the effect “it’s only according to the
Department that swearing is bad, families swear all the time
in front of their
children...if I want to swear I will swear in front of my son”. (An
assertion NS repeated to Ms Russell and
is referred to at paragraph 7.8.1 of Ms
Russell’s Social Assessment Report of 28 September 2010. I refer Ms
report in the following paragraphs of these reasons.)
[41] I accept Ms Purcell’s evidence at paragraph 46(i) of the affidavit
that when asked if she had threatened to burn down
the building, NS replied,
“Yep, I said this, and I do hope that it burns down. Yep, I said it all
[42] I accept Ms Purcell’s evidence at paragraph 49 of her affidavit of 23
February 2011 that she supervised contact between
NS and NE between May 2010 and
August 2010 during which time, in her opinion, NS showed limited attachment
towards NE, often not
interacting with him for long periods of contact. She
poorly supervised NE during contact and frequently it was necessary to prompt
to observe NE’s movements or to remove an unsafe object from him. NS
displayed affection towards NE towards the end of each
Purcell observed a positive change in NS’s interactions with NE over
[43] I accept Ms Purcell’s evidence at paragraph 60 of her affidavit of 23
February 2011 that at a family group meeting held
on 7 April 2010 NS stated that
she was not willing to participate in any parenting education, anger management
or counselling.
[44] I refer to the affidavit of Debbie Anderson, neuropsychologist, of 15 March
2011 to which is exhibited her report of 8 June
2010. This was prepared
following a neuropsychological assessment of NS undertaken on 24 May 2010.
[45] I accept Ms Anderson’s opinion at paragraph 8.4 of her report that
“Whilst NS has low average to borderline intellect,
poor memory and
function, and surprisingly intact performance on the executive function tasks,
her difficulties lie in the area of
her inability to perceive the nature of her
situation and to provide consistent information. ... It is unlikely that
intervention
in terms of parenting skills would be accepted by NS, as her view
appears to be that other people were to blame for her situation
and until this
perception changes, it is unlikely that intervention would be helpful, despite
the fact that she may have the intellectual
ability to understand it.
[46] I refer to the affidavit of Dianna Russell, psychologist, of 28 September
2010 to which is exhibited her Social Assessment Report
of the same
[47] I accept Ms Russell’s opinion at paragraph 7.9.3 of her report that
NS informed her that if the Department requested that
she attend the counselling
and anger management she would do so but she does not believe she needs
[48] I accept Ms Russell’s evidence at paragraph 7.9.4 of her report that
NS told her she would like to be reunified with NE
and that she was willing to
live with her mother so that OT could supervise and care for NE. When asked
her mother she stated that she usually presented in
a hostile manner to any person caring for her son as it is her child.
[49] I accept Ms Russell’s evidence that her observations of contact
between NS and her son over a period of one and a quarter
hours were as
was little attachment between NS and her son except towards the end of the visit
or on a few occasions when she called his
name. (Paragraph 8.2).
(b) Overall, interactions between NE and his mother were limited and there
were often periods of time when nothing was said at all.
At other times NS sat
away from NE as he played. During this time she appeared to lack focus on NE or
his needs. (Paragraph 8.5).
(c) NE appeared unsettled and possibly hungry. Although NS gave him a small
bottle of milk, she did not offer pureed food which her
mother had provided and
advised was in NE’s bag. (Paragraph 8.6).
(d) Overall, Ms Russell observed very limited attachment between NS and NE.
(Paragraph 8.8).
[50] I accept Ms Russell’s evidence at paragraph 11.6 of her affidavit
that based on her observations of NS’s parenting
skills, NS still required
supervision to make sure she parented for NE’s needs and that she was able
at all times to protect
him physically and emotionally.
[51] I accept Ms Russell’s evidence at paragraph 11.7 of her affidavit
that NS appeared rude and hostile towards her mother
advising that this was
because her mother was caring for her son. I accept Ms Russell’s evidence
that this was an example of
NS’s lack of insight (as is her unwillingness
to participate in parenting education, anger management or counselling).
[52] I accept Ms Russell’s evidence at paragraph 11.12 of her report that
NS did not display a sound knowledge of child development
and that she therefore
had concerns that NS’s limited ability to control her temper and manage
her stress levels were current
risk factors for NE which she needed to
[53] In light of the foregoing I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that as at 7 January 2010 NE was a child in need of
protection. In my view NE
was then and, but for the action of the Department in taking him into care,
would now be at an unacceptable
risk of suffering harm. This is due to the fact
that his mother presented as irrational and aggressive on occasions when having
with him, exhibited limited parenting skills, and attachment to NE,
failed to exhibit any or any sufficient insight into the Department’s
child protection concerns, demonstrated little interest in his welfare by
absenting herself from Toowoomba and making little enquiry
period of some five months and failing to work with the Department in addressing
its child protection concerns.
[54] For the same reasons, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that
NE, as at 7 January 2010 and subsequently did not
and does not have a parent who
is able and willing to protect him from harm. Secondly, the order sought by the
applicant is, in my
view, appropriate and desirable for the protection of
a case plan been developed or revised for NE that is appropriate for meeting his
assessed protection and care needs and has it
been filed in the Court?
[55] I am satisfied that a case plan, Exhibit H, to the affidavit of Ms Purcell
on 23 February 2011, has been developed for NE and
is appropriate for meeting
his assessed needs.
As a Case Plan was prepared following the family
group meeting of 7 April 2010, has a Review Report been prepared as required by
51(v) of the Act and filed in the Court in accordance with Section 59(4)
of the Act?
[56] I am satisfied that a review report of 16 November 2010, Exhibit G, to the
affidavit of Ms Purcell of 23 February 2011, has
been prepared as required by
Section 51(v) of the Act and filed in the Court in accordance with Section 59(4)
of the Act.
Has a conference been held between the parties or
have reasonable attempts been made to hold such a conference?
[57] I am satisfied that a conference was held on 1 June 2011 in accordance with
s 51(1)(c) of the Act.
Have NE’s views or wishes been ascertained
if they are able to be ascertained?
[58] I am satisfied that having regard to his age, it is not possible to
ascertain NE’s wishes.
Is it likely that a Protection Order sought by
the application can be achieved by an order on less intrusive terms than that
is the subject of the application?
[59] I am satisfied that a two year custody order would give the Chief Executive
the right to have NE’s daily care and the
right and responsibility to make
decisions about his daily care. However, NS absented herself from Toowoomba for
some five months
from October 2010 and showed little or no interest in
NE’s care or development. She did not take part in the Court ordered
conference on 19 October 2010 and family group meetings on 17 November 2010 and
16 February 2011. Her present whereabouts are unknown
and she recently refused
to inform Ms Zanlorenzi of her whereabouts. Her future intentions are unclear.
In my view, her lack of interest
in NE over the last several months gave the
Chief Executive no alternative but to apply for a two year Guardianship Order
in addition to its powers by way of a short term custody order, would
also give it the power, rights and responsibilities in relation
to NE that would
otherwise be vested in his mother. Such an order would also give the Chief
Executive power to make decisions about
his long term care, wellbeing and
development. Accordingly I am satisfied that the order sought by the Chief
Executive can be achieved
by an order on no less intrusive terms than that which
is the subject of this application.
[60] In the circumstances I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that it
is in the best interests of NE that a short term
two year Guardianship Order be
made in respect of him in favour of the Chief Executive and I order
accordingly.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (233 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter