URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council [2025] ICQ 1 (12 February 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council
[2025] ICQ 001
Mutonhori, Simon
(Appellant)
Mount Isa City Council
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Application in existing proceedings
DELIVERED ON:
23 January 2025
Hartigan DP
On the papers
Leave is granted for the Respondent to be legally represented pursuant
s 530(1)(a)(ii)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – QUEENSLAND – APPEALS – APPEAL TO
INDUSTRIAL COURT – OTHER MATTERS – where respondent
has applied for
leave to be legally represented – where appellant opposes application
– factors to be considered by the
Court in determining whether to allow
legal representation – complexity of the matter – where leave is
granted for legal
representation
LEGISLATION:
Industrial Relations Act 2016
v Mount Isa City Council (No.2)
[2024] QIRC 240
Sillay v State of
Queensland (Queensland Corrective Services)
[2024] ICQ 16
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
Appellant, Mr Simon Mutonhori, has filed an application to appeal, seeking,
, that the decision of
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council
[2024] QIRC 240
be set aside and that a decision be made to allow the
Appellant an extension of time to file the general protections application
outside the prescribed timeframe ('the proceeding').
Respondent, Mount Isa City Council, has applied for orders that it be granted
leave to be legally represented pursuant to
s 530(1)(a)(ii)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld) ('the
') in the proceeding.
Appellant objects to leave being granted for the Respondent to be legally
represented.
Relevant background
substantive proceeding is an appeal of a general protection decision which,
, dismissed the Appellant's application for an extension of
time to file the part of the application that relates to dismissal and
the Appellant's application in sofar as it related to the dismissal ('the
decision').
Appellant is seeking that the decision be set aside and replaced with one that
finds that exceptional circumstances exist
and allows an extension of time for
the Appellant to file the general protections application outside of the
prescribed timeframe.
Appellant has raised numerous grounds for appeal. In the application to appeal,
the Appellant contends that the Commission
erred in law and fact by:
to give adequate reasons for his decision. The Commissioner relied on a
generalised conclusion that allowing an extension
time would disadvantage others
in similar circumstances whose applications were declined in the past. Clearly,
the Commission failed
to examine this case on its own merit based on the
relevant evidence provided. The two case laws he relied on couldn’t be
to consider and give weight to contemporaneous and undisputed evidence of
procedural unfairness in the disciplinary process.
That the applicant was
immediately suspended without a show cause notice after lodging his work place
complaint; that his work place
complaint was totally ignored in favour of the
retaliatory allegations against him which expedited and eventually used to
him; that the applicant was not privy to the investigation details and
was not involved, etc.
to acknowledge and take into consideration work already dedicated into this case
by 4 other Commissioners prior to him and
given that none of the 4 Commissioners
dismissed the applicant's case. The Commissioner barely mentioned these previous
proceedings
but rather brushed them aside as non-events. What a waste of time of
the Commission, spending 7 months involving 4 Commissioners
only to be dismissed
by the 5th Commissioner with totally no regard or acknowledgement of the work
already done by his colleagues.
Commissioner focused at length on wrong evidence claiming the applicant blamed
late application on representation error. This
was never raised by the applicant
but the Commissioner dedicated a significant amount of time and effort on this
irrelevant matter
which weighs heavily in his mind when he formed his final
conclusion. All of that led to the Commissioner being distracted and diverted
from the facts relevant to this case in particular.
Appellant also appears to attempt to raise further grounds in submissions made
in support of the application to appeal.
December 2024, the Respondent filed a Form 4 - application in existing
proceedings with an accompanying affidavit, seeking
leave to be legally
represented.
Appellant filed submission in reply to the Form 4 – application, objecting
to the Respondent’s request for leave
to be legally represented.
[10] The parties
both filed further submissions in response to the application on 2 January 2025.
[11] The Form 4
– application filed 18 December 2024 was taken as an application for legal
representation and the Appellant's
response filed 2 January 2025 was taken as an
objection to the legal representation application.
relevant to note, as it is referred to in submissions by the parties, that in
the matter below, the Appellant filed a Form
102 on 27 May 2024 consenting to
the Respondent's request to be legally represented. By email dated, 27 May 2024
the Appellant indicated
that he had "no objection for the Respondent to be
represented" in the general protection matter and orders were subsequently
question for my determination is whether leave should be granted for the
Respondent to be legally represented in the appeal
before the Industrial Court
of Queensland ('the Court').
Relevant legislation
Section 529
relevantly states:
529 Representation of parties generally
(1) A party to proceedings, or a person ordered or permitted to appear or to
be represented in the proceedings, may be represented
in the proceedings
(a) a lawyer, only in accordance with
section 530
(b) an employee or
officer of an organisation appointed in writing as the agent of the party or
(c) if the party or person is an organisation—an employee,
officer or member of the organisation; or
(d) if the party or person is an employer—an employee or
officer of the employer;
(e) another person appointed in writing as the agent of the party or person,
only with the leave of the industrial tribunal conducting
the proceedings.
(2) However, a party or person may not be represented
subsection (1) (e)
by a person who—
(a) directly or indirectly demands or receives a fee for representing the party
or person; or
(b) is an employee or
officer of, or acting for, an entity (other than an organisation) that purports
to represent the industrial
interests of employees or employers.
(3) The industrial tribunal may give leave under subsection
(1) (e) only if—
(a) giving leave would enable the proceedings to be dealt with more efficiently,
having regard to the complexity of the matter; or
(b) it would be unfair not to allow the party or person to be represented
because the party or person is unable to represent itself,
himself or herself;
(c) it would be unfair not to allow the party or person to be represented having
regard to fairness between the party or person,
and other parties or persons in
the proceedings.
(4) In this section—
"industrial tribunal"
means the Court of Appeal, court, full
bench or commission or an Industrial Magistrates Court.
"proceedings"
(a) means proceedings under this Act or another Act being conducted by the
court, the commission, an Industrial Magistrates Court
or the registrar; and
(b) includes conciliation being conducted under
by a conciliator.
Section 530
provides for legal representation in the following
530 Legal representation
(1) A party to proceedings, or person ordered or permitted to appear or to be
represented in the proceedings, may be represented by
a lawyer only if
(a) for proceedings in the court—
(i) all parties consent; or
(ii) the court gives leave; or
(iii) the proceedings are for the prosecution of an offence; or
(4) An industrial tribunal may give leave under subsection (1) only if
(b) it would enable the proceedings to be dealt with more efficiently, having
regard to the complexity of the matter; or
(c) it would be unfair not to allow the party or person to be represented
because the party or person is unable to represent itself,
himself or herself;
(d) it would be unfair not to allow the party or person to be represented having
regard to fairness between the party or person,
and other parties or persons in
the proceedings.
Examples of when it may be unfair not to allow a party or person to be
represented by a lawyer -
a party is a
small business and has no specialist human resources staff, while the other
party is represented by an officer or employee
of an industrial association or
another person with experience in industrial relations advocacy
a person is from
a non-English speaking background or has difficulty reading or
(5) For this section, a party or person is taken not to be
represented by a lawyer if the lawyer is -
(a) an employee or officer of the party or person; or
(b) an employee or officer of an entity representing the party or person if the
entity is -
(i) an organisation; or
(ii) a State peak council; or
(iii) another entity that only has members who are employers.
(7) In this section –
industrial tribunal
means the Court of Appeal, court, full
bench, commission or Industrial Magistrates Court.
proceedings
(a) means proceedings under this Act or another Act being conducted by the
court, the commission, an Industrial Magistrates Court
or the registrar; and
(b) includes conciliation being conducted under
, division 4 or
division 5A by a conciliator.
relevant provision
, for a proceeding before the commission
other than the full bench means –
(a) chapter 8; or
section 471
(c) chapter 12,
Sillay v State of Queensland (Queensland Corrective
the Court recently
considered the statutory construction of
as follows:
Section 529(1)(a)
prohibits representation of a party by a lawyer
except in accordance with
s 530(1)(e)
, proceedings before the QIRC15
may involve legal representation only by leave. The bases upon which leave may
be given are prescribed
[31] The circumstances upon which a lawyer may appear before the QIRC are
governed by
of the Act. If the discretion arises under
to give leave to a party to be represented by a lawyer, then the discretion
falls to be exercised. There are no presumptions as to
how the discretion is
exercised. However, no executive or judicial discretion vested by an Australian
statute is unfettered. The
discretion is limited and circumscribed by the
purpose for which it was bestowed.
Section 530
has a typical structure. The factual circumstances
prescribed by each of
ss 530(4)(a)
, (b) and (c) are jurisdictional facts, the
establishment of which empowers the QIRC to exercise a discretion to grant leave
party to be legally represented.
[33] Subsection (4)(a) requires the QIRC to be satisfied that legal
representation “would enable the proceedings to be dealt
efficiently” if lawyers represent a party. However, that assessment is
limited. It is conducted “having regard
to the complexity of the
[34] The “matter” is the controversy the subject of the
principal proceedings. The “proceedings” are the
proceedings, namely the application for final relief.
[35] The task then is to:
(a) identify the complexity; and
(b) identify
how, “having regard to the complexity”, having a party represented
by lawyers would “enable the proceedings
to be dealt with more
efficiently”.
ss 530(4)(b)
(4)(c) concern an assessment of fairness. However,
the assessment to be conducted under each of the two subsections is quite
Section 530(4)(b)
requires an assessment only of the position of the
applicant for legal representation. Legal representation “may” be
allowed where it would be unfair to deny it “because the party or person
is unable to represent the party’s or person’s
interests in the
proceeding”.
Therefore, the first question is whether the
party or person is “unable to represent [their] interests in the
proceedings”.
If the answer to that question is in the affirmative, then
the use of the word “because” requires a causal connection
established between the inability of the person to represent themselves and any
unfairness in not allowing representation.
Section 530(4)(c)
requires consideration of the respective positions of
the parties to the proceedings. Legal representation “may” be
where it would be unfair not to allow legal representation to the party.
However, as with
s 530(4)(a)
, the assessment is limited. The assessment of
whether it would be “unfair” is made “having regard to
fairness between
the party or person, and other parties or persons in the
proceedings”.
[39] In conducting the assessment under
s 530(4)(c)
is relevant. A
lawyer employed by a party (here the State) may appear for that party without
leave. Therefore, when considering the
unfairness to a party who employs
lawyers, the question becomes whether it would be unfair not to allow the party
to be represented
by private lawyers rather than their own employed lawyers.
That assessment then is had “having regard to fairness between the
... and other parties in the proceedings”.
Should leave be granted for the Respondents to be legally
represented?
discretion to grant leave for a party to be legally represented is outlined in
. The Court may grant leave if:
(a) it would enable the proceedings to be dealt with more efficiently, having
regard to the complexity of the matter
(s 530(4)(a))
(b) it would be unfair not to allow the party or person to be represented
because the party or person is unable to represent itself,
himself or herself
(s 530(4)(b))
(c) it would be unfair not to allow the party or person to be represented having
regard to fairness between the party or person,
and other parties or persons in
the proceedings
(s 530(4)(c)).
Respondent relies on
s 530(4)(a)
in making the application.
Appellant objects to the Respondent's application on,
grounds that the Respondent's legal representative is in breach of
by seeking to appear in the current proceedings and appearing in the
proceedings below without express permission to do so. The Appellant
that granting the Respondent leave to be legally represented would "regularise
his illegal activity."
Appellant's complaint seems to be based on an assumption that leave below was
granted for a particular legal representative
to appear for the Respondent.
Respondent deposes to the Appellant having consented to leave being granted for
the Respondent to be legally represented
in the proceedings below through filing
a Form 102 on 27 May
Appellant makes several serious allegations about the conduct of the
Respondent's legal representative in the matter below
and submits that, as a
result of this conduct, the Respondent's legal representative should not be
granted leave to represent the
Respondent in these proceedings. These
allegations arise out of the Appellant's assumption that leave was granted below
for a particular
individual to appear as the Respondent's legal representative.
Appellant does not appear to make any further submissions about whether the
Court should exercise its discretion to grant
leave having regard to the
considerations set out under
Section 530(4)(a)
requires the following assessment to be
undertaken:
(a) identify the complexity of the "matter", being the controversy the subject
of the principal proceedings; and
(b) identify how, "having regard to the complexity", having a party represented
by lawyers would "enable the proceedings to be dealt
with more efficiently".
[25] Having
regard to the decision and to the Appellant's grounds of appeal, the
controversies the subject of the appeal concern:
(a) whether the Commissioner erred in the exercise of a discretion;
(b) consideration of questions of law and facts;
(c) consideration of the reasons for judgment to determine if the Commissioner
provided adequate reasons;
(d) consideration of the reasons for judgment to determine if the Commission
took into account irrelevant matters and, further, did
not take into account
relevant matters; and
(e) whether to permit an application (if any) for fresh evidence on the appeal.
matters are matters that add to the complexity of the appeal.
[27] Having now
identified the complexity of the matter, regard must be had as to whether having
a party represented by a lawyer would
enable the proceedings to be dealt with
more efficiently. Having regard to the word "efficient", the Macquarie
Dictionary relevantly
provides as follows:
Effective in the use of energy or
adequate in operation or performance; having and using
the requisite knowledge, skill, and industry; competent; capable.
producing an effect, as a cause; causative.
, present participle, accomplishing]
efficiently
[28] In the
context of proceedings, I consider that dealing with proceedings more
efficiently includes efficiently dealing with proceedings
by effectively using
resources and time.
[29] Having
regard to the matters that add to the complexity of this matter, they are
matters that may potentially impact on the efficient
conduct of the proceedings.
[30] Having
regard to the relatively complex issues on appeal, my view is that legal
representation will, in a manner that effectively
manages resources and time,
assist the Court to determine whether or not the decision is affected by error
that vitiates the decision.
[31] I consider
that such assistance would enable the proceedings to be dealt with more
efficiently than would be the case if the
Respondent was not legally
represented.
[32] These are
matters which weigh in favour of the exercise of discretion.
[33] Against the
exercise of discretion, the Appellant contends that Mr Meredith, Solicitor,
Preston Law, appeared below and in these
proceedings without leave.
Appellant's contention in this regard appears to be based on the fact that Ms
Care, Solicitor, Preston Law, initially applied
on behalf of the Respondent, for
leave for the Respondent to be legally represented.
Appellant argues that the Commission's subsequent granting of leave for the
Respondent to be legally represented is limited
to representation by Ms Care
[36] However,
that contention does not accord with the terms of the order granting leave.
Relevantly, the Commission's order was in
the following terms:
The Respondent has leave to be legally represented in matter number
GP/2024/20 pursuant to
s 530(1)(c)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
[37] The order
does not seek to restrict the identity of the legal representative to a
particular legal practitioner. In any event,
both Ms Care and Mr Meredith are
solicitors at Preston Law. It is apparent that Preston Law has been engaged by
the Respondent as
its legal representative, both in the matter below and in this
[38] Consequently,
there is no substance to the Appellant's submission that Mr Meredith "illegally"
appeared in the proceedings below.
[39] In this
proceeding, I served directions at the initial appeal directions hearing on 18
December 2024 requiring the parties to
file material relevant to the
Respondent's foreshadowed application for legal representation.
application for legal representations in these proceedings will be determined
before the hearing of the appeal.
[41] Accordingly,
the matters raised by the Respondent do not weigh against the exercise of the
discretion to grant leave.
Respondent's application for leave to be legally represented in these
proceedings is granted.
[43] I make the
following order:
is granted for the Respondent to be legally represented pursuant to
s 530(1)(a)(ii)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Affidavit of Mr Benjamin
Meredith filed 18 December 2024.
[2024] ICQ 16
’) (citations omitted).
Affidavit of Mr Benjamin
Meredith filed 18 December 2024.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (299 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter