URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stratford North Pty Ltd v Workers' Compensation Regulator & Ors [2025] ICQ 4 (26 June 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Stratford North
Pty Ltd v Workers' Compensation Regulator & Ors
[2025] ICQ 004
Stratford North Pty
(Appellant)
Workers' Compensation
(First Respondent)
(Second Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Appeal against decision of the Queensland Industrial Relations
DELIVERED ON:
21 March 2025
HEARING DATES:
O'Connor VP
appeal is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS' COMPENSATION - ENTITLEMENT TO COMPENSATION - APPEAL TO INDUSTRIAL
COURT - where appellant employed as a truck driver - where
appellant injured
during employment - whether the appellant's employment connected with Queensland
for the purpose of
Workers' Compensation and Rehabilitation Act
(Qld) (WCR Act) - whether appellant ''usually works" in Queensland -
whether appellant is ''usually based'' in Queensland - where
appellant appealed
to the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission(QIRC) - where appeal dismissed
- where appellant appealed decision
of QIRC to the Industrial Court of
Queensland pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act
whether appeal filed out of time - where appeal against a decision made under
the WCR Act is limited to errors of law or excess
or want of jurisdiction -
whether errors of law by commissioner identified in applying s 113 of the WCR
Act - whether findings by
commissioner supported by the evidence
LEGISLATION:
Acts Interpretation Act
Industrial Relations
Workers' Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act 2003
Relations (Tribunals) Rules
(Qld) , r 232
Abbott v Blackwood
[2014] ICQ 031
Avon Products Pty Ltd v Falls
[2010] ACTCA 21
A1 Rubber (Aust) Pty ltd v Chapman (Office of Industrial Relations)
[2019] ICQ 16
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Cameron v Q-Comp
[2011] ICQ 27
Chapman v State of Queensland
[2003] QCA 172
Coulton v Holcombe
[1986] HCA 33
Covill v WorkCover Queensland
[2022] QSC 171
Davidson v Blackwood
[2014] ICQ 8
Davis v Blackwood
[2014] ICQ 9
Ferguson v WorkCover Queensland
[2013] QSC 78.
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Irving v Blackwood
[2014] ICQ 030
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Lehrmann v Network Ten Pty Limited (Trial Judgment)
Martin v R G Hibbens Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWWCCPD 83
Misericordiae Health Service Brisbane Ltd v Q-Comp
(2005) QGIG 144
Michael Hanns v Greyhound Pioneer Australia Limited
[2006] ACTSC 5.
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
Neophytos Foundadjis v Collin Bailey
Robert Bax & Associates v Cavenham Pty Ltd
[2012] QCA 177
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
(1986) 161 CLR
Stratford North Pty td v Workers' Compensation Regulator & Ors
[2023] QIRC 359.
Sydneywide Distributors Pty Ltd v Red Bull Australia Pty Ltd
[2002] FCAFC 157
Tamboritha Consultants Pty Ltd v Knight
[2008] WADC
Turay v Workers' Compensation Regulator
[2023] ICQ 013
Turnbull v New South Wales Medical Board
[1976] 2 NSWLR 281
Wallis v Q-Comp
[2012] ICQ 23
Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Workers Compensation
Regulator v Glass
[2020] QCA 133
(2020) 4 QR 693
APPEARANCES:
Mr A.C. Harding, Counsel instructed by IM Lawyers for the Appellant.
Mr S.P. Gray, Counsel directly instructed by the Workers' Compensation
Regulator, the First Respondent.
Ms M.A. Stone, Counsel instructed by Dwyer Law Group for the Second
Respondent.
Reasons for Decision
January 2024 Stratford North Pty Ltd ('the Appellant') filed an appeal against a
decision of the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission ('the Commission')
confirming a decision of the Workers' Compensation Regulator ('the First
Respondent') to grant a claim
by Mr Jared Dinning ('the Second Respondent') for
workers' compensation entitlements under the
Workers' Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act
(Qld) (WCR Act). The decision of the Commission was
released on 18 December
[2] The Second
Respondent commenced employment with the Appellant in or about June 2020. There
was no written contract of employment.
Appellant carries on the business as a transport company based in the Northern
Territory. Mr Bradley Bloomfield was a director
and sole shareholder of the
[4] The Second
Respondent was initially employed to transport and deliver oversized demountable
huts from Yatala in Queensland to
the Granite gold mines in the Northern
Territory ('the huts job'). The Second Respondent spent the first three to four
weeks of his
employment at Alice Springs preparing the truck in order to
undertake the huts job.
[5] The Second
Respondent commenced driving the truck to collect the huts from Yatala and
deliver them to the mines in the Northern
Territory. However, sometime in July
2020, because of COVID-19 border restrictions, an arrangement was adopted
whereby the Second
Respondent drove the huts from Yatala to the Northern
Territory border and another driver took the huts from the border to the Granite
completion of the huts job, the Appellant continued to employ the Second
Respondent as an interstate truck driver.
[7] On 15 March
2021 the Second Respondent suffered a back injury whilst performing maintenance
work on the Appellant’s truck.
At the time of the injury, the truck was
parked at Morayfield, Queensland.
[8] On 6 April
2021 the Second Respondent made a claim for compensation under the WCR Act.
[9] By decision
dated 17 May 2021 WorkCover accepted the application for compensation in
accordance with s 32 of the WCR Act. On
26 November 2021 the First Respondent
confirmed the review decision. The Appellant appealed the review decision to
the Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission. On 18 December 2023, the
Commission dismissed the appeal finding that the Second Respondent was
who is usually based in Queensland for the purposes of his employment pursuant
to s 113(3)(b) of the WCR Act. This is an
appeal of that
Statutory Framework
[10] Section
113(1) of the WCR Act provides compensation is only payable in relation to
employment that is "connected with" Queensland.
[11] Section 113
of the WCR Act provides:
must be connected with State
(1) Compensation under this Act is only payable in relation to employment
that is connected with this State.
(2) The fact that a worker is outside this State when
the injury is sustained does not prevent compensation being
payable under this
Act in relation to employment that is connected with
this State.
(3) A worker's employment is connected with -
(a) the State in which the worker usually works in that
employment; or
(b) if no State or no 1 State is identified
paragraph (a)
, the State in which
the worker is usually based for the purposes of that employment; or
(c) if no State or no 1 State is identified
paragraph (a)
the State in which the employer’s principal place of business in
Australia is located.
(4) In the case of a worker on a ship, if no State or no
1 State is identified by
subsection (3)
a worker's employment is, while on a ship, connected with
the State in which the ship is registered or (if the ship is
in more than 1 State) the State in which the ship most
recently became registered.
(5) If no State is identified by
subsection (3)
(if applicable) (4), a worker's employment is connected with
this State if -
(a) the worker is in this State when the injury is
sustained; and
(b) there is no place outside Australia under the legislation of which
the worker may be entitled to compensation for the same
(6) In deciding whether a worker usually works in a State,
regard must be had to the worker's work history with the employer and the
intention of the worker and employer.
(7) However, regard must not be had to any temporary arrangement under which
the worker works in a State for a period of not longer
(8) Compensation under this Act does not apply in relation to the
employment of a worker on a ship if the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1997 (Cwlth)
the worker's employment.
(9) In this section -
in a geographical
sense, includes a State's relevant adjacent area as described
Grounds of Appeal
[12] Schedule A
of the Appellant’s notice of appeal sets out some fourteen grounds of
[13] In brief,
the grounds of appeal as expressed in the Appellant’s written submissions
and advanced before this Court were
as follows:
Ground 1: The Commission erred by misconstruing and therefore misapplying s
113 of the WCR Act;
Ground 2: The Commission erred by failing to genuinely consider submissions
made by the Appellant as to the proper application of
s 113(3)(b) of the WCR
Ground 3: The Commission made a finding that the Second Respondent was not
"usually based" in the NT. In making this finding the
Commission erred by
making a number of critical findings which were unsupported by and against the
Ground 4: In making the finding that the Second Respondent was "usually
based" in Queensland, the Commission erred by making a number
of critical
findings which were unsupported by and against the evidence;
Ground 5: Contrary to the holding of the decision in
Commission assessed where the Second Respondent was "usually based" applying a
mathematical test;
Ground 6: The Commission erred by failing to give genuine consideration to
submissions by the Appellant that "the only alternative
finding which is open is
that the Second Respondent did not have a single State where he was usually
` Ground 7: The Commission erred by failing to give genuine consideration to
submissions made by the Appellant that the Second Respondent
lived in his
Ground 8: The Commission erred by relying on that part of the WorkCover
Communication's Report (WC Report) which relates to a conversation
Bloomfield and a WorkCover employee in support of a finding that Mr Bloomfield
considered the Second Respondent to be
based in Queensland.
Ground 9: The Commission erred by relying on
that part of the WC Report because even if (which is disputed) it recorded Mr
Bloomfield's
subjective belief that belief was not a relevant consideration for
the purposes of s 113(3)(b) of the WCR
Appellant seeks the following:
(a) find the State or Territory in which the Second Respondent was usually based
for the purposes of that employment is the Northern
(b) alternatively, find that the Second Respondent did not have a single State
where he was usually based;
(c) find that the Northern Territory is the location where the business
activities of the Appellant were controlled or managed; and
(d) substitute a decision that the Second Respondent's employment is not
"connected with" Queensland for the purposes of s 113(1)
Nature of the appeal
[15] The right
is granted pursuant to s
561 of the WCR Act which provides as follows:
561 Appeal to industrial court
(1) A party aggrieved by the industrial magistrate's or the industrial
commission's decision may appeal to the industrial court.
Industrial Relations Act 2016
applies to the appeal.
(3) The appeal is by way of rehearing on the evidence and proceedings before
the industrial magistrate or the industrial commission,
unless the court orders
additional evidence be heard.
(4) The court's decision is final.
[16] Section 561
of the WCR Act gives a right of appeal to this Court. Section 561 provides an
avenue of appeal which is independent
of the rights of appeal from the
Commission created by the
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Therefore, the terms
imposed by s 557 of the IR Act, which limit grounds of appeal to this Court
to errors of law and jurisdiction,
except by leave, do not
[17] This appeal
is one by way of rehearing as that term is commonly
understood.
Whether appeal filed out of time
[18] By virtue
of s564(1) and ss(3)(b) of the IR Act, an appeal against a decision of the
Commission must be started within 21 days
after the decision is released. It is
not in dispute that the Commissioner released her decision on 18 December
[19] On the
argument advanced by the Second Respondent, the appeal was required to be
started by no later than 8 January 2024. The
appeal was filed in the Industrial
Registry on 16 January 2024 and on the Second Respondent’s submission some
8 days out of
time. Accordingly, the Court does not have jurisdiction to hear
the appeal unless leave is
[20] The First
Respondent did not take issue as to whether the appeal has been filed out of
[21] Section 564
of the IR Act provides:
564 Time limit for appeal
(1) An appeal against a decision to an industrial tribunal must be started,
as required under the rules, within the appeal period.
(2) However, on an application made during or after the appeal period, the
industrial tribunal may allow an appeal to be started within
(3) In this section -
appeal period
for an appeal against a decision to an industrial tribunal, means the period
within 21 days after -
(a) if the decision is given at a hearing - the announcement of the decision at
the hearing; or
(b) if the decision is given through the registrar - the release of the
decision; or
(c) if the decision is a promotion decision - the decision is publicly notified
Public Sector Act 2022
(d) if, under another Act, the decision is given in another way - the decision
is given in the other way.
[22] Section
564(3) of the IR Act sets out the appeal period being 21 days after a decision
is delivered by the Registrar. The Second
Respondent opposes leave being
granted and in any event on the basis that the Appellant has no prospects of
[23] Before the
Court, the Appellant submitted:
[T]he appeal period in fact ran from 19 December ... to 26 December - that's
eight days - and then there was the lacuna, where there's
a holiday. ... And
then it ran from ... 6 January to 18 January ... 13 days. So the appeal period
actually ran till the 18
of January, and the appeal was lodged on
[24] To support
the submission, the Appellant relies on r 232 of the
Industrial Relations
(Tribunals) Rules
('IR Rules'), rule 232 relevantly
232 Vacations and holidays
(1) The vacations and holidays of the court and commission are the same as
the Supreme Court at Brisbane but may be rearranged with
the president’s
[25] Practice
Direction 12 of 2023 – Designation of Court Holidays was issued by the
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Queensland.
The Practice Direction
designated the days from Wednesday 27 December 2023 to 5 January 2024 as a court
Acts Interpretation Act
(Qld) ('AI Act') deals with the
calculation of time limits when time limits are specified in any act. Section
38 provides:
38 Reckoning of time
(1) If a period beginning on a given day, act or event is provided or allowed
for a purpose by an Act, the period is to be calculated
by excluding the day, or
the day of the act or event, and—
(a) if the period is expressed to be a specified number of clear days or at
least a specified number of days—by excluding the
day on which the purpose
is to be fulfilled; and
(b) in any other case—by including the day on which the purpose is to
be fulfilled.
(2) If the time, or last day of a period, calculated forwards that is
provided or allowed by an Act for doing anything falls on an
excluded day, the
time, or last day, is taken to fall on the next day later that is not an
excluded day.
(3) If the time, or earliest day of a period, calculated backwards that is
provided or allowed by an Act for doing anything falls
on an excluded day, the
time, or earliest day, is taken to fall on the next day earlier that is not an
excluded day.
[27] If the last
day falls on an ‘excluded day’, then the final day is the next day
that is not an excluded day. Under
, “Excluded
day” means:
(a) for filing or registering a document – a day on which the relevant
office at which the documents must be filed or registered
is closed; or
(b) otherwise, a day that is not a business day in the place in which the thing
must or may be done.
[28] In reliance
, it was submitted by the Appellant that the relevant appeal period
ran till 18 January 2024. The appeal was lodged on 16 January
accordingly it was filed within time.
Appellant’s argument was premised on a misreading of
The Appellant’s calculation of the appeal period was determined by
excluding the days on which the Industrial Registry was
calculating the appeal period, the day the decision was issued is excluded from
the calculation. In accordance with s 564(3)
of the IR Act and on a proper
reading of the
, the appeal period commenced on 19 December 2023 and
accordingly, the appeal ought to have been filed in the Industrial Registry
January 2024 being the last day by which something must be done.
should not be read to exclude the days identified in PD 12 of 2023
from the calculation of the appeal period.
Section 38(5)
only has application in
circumstances where the last day falls on an ‘excluded day’. In
those circumstances, the final
day is the next day that is not an excluded
[32] The appeal
was lodged out of time.
considering an extension of time in which to appeal, the approach of this Court
was described by Hall P in the
Neophytos Foundadjis v Collin
[2007] ICQ 10
following way:
This Court has traditionally adhered to the view that s. 346 of the
Industrial Relations Act
represents a legislative assessment that in
the ordinary category of cases, justice will best be served by adhering to a 21
day limitation
period, though on occasion the limitation may defeat a perfectly
good case and that the discretion to extend time should be exercised
the applicant for an extension of time discharges a positive burden of
demonstrating that the justice of the case requires
the indulgence of a further
[34] Section 346
of the 1999 Act is reproduced as s 564 in the current Act. In applying those
principles, this Court will not grant
leave unless it is positively satisfied
that it is proper to do so.
[35] As was said
Chapman v State of
In determining whether it is proper to grant the extension, it is appropriate
to consider the merits of the substantive application
... An extension of time
will not be granted if the court considers the appeal to be plainly hopeless
[36] In order to
be successful, an applicant must ordinarily discharge the burden in three ways:
first, the applicant must demonstrate
that the justice of the case requires the
indulgence sought; secondly, the applicant must demonstrate that the case sought
appealed has prospects of success; and thirdly there must be an
explanation for the delay between the expiry of the time period and
the time at
which the application was filed.
[37] Notwithstanding
that the appeal was filed out of time, I would nevertheless exercise my
discretion pursuant to s564(2) of the
IR Act to allow the appeal to be lodged in
a period outside the 21 days.
exercising the discretion, I have considered the time of the year and the
reasons advanced by the Appellant for the late filing
the appeal, albeit because
of a misinterpretation of the statutory provisions. Moreover, the delay in
filing the appeal was not significant,
the First Respondent does not make an
objection to the late filing and the Second Respondent has not asserted that he
was otherwise
prejudiced by it. In my view, the interests of justice would be
best served by granting leave. In those circumstances leave is granted.
Ground One: The Commission erred by misconstruing and therefore
misapplying s 113 of the WCR Act;
ground of appeal concerns the submission that the Commission erred in
misconstruing and therefore misapplying s 113(3)(b)
of the WCR Act. For the
reasons which follow, I do not accept that submission.
[40] What is
argued by the Appellant is that the Commission is required to consider and
determine whether there was a State or Territory
in which the Second Respondent
was “usually based” for the purposes of his employment. The legal
error in the approach
of the Commissioner to the application of s113 of the Act
was said to proceed on the basis that unless there is a State or Territory
than Queensland which was itself capable of satisfying the test then Queensland
must satisfy that test.
[41] The issue
before the Commission was whether the Second Respondent’s employment was
connected with Queensland, as determined
in accordance with s 113 of the WCR
[42] Section 113
(1) provides that compensation is only payable in relation to employment that is
connected with Queensland. Subsection
(2) provides that being outside
Queensland when the injury is sustained does not prevent compensation being
payable in relation to
employment that is connected with Queensland. The above
subsections raise the question of how this connection with Queensland is
determined.
connection with Queensland is determined by the cascading provisions of s
. Relevantly for our
purposes, subsection (3) of s113 of the Act sets out three circumstances when it
is said that a worker's employment
is connected with Queensland,
(a) whether the worker usually works in that employment in Queensland or in
another state;
(b) if the state in which the worker usually works in an employment cannot be
determined then the state in which the worker is usually
based for the purposes
of that employment is to be identified; and
(c) if neither of the above identifiers yields a result then a determination
needs to be made as to where the employer's principal
place of business is
Products Pty Ltd v Falls
the Court of Appeal of the Australian Capital Territory described the
application of the test in the following terms:
[10] The tests are not, however, applied together. Rather, if the first
test provides the answer, then that is the end of the matter,
but if not, the
next test is applied and failing an answer emerging from that test, the third
test determines the State or Territory
of connection. This approach is
significant, because it means that in applying each of the first two tests, it
is not appropriate
to look for the best answer in all the circumstances, but to
assess whether there is a clear answer at all to the question posed
relevant test. If there is no clear answer, it is necessary to move on to the
[45] Section 113
(3)(b) of the WCR Act, and more particularly the term “usually
based” was considered by Applegarth J
Ferguson v WorkCover
Queensland.
accepted facts in
were very different to the current matter
before this Court. In
, Tweed Heads was the place where the
applicant turned up for work each morning, received his instructions, loaded his
truck, reported
to and returned to at the end of each workday. Tweed Heads was
the place at which the truck he used was based. It was the centre
out of which
the applicant operated, and the fact that he spent, on average, a large part of
his working day driving on roads in
Queensland does not alter this fact. The
Tweed Heads warehouse was his base and in cross-examination, the applicant
accepted that
Tweed Heads was where he was based. It was upon this factual
matrix that Applegarth J in utilising the test set out in subs (3)(b)
found that the worker was usually based in New South Wales so that compensation
was not payable under the Queensland Act.
[47] In dealing
with the interpretation of “usually based” his Honour
[35] The term “usually based” was considered in
Consultants Pty Ltd v Knight
. Commissioner Herron referred to the Shorter
Oxford English Dictionary definition of “base” as a “town,
camp, harbour,
airfield, etc., from which (esp. military) operations are
conducted and where stores and supporting facilities are concentrated;
of operations, a headquarters.”
[36] The test is where the worker is usually based “for the purposes
of that employment”, and this may not be the same
place in which a
majority of the worke’s time is spent each day. I respectfully agree with
the statement in
Martin v R G Hibbens Pty Ltd
that where “a worker
is usually based may coincide with the place where the worker usually works, but
that need not necessarily
be so.” I also agree with the other observations
in that case, which I have quoted in [29] above, about the factors that may
taken into account in considering where a worker is usually based. I add that
the place in which the worker’s employer is
based may not be the same
place in which the worker is based for the purposes of that employment. The
place in which the employer
chooses to base certain operations for the purpose
of administering the contract of employment, for example, for administering
may have little to do with the place at which the employee is based for
the purposes of that employment. The location at which the
worker routinely
attends during the term of employment to receive directions or collect materials
or equipment may be highly relevant.
Avon Products Pty Ltd v Falls
the Court of Appeal
contemplated that it might be said that while working in her sales district in
the ACT, the respondent’s
vehicle was her base. The Court continued:
“What would have particular relevance is the provision by the employer of
from which the employee is expected to operate.”
[38] The authorities which have been required to consider the meaning of
“usually based” in the same or similar statutory
contexts have
adopted the ordinary meaning of “usually” and “base”. I
agree with this approach. The determination
in those cases of the factual
question of where a worker was usually based for the purposes of his or her
employment was dependent
on the facts of the case, and little is to be gained by
detailing those matters.
[39] In the facts of the present case, the place at which the applicant
started and finished work each day has an obvious relevance.
So too is the place
to which he returned to collect products, and the place at which the vehicle he
used for the purposes of his
employment was based. The place at which he planned
his daily runs and the place at which he received directions about the work he
was to undertake by way of delivering products also are relevant in determining
where he was “usually based”. The place
at which he worked whilst
awaiting delivery jobs is also relevant in determining where he was
“usually based”. Whilst
regard must be had to these and other facts,
none may be decisive in determining where the applicant was “usually
[40] It may be inappropriate to place undue weight upon the place at which
the worker starts and finishes each working day. During
argument I ventured the
hypothetical example of a taxi driver who collects a cab from his
employer’s yard just inside New South
Wales and then spends almost 12
hours in providing taxi services on the Gold Coast, following which he returns
the cab to the yard
where it is collected by a new driver who commences another
12 hour shift, driving the licensed taxi in Queensland. In such a case
worker spends 10 minutes out of each 12-hour shift in New South Wales, being the
State in which his work starts and finishes
each day. He collects the vehicle in
New South Wales and returns it there. But in such a case the worker might not be
based” in New South Wales for the purpose of his employment
as a taxi driver. His vehicle may be his base or he may have no
least, no usual base. In other cases, for example an airline pilot or a bus
driver, the organisation of their employment
and their own or their
employer’s description of their base may permit a conclusion to be drawn
that there is a State in which
the worker is “usually based for the
purpose of that employment”.
Hanns v Greyhound Pioneer Australia
is such a case in which it was common ground that the worker’s
“base” was Canberra.
[41] In such a case, the one place in which the worker is
“based” for the purpose of employment may be a place at which
she spends a fairly small percentage of a normal working day.
[42] The statute contemplates that there may be cases in which there is no
State or no one State in which the worker is usually
based for the purposes of
his or her employment. In that event, the cascading test requires consideration
of the State in which the
employer’s principal place of business in
Australia is located.
[43] Depending upon the facts of a particular case, a worker may have no
“base” for the purpose of his or her employment,
even in a case in
which he or she starts and finishes work each day in the same place. If,
however, a base or bases are identified,
then the question turns to whether a
particular base is the place at which the worker is “usually based”
for the purpose
of that employment. The requirement that the worker is
“usually” based involves consideration of whether the worker is
customarily, commonly or habitually based in that
[48] As was
observed in
, whilst the legislation in other States and
Territories contain similar provisions for determining whether employment is
with a State or Territory some care is required in considering
decisions in relation to these other provisions because of slight
differences in
their wording. Nevertheless, the decisions which interpret the meaning of
“usually based” in such provisions
provide guidance for the proper
interpretation of that expression in s 113 of the WCR Act. Let me now turn to a
brief survey of those
[49] The term
“usually based” was considered in
Tamboritha Consultants Pty Ltd
where Commissioner
Herron referred to the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary definition of
“base” as a “town, camp,
harbour, airfield, etc., from which
(esp. military) operations are conducted and where stores and supporting
facilities are concentrated;
a centre of operations, a
headquarters.”
Martin v R G Hibbens Pty
Roche DP observed that
where “a worker is usually based may coincide with the place where the
worker usually works, but that
need not necessarily be
[51] Michael
Hanns v Greyhound Pioneer Australia
was a case which
involved an interstate bus driver for Greyhound, based in Canberra, but
performing his duties over routes through
New South Wales and occasionally to
Victoria and Queensland. The evidence was that Mr Hanns spent approximately 80
per cent of his
working hours in New South Wales. His employer argued that the
word ‘usually’ should be applied quantitatively, so that
where a worker spends most of their working hours should be regarded as their
usual place of work. Gray J rejected this
approach, finding that
‘usual’ should be interpreted in the sense of
‘customary’ or ‘habitual'. His
Honour concluded that there was
no single usual place of work. It was customary for Mr Hanns to perform his work
in more than one
and as the workers base for employment purposes was the ACT, Gray
J determined
that the ACT was the territory of connection.
Products Pty Ltd v Falls
the ACT Court of Appeal contemplated that it might be said that while
working in her sales district in the ACT, the respondent’s
vehicle was her
“What would have particular relevance is the provision by the employer
of a place from which the employee is expected to operate.”
essential issue for the purpose of s 113 of the WCR Act is whether the Second
Respondent’s employment was connected
with Queensland, and this will be so
if Queensland is “the State” in which he was “usually
based” in that
employment. That was a question of fact to be determined by
the Commissioner. .
paragraphs [68] to [71] of her reasons the Commissioner wrote:
[68] Consideration of where the worker is ''usually based'' requires
consideration of where the worker is customarily, commonly,
or habitually based.
Tamboritha Consultants Pty Ltd v Knight
, the court stated
that the use of the term ''usually based'' suggests it has a different meaning
to the term ''usually works'' however,
it also noted that they may coincide.
, Applegarth J outlined the considerations relevant to
determining where a worker is 'usually based for the purposes of employment'
includes the following:
The State in
which a worker is usually based may not be the place in which the worker spends
the majority of their time;
The State in
which a worker is usually based may, but is not required to, coincide with the
State in which the worker usually works;
inappropriate to place undue weight upon the place at which the worker starts
and finishes each working day; and
The location at
which the worker routinely attends to receive directions or collect materials or
equipment may be highly relevant.
the court considered the types of matters
contemplated by the phrase 'usually based for the purposes of that employment'
The location the
worker reports to in relation to the work, which may not be the same place in
which a majority of the worker's time
is spent each day;
The location
from which the worker's wages are paid; and
The location at
which the worker routinely attends during the term of employment to receive
directions or collect materials or equipment
may be highly relevant.(citations
[55] Having
undertaken the task required of her under s113(3)(b) of the WCR Act the
Commissioner concluded:
[102] After considering all of the
evidence, I am satisfied that Mr Dinning was usually based in Queensland on the
basis that he
was customarily, commonly or habitually based in that State for
the purposes of his employment.
approach adopted by the Commissioner was informed by the relevant authorities,
consistent with the statutory provision and
reflective of the evidence before
her. Moreover, her approach was responsive to the submissions advanced by the
Appellant and the
Respondents.
[57] There is no
basis to conclude that the Commissioner misconstrued or misapplied s113(3)(b) of
the WCR Act. No error has been demonstrated.
Ground Two: The Commission erred by failing to genuinely consider
submissions made by the Applicant as to the proper application
of s 113(3)(b) of
the WCR Act.
[58] This ground
challenges the decision of the Commission on the basis that in respect of
s 113(3)(b) of the WCR Act, the Commissioner
failed to grapple with the
Appellant’s submission that the only alternative finding open was that the
Second Respondent did
not have a single State where he was usually
[59] What was
argued before this Court was the assertion that the Commissioner failed to
direct attention to and resolve the submission
that “...the only
alternative finding which is open is that the Second Respondent’s
employment did not have a single
State where he was usually
Commissioner described the Appellant’s submissions in the following
[8] The Appellant contends that Mr Dinning did not have a single State in
which he ''usually works'' and that the State in which
Mr Dinning was ''usually
based'' for the purposes of that employment was the NT.
[9] In the alternative, the Appellant submits that Mr Dinning did not have
a single State where he usually worked or was usually
based, in which case the
State of connection is the principal place of business in Australia being the
[10] The Appellant's submissions regarding s 113(3)(a), in summary,
are as follows:
(a) It is not contentious that Mr Dinning worked as an interstate truck
driver, with Mr Dinning confirming as much in oral evidence;
(b) When Mr Dinning suffered the injury, he was preparing for a trip to
Port Headland, WA;
(c) Between June 2020 and March 2021, Mr Dinning spent about 107 workdays
in Queensland; 59 in the NT and 50 across NSW, Victoria,
and Western
(d) Upon further assessment using the documents in the trail bundle, the
breakdown is that Mr Dinning spent 41 days in the NT; 60
days in Queensland; 5
days in South Australia and 2 days in NSW;
(e) Regardless of the precise number of workdays Mr Dinning spent in Queensland,
in the NT and in the other States, it is clear he
usually worked across mainland
(f) It follows that Mr Dinning did not have a single state that he ''usually
works'' in, thus requiring a consideration of the next
step in s 113(3)b).
[11] The Appellant's submissions in regard to s 113(3)(b) are
summarised as follows:
(a) The work location was across Australia, supporting a finding that the
employment was not based in Queensland;
(b) There was no arrangement for Mr Dinning to routinely attend a place to
receive directions or collect materials or equipment in
relation to the works.
However, the arrangement was that if the truck was not in use Mr Dinning would
drive with the truck to the
NT where the truck would remain while it was not in
use so Mr Bloomfield could service it;
(c) Mr Dinning routinely reported to Mr Bloomfield in relation to the work and
the location he reported to was wherever Mr Bloomfield
was situated, which was
primarily in the NT. Mr Dinning’s evidence provides the following:
And that work was coming to the company – that’s Brad – in
the Northern Territory, wasn’t it? – If Brad
was in the Norther
– Northern Territory, then yes. He was arranging the work via apps and
websites, so - - -
He was arranging the work, wasn’t he? –
Yeah. Most of it, yes.
And he was – you were reporting to him
And you’d report it to him when
you’d unladed? – Yep.
And that included you sending him photos of the delivery docket ---?
---so that he could do invoices up? –Yes. As soon as
it was delivered.
We talked about you reporting back to Mr Bloomfield. And one of the things
you reported back to him about how you were going in terms
of needing a break
because there were restrictions on how many days you could drive without a
break? – Yes. Bradley should
be aware of that. Being a heavy vehicle
operator, you need to have your seventh day off.
(d) The location from which Mr Dinning's wages were paid was the NT. The
Appellant's office was in Alice Springs and Mr Bloomfield
made the payments from
his business bank account using his computer at his depot in Alice Springs. On
the occasions when he wasn't
in Alice Springs, he would make payments from his
truck which was usually in the NT.
(e) Mr Dinning had previously advised a Workcover claims' officer that his work
was based in the NT. This was summarised as follows
in the WorkCover record :
Jared noted:
Didn't register the
claim initially as was worried boss didn't have WC
Is aware he needs a
Dr will send one over from today.
Previous discectomy.
Did not do an incident report, it’s only the boss and me. I call him
straight away.
The person who was there was Bhen Boyes. (cousin) – boss is Bradley
Bloomfield – I stepped back when changing tyres and
felt something
I use my uncles yard to do maintenance
Paid under TFN. Ful time. Salaried, but diff rate when at yard to on road
– Truck is supplied by Bradley.
I never get home,
I’m often away for months at a time.
I drive all over the
country. Work is based out of NT however.
(f) The national driver work diary daily sheet, which was completed by Mr
Dinning almost invariably records 'NT' as his base.
This record is a matter of
weight because Mr Dinning agreed that he was familiar with the concept that a
driver has a base and that
is recorded with the daily sheet.(citations
paragraphs [92] to [102] of her reasons for decision the Commissioner
[92] The documentary evidence does not support the Appellant's contention
that maintenance work was only performed on the truck in
Queensland in the case
of emergencies. Mr Bloomfield gave evidence that he tried to have the truck
serviced every 15,000 km, and
when that could not be done in the NT, he arranged
for it be done in Queensland. The truck was regularly serviced in Queensland as
evidenced by invoices from Northside Diesel for work performed in Queensland.
[93] The October 2020 service coincided with a period of leave taken by Mr
Dinning. This supports the evidence of Mr Dinning that
it was simply convenient
to have the truck serviced in Queensland to minimise the truck’s
[94] Many of the cases referred to by the Appellant indicate that the
location of where the work is based is a relevant consideration,
however this
matter does not involve a single depot into which the worker presents regularly.
The documentary evidence indicates
that Mr Dinning did not attend the depots in
the NT for weeks at a time and in fact on only one occasion did he spend two
consecutive
days in the NT.
[95] The evidence indicates that Mr Dinning circled the NT as his base in his
logbook. I accept the Respondents' submission that the
concept of a 'base' under
freight haulage legislation as reflected in the logbook is not the same as the
concept of a worker's 'usual
base' for the purposes of the WCR Act. It also
appears that Mr Dinning did not always circle the NT, with Qld being circled on
number of occasions. This evidence does not support a determination that Mr
Dinning considered that he was usually based in the NT.
[96] The Respondent refers to
as authority for a finding
that a worker was 'usually based' in the State in which the employer was based
due to a number of factors.
In my view a significant difference in the facts in
, was that the worker performed other work for the employer in
WA when not engaged in his primary duties. This was one of the factors
into consideration in determining that the worker was 'usually based' in WA for
the purposes of his employment.
[97] I accept the Appellant's submission that the requirement of a mutual
intention only applies to the test as to where a worker
'usually works' not
where the worker was 'usually based'.
[98] Mr Dinning gave evidence that he was resident in premises north of
Brisbane in Queensland. This evidence was supported by a General
Agreement indicating that the residential lease commenced on 24 July 2020.
Notwithstanding this arrangement, the evidence
of Mr Dinning and his mother Ms
Leanne Prince indicates that he spent more time in the truck than at the
residence. This evidence
supports a conclusion that Mr Dinning was not usually
based in his residential home and that he was more often based in his truck.
This is not evidence however that this usually occurred in another State as it
appears that the truck was primarily based in Queensland.
[99] Although the nature of Mr Dinning's work took him to other States, an
assessment of working days indicates that for the purposes
of his employment, Mr
Dinning was usually based in Queensland. I particularly note Mr Bloomfield's
evidence that Stratford did not
have sufficient work in the NT to justify Mr
Dinning's truck being based in the NT.
[100] Mr Dinning's evidence that he usually left Queensland with a full load
of freight but did not necessarily return with a full
load indicates that the
pattern of his employment was to return to Queensland as his base. The evidence
of Mr Dinning's work in other
States cannot reasonably be accepted as indicating
that he was customarily, commonly or habitually based in any of these
[101] I am satisfied that Mr Dinning was based in Queensland and that Mr
Bloomfield considered Mr Dinning to be based in Queensland,
as evidenced in the
WC Report. Although Mr Dinning received his instructions from Mr Bloomfield from
the NT via phone or text, he
did not have to attend the NT to obtain materials,
collect equipment or have his vehicle serviced or maintained. Mr Dinning
the NT on a number of occasions, however the evidence indicates that Mr
Dinning spent significantly more time in Queensland. This
arrangement may have
evolved in the future such that the work obtained by Stratford could have
necessitated more freight transport
throughout other States, however at the time
of the injury this was simply not the case. Mr Dinning' employment took him to
States, but he was commonly based in Queensland for the purposes of his
employment.
[102] After considering all of the evidence, I am satisfied that Mr Dinning
was usually based in Queensland on the basis that he
was customarily, commonly
or habitually based in that State for the purposes of his employment.(Citations
[62] The caution
to be exercised by this Court when scrutinising the reasons of the Commission
was considered in
In that case, the
following extract from the decision of Hall P in
was referred to with
[18] Of course, when considering whether or not a Tribunal has either
overlooked some relevant evidence or misconstrued the issue
to be determined, an
appeal court must not be quick to apply a critical magnifying glass. I agree,
with respect, with what Hall P
Cameron v Q-Comp
[3] It is, however, important for an appeal court to refrain from undue
ebullience in seeking-out error in decisions written under
the pressure of other
work and after lengthy trials. I adhere to the view expressed by this Court in
Cunningham and Others (Flower
and Hart) v William Hamilton Hart, viz:
‘... However, I accept that the Court should not be overly enthusiastic
to seek out error. Cases abound in which the need for
caution and restraint have
been emphasised. It is convenient to commence with the observations of Meagher
Beale v Government Insurance Office of NSW
‘It does not automatically follow that because the reasons for decision
are inadequate then an appealable error has occurred.
Examination of nearly any
statement of reasons with a fine tooth comb would throw up some inadequacies.
Indeed, an appeal court will
reserve any intervention to those situations in
which it is left with no choice: where no reasons have been given in
circumstances
where a statement of reasons is so inadequate as to constitute a
miscarriage of justice. In other words, the statement of reasons
must be looked
at as a whole and the material inadequacies identified and considered.
[63] It cannot
be properly said that the Commissioner failed to grapple with or give genuine
consideration to the Appellant’s
submissions as to the application of
s113(3)(b) of the Act.
ultimate task of the Commissioner was to determine the factual question of where
the Second Respondent was usually based
for the purposes of his employment. What
the Commissioner’s reasons demonstrate, is that she engaged at an
appropriate level
of detail with all the relevant evidence so far as the issues
before her were concerned.
[65] This ground
of appeal amounts to nothing more than a re-argument of the matters raised
below. In short, it is an argument that
the Appellant’s evidence should
have been preferred. Mere differences of opinion however do not found an appeal.
Commission has made a finding reasonably open to it, this Court ought
not, without more, disturb such a finding, given that it is
necessarily at a
disadvantage in doing
[66] No error
has been demonstrated.
Ground Three: The Commission made a finding that the Second Respondent
was not "usually based" in the NT. In making this finding
the Commission erred
by making a number of critical findings which were unsupported by and against
the evidence
Ground Four: In making the finding that the Second Respondent was
"usually based" in Queensland, the Commission erred by making a
critical findings which were unsupported by and against the
[67] Let me deal
with appeal grounds three and four together, both seek to challenge the
Commission’s findings of fact.
Appellant sought leave pursuant to s 557 of the IR Act in respect of these
grounds on the basis that there is a reasonably
arguable case of error in the
Commission’s decision which is evident on the objective facts. Leave is
not required.
[69] Section 557
of the IR Act gives a right of appeal generally from decisions of the
Commission. It does not provide an appeal against
decisions made by the
Commission under the WCR Act. Section 561 of the WCR Act does that.
v Workers' Compensation
determined that
Industrial Relations Act
define the grounds of appeal from a decision of the Commission to this Court,
under ch 13,
, div 1A of the Act.
commencing his reasons in
Wallis v Q-Comp,
[1] Unlike appeals to the Industrial Court under s. 341(1) of the
Industrial Relations Act
, appeals to the Industrial Court under
Workers' Compensation and Rehabilitation Act
Act), are not restricted to appeals on the narrow grounds of error of law or
excess or want of jurisdiction. However, such appeals
are true appeals. They are
not second chance trials. They are about the correction of error. A decision is
not to be set aside or
varied, if it is reasonably open on the evidence.
[72] What is
advanced by the Appellant is, in my view, an attempt to reagitate matters raised
below. It is not a valid ground of
appeal that a disappointed party disagrees
with the findings below. As observed elsewhere, an error of a particular type
demonstrated and the mere fact that a member of the Commission has
preferred some evidence over other evidence is not, on that ground
appellable error.
[73] As Branson
Sydneywide Distributors Pty Ltd v Red Bull Australia Pty Ltd
Not every grievance entertained by a party, or its legal advisors, in respect
of the factual findings or legal reasoning of the primary
judge will constitute
a ground of appeal. Findings as to subordinate or basic facts will rarely, if
ever, found a ground of appeal.
Even were the Full Court to be persuaded that
different factual findings of this kind should have been made, this would not of
lead to the judgment, or part of the judgment, being set aside or varied.
This result would be achieved, if at all, only if the Full
Court were persuaded
that an ultimate fact in issue had been wrongly determined. The same applies
with respect to steps in the primary
judge’s process of legal reasoning.
Although alleged errors with respect to findings as to subordinate or basic
as to steps in a process of legal reasoning leading to an ultimate
conclusion of law, may be relied upon to support a ground of appeal,
they do not
themselves constitute a ground of appeal.
[74] It was
submitted by the Appellant that this Court is in as good a position as the
Commission to decide that the findings outlined
in paragraphs [76], [94] and
[101] of the judgment were made in error.
[75] However,
the extent to which it is possible in an appeal to this Court to overturn
findings of fact has been dealt with in decisions
of this Court including
Irving v Blackwood,
At paragraph 16 of that decision, part of what the High Court said in
Coulton v Holcombe,
is set out:. The High Court said:
Coulton v Holcombe
To say that an appeal is by way of rehearing does not mean that the issues
and the evidence to be considered are at large. It is fundamental
administration of justice that the substantial issues between the parties are
ordinarily settled at the trial. If it were
not so, the main arena for the
settlement of disputes would move from the court of first instance to the
appellate court tending
to reduce the proceedings in the former court to little
more than a preliminary
[76] It is well
recognised that appellate courts are limited in the manner in which they can
deal with findings of fact made by the
primary tribunal.
principles which are to be applied were summarised by Muir J in
& Associates v Cavenham Pty Ltd,
Fox v Percy
, Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ, discussing the
circumstances in which an appellate court should interfere with a trial
findings of fact, said:
‘... the mere fact that a trial judge necessarily reached a conclusion
favouring the witnesses of one party over those of another
does not, and cannot,
prevent the performance by a court of appeal of the functions imposed on it by
statute. In particular cases
incontrovertible facts or uncontested testimony
will demonstrate that the trial judge‘s conclusions are erroneous, even
they appear to be, or are stated to be, based on credibility findings....
In some, quite rare, cases, although the facts fall short
“incontrovertible”, an appellate conclusion may be reached that the
decision at trial is “glaringly improbable”
or “contrary to
compelling inferences” in the case. In such circumstances, the appellate
court is not relieved of its
statutory functions by the fact that the trial
judge has, expressly or implicitly, reached a conclusion influenced by an
concerning the credibility of witnesses. In such a case, making all due
allowances for the advantages available to the trial judge,
the appellate court
must “not shrink from giving effect to” its own
conclusion.’
After referring to the nature of an appeal by way of re-hearing, their
Honours said:
‘The foregoing procedure shapes the requirements, and limitations, of
such an appeal. On the one hand, the appellate court is
obliged to “give
the judgment which in its opinion ought to have been given in the first
instance”. On the other, it
must, of necessity, observe the “natural
limitations” that exist in the case of any appellate court proceeding
or substantially on the record. These limitations include the
disadvantage that the appellate court has when compared with the trial
respect of the evaluation of witnesses' credibility and of the
“feeling” of a case which an appellate court,
reading the
transcript, cannot always fully share. Furthermore, the appellate court does not
typically get taken to, or read, all
of the evidence taken at the trial.
Commonly, the trial judge therefore has advantages that derive from the
obligation at trial to
receive and consider the entirety of the evidence and the
opportunity, normally over a longer interval, to reflect upon that evidence
to draw conclusions from it, viewed as a whole.’
Devries v Australian National Railways Commission
Gaudron and McHugh JJ said:
‘More than once in recent years, this Court has pointed out that a
finding of fact by a trial judge, based on the credibility
of a witness, is not
to be set aside because an appellate court thinks that the probabilities of the
case are against – even
strongly against – that finding of fact. If
the trial judge‘s finding depends to any substantial degree on the
credibility
of the witness, the finding must stand unless it can be shown that
the trial judge “has failed to use or has palpably misused
advantage” or has acted on evidence which was “inconsistent with
facts incontrovertibly established by the evidence”
or which was
“glaringly improbable”.’
Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ, in their reasons in
Fox v Percy
referred to
as one of three cases in which the High Court had
reiterated:
‘its earlier statements concerning the need for appellate respect for
the advantages of trial judges, and especially where their
decisions might be
affected by their impression about the
credibility of witnesses whom the
trial judge sees but the appellate court does not.’
[86] Their Honours observed that those three decisions ―were simply a
reminder of the limits under which appellate judges
typically operate when
compared with trial judges.” (citations omitted)
Appellant challenges the findings of the Commissioner on the basis that the
‘vast majority of the work undertaken by
the Second Respondent following
the huts contract was performing the Applicant’s subcontract work for two
transport companied,
Korunye and J & C Meaney Transport which had depots in
South Australia and the Northern Territory respectively.”
[79] The place
in which a worker is “based” for the purpose of employment is
different to the various places to which
the worker might be required to go in
the course of that employment. Authorities like
Hanns v Greyhound Pioneer
Australia Ltd
that point.
Appellant submitted that the evidence before the Commission was that the Second
Respondent was fulfilling the Appellant's
subcontractor to Korunye and J & C Meaney
Transport, two companies who were not based in Queensland.
evidence dealing with the interstate subcontractors, Korunye and J & C
Meaney Transport is dealt with in the reasons
of the Commissioner. At paragraph
[61] the Commissioner noted that whilst it is only the location of the employer
that is relevant
to a consideration of s 113(3)(c), the location of the
transport companies is not irrelevant to a consideration of where the Second
Respondent usually worked. The test under s113(3)(b) required an assessment to
determine whether a worker's employment is connected
with the State in which the
worker is usually based for the purposes of that employment.
Appellant further complains about the findings of the Commissioner as expressed
in her reasons at paragraphs [65] and
First, those paragraphs
need to be read in the context of the balance of the reasons for decision.
Secondly, paragraphs [65] and
[66] are dealing with a determination as to the
application of s113(3)(a) and ought to be read in that context.
Appellant isolates two paragraphs from the rest of the reasons of the
Commissioner and, in the absence of that context, seeks
to find fault. A
decision cannot be read in that way. In order to understand the
Commissioner’s reasoning, it is necessary,
to read the entire decision and
to read each part of it in context.
[84] As the
authorities illustrate, a worker will usually work in more than one State if the
worker habitually or customarily works
in a second State. In such a case there
will be no one State identified as being the "the State in which the worker
usually works
in that employment" and the enquiry will turn to determining under
s113(3)(b) the state in which the worker is "usually based" for
the purposes of
that employment.
[85] The concept
of "usually based" is, as the authorities suggest essentially a factual
determination. The Commissioner’s conclusion
was informed by the evidence
before her. Without embarking on an exhaustive survey of the evidence before the
Commission, let me
briefly highlight some of the evidence.
evidence before the Commission was that the truck was driven exclusively by the
Second Respondent. Mr Bloomfield’s
evidence was:
So the truck would always be where Mr Dinning was located; that’s
correct, isn’t it?---Generally,
cross-examination, the following exchange took place:
All right. Well, if we turn to where Mr Dinning was not driving the truck,
isn’t the case that when he was not driving the truck,
he would take the
truck with him to Queensland and he would leave it in Queensland because that
was where he resided. That’s
where he lived? ---That’s where he
lives, yeah.
So when he wasn’t working, he would take the truck back with him to
Queensland, he would leave it there - because he was no
longer working - and the
truck would need to stay there, so that when he started working again, it would
be there for him?---Yes,
and that’s exactly why it’s not good for my
company to - to have it in Queensland.
I’m not asking what’s good for your company or not. I’m
asking you about whether the truck stayed in Queensland
when it wasn’t
being used? ---If Mr Dinning drove the truck to Queensland and he had some time
off, then it would have been
in Queensland while he was not using
[88] It was
clear from the evidence that the Second Respondent wanted to spend more time in
Queensland as the following exchange in
cross-examination
illustrates:
But just - so you were trying to get so that he could be back in Queensland
from time to time for a break?---Yes. Yep. Yeah. He -
often he’d want to
get back to Queensland - he wanted to get back to Queensland more than - than
was good for my company because
initially when I employed him from his first
four weeks he spent in Alice Springs, you know, from my understanding of it -
he is happy in Alice and in - and I could have him back in the Northern
Territory in Alice Springs for time off and for more maintenance,
which was good
for the company because, you know, the driver can have time off and I can work
on the truck and do the maintenance
that was needed, and it sort of works out
well for everyone. But as time wore on, Jared wanted to get back more and more
to Queensland,
and it was - made it very inconvenient and difficult for me to
run things properly because the truck was here when it should've been
there and I couldn’t do the maintenance that was necessary because the
driver wanted to be here so he could have
his time off and - and that sort of
stuff, and it made it very
[89] Whilst it
may have been Mr Bloomfield’s intention or preference for the truck to be
returned to the Northern Territory,
he accepted in cross-examination that the
Second Respondent was never directed to return the vehicle to the Northern
But at no point did you direct Jared that he must return to the truck to the
Northern Territory and commence his leave from the Northern
Territory?---Jared
knew that from our conversations and I told him as such.
I’m not asking what Mr Dinning knew. I’m asking whether you ever
directed Mr Dinning to return to the Northern Territory.
When he said, “I
want to take leave,” did you say, “Okay, you must return the truck
to the Northern Territory”?---
No, I don’t - I allowed him to take -
take the truck with him. I shouldn’t
[90] It was
submitted by the Appellant that the evidence suggested that Mr Bloomfield was
giving the Second Respondent directions
from the Northern Territory. Whilst the
Second Respondent may not have attended the Northern Territory, he was
nevertheless getting
directions verbally from
[91] It cannot
be reasonably said that the Second Respondent was receiving directions from Mr
Bloomfield. The evidence was that Mr
Bloomfield operated his business from
premises in Alice Springs and if he was driving his truck, he operated the
business from his
nature of the communications between Mr Bloomfield and the Second Respondent
could not be characterised as receiving instructions
or directions. The
communications were in the form of a general conversation, or a text message.
[92] In evidence
in chief, Mr Bloomfield describe his communication with the Second Respondent in
the following terms:
Thank you. Okay. So you’ve described in your evidence the work that Mr
Dinning was doing for the company which was subcontracting
to these transport
companies. Could you expand on that by explaining the system as it worked in
terms of communicating between you
and him about these jobs?---Jared and I would
usually just keep in touch through phone calls and text messages quite often, as
were mates, and that’s how we sort of basically coordinated -
we’d just converse, keep in touch like that. And I think
the main reason
why it was so important I had to get everything back to the Northern Territory
and get the truck back in to the Northern
Territory was because I had no system
at this stage to keep track of everything. No official thing that he had to
actually fill out
and - fill out and sign and document for me. So I was always
reliant on his - his word or his say how things were going. But we would
generally just converse, and then, you know, he’d let me know how he was
Bloomfield told the Commission that as time wore on, communication with the
Second Respondent broke down because the Second
Respondent was in
“Queensland more”:
And so did you communicate with Mr Dinning about these matters?---Yeah. So I
would - Jared would let me know when - when he was due
for a 24-hour break, or
he would say, you know, “Look, I’ve got another two days in my
logbook before I have to have
a 24-hour break, you know. Should I have one now
before I load or something l that?” And we would sort of both keep of
of that and I would say, you know - you know, “Have a - have a
24-hour break now before you load, or maybe load and then go
here and have -
have your break there and then go on like that.” But, yeah, as time wore
on just - it just sort of broke down
- a bit less love.
Say that again?---This - this - as time wore on, I found it became - yeah,
the - the communication was not - not as good and it became
more difficult to
organise this because, yeah, as he’s in Queensland more I lost touch of
what was happening, really, because
the communication broke
[94] Later in
cross-examination, Mr Bloomfield told the Commission:
That’s so I would be able to - he would sort of have a rough plan
already, because he would sort of run my trucks as his own,
in a way, under his
accreditations and whatnot. And then once he and I had worked out a rough plan,
I would sort of communicate with
Jared and keep in touch with Jared, let him
know what we sort of had going on. And then he would - yeah - he would
communicate with
me about, you know, if he needed a break in terms of his
logbook or something like that, or if the truck needed repairs or maintenance
abruptly or anything like that.
[95] Whilst the
Second Respondent was working for the Appellant, the Appellant was
subcontracting through trucking companies based
in South Australia and it was
those companies which in most instances coordinated the
evidence suggests that each time the Second Respondent left Queensland it was
with a full load. The Second Respondent’s
evidence was that most of the
time the truck did not travel empty unless it was on the hut job returning to
Queensland with empty
trailers. However, the majority of the time “... we
didn’t like to run empty because you don’t make
[97] Whilst Mr
Bloomfield may have preferred that the maintenance of the truck should be
undertaken in the Northern Territory, that
is not what occurred. It was clear
from the evidence, in particular the documentary evidence that the truck was
periodically and
routinely maintained in Queensland.
[98] In regard
to the maintenance of the truck, the Commissioner concluded:
[92] The documentary evidence does not support the Appellant's contention
that maintenance work was only performed on the truck in
Queensland in the case
of emergencies. Mr Bloomfield gave evidence that he tried to have the truck
serviced every 15,000 km, and
when that could not be done in the NT, he arranged
for it be done in Queensland. The truck was regularly serviced in Queensland as
evidenced by invoices from Northside Diesel for work performed in
Queensland.
cross-examination, Mr Bloomfield was asked:
That and the following pages. Right. Now, you should have four invoices
there, the first - well, chronologically, I’m not sure
what order they
appear in the bundle, but there should be an invoice for the 5th of August 2020,
the 10th of November 2020, the 12th
of January 2021 and the 22nd 30 of March
2021?---I believe they’ll all be here. Yes, but - - -
Yep. Okay. Well, would you take my word for it that those are the
dates?---Yeah. No.
That’s - that’s right. Now, doesn’t that suggest that
Northside Diesel performed work on Mr Dinning’s truck
roughly every two
months in that period? Doesn’t that suggest some kind of regularity or
routine in maintenance performed in
Queensland?---No, it simply suggests that
it’s convenient at the time to use them because I’d no other choice
the HTS job stipulated that the truck should be there to load at that
time, so I tried to make the most of it, and also - also Jared
wanted to be in
Queensland to have his time off and to spend time with his family, and so I
tried to be a good employer and allow
him to have some time at home at a loss to
myself on the truck where I should have insisted -
[100] The Second
Respondent incurred his injury undertaking maintenance work on the truck. Of
course, the location at which the employee
was working at the time of his injury
and for the period that immediately preceded it, and the terms of his contract,
are relevant
in determining the “employment” for the purposes of s
113 of the WCR
[101] In her
written judgment, the Commissioner made a clear assessment of the evidence that
ultimately informed her decision. In
particular, the Commissioner accepted that
the Second Respondent resided in Queensland; the truck was only driven by the
Second Respondent
and when the truck was not being driven by the Second
Respondent, even when the Second Respondent was on leave, it remained with
in Queensland; the truck was periodically and routinely maintained in
Queensland; and the Second Respondent would leave Queensland
with a full load
but did not necessarily return with a full load. Mr Bloomfield acknowledged in
his evidence that the Second Respondent
was spending more time in Queensland and
indeed the Second Respondent was desirous of spending more time in Queensland.
Mr Bloomfield accepted that he allowed the Second Respondent to return
to Queensland with the truck even though it was not necessarily
in the best
interests of the business to do so. Mr Bloomfield did not necessarily give
instructions or directions to the Second Respondent.
The communications were in
the form of a text message or a general conversation. The evidence was that
these communications became
more problematic over time as the Second Respondent
was spending more time in Queensland.
critical finding of the Commissioner after applying the requisite test was that
the Second Respondent was usually based
in Queensland for the purposes of his
employment.
[103] It is an
error of law to fail to have regard to relevant evidence that would materially
affect the outcome of a
Appellant has not particularised the alleged inadequacy of reasons with any
precision. The criticisms are, with respect,
factual complaints. It was the
prerogative of the Commissioner to take a different approach to the evidence and
how it should be
assessed. The Commissioner’s reasoning is clear. She has
identified the evidence she thought was important, made findings in
the respondents and applied the correct legal principles to the facts as found.
There are not grounds upon which those
findings ought to be disturbed.
Ground Five:
Contrary to the holding of the decision in
Ferguson, the Commission assessed where the Second Respondent was "usually
based" applying
a mathematical test.
argument advanced by the Appellant to support this ground of appeal was that the
Commission assessed where the Second Respondent
was “usually based”
in reliance of a mathematical test. The Appellant argued that this approach was
contrary to the approach
advanced in
Appellant says that the reasons given by the Commissioner for the finding that
the Second Respondent was “usually
based” in Queensland was attended
with errors of reasoning. The argument advanced is based upon a selective
quoting or misreading
of various paragraphs in the Commission’s
Appellant makes specific reference to paragraphs [99] and [101] of the
Commissioner’s judgment:
[99] Although the nature of Mr Dinning's work took him to other States, an
assessment of working days indicates that for the purposes
of his employment, Mr
Dinning was usually based in Queensland. I particularly note Mr Bloomfield's
evidence that Stratford did not
have sufficient work in the NT to justify Mr
Dinning's truck being based in the NT.
[101] I am satisfied that Mr Dinning was based in Queensland and that Mr
Bloomfield considered Mr Dinning to be based in Queensland,
as evidenced in the
WC Report. Although Mr Dinning received his instructions from Mr Bloomfield from
the NT via phone or text, he
did not have to attend the NT to obtain materials,
collect equipment or have his vehicle serviced or maintained. Mr Dinning
the NT on a number of occasions, however the evidence indicates that Mr
Dinning spent significantly more time in Queensland. This
arrangement may have
evolved in the future such that the work obtained by Stratford could have
necessitated more freight transport
throughout other States, however at the time
of the injury this was simply not the case. Mr Dinning' employment took him to
States, but he was commonly based in Queensland for the purposes of his
employment.
Appellant seeks to rely, in isolation on paragraphs [99] and [101]. As discussed
elsewhere it is a wrong approach to isolate
a paragraph from the balance of the
reasons of the Commissioner. Reasons for decision cannot be read in that way. To
understand the
Commissioner’s reasoning, it is necessary to read the
decision in its totality.
Martin v RJ Hibbens Pty
make clear that
whilst it is not “simply a mathematical exercise”, the time spent in
any particular State is still relevant.
Commissioner was alive to the appropriate test to be adopted. In her reasons for
decision, she wrote:
[68] Consideration of where the worker is ''usually based'' requires
consideration of where the worker is customarily, commonly, or
Tamboritha Consultants Pty Ltd v Knight
, the court stated that
the use of the term ''usually based'' suggests it has a different meaning to the
term ''usually works'' however,
it also noted that they may coincide.
, Applegarth J outlined the considerations relevant to
determining where a worker is 'usually based for the purposes of employment'
includes the following:
The State in
which a worker is usually based may not be the place in which the worker spends
the majority of their time;
The State in
which a worker is usually based may, but is not required to, coincide with the
State in which the worker usually works;
inappropriate to place undue weight upon the place at which the worker starts
and finishes each working day; and
The location at
which the worker routinely attends to receive directions or collect materials or
equipment may be highly relevant.
court considered the types of matters contemplated by the phrase 'usually based
for the purposes of that employment' to include:
The location the
worker reports to in relation to the work, which may not be the same place in
which a majority of the worker's time
is spent each day;
The location
from which the worker's wages are paid; and
The location at
which the worker routinely attends during the term of employment to receive
directions or collect materials or equipment
may be highly
[72] As noted in
, an assessment of where a
worker is 'usually' based requires consideration of whether the worker is
customarily, commonly or habitually
based in that place.
[73] The court considered in
that an assessment of the
percentage of time the worker spends in a particular State is not useful in the
application of the test
in deciding what is the State of connection.(citations
assessment of working days was but one factor amongst a number of factors
considered by the Commissioner in giving judgment.
Moreover, the reasons of the
Commission were both reflective and responsive to the submissions of both the
Appellant and Respondents
[112] No error
has been disclosed.
Ground Six: The Commission erred by failing to give genuine
consideration to submissions by the Applicant that "the only alternative
which is open is that the Second Respondent did not have a single State where he
was usually based".
Appellant advanced a submission that the only alternative finding which is open
is that the Second Respondent did not have
a single State where he was usually
[114] I do not
accept the submission of the Appellant. It is clear from the reasons of the
Commissioner that she took a different
view of the evidence.
Appellant complains that the Commissioner did not give a ‘genuine
consideration’ of the evidence that a vast
majority of the of the work
following the huts job was as a subcontractor for Korunye and J & C Meaney
Transport. In this regard,
the Commissioner accurately and fairly set out the
submissions of the Appellant. At paragraphs [59] to [61] the Commissioner
the Appellant’s submission in the following
[59] The Appellant submits that the vast majority of the work following the
huts contract was as a subcontractor to Korunye and J
& C Meaney Transport
['the transport companies']. Mr Bloomfield's evidence was that Korunye had
depots in Alice Springs and South
Australia and Meaney Transport had depots in
Darwin and South Australia.
[60] The Respondents submits that the locations of the transport companies
are not relevant, and that it is only the location of
the employer that may be
relevant in accordance with s113(3)(c). The Appellant however contends that the
arrangement for where Mr
Dinning would be located depended upon the nature of
the transport jobs and where that work was located. The Appellant submits that
the work performed by Mr Dinning was tied to the work the transport companies
gave to the Appellant, which was to provide interstate
transport across mainland
[61] Whilst it is only the location of the employer that is relevant to a
consideration of s 113(3)(c), the location of the transport
companies is not
irrelevant to a consideration of where Mr Dinning usually worked. The location
of these companies is a relevant
consideration for the purposes of determining
where he usually worked.
[116] Again, at
paragraph [74] the Commissioner wrote:
[74] The Appellant submits that consideration must be had of the location
the worker routinely attends to receive directions or
collect materials or
equipment in relation to work and contends in this matter these locations would
include the Korunye and Meaney
Transport's depots.
[117] Whilst the
Appellant submitted that “...the only alternative finding which is open is
the Second Respondent did not have
a single State where he was usually
based”, having assessed the evidence, the Commissioner rejected that
submission.
Commissioner reached a conclusion that was open on the evidence.
[119] No error
has been demonstrated.
Ground Seven: The Commission erred by failing to give genuine
consideration to submissions made by the Applicant that the Second
lived in his truck
[120] It is
submitted that the Commissioner erred by failing to grapple with or give genuine
consideration to the submissions made
by the Appellant as to the relevance of s
113(3)(b) of the WCR Act and the fact that the Second Respondent lived in his
[121] In this
ground of appeal, the Appellant relied on the evidence of the Second
Respondent’s mother, Ms Leanne Prince. Her
evidence was:
Now, I want you to think back to the period between June 2020 and March 2021.
Do you recall where Jared was living at that time?---Mostly
he was living in his
truck. His - he had a lease on a house and I think he slept there four times.
Where - - -?---Yeah. He mostly lived in his truck.
Do you recall the address of the premises Mr Dinning leased or do you recall
the suburb?---It was Glass House Mountains.
Thank you?---Yeah. Sorry.
And you know - you’ve just made reference to Jared’s truck. Did
you ever see his truck?---Yes. Where would you see it?---At
our house or at my
brother’s house.
And what was it doing there?---Mostly getting washed, getting serviced,
getting repaired.
And how often would you see it - see the truck
there, do you think? An estimate is fine?---Probably half a dozen
[122] It is not
correct to categorise Mr Dinning taking rest breaks in his truck as
‘living in his truck’.
cross-examination, Mr Dinning gave the following evidence:
Yes. Okay. And you - just in terms of Meaney’s and Korunye, those two
companies which the - that Stratford was doing work for,
you knew that they were
based in South Australia, didn’t you?---No. I knew Calvin was based in So
- Korunye, but I wasn’t
sure where Meaney’s are from. I thought - -
I - - -?--- - - - they were from Darwin.
You didn’t know. No. Okay. But you knew that working - subcontracting
for those companies, as actually happened, you could work
anywhere around the
country?---We subcontracted for many companies, so yeah, we can work anywhere.
We didn’t have a designated
set run because we didn’t have any
contracts outside of the hut contract which I was initially employed
Yes. Yes. And when you travelled overnight, you slept in the
truck?---Yes, sir.
Yes. And the truck would be parked in - is it a roadside rest area?---Could
be anywhere. Yep.
[124] Where the
Second Respondent took a rest break or slept is not determinant of where he was
usually based for the purposes of
his employment. As was observed in
[40] ... In other cases, for example an airline pilot or a bus driver, the
organisation of their employment and their own or their
description of their base may permit a conclusion to be drawn that there is a
State in which the worker is “usually
based for the purpose of that
employment”.
Hanns v Greyhound Pioneer Australia Ltd
is such a case
in which it was common ground that the worker’s “base” was
[41] In such a case, the one place in which the worker is
“based” for the purpose of employment may be a place at which
she spends a fairly small percentage of a normal working day.
[125] However,
the evidence of Ms Prince did support the evidence of the Second Respondent that
the truck was serviced in Queensland.
Between June 2020 and March 2021, Ms
Prince observed the truck at her home or her brother’s home on some six
occasions “...
getting washed, getting serviced, getting
ground of appeal is misconceived. The focus of s113 of the Act is on the
relationship between the employment of the worker
and the injury sustained as
set out in s 32 of the WCR Act with the essential element being upon the
connection that the worker's
employment has with Queensland.
ground of appeal does not disclose an error. It is again an attempt to reagitate
the arguments advanced below.
Ground Eight:
The Commission erred by relying on that
part of the WC Report which relates to a conversation between Mr Bloomfield and
a WorkCover
employee in support of a finding that Mr Bloomfield considered the
Second Respondent to be based in Queensland.
[128] What is
argued by the Appellant is that the Commissioner erred by relying on that part
of the WC Report which related to a conversation
between Mr Bloomfield and a
WorkCover employee in support of a finding that Mr Bloomfield considered the
Second Respondent to be
based in Queensland.
[129] There are
two aspects to this ground of appeal. Both are misconceived.
[130] First, the
Appellant argues that the reliance by the Commissioner on the WC Report, in
particular, the apparent acceptance of
the comment of Mr Bloomfield as to where
the Second Respondent was based, was somehow a denial of natural justice. The
argument as
to the breach of natural justice was not fully developed before this
Court either in the written or oral submissions.
reliance by the Appellant upon
Stead v State Government Insurance
is misplaced.
was an action for damages for personal injury. The plaintiff
claimed that the accident had caused him to suffer a neurotic condition
rendered him totally incapacitated for work. A psychiatrist gave evidence that
the accident and the condition were not causally
connected. In the course of
addressing, the plaintiff’s counsel submitted that the
psychiatrist’s evidence should not
be accepted on the point of whether
there was a causal connection. The trial Judge responded: -
“I don’t accept [the psychiatrist] on that. You needn’t
go on, as to
reliance on that comment of the trial judge, Counsel did not pursue the matter
further. In giving judgment, his Honour in
fact accepted the
psychiatrist’s evidence on the point. It was upon those issues that the
case was decided. In
the Appellant was denied a reasonable
opportunity to present his case in support of the argument that certain
psychiatric evidence
ought not to be
concerned with the application of different principles and, in any event, the
facts in the instant case are distinguishable from
the facts in
[133] Secondly,
the Appellant relies on a submission advanced below by the Second Respondent
that the WC Report was inherently unreliable
making it ‘...inadmissible as
to the truth or accuracy of the conversation recorded
[134] The WC
Report was tendered before the Commission by Counsel for the Appellant as a
business record. As the following extract
from the transcript of proceedings
illustrates, the WC Report was not tendered for any limited
MR HARDING: - - - number one; number two, it’s a record disclosed by
the first respondent, and on that basis it’s a document
which under the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
, which apply here - is a document which can
be tendered. And - but more importantly, the basis of the tender is that
Robert Bax & Associates v Cavenham Pty Ltd,
[43] It has long been accepted in Queensland that the general principle in
civil cases is that inadmissible evidence adduced without
objection must be
given the probative value the Court considers appropriate. In
Ceiling Construction Co v SA Wigan & Co Pty Ltd
, Lucas J, the other
members of the Court agreeing, said:
It seems to me that it should now be regarded as settled that when in a civil
case inadmissible though relevant evidence is tendered
without objection, it may
be given such probative value as the court thinks it is worth.
, Callaway JA, with whose reasons the other members
of the Court agreed, in considering an argument that a failure to have the
complainant
verify in court the content of statements made by her in a police
interview constituted a miscarriage of justice, said:
The position was no different, in principle, from any other case where
hearsay evidence is admitted without objection at a trial.
The VATE tapes,
having been introduced into evidence by a police witness, were hearsay if the
statutory conditions were not satisfied.
Where hearsay is admitted without objection, there is rarely, if ever, a
wrong decision of a question of law ‘within the meaning
of the opening
words of s 568(1). There is, if anything, a miscarriage of justice. It is a very
exceptional case where an objection
to hearsay can be taken for the first time
in the Court of Appeal. That need not be because of the doctrine of waiver. It
the reception of hearsay, to which no objection is taken, is an
ordinary incident of a trial regularly conducted. Indeed, it would
be difficult
to conduct most trials without the reception of some technically inadmissible
[46] In Queensland the practice has been that, where a party wishes to
confine the evidentiary use which may be made of a document
which is admissible
for a limited purpose, counsel for that party states that there is no objection
to the document being admitted
for that purpose or objects to the document being
admitted for any other purpose. It is possible that some laxity has arisen in
years in relation to objections to evidence and there appears to be an
increased reluctance now to take evidentiary points unless
the evidence objected
to is thought to have a potential bearing on the outcome of the case. However,
in my view, the practice that
I have identified remains. The observations of
Callaway JA quoted above assist in illustrating the principle behind the
Plainly, a party‘s inability to know what evidence was
admissible or inadmissible before the close of its case would substantially
impede the efficient and due conduct of the case. To the extent that the
consequences of a failure to object are determined by the
operation of the
doctrine of waiver, the effect of the practice in Queensland is that, generally
speaking at least, a party who fails
to object to inadmissible hearsay evidence
contained in a document which is admissible as original evidence will have
right to limit the use to which the evidence may be put.
[136] Accepting
the statement of general principle as expressed by Muir JA, the WC Report was
tendered by the Appellant in cross-examination.
No restrictions were placed by
the Appellant on the use to which the evidence could be put. The consequence was
that the WC Report
became evidence for all purposes.
[137] No error
has been demonstrated.
Ground Nine: The Commission erred by relying on that part of the WC
Report because even if (which is disputed) it recorded Mr Bloomfield's
subjective belief that belief was not a relevant consideration for the purposes
of s 113(3)(b) of the WCR Act.
Appellant submits that the Commissioner erred by relying on the subjective
belief of Mr Bloomfield as recorded in the WC
referring to the WC Report, the Commissioner said as follows:
[89] I also note the WC Report records a conversation between Mr Bloomfield
and WorkCover, outlined as follows:
Brad confirmed
Full time Qld based employee
This was my first time employing someone in Qld
Only took out a policy recently as I’m NT base
[90] The WC Report indicates that Mr Dinning was of the view that his work
was based out of the NT, which is an accurate reflection
of where Stratford was
based, but it did not indicate that Mr Dinning was of the view that
was based out of the NT. It also indicates that Mr Bloomfield considered
Mr Dinning to be a fulltime employee based in Queensland.
This is not
consistent with a view that Mr Dinning was based in the NT or in any other State
for the purposes of his employment.
[91] The WC Report was also consistent with Mr Dinning's oral evidence that
he undertook maintenance on the truck in Queensland.
Whilst it may have been
the original intention of Mr Bloomfield that he undertake maintenance and
servicing of the truck in the NT,
it appears that the majority of this work was
undertaken by Mr Dinning or mechanics in Queensland.(citations omitted)
[140] It was
submitted by the Appellant that the Commission was required to consider and make
its determination of ‘usually
based for the purposes of that
employment’ as contained in s 113(3)(b) of the Act on the basis of
objective facts not subjective
[141] Before the
Commission, the onus was on the Appellant to prove, on the balance of
probabilities, that the Second Respondent's
employment, at the time of his
injury, was not connected with Queensland within the meaning of s 113 of the
Lehrmann v Network Ten Pty Limited
, Lee J wrote:
... the “balance of probabilities”, is often misunderstood. It
does not mean a simple estimate of probabilities; it requires
a subjective
belief in a state of facts on the part of the tribunal of fact. A party bearing
the onus will not succeed unless the
whole of the evidence establishes a
“reasonable satisfaction” on the preponderance of probabilities such
as to sustain
the relevant issue:
[143] What is
involved in the notion of satisfaction on the balance of probabilities was spelt
out by Dixon J in
Briginshaw v
The truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact, the tribunal
must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence
before it can be
found. It cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of
probabilities independently of any belief
in its reality. No doubt an opinion
that a state of facts exists may be held according to indefinite gradations of
certainty ...
[144] The Hon
Justice Gageler writing extra-curially said that “... what Dixon J was
was that satisfaction on the balance of
probabilities involves the formation under conditions of acknowledged
uncertainty of a subjective
belief. The requisite belief is an “actual
persuasion” that the fact in issue actually exists — that a past
the occurrence of which is uncertain and is disputed did indeed
Commissioner concluded on the balance of probabilities that the Second
Respondent was usually based in Queensland on the
basis that he was customarily,
commonly or habitually based in that State for the purposes of his employment.
In forming that view,
the Commissioner undertook an assessment of all the
evidence before her. The determination in this case is a factual one of where
worker was usually based for the purposes of his or her employment. A note
recording that Mr Bloomfield as a Director of the Appellant
regarded the
Appellant as being a “Full time Qld based employee” was of obvious
relevance. However, a careful reading
of the Commissioner’s decision
demonstrates, that the WC Report was but one part of the evidence relied upon by
the Commissioner
to form her conclusion.
[146] In this
case, the Appellant has not demonstrated any error in the approach taken by the
Commissioner. The Commissioner engaged
in a logical examination of the evidence
and considered carefully the matters which were raised before her both in
evidence and in
submissions. Her findings were consistent with the bulk of the
accepted evidence and were not inconsistent with other findings that
Appellant has mobilised a series of repetitive and, in some cases, irrelevant
objections. An appeal is not an opportunity
for an Appellant to re-argue the
case below. For the reasons expressed above, the appeal ought to be
[148] It is
appeal is dismissed.
Stratford North Pty td v
Workers' Compensation Regulator & Ors
[2023] QIRC
Ferguson v WorkCover
[2013] QSC 78.
Application to appeal filed 14 January 2024, Schedule A,
Appellant's
submissions in reply filed on 15 April 2024,
Turay v Workers'
Compensation Regulator
[2023] ICQ 013
Workers Compensation
Regulator v Glass
[2020] QCA 133
(2020) 4 QR 693
Turay v Workers
Compensation Regulator
[2023] ICQ 13
; and see generally
v New South Wales Medical Board
[1976] 2 NSWLR
TR1-3, L15-TR1-4, L4;
Second Respondent submissions filed 18 March 2024, [11]-[12].
Covill v WorkCover
[2022] QSC 171
(210) ACTLR 34;
WorkCover Queensland
[2008] WADC 78.
[2010] NSWWCCPD
[2006] ACTSC
[2010] ACTCA 21
Applicant's Submissions
filed 7 June 2023, para 6(c) and 39.
Mater Misericordiae
Health Service Brisbane Ltd v Q-Comp
(2005) QGIG 144
[2002] FCAFC 157
[1986] HCA 33
60 ALJR 470
Ibid at [9].
Appellants submissions
filed 16 February 2024,
[2006] ACTSC
Appellants submissions
filed 16 February 2025, [21]
Appellants submissions filed 16 February 2025,
TR1-31, LL.40-41
(09.05.2023).
11-16 (09.05.2023).
LL. 17-23 (09.05.2023).
TR1-29, LL 26-34
(09.05.2023).
23-28 (09.05.2023).
LL.46-49 (09.05.2023).
TR1-14, LL.29-41
(09.05.2023).
12-24 (09.05.2023).
LL 49 - TR1-15, LL.1-7 (09.05.2023).
TR1-11, LI.41-44 , TR1-12,
LL.9-10 (09.05.2023).
TR1-38, LL 24-25
(09.05.2023).
LL.27-44 (09.05.2023).
Covill v WorkCover Queensland
[2022] QSC 171
Minister for
Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
NSW CC CPD 83
[2010] NSWWCCPD 83
Appellants submissions filed 16 February 2024,
TR 1-62, LL
TR 1-56, LL 1-18
(09.05.2023).
TR 1-62, LL
32-33 (09.05.2023).
161 CLR 141 at 145-6
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
(1986) 161 CLR 141at [6]
Second Respondents
submissions filed 26 June 2023, para 35(c)
TR1-52, LL 23-26
(09.05.2023).
[2013] 1 Qd R 476
[2024] FCA 369
[1938] HCA 34
"Evidence and
(2017) 13 (3) The Judicial Review 249.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (623 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter