URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/167.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hobelt v Gold Coast City Marina Pty Ltd [2025] QDC 167 (14 November 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF
Hobelt v Gold Coast City Marina Pty Ltd
[2025] QDC 167
HANS-WERNER KARL HOBELT
(Appellant)
CITY MARINA PTY LTD (ACN 083 695 283)
(Respondent)
DC 56 of 2025
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Magistrates Court at Southport
DELIVERED ON:
14 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
5 November 2025
Holliday KC DCJ
appeal be allowed.
orders of the Acting Magistrate made on 10 February 2025 be set aside apart from
paragraph 3(a) which has been satisfied by the
appellant’s former
solicitor and in circumstances where that solicitor is not an appellant on this
will hear from the parties as to further orders.
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal from Magistrates Court to District Court – Acting Magistrate
entered judgment as sought by counterclaiming defendant
appellant/plaintiff’s claim and on the defendant’s counterclaim for
failure of the plaintiff to comply with a Magistrate’s
UCPR r 374(8) required such a judgment to be appealed against if to be set aside
– error of fact re non-compliance
with court order – otherwise
extent of non-compliance was not such that order ought to have been made under r
374(5)(a) dismissing
the claim or awarding counter-claim – where no
separate consideration was given to counter-claim – appeal allowed
LEGISLATION:
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) rr 163, 171, 225, 371, 374,
Aqwell Pty Ltd v BJC Drilling Services Pty Ltd & Ors
Johnson v Public Trustee of Queensland as executor of the will of
Brady (deceased)
[2010] QCA 260
Klerck & Ors v Sierocki &
[2014] QCA 355
Lenijamar Pty Ltd v AGC (Advances) Ltd
[1990] FCA 520
MacTaggart v Burleigh Marr Distributions Pty Ltd
Pullen & Anor v Lambert Wilcox Estate Agents Pty Ltd
Resolute Mining Pty Ltd v Commissioner of State Revenue (No 2)
[2020] QSC 302
Sunlouvre Pty Ltd v Huenerberg
[2003] QDC 439
The appellant appeared on his own behalf
C A McCormack (solicitor) for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
The appellant appeared on his own behalf
K & L Gates for the
Introduction
appellant appeals, by amended Notice of Appeal, orders of an Acting Magistrate
made on 10 February 2025
“1. Pursuant
to Rule 374(5)(a) of the Uniform Civil Procedures Rules 1999 (Qld):
(a) The Plaintiff’s claim is dismissed.
(b) Judgment be entered for the Defendant on the Defendant’s counterclaim
and the Plaintiff pay to the Defendant:
(i) $74,797.00 as a debt due and owing;
(ii) interest payable on the judgment debt and costs as agreed between the
parties or failing agreement, the parties are to file
and serve written outlines
in respect of interest (including calculations) within 10 days;
(iii) The Defendant’s costs of the proceeding (not otherwise dealt with by
this Order) as agreed between the parties or, failing
agreement, assessed on the
standard basis.
amount of $72,808.00 held in the Defendant’s solicitors’ Trust
Account be released to the Defendant in partial satisfaction
of the Judgment
entered in consequence of paragraph [1(b)]
Interlocutory
Applications
Defendant’s costs of the Plaintiff’s application filed 9 April 2024
and the Defendant’s application filed 2
August 2024 be paid on the
indemnity basis:
(a) as to the period 7 August 2023 to 3 July
– by the Plaintiff and
[the appellant’s former solicitor] jointly, fixed in the amount of
$31,929.30; and
(b) as to the period 8 July 2024 to 7 August
– by the Plaintiff fixed
in the amount of $18,939.60.
Plaintiff’s application filed 22 August 2024 is dismissed.
Plaintiff pay the Defendant’s costs of the Plaintiff’s application
filed 22 August 2024 and the Defendant’s
application filed 26 September
2024 on the indemnity basis:
(a) As to the period 8 August 2024 to 2 October 2024 fixed in the amount of
$21,231.90.
Plaintiff pay the Second Defendant, Trenton Gay’s, costs of the proceeding
on the standard basis as agreed between the parties
or, failing agreement, as
Preliminary matter
appellant submits that the respondents should be excluded from further
participation in the appeal as they have “repeatedly
breached orders and
deadlines set by this court most recently on 11 July 2025.”
[3] There is no
merit in the appellant’s contention as the below chronology of the matter
in this court demonstrates.
[4] The Notice
of Appeal was filed on 24 February
An outline of argument was
filed by the appellant on 26 March
An application and a document
headed “affidavit” was filed by the appellant on 10 April 2025
seeking a stay of the Acting
Magistrate’s
[5] By consent,
that application was dismissed on 10 April 2025, and the time for the
respondents to file an outline of argument was
extended to 4 June
[6] An outline
of argument was not filed as required by 4 June 2025 such that there was a brief
period of non-compliance before, on
11 June 2025, the respondents filed an
application for security for costs.
The application was dated 5 June 2025, one day after the due date for the
outline of argument.
[7] On 25 June
2025, the appellant applied to the court for orders including that the
respondents be barred from filing any further
material including an outline of
argument; that the respondents’ defence be struck out; that judgment be
entered in favour
of the appellant in the terms sought in the Third Further
Amended Statement of Claim and outline of argument filed 26 March 2025;
the alternative, that the matter be listed for final hearing without further
input from the respondents.
affidavit was filed in support of the application detailing that the respondents
had not filed an outline of argument as required
by the order of 10 April
[8] On 27 June
2025, her Honour Judge Balic made orders relating to security for costs and
dismissed the appellant’s application
of 25 June 2025. She ordered that
the time for the respondents to file an outline of argument in respect of the
appellant’s
Notice of Appeal be extended to the date that is 14 days after
the appellant gives notice to the respondents of his compliance with
security for costs order.
[9] On 30 June
2025, the appellant filed an application to the court for leave to amend the
Notice of Appeal in the form annexed to
the affidavit in his name sworn on 30
June 2025. Further, that he be granted leave to file and rely upon further
written submissions
in the form annexed to the same affidavit and other
ancillary orders.
[10] On 18 July
2025, the appellant’s application was allowed. It was ordered:
appellant is granted leave to amend his Notice of Appeal in the form served on
the respondents on 13 July 2025;
appellant is granted leave to file and rely on further written submissions in
the form served on the respondents on 13 July 2025;
appellant is to file and serve the documents referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2
of this order within 7 days after the date of this
respondents are to file and serve an outline of argument within 14 days after
the date on which the respondents are served with
the documents referred to in
paragraph 3 of this
[11] An Amended
Notice of Appeal was filed by the appellant on 21 July 2025 as well as a
document headed “submissions in support
respondents filed an outline of argument on 4 August 2025. That was in
compliance with the orders made on 18 July
August 2025, the appellant filed a document headed “response to
respondents’ outline of
Grounds of appeal as amended
grounds of appeal are nominated in the Amended Notice of Appeal as:
to provide adequate reasons/inadequate or no reasons for key orders;
irregularity;
to consider or address crucial evidence;
or apparent bias; and
of law or jurisdiction.
Nature of the appeal
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
”) provides that judgment may be set aside only on
In my view, r 783 is
applicable.
[16] I adopt
what was stated by Muir DCJ (as her Honour then was) in
Pullen & Anor v
Lambert Wilcox Estate Agents Pty Ltd
[2019] QDC 104
nature of the appeal for appeals made pursuant to r
On appeal, this court may relevantly: draw inferences
of fact from facts found by the magistrate, or from admitted facts or facts
disputed; order a new trial on such terms as it thinks just; order judgment to
be entered for any party; and make any order on
such terms as it thinks
Rule 765(1)
[made applicable by r 785] provides that an appeal under
Chapter 18 of the UCPR is an appeal by way of rehearing. A rehearing involves
“real” review of the original record of proceedings below rather
than a fresh hearing. The appeal judge is required
to review the evidence, to
weigh the conflicting evidence, and to draw his or her own conclusions. This may
mean overturning findings
of primary facts made by a magistrate. In undertaking
this task, the judge should afford respect to the decision of the magistrate
bear in mind any advantage the magistrate had in seeing and hearing witnesses.
But an appeal court may interfere if the conclusion
is “contrary to
compelling inferences” in the case. An appeal court will not usually
disturb findings of fact if the
evidence is capable of supporting the
conclusion. If this court concludes that an error has been shown such that the
decision of
the magistrate is wrong, the decision below should be
” (footnotes omitted)
The proceedings below
proceedings below had a protracted history. Given the grounds of appeal, and the
orders made by the Court pursuant to r 374(5)(a),
it is necessary to set out the
history in some detail.
appellant filed a Claim and Statement of Claim on 23 June
Only a month later, an
Amended Claim and Statement of Claim was
The appellant applied for
default judgment
refused on 12 August 2021.
August 2021, the respondents filed a Notice of Intention to
and a Defence and
Counterclaim.
[19] In its
Counterclaim, the first respondent claimed the sum of $9,160.00 plus interest
and costs and alleged that the appellant
and the first respondent entered into a
contract on 1 June 2021 which made the appellant liable to pay charges to the
first respondent
for the performance of “lifting services”.
The first respondent claimed that on 17 June 2021, the appellant provided
notice to the first respondent that he wanted the vessel
returned to the water
on 19 June 2021 and, upon receiving this notice, the first respondent issued an
invoice to the appellant. The
first respondent claimed that the invoice of 17
June 2021 was payable by the appellant prior to the vessel being returned to the
[20] The first
respondent claimed that the appellant failed to pay the invoice and accordingly
the vessel was not removed from the
hardstand and continued to incur fees at a
rate of $117 per day. The respondent further claimed, by virtue of the contract
2021, the appellant was liable for payment of interest as a result of
the appellant’s failure to pay the invoice.
September 2021, solicitors came onto the record for the appellant and a Reply
[22] A Further
Amended Claim and Statement of Claim were filed on 4 January
an application and
affidavit in support to compel the respondents to produce the hardstand
agreement for inspection was filed.
By consent, that application was
[23] Following
the respondents’ solicitors sending a letter pursuant to r
a Reply and Answer to the
Counter Claim was filed on 11 August
as well as a Second
Further Amended Statement of
[24] There was
further correspondence between the parties between 21 August 2023 and 8 April
2024 including the respondents requesting
Further and Better Particulars. On 27
October 2023, the appellant’s then solicitor sent correspondence stating
that the appellant
would file a Third Further Amended Statement of Claim
“mid next week” and attached a document headed “Further and
Better Particulars”. No Third Further Amended Statement of Claim as
foreshadowed in the letter of 27 October 2023 was filed
or provided.
[25] Despite
this, the appellant’s solicitor sent a r 444 letter to the
respondents’ solicitors complaining that the respondents
had not filed a
Further Amended Defence in response to the Second Further Amended Statement of
Claim sent to the respondents on or
appellant would seek summary judgment on its Second Further Amended Statement of
December 2023, the respondents’ solicitors sent a rr 445 & 446 letter
to the appellant stating that they had
not filed a Further Amended Defence
because they were waiting for the appellant to file a Third Further Amended
Statement of Claim
as foreshadowed in the letter of 27 October 2023. The
respondents raised deficiencies in the particulars provided on 27 October
December 2023, the appellant wrote to the respondents in relation to a request
for a trial date.
further correspondence, on 18 December 2023, the respondents asked whether the
appellant intended to make any amendment
to his pleading or provide particulars
as per the correspondence sent on 13 December 2023.
respondents stated that the deficiencies in the pleadings and non-compliance
with the UCPR to date made it “impossible
for [the respondents] to certify
that the matter is ready for trial” because they had not yet received the
appellant’s
disclosure, nor did the respondents know “what case [the
appellant] intends to propound at
[29] There was
further correspondence. On 9 April 2024, the appellant filed an application and
supporting affidavit for orders including
that the respondents file an amended
defence within 14 days;
alternatively, that the respondents’ signatures be dispensed with
(“9 April 2024 application”). The 9 April
2024 application was not
served until 17 June 2024.
[30] On 12 April
2024, the respondents responded to a letter from the appellant dated 8 April
2024 foreshadowing that the appellant
will seek an order that the
respondents’ signature be dispensed
with a r 445 letter
detailing that the matter was not ready to be listed for trial because steps
remained outstanding. These were
nominated to “at least” include
disclosure described in the List of Documents and for the respondents to file an
Defence to the Second Further Amended Statement of Claim served on 11
August 2023.”
[31] A follow up
r 444 letter was sent a month later, on 15 May 2024, detailing that the
appellant had failed to effect disclosure,
provide a satisfactory response to
the request for Further and Better Particulars, and was causing undue delay and
The letter required
the appellant to take certain steps by 24 May 2024 including filing a Third
Further Amended Statement of Claim
which, amongst other things, addressed the
deficiencies raised in the previous requests for Further and Better particulars.
[32] On 18 June
2024, after being served with the 9 April 2024 application, the respondents
wrote again stating, amongst other things,
that a Third Further Amended
Statement of Claim had not been filed as
foreshadowed.
[33] On the same
date, the appellant communicated with the respondents indicating that it did not
intend to file a Third Further Amended
Statement of
There was further
correspondence including an undated letter sent by email from the respondents to
the appellant on 20 June 2024
pursuant to r 446 in relation to the 9 April 2024
application. It sets out that unless the appellant agreed to the proposal the
respondents
would be seeking indemnity
[34] I make it
clear that all of the above communication from 10 September 2021 was between the
appellant’s solicitors and respondents’
solicitors.
[35] There was
then communication between the respondents’ solicitors and
appellant’s solicitors from 20 June 2024 where
the appellant’s
solicitor indicated that he will be “advising [the appellant] I cannot
continue to [represent] him, given
that you have now made an allegation of
ethical misconduct.”
[36] On 2 July
2024, a Notice that Party Acting in Person was filed by the appellant’s
former solicitors.
[37] On 2 August
the respondents applied to
the court for orders including that: the Court dismiss the 9 April 2024
application; the appellant’s
Claim against the second respondent be struck
out; a Third Further Amended Statement of Claim and particulars be filed and
by 21 August 2024; the respondents file a Defence to the Third Further
Amended Statement of Claim within the time period nominated;
disclosure be
effected as nominated; and, in relation to the 9 April 2024 application and the
present application, that the appellant
pay the respondents’ costs in an
amount to be agreed, or failing agreement to be assessed on the indemnity basis
or standard
basis (“2 August 2024
application”).
In relation
to the orders sought regarding particulars it included for “particulars
set out in Schedule 1 to this application.”
Schedule 1 set out, in 12
numbered paragraphs, details of the “Further and Better Particulars”
[38] On 7 August
2024, the 9 April 2024 application and 2 August 2024 application were before the
court, it seems, for hearing. It
was noted by the Magistrate that the 2 August
2024 application had only been served two days prior and the appellant had not
to the application so she was “not minded” to hear that
application.
The appellant
initially indicated that he did not wish to respond to the 2 August 2024
application by way of filing affidavit
and stated that he
wished for the matter to proceed to
The appellant later
indicated that he did wish to respond to the 2 August application and required a
week to do so.
representative for the respondents opposed any application for an adjournment of
the 2 August 2024 application and suggested
that he have some discussion with
the appellant to see “what time he needs to respond to [the 2 August 2024
application] and
whether some of it can be resolved
The matter was
stood down and resumed two hours later. A draft order was provided to the
by the respondents’
legal representative and it was indicated that paragraphs 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10,
12, and 13 of the draft
order were “by
It was agreed by
the parties, after discussion, that paragraph 11 should be excluded as well as
paragraph 9; and that in relation
to paragraphs 4 and 14, costs should be
In relation to
paragraph 2, the Magistrate determined that the order she would make is
“the issue of the defendant’s
costs of and incidental to the
plaintiff’s application be determined on 2 October
[39] The order
on the court file in relation to 7 August 2024 is worded “by
consent” even though it appears that paragraph
2 was determined by the
Magistrate.
It includes that
the 9 April 2024 application was dismissed with costs to be determined on 2
October 2024. In relation to the 2
August 2024 application, it was adjourned to
2 October 2024, and orders were made in relation to the appellant filing a Third
Amended Statement of Claim (paragraph 7), Particulars (paragraph
and disclosure (paragraphs 9
and 10) by 21 August 2024. The first respondent was to file a Defence to any
Third Further Amended Statement
of Claim and an Amended Counterclaim by 11
September 2024. The claim against the second respondent was dismissed (paragraph
the second respondent’s costs of the proceeding were reserved
(paragraph 5). The respondents’ costs of and incidental
to the 2 August
2024 application were reserved (paragraph 13) (“7 August 2024
August 2024,
the appellant filed
an affidavit which included that, as at 12 August 2024, he had not been provided
with the file from his former
solicitors.
August 2024 the appellant filed a Third Further Amended Statement of Claim as
well as a “list of
documents”.
[42] In the
Third Further Amended Statement of
the appellant
claims that the vessel is a 35-ton, 60-foot Flybridge Cruiser. A verbal contract
was made between the parties on 1
June 2021 that the vessel would be hauled and
placed on a hardstand for a period of time required by the appellant. Further,
vessel would be returned to the water upon the appellant providing notice to
the first respondent.
appellant claims that the contract required the first respondent to provide the
appellant sufficient space and electricity
to carry out maintenance on the
vessel; the daily fee under the contract was $111.15, rather than the $117
alleged by the first respondent
in its Counterclaim; the $117 per day amount was
set out in a quote that was never sent to the appellant; and he was never
nor did he sign, a copy of the written agreement that the first
respondent claims exists between the parties.
appellant claims that the first respondent failed to provide the appellant with
adequate electricity as required by the verbal
contract and the lack of power
delayed his ability to carry out works on the boat. On 17 June 2021, the
appellant entered into an
agreement to hire his boat to a third party for a
30-day period at a rate of $500 per day starting on 21 June 2021. The appellant
claims that he gave the first respondent notice on 21 June 2021 that the boat
was to be removed from the hardstand and released into
the water but, contrary
to the verbal agreement that the boat would be released on notice, the first
respondent failed to release
the boat and told him it would not do so without
payment. The appellant claims he therefore lost the income associated with the
rental agreement he had entered with the third party in the sum of
appellant claims that he arranged for the boat to be moored at an alternate
mooring for a year starting on 21 June 2021 for
a cost of $12,389.83. By failing
to release the vessel into the water, the appellant claims the first respondent
frustrated his ability
to use the alternate mooring and the appellant incurred a
financial loss in that amount.
appellant claims that, at various times, he had entered into contracts with
prospective purchasers of the vessel. The second
prospective purchaser agreed to
purchase the vessel for $249,000 but the sale was frustrated, and ultimately
collapsed, by the first
respondent refusing to release the vessel into the
water. Ultimately, the boat was sold to the third prospective purchaser for
and the first respondent agreed to release the vessel upon the sum of
$72,808 being paid into the trust account of the first respondent’s
solicitor. The appellant claims that he was deprived of $49,000,00 being the
difference between the claimed sale price to the second
prospective purchaser
and the ultimate sale price of the vessel. A total of $76,389.63 is
August 2024, the appellant filed an application for orders including for the
first respondent to make available to the
appellant documents nominated in the
application and that those same documents be struck out or deemed inadmissible
in the proceedings.
An order was
also sought for “variation of the orders made on 7 August 2024 to remove
the following orders for the following
reasons: 1. The plaintiff was handed his
complete file on Sunday 18 August at 12.00 Noon in the carpark of the former
containing approximately 1500 pages and not in any order. It is
impossible for the plaintiff to find the ordered material in this
Notwithstanding that the defendant is in possession of the said documents, I now
refer to order 10(b) of the orders made. 2.
That order 8(a) be removed for the
same reasons as in Order 10(b)”.
(“22 August 2024
application”)
September 2024, the appellant’s former solicitor filed an affidavit in
relation to the costs’ application listed
on 2 October
The former solicitor
states that the “file was about 1500 pages long” and that
arrangements were made for the appellant
to “come in on Sunday 7 August
2024 to collect his complete file.” There is dispute between the former
solicitor and
the appellant as to the state of the file with the former
solicitor stating he disagrees that the “file was in a
respondent’s
filed an affidavit relating to costs on 25 September
September 2024, the first respondent applied to the court for orders
the plaintiff’s application filed 22 August 2024 be dismissed;
plaintiff pay the defendant’s costs of the plaintiff’s application
filed 22 August 2024 on the indemnity basis
alternatively the standard
3. Pursuant
rule 374(3)
of the UCPR (Qld), the plaintiff show cause why an order namely
that the plaintiff’s claim be dismissed and that judgment be
the defendant’s counterclaim should not be made against him on the bases
plaintiff failed to comply with paragraph 8 of the order made 7 August 2024 in
that he has not filed and served Further and Better
Particulars of the Third
Further Amended Statement of Claim;
plaintiff failed to comply with paragraph 9(f) of the order made 7 August 2024
in that he has not disclosed a copy of the contract
between the plaintiff and
the “third prospective purchaser” referred to at paragraph 15 of the
Third Further Amended
Statement of Claim;
plaintiff failed to comply with paragraph 9(h)(ii) of the order made 7 August
2024 in that he has not disclosed all correspondence
between the plaintiff and
the “first prospective purchaser” relating to the formation, terms,
and termination of the
agreement pleaded at paragraph 13 of the Statement of
plaintiff failed to comply with paragraph 10 of the order made 7 August 2024 in
that he has not effected disclosure by providing
to the defendants’
solicitors:
Amended List of Documents describing each of the documents which the Plaintiff
disclosed in the Proceeding; and
copy of each of the documents in separate PDF files named in a way that
corresponds to the numbering and description of those documents
Plaintiff’s Amended List of
documents.”
[50] Alternatives
to the paragraph 3 orders were nominated, namely:
the plaintiff’s claim be dismissed and that judgment be entered on the
defendant’s counterclaim pursuant to
rr 163 and 371(2) for failing to give
proper particulars of the Third Further Amended Statement of Claim and rr 225(2)
for the plaintiff’s failure to disclose the documents set out
in “Schedule 1, Part A to this
application”;
if the plaintiff fails on a further occasion to comply with an order of the
Court or a provision of the UCPR then, upon further application
by the defendant
accompanied by an affidavit evidencing the failure to comply the defendant shall
be entitled to an Order that the
plaintiff’s claim be dismissed and
judgment entered in favour of the defendant on its counterclaim including as to
(i) Pursuant to
of the UCPR paragraphs 3(vi)–(vii) of the Third
Further Amended Statement of Claim be struck out; and
(ii) Pursuant to
of the UCPR, the plaintiff disclose to the defendant
the documents set out in Schedule 1, Part B to this application.”
(“26 September 2024
application”)
affidavit sworn on 27 September 2024 was relied upon for the 26 September 2024
application.
That affidavit
details the following at paragraph 22:
“[22] As at the time of
swearing this Affidavit;
(a) the Plaintiff has not filed and served any Further and Better Particulars of
the FASOC as required by paragraph 8 of the Order;
(b) the plaintiff has not produced a copy of the documents in the following
categories, which I consider were captured by paragraph
9 of the 7 August 2024
(i) a copy of the contract between the Plaintiff and the ‘third
prospective purchaser’ referred to at paragraph 15 of
the Third Further
Amended Statement of Claim;
(ii) all correspondence between the Plaintiff and the ‘first prospective
purchaser’ relating to the formation, terms,
and termination of the
agreement pleaded at paragraph 13 of the Statement of Claim;
(c) although the Plaintiff delivered a further version of a List of Documents
(at pages 96 to 101 of
), that List of Documents does not describe
the documents referred to in the Plaintiff’s Affidavits sworn 15 and 21
August 2024
and marked ‘1A’, ‘3’, or the email dated 6
December 2021 appearing immediately before the document marked
(d) the Plaintiff has not delivered the additional documents by separate PDF
files named in a way that corresponds to the numbering
and description of those
documents in any List of Documents.”
annexures to the affidavit include correspondence between the appellant and
solicitors for the respondent over the period
12 August 2024 to 26 September
The correspondence
August 2024 – email from the respondent’s solicitor to the appellant
attaching a copy of the orders made by the Magistrate
on 7 August
August 2024 – email from the appellant to the respondent’s solicitor
– the appellant thanks the respondent’s
solicitor for sending
through the 7 August 2024 order as he had not received same from the Court. He
states “I may not be able
to have all compiled, done and served as per
those orders I just received. However, I will do my best and file what is
as soon as possible. Please respond and indicate that you agree for an
extension of 1 week for me to file all of the ordered
August 2024 – email from the respondent’s solicitor to the appellant
clarifying what orders he is seeking an extension
in relation to and stating
“every attempt should be made to comply with the rest of the orders...If,
next week, you still consider
you cannot comply in time, please let us
August 2024 – email from the appellant to the respondent’s
solicitors seeking consent for paragraphs 7-10 of the 7
August 2024 order to be
extended “by one week only. This is due to some documents not available to
me at this time”;
August 2024 – email from appellant to respondent’s solicitors
stating that he received his file on 18 August 2025 and
there are “over
1000 pages...regarding the orders made on 07/08/2024, Paragraph 8 and 9. You
have already received much of
what you are asking for. Please advise whether
there is anything else you require and that order 8 and 9 is now complied
August 2024 – email from appellant to respondent’s solicitors
including, “...most of which you are asking for
is already in your
possession. After looking through my file, only received yesterday, I note that
the “further and better
particulars asked for had already been provided to
you on 23 October
August 2024 – letter from respondent’s solicitors to the appellant
pursuant to r 446 putting the appellant on notice
that the respondent may seek
orders dismissing his claim in the proceeding pursuant to rr 225(2), 371 and
374. The respondent’s
solicitors stated: “our client’s
position about the extension [of one week] is that [the appellant] should comply
the 7 August 2024 orders which were made with consent... that if the
documents which are unavailable are required to comply with
the court order then
it should be explained why they are required. Further, that if any steps are
taken late then the appropriate
course is to seek to vary the Orders”. The
appellant was encouraged to “read the Order carefully, seek legal advice
necessary and make every effort to comply with the 7 August 2024
August 2024 – email from the appellant to the respondent’s
solicitors – states that “it is clear to me
that your client
continues to obstruct, causing delays, deliberately looking for more
adjournments...”;
August 2024 – email from the appellant to the respondent’s
solicitors stating that he had filed a number of documents
with the court that
same day and will send the stamped copies as soon as
September 2024 – letter from respondent’s solicitor to appellant
pursuant to r 446 setting out purported failures of
the appellant with regard to
the 7 August 2024 order. It detailed that unless the appellant rectifies the
non-compliance with the
7 August 2024 order by 18 September 2024, that
instructions are expected to bring further applications seeking orders pursuant
rr 374, 371, and 225;
September 2024 – email from appellant to respondent’s solicitor
stating that he does not have internet service until
next Monday and is not able
to “look into and respond regarding the many issues raised by your firm.
Could you please name
the documents you are seeking. This would be most
September 2024 – email from appellant to respondent’s solicitor
– indicated it was in response to letters of
20 August 2024, 11 September
2024, and “15 August 2022”. In relation to the letter of 20 August
2024, the appellant states:
“I made you aware that I received my file on a
Sunday afternoon while the court orders of 7 August required me to provide all
documents by Wednesday, giving me two days’ time. I did file the vast
majority and to comply with the Orders in time to the
best of my ability. Your
response to deny the extension was unreasonable and deliberate to cause a breach
of the orders...”.
In relation to the letter of 11 September 2024,
“paragraph 2 to 3. You are in receipt of all documents as per the orders
on 7 August 2024. You are asking for documents that do not exist. You are
asking for Further and Better particulars when there are
disclose...”. Documents were attached to the
September 2024 – email from respondent’s solicitors to appellant
filed 9 April 2024; an
email to the court was proposed with a draft order vacating paragraphs 11 and 12
of the 7 August 2024 order
and varying paragraph 15(d). Wording to the court is
suggested which includes “first, the plaintiff has not complied with,
least paragraph 8 and aspects of paragraphs 9 and 10 of that Order. Given that
non-compliance (i.e., the failure to deliver particulars
and to produce certain
documents), the first defendant considers it is unable (or ought not be
required) to file an Amended Defence
until those issues of non-compliance are
addressed. The matter is next before the Court on 2 October 2024, and it is
expected those
issues can be addressed on that
occasion...”;
September 2024 – email from appellant to respondent’s solicitor
– includes the words “I do not give consent
to the proposed
September 2024 – letter from respondent’s solicitors to appellant
addressing appellant’s application of 22 August
2024 and r 446 relating to
non-compliance.
October 2024, the matter was before a different Magistrate – the same
Acting Magistrate who made the orders the subject
of the appeal. The first
respondent alleged that Further and Better Particulars had not “been
complied with at all”.
appellant stated that there were orders made on 7 August 2024 that he
shouldn’t have agreed to as they are “just a
respondent’s legal representative indicated in relation to paragraph 9 of
the 7 August 2024 order:
it was accepted that there has been a “genuine attempt to comply with each
of those subparagraphs [paragraphs 9(a)-(d)
of the 7 August 2024 order]...there
has been compliance;”
relation to subparagraph (e) that there has been a document disclosed that seems
to align with the allegations made about the second
prospective purchasers but
it becomes “messy” due to now what is the third prospective
relation to subparagraph (f) there has been no disclosure in relation to the
third prospective purchaser;
relation to subparagraph (g) and (h)(i) no documents have been produced
“but an explanation has been given that there are
documents” which is
relation to subparagraph (h)(ii) an explanation has been provided that there are
no further documents which is not accepted as
“common experience would
suggest that in relation to the purchase and sale of a $250,000 asset, there
would at least be some
emails back and forth about
relation to subparagraph (i), a document has been produced along with an
explanation that it is the only document which is not
accepted as “we
expect there are other documents in existence about that [condition of the
vessel] relating to the application
to transfer ownership and also any
applications for
insurance.”
appellant indicated that he did not have any documentation in relation to
paragraph 9(h)(ii) of the 7 August 2024
and in relation to
paragraph 9(i) he had provided a copy of the survey report for the vessel which
is equivalent to a safety certificate.
[55] In relation
to paragraph 10 of the 7 August 2024 order, the respondent’s legal
representative said it was “...administrative.
It’s designed to help
our office because of the way in which material’s been received to date in
the proceedings...”.
It was indicated that paragraph 10 had been
“complied with in part; it’s certainly not been complied with in
full...There
is an amended list of documents that has been provided by [the
appellant], which includes some of the new material that he provided...There
some other documents which do not appear in that list which have also been
produced...I raise that for completeness in relation
to compliance with the
order, your Honour. We don’t say that that’s the end of the world,
but it’s this sort of
approach [which has served to increase costs]... I
think that’s all I want to say about
respondent’s legal representative indicated, in relation to the 26
September 2024 application, that “the most
significant basis for that
application is the failure to give particulars together with the position that I
think [the appellant]
conveyed to your Honour about what he proposes to do about
The remainder of
the day was taken up in relation to submissions in relation to costs of the 9
April 2024 application.
[57] The learned
acting Magistrate indicated, after submissions were heard about costs of the 9
April 2024 application, that she would
adjourn part-heard.
[58] The matter
resumed on 23 October 2024. The appellant, when making submissions about why he
should not be ordered to pay indemnity
costs relating to the 9 April 2024
application, stated that when his solicitor “walked away on July 2nd,
doesn’t automatically
mean that I understand what’s going on. I
didn’t. I didn’t really understand even on August 7 when I consented
to all sorts of orders being made. I didn’t fully understand what that
meant until after...”.
[59] In relation
to the 26 September 2024 application pursuant to r 374, the legal representative
for the first respondent stated:
“And I mean that in the
sense that perhaps the failure to give particulars might not be so grievous if
there had been fulsome
disclosure from which we could understand the case
that’s been put against us, but we’re told in many cases that there
– documents don’t exist. Whether that’s to be accepted or not,
my client’s in a position where it has great
difficulty in understanding
the full extent of the case that might be put against it at trial and is met
with an attitude from the
plaintiff of refusal to engage with our
correspondence, declining to deal with things, as he said today, unless
they’ve been
filed and sealed with the court, and an express desire to get
the matter to trial as quickly as possible, never mind what sort of
that might occasion to my client in actually understanding what the position is
going to be. This matter can’t proceed
without the particulars being
given. The plaintiff has made no attempt – or given no indication that any
further particulars
are forthcoming. There’s been blanket refusals,
blanket assertions that we have the documents that we’re asking for.
I’m not sure whether there’s an appreciation of what particulars
are or not, but certainly there should be
based on what schedule 1 of my
application said, and the orders that were made on the last
(underlining added)
appellant submitted that he had complied with the 7 August 2024
In relation to the
Further and Better Particulars, the appellant indicated that he had provided all
the documents in his possession.
When the Acting Magistrate stated that is not
the same as particulars “because the court has ordered to provide Further
Better Particulars”, the appellant responded “they don’t
exist. That’s why I couldn’t do any
stated “they [Further and Better Particulars] don’t exist. I
don’t have anything else to give or add
to what I’ve already stated
and given.”
Acting Magistrate tried to take the appellant to “schedule 1”, the
appellant said “What’s schedule
1? What’s schedule 1... I
don’t know about Schedule 1... I don’t think I have
The appellant
submitted that “if there was a case that I did not fully or properly
comply with any of the orders made on 7th
of August, it was certainly not
deliberate and certainly should not give rise for a court to dismiss the
Rule 374 of the UCPR and relevant principles
a party does not comply with an order, r 374 empowers a party entitled to the
benefit of that order to make an application
requiring the defaulting party to
show cause why an order should not be made against it, and it confers a
discretionary power upon
the judge hearing the application to make orders,
including an order for judgment against the defaulting
[62] Rule 374
374 Failure to comply with order
(1) This rule applies if a party does not comply with an order to take a
step in a proceeding.
(2) This rule does not limit the powers of the court to punish for contempt
(3) A party who is entitled to the benefit of the order may, by application,
require the party who has not complied to show cause
why an order should not be
made against it.
(4) The application-
(a) must allege the grounds on which it is based; and
(b) is evidence of the allegations specified in the application; and
(c) must, together with all affidavits to be relied on in support of the
application, be filed and served at least 2 business days
before the day set for
hearing the application.
See also rule 447 (Application to court).
(5) On the hearing of the application, the court may-
(a) give judgment against the party served with the application; or
(b) extend time for compliance with the order; or
(c) give directions; or
(d) make another order.
(6) The party who makes the application may reply to any material filed by
the party who was served with the application.
(7) The application may be withdrawn with the consent of all parties
concerned in the application or with the court’s leave.
(8) A judgment given under subrule (5)(a) may be set aside-
(a) if the application is made without notice – on an application to set
the judgment aside; or
(b) otherwise – only on appeal.
(9) Despite subrule (8), if the court is satisfied an order dismissing the
proceeding was made because of an accidental slip or omission,
the court may
rectify the order.”
[63] Although it
is not possible to exhaustively state the circumstances under which the power to
dismiss a proceeding for failure
to comply with the rules will appropriately be
exercised, in
Lenijamar Pty Ltd v AGC (Advances) Ltd
[1990] FCA 520
(1990) 27 FCR 388
which was followed by Applegarth J in
Aqwell Pty Ltd v BJC Drilling Services
Pty Ltd & Ors
[2012] QSC 413
, the Full Court of the Federal Court
observed at [36]:
... two situations are obvious
candidates for the exercise of the power: cases in which the history of
non-compliance by an applicant
is such as to indicate an inability or
unwillingness to co-operate with the Court and the other party or parties in
having the matter
ready for trial within an acceptable period and cases –
whatever the applicant’s state of mind or resources – in
non-compliance is continuing and occasioning unnecessary delay, expense or other
prejudice to the respondent. Although
the history of the matter will always be
relevant, it is more likely to be decisive in the first of these two situations.
Even though
the most recent non-compliance may be minor, the cumulative effect
of an applicant’s defaults may be such as to satisfy the
judge that the
applicant is either subjectively unwilling to co-operate or, for some reason, is
unable to do so. Such a conclusion
would not readily be reached; but, where it
was, fairness to the respondent would normally require the summary dismissal of
the proceeding.
[64] As was
Johnson v Public Trustee of Queensland as executor of the will of
Brady (deceased)
[2010] QCA 260
by Applegarth J with whose
reasons McMurdo P and Chesterman JA agreed:
provides for a party who is entitled to the benefit of an order to, by
application, require the party who has not complied
to show cause why an order
should not be made against it. On the hearing of such an application the Court
may make a variety of orders
and may “give judgment against the party
served with the application.” Such a rule:
“... must be administered sensibly and with an appreciation both of
the fact that some delays are unavoidable, and unpredictable,
by even the most
conscientious parties and their lawyers, and of the likely serious consequences
to an applicant of staying or dismissing
a claim...”
The exercise of the discretion conferred by UCPR r 374 must take account
of the purpose of the rules, which is “to facilitate
the just and
expeditious resolution of the real issues in civil proceedings at a minimum of
expense.” The rules are to be applied
with the objective of avoiding undue
delay, expense and technicality and facilitating the purpose of the rules. In
accordance with
UCPR r 5(3), a party such as the appellant “impliedly
undertakes to the court and to the other parties to proceed in an expeditious
way”, and the Court may impose appropriate sanctions if a party does not
comply with the rules or an order of the Court.
Reference was made by the appellant to the observations of Dawson,
Gaudron and McHugh JJ in State of Queensland v JL Holdings about
the extreme
circumstances in which a party would be shut out from litigating an issue which
is fairly arguable. Those observations
were made in the context of the power to
amend, and account must be taken of the more recent statements of principle
concerning late
amendment in Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian
National University. The High Court’s consideration of the interests
justice in that case arose in the context of late amendment to pleadings, and a
rule of court in similar terms to UCPR r 5 concerning
the purpose of the rules
of civil procedure. It is unnecessary to address the variety of matters that may
affect the determination
of the interests of justice upon an application to
amend, and the extent to which they also apply to the exercise of discretion
UCPR r 374. In considering the exercise of the discretionary power
conferred under UCPR r 374 to terminate a proceeding account must
be taken of
“the need for reasonable access to the courts”. The interests of
justice also require account to be taken
of the financial and personal strain
imposed on litigants, witnesses and other parties who are affected by a
party’s failure
to comply with a court order without adequate explanation
or justification. The costs associated with bringing applications arising
non-compliance with court orders cannot always be recovered in full or at all by
a costs order. In this matter the respondent
was put to substantial costs
associated with a number of hearings before judges of the District Court in
2009. For reasons to be
addressed, there is no assurance that the respondent
will recover those costs from the appellant, and recovery of them out of the
estate diminishes the amount that is available for the benefit of its sole
beneficiary.
By her amended grounds of appeal, the appellant contends that the
primary judge overlooked material considerations. However, the
conferred by UCPR r 374(5) is broad, once the condition for its exercise arises.
Its exercise is governed by the purpose
of the rules stated in UCPR r 5 and the
general consideration as to whether the interests of justice warrant the
exercise of the
discretion. The exercise of the discretion is also influenced by
the arguments advanced at a hearing for and against its exercise.
reviewing the exercise of such a discretion should not lightly conclude that the
primary judge overlooked material considerations
if these matters were not
submitted to be material.
In considering a comparable rule in the
Federal Court Rules
and Gummow JJ stated that the discretion conferred by the rule was
“unconfined, except for the condition of non-compliance
with a direction
... [b]ut two situations are obvious candidates for the exercise of the
power.” The first was “cases
in which the history of non-compliance
by an applicant is such as to indicate an inability or unwillingness to
co-operate with the
Court and the other party or parties in having the matter
ready for trial within an acceptable period”. The second were cases
“whatever the applicant’s state of mind or resources - in which the
non-compliance is continuing and occasioning unnecessary
delay, expense or other
prejudice to the respondent.” Their Honours observed that although the
history of the matter will always
be relevant, it is more likely to be decisive
in the first of those two situations:
“Even though the most recent non-compliance may be minor, the
cumulative effect of an applicant’s defaults may be such
as to satisfy the
judge that the applicant is either subjectively unwilling to cooperate, or for
some reason, is unable to do so.
Such a conclusion would not readily be reached;
but where it was, fairness to the respondent would normally require the summary
of the proceeding.”
In the second of the two situations postulated by their Honours, namely a
significant continuing default, it was observed:
“it does not really matter whether there have been earlier omissions
to comply with the Court’s directions. Ex hypothesi
the default is
continuing and is imposing an unacceptable burden on the
respondent.”
In this matter both of the situations postulated by Wilcox and Gummow
JJ existed. This proceeding became an obvious candidate for
the exercise of the
power to dismiss under UCPR r 374 because:
(a) the appellant’s history of non-compliance indicated an inability
or unwillingness to co-operate with the Court and the
respondent in having the
matter ready for trial within an acceptable period; and
(b) her default in compliance with the Court’s orders was continuing
and occasioning unnecessary delay and expense.
In addition, the appellant gave no indication as to how and when, if ever,
she would comply with Court directions to file affidavits
in a proper form in
relation to her assets”.
[65] The power
is one to be exercised with caution, but r 5 makes it clear that the relevant
considerations must include those which
bear upon the question whether an
applicant under r 374 is being vexed by a respondent who is unwilling or unable
to proceed with
the expeditious disposition of the
litigation.
Disposition – appeal allowed
were four applications that the Acting Magistrate determined which are subject
of the appeal namely the 9 April 2024, 2
August 2024, 22 August 2024, and 26
September 2024 applications.
[67] In relation
to paragraph 3(a) of the Acting Magistrate’s orders, I was informed by the
respondents’ legal representative
that the appellant’s former
solicitors have satisfied the order and is not an appellant on this appeal. In
those circumstances,
I have excluded from my consideration paragraph 3(a) of the
Acting Magistrate’s orders. The parties agreed with that course.
[68] I agree
with the respondents’ submission that the grounds of appeal are cast in
very general terms, however, the appellant
is self-represented and some latitude
must be afforded particularly in circumstances where I have formed the view that
there is merit
in the appeal.
respondents submit that no “precise instance of an error of fact, law or
discretion” has been identified. I disagree.
I have taken into account
that the Acting Magistrate “enjoyed some benefit over this court”
including in assessing the
appellant’s attitude towards the proper conduct
of the proceedings given the hearings on 2 October 2024 and 23 October 2024.
Further, I have given respect and weight to the decision of the Acting
Magistrate in deciding the proper inferences to be drawn from
[70] I propose
to address the orders made in relation to the 26 September 2024 application
UCPR r 374(5)(a) – plaintiff’s claim is dismissed
– appeal allowed
374(4)(a) of the UCPR requires that the applicant set out the grounds on which
the application is based. The first respondent
complied with r 374(4)(a) and set
out grounds limited to those detailed above at paragraph 49.
[72] As was
stated by Skoein SJDC in
MacTaggart v Burleigh
Marr Distributions Pty Ltd
[2004] QDC 480
intention of the rule is obvious. It is to have the application act as a
pleading of all relevant facts and actually to stand
as evidence of those facts.
The reason behind that intention is also obvious. If the applicant can have the
draconian result envisaged
by rule 374(5)(a), that is, the final determination
of the action, the shutting out of a party forever, that party ought to be made
aware in the clearest terms of the facts on which the application is based and
be faced with evidence of those facts.
[73] However,
other matters may be taken into account in exercising the discretion including,
for example, previous
non-compliance.
[74] The Acting
Magistrate stated at paragraph 46 of her decision:
defendant’s evidence was that as at 2 October 2024, although the plaintiff
had complied (in part) with the order from
7 August 2024, in all significant
respects, particularly with compliance that would allow the defendant to know
and prepare the case
against it, the plaintiff has not complied with the order.
The plaintiff had not
Filed a Further Amended Statement of Claim (Third Further Amended
Statement of Claim (order 7)
(ii) Filed and served on the Defendants Further and Better Particulars of
the Further Amended Statement of Claim or any Third Further
Amended Statement of
(iii) Disclosed a copy of the contract between the Plaintiff and the
‘third prospective purchaser’ (as per paragraph 15
of the Third
Further Amended Statement of Claim) (as per order 9(f));
(iv) Disclosed all correspondence between the Plaintiff and the ‘first
prospective purchaser’ relating to the formation,
terms and termination of
the agreement pleaded at paragraph 13 of the Statement of Claim (as per order
(v) Effected disclosure by providing to the Defendant’s
solicitors;
(a) An amended list of documents prescribing each of the documents which the
Plaintiff discloses in the proceeding; and
(b) A copy of the documents in separate PDF files named in a way that
corresponds to the numbering and description of those documents
Plaintiff’s Amended List of Documents (as per order 10).
(underlining added)
contains an error of fact.
[76] Whilst the
Acting Magistrate footnoted the 26 September 2024 application at paragraph 46 of
her decision, the application did
not allege that the appellant had not filed a
Third Further Amended Statement of Claim. The appellant had filed a Third
Further Amended
Statement of Claim on 21 August 2024, in compliance with the 7
August 2024 order.
[77] Further, in
paragraph 51 of the Acting Magistrate’s decision, the error was repeated
when she stated that the “defendant’s
solicitors conceded that the
plaintiff had complied with the order in part only with respect to the
disclosure of some documents.”
Compliance was not only with respect to
disclosure.
appellant had partly complied with the orders including by providing a Third
Further Amended Statement of Claim. I recognise
that the Acting Magistrate goes
on at paragraph 51 to detail failures which do not include a Third Further
Amended Statement of Claim
but given what is detailed at paragraph
then repeated in the
first sentence of paragraph 51, and the reasons not expressly mentioning the
filing of a Third Amended Statement
of Claim, I am satisfied that the Acting
Magistrate erred in fact.
[79] At the
appeal hearing, the legal representative for the respondents conceded that there
had been an error at paragraph 46 and
the first sentence of paragraph 51 but
submitted that it was a “slip” and the “intent of her
Honour’s reasons
here [including paragraphs 46 and 51] is to say that the
Third Further Amended Statement of Claim did not contain the
particulars”.
accept the respondents’ contention given the Acting Magistrate’s
express wording in paragraph 46 and there is
otherwise no express mention of
filing a Third Further Amended State of Claim.
respondents further contended at the appeal hearing that it was not a material
error as the focus was on the failure to provide
particulars.
I disagree. This
was a material error of the Acting Magistrate given that the issue to be
determined centred around compliance, or
otherwise, with court orders. The
Acting Magistrate’s error is aggravated by the lack of express
consideration of the other
steps (in addition to filing a Third Further Amended
Statement of Claim) taken by the self-represented appellant since 7 August 2024
to comply with, and clarify, the 7 August 2024
[81] To my mind,
the error is of such significance that it alone demonstrates that the Acting
Magistrate erred in fact to the degree
necessary to allow the appeal. However,
even if I am wrong, and in any event, I also consider that the Acting Magistrate
the exercise of her discretion in making the order pursuant to r
374(5)(a) in all of the circumstances.
[82] Given the
steps taken towards compliance with the 7 August 2024 order, and the properly
made concession by the respondent’s
legal representative below that the
“significant basis of the application” was limited to the failure to
provide particulars
in compliance with the 7 August 2024 order, to my mind it
was not open to determine, in the exercise of discretion, that the matter
reached the stage where it was appropriate to make an order pursuant to r
374(5)(a). The decision of the Acting Magistrate in
the exercise of discretion
was so unreasonable or so unjust that it must be set aside.
self-represented appellant did not fail to comply with the 7 August 2024 order
in its entirety – in fact there are
only four grounds nominated as
failures. Importantly, there was exchange of correspondence and an application
made to the court seeking
an extension of parts of the 7 August 2024 order.
[84] I accept
that there was a history of non-compliance with particulars, including when the
appellant was self-represented, but
that has to be balanced and weighed with the
other steps taken by the appellant including partial compliance with the 7
August 2024
[85] I have
taken into account that the onus is on the appellant.
[86] Addressing
each of the grounds relied upon for the 26 September 2024 application as per the
lettering in paragraph 3 of the application:
a) Whilst the plaintiff had not filed and served Further and Better Particulars
as required by the 7 August 2024 order, he did file
the Third Further Amended
Statement of Claim as required by the order. Further, on 22 August 2024, the
plaintiff made an application,
with accompanying affidavit, for orders including
seeking to vary the order made on 7 August 2024 to remove the paragraph in
to providing Further and Better Particulars (in part) and set out his
reasons including that he had only been provided the file from
solicitors recently.
It also cannot be lost sight of that whilst the order of
7 August 2024 was a court order, it was one made by consent by a
self-represented
litigant. Even the legal representative for the first
respondent indicated at the 23 October 2024 hearing, “I’m not sure
whether there’s an appreciation of what particulars are or not...”.
That seems a reasonable concession for the legal
representative to have made
especially as the appellant said on a number of occasions to the Acting
Magistrate and in correspondence
that he had complied as he had provided all the
documents in his possession. Further, the appellant indicated below that he was
of “Schedule 1” which was the document referenced in the 7
August 2024 order founding, in part, what was required for
the Further and
Better particulars. Schedule 1 was attached to the respondent’s
application of 2 August 2024 but was not attached
to the 7 August 2024 order
made by the court nor to the copy of the order provided by the respondent to the
b) In relation to non-compliance with paragraph 9(f) of the 7 August 2024 order,
it was one of nine sub-paragraphs of paragraph 9
requiring the appellant to
disclose documents. Paragraph 9(f) was worded as “any other document
referred to in the plaintiff’s
Third Further Amended Statement of
Claim” and the contention was that the appellant had not disclosed
“a copy of the
contract between the plaintiff and the third prospective
purchaser referred to at paragraph 15 of the Third Further Amended Statement
Claim.” For a self-represented litigant, it is perhaps understandable that
he may have omitted to provide a document given
the generality of the order made
and now states that he is not in possession of same;
c) Some of the same considerations apply as per (b) for a self-represented
litigant to omit to disclose what is required as per 9(h)(ii)
sub-paragraphs were complied with;
d) The appellant had filed on 22 August 2024, an application seeking that part
of this order be removed for the reasons detailed
by him including that he had
only recently been handed the file by his former solicitor and the volume of
[87] The Acting
Magistrate made the finding at paragraph 48 of her decision that she did not
accept that the “plaintiff was
confused by the status of the provision of
Further and Better Particulars, believing that the defendant is in receipt of
but does not provide any reasons for this finding other than stating
at paragraph 49 that the respondent’s solicitors clearly
advised the
plaintiff on 20 August 2024 and 11 September 2024 that re-sending deficient
particulars did not constitute
compliance.
[88] To my mind,
at least, further reasons were required, in the circumstances of the present
case, as to the basis of that finding
given the appellant was self-represented
by the time of the 7 August 2024 order which was made by consent; there was
partial compliance
with the 7 August 2024 order and emails were sent by the
appellant to the respondent’s solicitors seeking clarification of
of the 7 August 2024 order.
[89] At the
appeal hearing the respondents’ legal representative submitted that even
if the Court determined that the appellant
was unaware of schedule 1 to the 2
August 2024 application, that is “capable of going to inability or
unwillingness”
comply with the 7 August 2024 order given that the schedule was attached to the
application and to a letter from the respondents
on 20 August 2024. Further,
that the respondents had gone to considerable length to inform the appellant of
what was required to
[90] To my mind,
the point had not been reached where it could be said that the appellant was
subjectively unwilling to co-operate
or was unable to do so. The 7 August 2024
order was made by consent shortly after the appellant became self-represented.
The appellant
had informed the respondent’s solicitors that the material
was, to him, voluminous; he engaged in correspondence with the respondents
made an application to the court seeking an extension of time for compliance in
discretion must take into account the seriousness of the consequences of
shutting out a claim or the defence of a claim.
The power must be exercised with
caution. There was not repeated non-compliance with court orders as occurred in
Klerck & Ors v Sierocki & Anor
[2014] QCA 355.
[92] The Acting
Magistrate stated at paragraph 17 of her reasons:
plaintiff’s non-compliance with the 7 August 2024 order cannot be viewed
in isolation. It is the culmination of the Plaintiff’s
non-compliance with
the 7 August 2024 order, the non-compliance with the UCPR from the outset of
proceedings and his inability or
unwillingness to cooperate with the Defendant
to progress the matter is what makes the non-compliance of the 7 August 2024
significant.
It was due to the Plaintiff’s persistent non-compliance with
the UCPR and the Plaintiff’s ongoing delay in progressing
the proceedings
that founded the First and Second Defendant’s 2 August 2024 application
and the 7 August 2024 Order.
[93] And at
The plaintiff’s persistent non-compliance with
the UCPR, particularly with the provision of “non-deficient”
particulars
(despite numerous complaints by the Defendants) from the outset of
proceedings and then the Plaintiff’s continued non-compliance
despite the
order from the Court on 7 August 2024 is a relevant consideration. So too is the
breach of the Plaintiff’s implied
undertaking to proceed in an expeditious
way which has resulted in prejudicial impact to the Defendants not only in terms
the Plaintiff’s case and preparing its defence but also with
respect to financial outlay and incurred costs.
[94] The Acting
Magistrate stated at paragraph 42 of her decision, that “on 22 August
2024, without complying with the orders
made [on] 7 August 2024, the Plaintiff
filed another application.”
[95] The above
passages in my view fail to consider, or do not give sufficient weight to, the
appellant’s partial compliance
with the 7 August 2024 order, and that part
of the 22 August 2024 application was to seek extensions of the 7 August 2024
[96] Further,
whilst the Acting Magistrate in her decision at paragraphs 21-40, details under
the heading of “chronology of
plaintiff’s non-compliance with the
UCPR”, correspondence between the parties up to 18 June 2024, she does not
to consider the correspondence following 7 August 2024 and in particular
the correspondence where the appellant is engaging with
the respondent’s
solicitors as a self-represented litigant.
[97] I allow the
appeal and set aside paragraph 1(a) of the Magistrate’s order. I recognise
that r 371 of the UCPR was also
relied upon but that does not alter my views
expressed above.
[98] To my mind,
the order that was appropriate to make in all the circumstances was one which
expressly stated what was required
(and for any schedule, if one is required, to
be attached to the order itself) in terms of particulars and to give the
self-represented
appellant an opportunity to comply with that order. I will hear
the parties as to the terms of what that order should contain.
Rule 374(5)(a) – judgment entered on the counterclaim
– appeal allowed
my mind, it is clear that the Magistrate erred in entering judgment on the
counterclaim.
addition to the reasons detailed above, the learned Magistrate failed to give
separate consideration as to whether judgment should be entered for
the first respondent on the Counterclaim. After detailing the
failings of the
appellant to comply with the 7 August 2024 order and making adverse findings
against him, she stated at paragraph
Consequently,
pursuant to Rule 374(5) UCPR the plaintiff’s claim is dismissed and
judgment entered for the defendant on the
counterclaim.
[101] This was
[102] Separate
consideration was required as to whether judgment should be entered for the
first respondent on the Counterclaim and
reasons provided.
[103] In the
hearing of 23 October 2024, there was no mention of the Counterclaim in
substantive submissions. The Acting Magistrate
explained to the appellant that
the application was “asking for your claim to be
dismissed”.
no mention by the respondent’s legal representative in substantive
submissions about the Counterclaim nor by the
[104] In making
the order, the Acting Magistrate conclusively struck out the appellant from
defending a not insignificant claim against
[105] I adopt
what Robin DCJ stated in
Sunlouvre Pty Ltd v Huenerberg
[2003] QDC 439
It is one thing, in my opinion, to give judgment
against a plaintiff, claimant or applicant upon his own claim on the basis of
sufficiently
serious failure to comply with a rule, practice direction or order
of a court- it may be a far stronger thing to punish an errant
defendant or
respondent by giving judgment against him, her or it upon a claim which was
never tested or examined...”. Similar
to that case, the present is not a
case where the “[counter] claim appears so clear that being permitted to
defend it looks
something like an
indulgence.
[106] At the
appeal hearing, the respondents’ legal representative conceded that
“the judgment on the Counterclaim was
entered on the same basis as the
judgment on the Claim, and so I don’t consider it can survive if your
Honour was to allow
the appeal on the
Further, the
respondents’ legal representative accepted that the Acting
Magistrate’s decision should have set out why
she was exercising her
discretion to enter judgment on the
Counterclaim.
[107] I allow
the appeal and set aside paragraphs 1(b)(i)(ii) and (iii) of the Acting
Magistrate’s order. I also set aside paragraph
2 which was an order made
for release of funds from the respondent’s solicitors trust account in
partial satisfaction of the
judgment entered in consequence of paragraph 1(b) of
the Order. I also set aside paragraph 5 as it relates to costs of the 26
2024 application.
Dismissal of plaintiff’s
application filed 22 August 2024 – appeal allowed
respondents submit that “the Magistrate, correctly, took the approach of
first dealing with the [First] defendant’s
26 September 2024 application
seeking final orders under Rule 374 of the UCPR on the basis that, if it was
resolved in favour of
the First Defendant, then it would be unnecessary to deal
with the remaining substantive aspects of the first and second defendants
August 2024 application or the plaintiff’s 22 August 2024
application.”
[109] Whilst
that is true, where that leaves matters on appeal is that the only reasons given
by the Magistrate in dismissing the
22 August 2024 application are at paragraph
59 where she states “also, given the reasons outlined above and the
dismissal of
the plaintiff’s claim pursuant to Rule 374 UCPR, the
plaintiff’s application filed 22 August 2024 is dismissed.”
[110] In my
view, the order made dismissing the application ought be set aside given that
there was no separate consideration given
to it and in circumstances where I
have determined that the Acting Magistrate erred in making the orders pursuant
to UCPR r 374.
[111] I allow
the appeal and set aside paragraph 4 of the Acting Magistrate’s order. I
also set aside paragraph 5 as it relates
to costs of the 22 August 2024
application.
Costs of the proceeding on the standard basis – second
respondent – appeal allowed
proceedings against the second respondent were dismissed by consent in the 7
August 2024 order and costs were reserved.
[113] Paragraph
6 of the Acting Magistrate’s order was that “the plaintiff pay the
defendant, Trenton Gay’s, costs
of the proceeding on the standard basis as
agreed between the parties or, failing agreement, as assessed”. There are
provided by the Magistrate as to why she made this order nor does
there appear to be any discussion of it at the hearing.
respondents accepted in oral submissions on the appeal, that if the appeal is
allowed and the orders made relating to the
Claim and Counterclaim are being set
aside, it is appropriate that this order also be set
. I set aside paragraph
6 of the Acting Magistrate’s order.
Costs of the plaintiff’s application filed 9 April 2024
and defendant’s application filed 2 August 2024 – appeal
[115] Paragraph
3(b) of the Acting Magistrate’s order was that “the
defendant’s costs of the plaintiff’s application
filed 9 April 2024
and the defendant’s application filed 2 August 2024 be paid on the
indemnity basis: As to the period 8
July 2024 to 7 August 2024 by the plaintiff
fixed in the amount of $18,939.60.”
[116] It is
accepted by the respondents that:
the event that the appeal is allowed and paragraph 1 of [the Acting
Magistrate’s] order is set aside, that paragraph
3(b) should also be set
aside as it relates to costs of the application filed 2 August 2024”;
the affidavit of Harry Nicolaidis cannot be relied upon in order to fix the
costs of the plaintiff’s application
filed on [9 April 2024] only, given
that the costs which Mr Nicolaidis deposes to over the time period of 4 July
2024 to 7 August
2024 includes the costs of the 7 August 2024 hearing which only
partly related to the plaintiff’s application of 9 April 2024,
related to the defendants’ application filed on 2 August 2024, and Mr
Nicolaidis’ affidavit does not distinguish
between which costs are
attributable to each
application”.
respondents “seek that the issues captured by Order 3(b) be remitted to
the Magistrates Court”.
I set aside paragraph 3(b) of the order.
Bias or apprehended
[118] It is not
strictly necessary to determine this ground given my other findings however
given the contentions made by the appellant
I consider it appropriate for me to
state that there is no merit in this ground. The appellant contends that the
Acting Magistrate
demonstrated “personal displeasure and bias”
throughout the proceedings which compromised the fairness of the hearing.
particulars are provided. There is no evidence that the Acting Magistrate
displayed bias or apprehended bias. In a busy court,
she, in juggling many
matters, sought to hear the matter and provide an outcome in an expeditious
order that:
appeal be allowed.
orders of the Acting Magistrate made on 10 February 2025 be set aside apart from
paragraph 3(a) which has been satisfied by the
appellant’s former
solicitor and in circumstances where that solicitor is not an appellant on this
will hear from the parties as to further
Magistrates Court document
There is an obvious
error in the order as it refers to “paragraph 6(b) above” when there
is no such paragraph. It should
refer to paragraph 1(b).
A “?” appears on
the Order which appears to be an
Again, a “?”
appears on the Order which appears to be an
Document 1 on the
Document 4 on the
Documents 5 and 6 on
the appeal.
Document 9 on the
Document 10 on the
Document 12 on the
Document 13 on the
Document 16 on the
Document 18 on the
Document 19 on the
Document 20 on the
Document 21 on the
UCPR 374(8) –
as here notice was provided of the
application.
Document 1 and
Document 2 in the Magistrates Court proceeding, respectively.
Document 3 in the
Magistrates Court proceeding.
Document 6 in the
Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Document 8 in
the Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Document 9 in
the Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Document 10 in
the Magistrates Court proceeding. The Counterclaim was made by the first
respondent only.
11 in the Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Document 14 in
the Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Document 14A and
Document 15 in the Magistrates Court proceeding, respectively.
Document 16 in the
Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Affidavit of
Harry Nicolaidis sworn 2 July 2024 (Document 25), Exhibit HN 1
Document 18 in the
Magistrates Court proceeding.
Document 19 in the
Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Affidavit of
Harry Nicolaidis sworn 2 July 2024 (Document 25), Exhibit HN 1
Affidavit of Harry
Nicolaidis sworn 2 July 2024 (Document 25); Exhibit HN 1
Affidavit of Harry
Nicolaidis sworn 2 July 2024 (Document 25); Exhibit HN 1
Affidavit of Harry
Nicolaidis sworn 2 July 2024 (Document 25); Exhibit HN 1
Document 20 and
Document 21 in the Magistrates Court proceeding,
respectively.
Affidavit of
Harry Nicolaidis sworn 2 July 2024 (Document 25); Exhibit HN 1
Affidavit of Harry
Nicolaidis sworn 2 July 2024 (Document 25); Exhibit HN 1
Affidavit of Harry
Nicolaidis sworn 2 July 2024 (Document 25); Exhibit HN 1 p189-197.
Affidavit of Harry
Nicolaidis sworn 2 July 2024 (Document 25); Exhibit HN 1
Affidavit of Harry
Nicolaidis sworn 2 July 2024 (Document 25); Exhibit HN 1
Affidavit of Harry
Nicolaidis sworn 2 July 2024 (Document 25); Exhibit HN 1
Affidavit of Harry
Nicolaidis sworn 2 July 2024 (Document 25); Exhibit HN 1
Document 30 in the
Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Document 28 in
the Magistrates Court proceeding.
Document 29 in the
Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Transcript of 7
August 2024 at page 3 line 42 to page 4 line 25.
Transcript of 7 August 2024
at page 5 lines 30-40.
Transcript of 7 August 2024 at page 6 lines 14-20.
Transcript of 7 August 2024
at page 7 lines 45 to page 8 line
Transcript of 7 August
2024 at page 10 lines 1-5.
This is not document 31 and no copy is on the Magistrate’s court file.
Transcript of 7 August 2024
at page 17 line 17-19.
Transcript of 7 August 2024 at page 19 line 45- page 25 line
Transcript of 7 August
2024 at page 58 lines 5-8.
Document 31 in the Magistrates Court
proceeding.
This included
particulars as set out in “Schedule One to the Defendants’
Application” but the Schedule is not attached
to the Order.
There are two stamps on
this document – one from the Magistrates Court registry of 15 August 2024
and the other says “electronically
filed – 20 August 2024”.
Document 34 in the Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Documents 35 and
36 in the Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Document 35 in
the Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Document 33 in
the Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Paragraph 10(b)
was for the appellant to provide to the respondent’s solicitors by 21
August 2024 a copy of each of the documents
(nominated in paragraph 9) in
separate PDF files. Paragraph 8(a) related to providing “any part of the
Further and Better Particulars
delivered on 27 October 2023 (the particulars)
which the plaintiff intends to rely upon at trial.” The appellant did not
an extension in relation to paragraph 8(b) which read “the
particulars set out in Schedule 1 to the defendants’
application.”
37 in the Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Affidavit of
Rodney Mugford filed on 10 September 2024 at paragraph
There is deliberate use
of the singular from 7 August 2024, as applicable, given the proceedings in
relation to the second respondent
were dismissed- there was an outstanding issue
of costs but they were reserved by the 7 August 2024 order and there was no
in the 7 August 2024 order that the question of those costs would be
heard on 2 October 2024.
Document 38 in the Magistrates Court
proceeding.
Document 39 in
the Magistrates Court
proceeding.
These were the
documents at 9(h)(ii) of the 7 August 2024 order; documents referenced at the
top of page 4 of the Third Further Amended
Statement of Claim; and documents at
paragraph 9(i) of the 7 August 2024
These were not, at
least, expressly detailed in the 7 August 2024 order.
Document 41 in the
Magistrates Court proceeding. It also was filed in relation to the
plaintiff’s 22 August 2024 application.
Exhibit CM-1 to affidavit
at pages 16-185.
16-19. Schedule One to the respondents’ 2 August 2024 application is not
Pages 131-140.
Pages 148-152.
Transcript of proceedings
on 2 October 2024 at page 19 line
Transcript of
proceedings on 2 October 2024 at page 22 line
Transcript of
proceedings on 2 October 2024 at page 26 lines
Transcript of
proceedings on 2 October 2024 at page 27 lines
Transcript of
proceedings on 2 October 2024 at page 27 lines
Transcript of
proceedings on 2 October 2024 at page 27 lines
Transcript of
proceedings on 2 October 2024 at lines
Transcript of
proceedings on 2 October 2024 at page 28 line
Transcript of
proceedings on 2 October 2024 at page 30 lines
Transcript of
proceedings on 2 October 2024 at page 31 line 17- page 33 line
Transcript of
proceedings on 2 October 2024 at page 42 lines
Transcript of
proceedings on 23 October 2024 at page 12 lines
Transcript of
proceedings on 23 October 2024 at page 51 lines 9-25.
Transcript of proceedings
on 23 October 2024 at page 27 line 43.
Transcript of
proceedings on 23 October 2024 at page 57 line 30- page 58 line 32.
Transcript of
proceedings on 23 October 2024 at page 59 lines
Transcript of
proceedings on 23 October 2024 at page 60 lines
Transcript of
proceedings on 23 October 2024 at page 66 lines
Klerck & Ors
v Sierocki & Anor
[2014] QCA 355
Klerck & Ors v
Sierocki & Anor
[2014] QCA 355
Klerck & Ors v
Sierocki & Anor
[2014] QCA 335
And [42] where filing
of the Third Further Amended Statement of Claim is not
Transcript of
appeal hearing on 5 November 2025 at page 6 lines 15- page 7 line
Transcript of appeal
hearing on 5 November 2025 at page 7 lines
These are set out
at paragraphs 47 and 52 of this
I accept that
it was, at least, attached or enclosed to a lengthy letter to the appellant by
the respondent’s legal representative
of 20 August 2024 even though the
attachment or enclosure was not exhibited to the affidavit of Cameron McCormack
(Document 41 at
page 51-56; see paragraph 8.3 of the
I refer also to
paragraph 53 where the Acting Magistrate accepted the submission on behalf of
the defendant that the plaintiff has
had ample opportunity to provide
particulars.
of appeal hearing on 5 November 2025 at page 11 lines
Transcript of
proceedings on 23 October 2024 at page 35 line 24. See also page 52 at line
Sunlouvre Pty Ltd
v Huenerberg
[2003] QDC at
Transcript of
proceedings at the appeal hearing at page 30 lines
Transcript of
proceedings at the appeal hearing on 5 November 2025 at page 31 lines
Transcript of
appeal hearing at page 81 lines
See Exhibit 2 on
the appeal.
See Exhibit 2
on the appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (406 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter