URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIRC/2025/286.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:40:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Quick v State of Queensland (Queensland Police Service) [2025] QIRC 286 (24 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Quick v State of Queensland (Queensland Police Service)
[2025] QIRC
Quick, John William
(Appellant)
State of Queensland (Queensland Police Service)
(Respondent)
PSA/2024/60
PROCEEDING:
Public Sector Appeal – Appeal against a fair treatment decision
DELIVERED ON:
24 October 2025
Gazenbeek IC
On the papers
Pursuant to
s 562A(3)(b)(ii)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld), the appeal will not be heard
CATCHWORDS:
PUBLIC SECTOR – EMPLOYEES AND SERVANTS OF THE CROWN GENERALLY –
appeal against a fair treatment decision – where
appellant seeks to be
appointed to a higher classification position at a higher paypoint – where
respondent raises two jurisdictional
objections to appeal against decision to
appoint appellant at the first paypoint of the classification level –
consideration
of cl 12.2(g) of the
General Employees (Queensland Government
Departments) and Other Employees Award - State 2015
– consideration of
whether a decision about paypoint level prior to engagement is distinct from a
decision about classification
level of employment – where the appeal is
against a decision about the classification level of employment – where
appeal relates to the recruitment or selection of a public sector employee
– where appeal is misconceived – where decision
cannot be appealed
LEGISLATION AND INSTRUMENTS:
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Public Sector Act 2022
General Employees (Queensland Government Departments) and Other
Employees Award – State 2015,
Appeals (Directive 04/23)
, cls 9, 17
Recruitment and Selective (Directive 07/23)
, cl 4, 7, 8, 13
Parmar v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC
Parmar v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
[1] Mr John
Quick (‘the Appellant’) has been employed by the Queensland Police
Service (‘the Respondent’)
since 13 November 2000, when he commenced
as an AO2 Armoury Administration Officer. In recognition of his prior service
Australian Army, the Appellant commenced this position at the top
paypoint of the AO2 classification, namely
[2] In July
2018, the Respondent created two new OPOT4 Weapons Maintenance Officer positions
at the Armoury. Upon the Appellant’s
request, and in recognition of his
experience and length of service in the incumbent AO2 position, the Appellant
was promoted to
one of the new OPOT4 positions at the top paypoint within that
classification level, OPOT4(4).
September 2022, the Respondent reclassified the OPOT4 position held by the
Appellant to a higher OPOT5 classification.
[4] On 4 April
2023, the Appellant requested that he be directly appointed to the OPOT5
position and commence in that higher classification
level at paypoint 5, in
light of his skills, knowledge and
correspondence dated 12 June 2023, the Appellant was advised by Superintendent
Garrath Channells (Operational Equipment and
Capability Management,
Organisational Capability Command) of his decision to directly appoint the
Appellant to the higher classification
level of OPOT5 position at paypoint 1.
[6] On 2 March
2024, following several attempts at locally escalating and resolving this
matter, the Appellant’s union representative
sent correspondence to the
Respondent (extracted below) in respect of the 12 June 2023 decision to directly
appoint the Appellant
to the higher classification level on paypoint 1:
This correspondence is to provide a final opportunity for the
Service to resolve this issue without the assistance of the industrial
commission and a likely arbitration of the issue.
What we are seeking is for the Service to provide to Mr Quick with a
written decision including appropriately detailed written reasons
which include
sufficient detail for him to be able to understand the decision and if it is not
in his favour, why it has gone against
him and to set out his rights to lodge a
public sector appeal or a dispute if he is aggrieved by it.
decisionmaker requires more information from Mr Quick, then please advise ASAP.
We seek for the Service to provide to the Union, by 5pm the coming Friday (8
March), a written commitment that this decision and reasons
will be provided to
Mr Quick by 5pm on 22 March.
If this commitment is not received by the Union by 8 March, the Union intends
to lodge an industrial dispute in the Queensland Industrial
Relations Commission
on Monday 11 March 2024.
Mr Quick formally sought to be direct appointed to the role and a higher
starting increment on 4 April 2023 through his Union (see
attached). Mr Quick
provided a summary of his skills, knowledge and abilities including relevant
experience and qualifications and
addressed the considerations in the
Recruitment and Selection Directive and the position description.
On 12 June, 2 months later Mr Quick received a decision which provided he be
direct appointed to the role but start at pay point 1.
The decision contained no
reasons or information about the decision or Mr Qicks review or appeal rights.
Mr Quick requested information through his chain of command about any appeal
or review rights and received a response that advice
was being sought from HR.
That was approximately 8 months ago.
I emailed Gary among others on 10 August 2023, 18 August 2023 and received no
On 30 August Mr Quick was advised to contact Chief Superintendent Ray
I notified the Chief Superintendent of Mr Quick's intention to
seek an internal review or to lodge a dispute and advised that
primary issue was a lack of written reasons.
The Chief Super offered to
discuss the disputed matter with me, however, has been unable to do so due to
waiting for advice from
the IR team since November 2023.
I have since emailed several times seeking a way forward on this matter and
have had no substantive response.
Mr Quick has been provided with a decision with no reasons. This is, on
its face, unfair and unreasonable and a breach of the employer's
obligations.
The Service has conceded this on transcript in the
Industrial Commission in a related dispute about Comms Room and Policelink
under the same award provision. The wording of the decision is almost
identical to the ones in that dispute which were conceded to
be deficient ...
[7] In response
to the request for sufficiently detailed written reasons for the decision of the
Respondent, Mr Gary Patterson (Director,
Employee Relations) issued the
following correspondence to the Appellant on 8 March 2024:
to the decision to upgrade your substantive position of Weapons Maintenance
Officer from the 004 to 005 classification and
your request that consideration
of the level of your skills, knowledge and abilities be factors for determining
your pay point on
promotion via direct appointment in accordance with Clause
12.2 (g) of the
General Employees (Queensland Government Departments) and
Other Employees Award - State 2015
(The Award).
Employee Relations have reviewed your request in accordance with 12.2 (g) and
have taken into consideration the following:
your previous
employment with the ADF prior to commencement with the QPS as an Administrative
Officer AO2 classification on 13 November
• your service
history and experience at the 004 classification as from 28 August 2018
• your promotion via direct appointment to the 005 classification as
from 9 June 2023
• your higher duties history in accordance
of the Higher
Duties Directive 04/20
your reference
to completion of relevant weapons maintenance training courses and training
• the supporting email from SSGT Scott Raven of 26
October 2022
• the position description of the Weapons Maintenance Officer
As outlined in 12.2 (g), prior to engagement, the offering of a paypoint,
other than pay point one of the classification level may
be made at the
discretion of the employer. In addition, clause 12.9(c) outlines that subject to
12.2 (g), as an employee being promoted
via direct appointment to a position at
a higher classification level within the same stream, unless the employer
exercises discretion,
you shall be employed at paypoint one of that higher
classification level.
Following consideration of your request under 12.2 (g), I advise the
Your service
undertaken with the ADF was considered at the time of commencement with the OPS
at the AO2 classification on 13 November
2000 resulting in commencement at AO2
level 8. Service with the ADF prior to 2000 does not justify additional pay
points following
promotion via direct appointment in 2023.
Your service at
the 004 level has been taken into consideration in the decision to promote you
via direct appointment to the 005 classification
level however service
undertaken at the 004 level does not justify additional paypoints on appointment
to a higher classification
following promotion to the higher 005 level.
Your reference
to completed training courses, whilst acknowledged, does not provide sufficient
justification to approve additional
pay points.
the supporting
email from SSGT Raven, whilst acknowledged, does not provide sufficient
justification to approve additional pay points.
Accordingly, I am
unable to support your request for appointment to 005 paypoint 4 and I have made
a recommendation to the Director
Human Resources as the delegate to confirm that
you are approved to commence on paypoint 1 of the higher 005 classification
following your promotion on 9 June 2023 via direct appointment.
[8] It is the
decision conveyed in this correspondence of 8 March 2024, reiterating and
providing sufficient written reasons for the
initial decision of 12 June 2023,
against which the Appellant now
Proceedings before the Commission
[9] On 9 April
2024, the Commission issued a Directions Order requiring the parties to file
written submissions in relation to the
substantive appeal. In accordance with
these directions, the submissions were filed by the Respondent on 3 May 2024,
and by the Appellant
on 29 May 2024.
[10] On 3 June
2024, the Appellant sought leave to file an addendum to its submissions of
29 May 2024, after having obtained additional material not available to the
Appellant at the time of its initial submissions. A Further
Directions Order
issued by the Commission on 4 June 2024 accepted the Appellant’s addendum
submissions of 3 June 2024 for filing,
and granted the Respondent leave to file
submissions in reply.
[11] Submissions
in reply were accordingly filed by the Respondent on 13 June 2024, in which the
Respondent raised two jurisdictional
objections to the appeal, as follows:
a model litigant we are obliged to advise the Commission there is a
The following
section of the
Public Sector Act 2022
(PS Act) Section 132(l)(f)
Decisions against which appeals cannot be
(1) A person can not appeal against any of the following decisions
(f) A decision about the classification level of employment, unless the
decision is declared under a directive to be a decision against
which an appeal
may be made; ...
3 of the General Employees (Queensland Government Departments) and Other
Employees Award -State 2015 (the Award) provides for
a definition of
'classification level' as follows:
Classification level comprises
a minimum salary rate plus a number of increments in a particular stream through
which employees will
be eligible to progress.
is therefore evident
the current appeal is against a decision about the
classification level of appointment, which is statutorily barred unless a
expressly authorises the appeal.
the Recruitment and Selection Directive 07/23 nor the Appeals Directive 04/23
declare that an appeal can be made about the
classification level of
employment.
Relevantly,
Clause 13.3 of the Recruitment and Selection Directive 07/23
A person may not appeal against a fair treatment
decision under section 132(4)(c) of the Act relating to the recruitment or
of a public sector employee.
And Clause 17.1 of the Appeals Directive 04/23 provides:
In consideration of the definition of 'non-appealable appointment'
provided for in section 132 (5) of the Act, it is declared that
an appeal may
not be made against the following appointments or employment:
(c) to a role to which a person is directly appointed to or employed in
accordance with the directive relating to recruitment and
correlates with Section 132(4)(c) of the PS Act which
A person can not appeal against a fair treatment
..... (c) relating to the recruitment or selection of a public sector
Parmar v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC 150
"Section 132(4)(c) does not only prohibit an appeal
against the actual decision to select a public sector employee, but it also
an appeal against any decision relating to the recruitment or
selection of a public sector employee .... ".
follows then, the direct appointment of the Appellant to the position was their
'selection' and both this and the determination
of the relevant classification
level and paypoint are decisions 'relating to the recruitment or selection of a
public sector employee'
and are, therefore, not appealable.
Respondent submits it is open for the Commission to determine this appeal should
be jurisdictionally barred under both Section
132(l)(f) and 132(4)(c) of the PS
emphasis added)
[12] As these
Appellant was granted leave to file written
submissions in relation to these
on 24 June 2024.
[13] Having
reviewed all filed submissions filed and material before the Commission, I have
determined it necessary to first consider
the jurisdictional objections raised
by the Respondent, before proceeding to consider the substantive appeal. In
doing so, I have
elected not to summarise the entirety of the parties’
submissions and attachments addressing these objections. Rather, I have
extracted the relevant parts of such submissions where necessary, and have
referred to the parties’ key positions on pertinent
issues throughout my
consideration.
[14] Pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld), this matter has been
determined on the papers.
Legislation and instruments relevant
to jurisdictional objections raised
treatment decisions
are appealable
pursuant to
s 131(1)(d)
Public Sector Act 2022
Act’). This is subject to s 132 of the PS
which relevantly
132 Decisions against which appeals can not be
(1) A person can not appeal against any of the following
(f) a decision about the classification level of employment, unless the
decision is declared under a directive to be a decision
against which an appeal
may be made;
(l) a non-appealable appointment.
(4) A person can not appeal against a fair treatment decision—
(c) relating to the recruitment or selection of a public sector
(5) In this section –
non-appealable appointment
means an appointment or employment
(a) for which the commissioner is satisfied the principles
mentioned in section 44 are sufficiently protected by ways other than an
under this part; and
(b) that the commissioner has declared by gazette notice, or a directive,
to be an appointment or employment against which an appeal
may not be made.
industrial instrument agreed between the parties to be applicable to the
Appellant’s employment, the
General Employees (Queensland Government
Departments) and Other Employees Award – State 2015
(‘Award’), provides the following relevant
definitions:
3. Definitions and interpretation
Unless the context otherwise requires, in this Award:
classification level
comprises a minimum salary rate plus a range of
increments in a particular stream through which employees will be eligible to
means for all employees an increase in salary from one
paypoint to the next highest paypoint within a classification level
means the specific rate of remuneration payable to employees
within a classification level
[17] Further,
the Award relevantly provides the following:
12. Classifications
and minimum salary levels
12.1 Classification structure
Employees covered by this Award are to be classified into one of
seven streams as follows:
(b) Operational stream
The Operational stream comprises those roles, the duties of which apply to
various functional areas, the incumbents of which are required
to possess a
range of skills appropriate to this stream.
12.2 Allocation to stream and classification levels
(a) Subject to clause 12.1(a)(ii) allocation of employees to the
Administrative or Operational streams and to classification levels
within those
streams shall be in accordance with the generic level statements contained in
Schedules 1 and 2. These statements reflect
the degree of complexity and
responsibility of duties, skills and knowledge proceeding from the lowest to the
highest classification
levels. Their purpose is to provide an indication as to
the classification level appropriate to any packaging of duties.
(b) An employee employed pursuant to
Public Sector Act 2022
shall have their previous service as a public service employee counted for
the purpose of determining their commencing paypoint and
calculation of their
salary increment, provided that the employee is reemployed within 12 months of
cessation of employment and the
employee's previous employment was terminated
other than by way of disciplinary action.
(c) Allocation of employees engaged by Public Safety Business Agency within
the Aircrew stream shall be in accordance with the generic
level statements
contained in Schedule 3.
(d) Allocation of employees engaged by Agriculture within the Forestry
stream to classification levels within that stream shall be
in accordance with
the generic level statements contained in Schedule 4.
(e) Allocation of employees within the Hospitality stream to classification
levels within that stream shall be in accordance with
the generic level
statements contained in Schedule 5.
(f) Where a new position is created and its allocation cannot be determined
the matter may be discussed with the relevant employee/s
and, where requested,
their representative, and/or referred to the Commission for resolution.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Award, prior
to engagement, an applicant who is employed in a position may, at
the discretion
of the relevant employer, be offered and employed at any paypoint within a level
based on recognition of skills, knowledge
and abilities.
12.9 Movement between classification levels - other than Aircrew,
Hospitality, South Bank and Rabbit Board streams
(a) Except as provided below and in Schedule 4 of this Award, movement
between classification levels will be based on employment
on merit to
(b) Annual increments will continue to apply in accordance with the
relevant provisions of clause 12.11 to employees moving between
classification
level 1 and classification level 2 of the Administrative stream.
Subject to clause 12.2(g) an employee promoted to a position at a
higher classification level within the same stream shall be employed
at paypoint
one of that higher classification level.
12.11 Movement within classification levels (increments) –
Administrative Aircrew and Operational Streams
Movement within classification levels is to be based on meeting the
following requirements:
(a) Except in the case of an employee who is paid the prescribed basic salary on
attaining the age of 21 years or in the case of
a promotion, or transfer and
promotion, from one classification level to another, an increase is not to be
made to the salary of
any employee until:
(i) In the case of a full-time or a part-time employee:
the employee has
received a salary at a particular classification and paypoint for a period of 12
(ii) In the case of a casual employee with 12 months' continuous service with
the same employer:
(A) the employee
has received a salary at a particular classification and paypoint for a period
of at least 12 months; and
(B) the employee
has worked 1,200 ordinary hours in such classification.
(b) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Award,
employee is not entitled to move to the next salary increment level by virtue of
the Award unless
(i) In the case of employees:
(A) in levels 1 and 2 of the Administrative stream; and
(B) in levels 1, 2 and 3 of the Operational stream,
The conduct, diligence and efficiency of the employee has been certified by
the chief executive to have been and to be satisfactory.
In the case of employees in all other classification levels,
performance objectives have been achieved as certified by the chief
emphasis added)
Recruitment and selection (Directive 07/23)
(‘Recruitment
Directive’)
outlines the way in which recruitment and selection in
public sector entities must be carried out, and relevantly provides the
4.6 Section 44 of the Act requires that recruitment and
selection processes must be undertaken in accordance with the following three
principles:
(a) recruitment and selection processes must be directed to the selection
of the eligible person best suited to the position
(b) recruitment and selection processes must be fair and transparent
(c) recruitment and selection processes must reflect the obligations under
chapter 2 relating to equity, diversity, respect and
8.4 Recruitment and selection processes must be undertaken in accordance
with the principles underpinning recruitment and selection,
as provided for in
section 44 of the Act and clause 4.6,
including where advertising is
limited, or a person is directly appointed under clause 8.16.
[19] Clause 8.16
of the Recruitment Directive allows for a chief executive to decide to directly
employ a person without advertising
a vacancy, with clauses 8.17 and 8.18
further stipulating that:
8.17 In determining whether to exercise
their discretion under clause 8.16, a chief executive must consider:
(a) their obligations under the Act, including:
(i) maximising employment security and permanency of employment,
consistent with the main purpose of the Act and how the main purpose
primarily achieved (section 3 and 4)
(ii) the effective, efficient and appropriate management of public
resources (section 177 – for chief executives of departments)
(iii) adherence to the public sector principles (section 39)
(iv) the attraction of a diverse workforce (section 24)
(v) the duty to promote equity and diversity in relation to employment
matters (section 27)
(vi) adherence to the principles underpinning recruitment and selection
(section 44)
(b) whether a similar vacancy was advertised previously
(c) whether the position classification or nature (for example, fixed-term
temporary to permanent) has changed, including as part
of a progression scheme,
or where a position classification is upgraded, and the decision maker
determines that the incumbent has
demonstrated that they can perform the duties
to the required standard or level
(d) the implications of any workplace change, including whether exemption
from or limited advertising will prevent the displacement
of existing permanent
public sector employee/s
(e) whether the incumbent has been seconded to or has been acting in the
position for a period of 12 months or more, but is unable
to be converted to
that position permanently under the relevant directive, for example because they
are not substantively employed
in the public sector entity
(f) the impact, if any, on the achievement of the entity’s service
delivery outcomes.
8.18 A chief executive must document the reasons for exercising discretion
under clause 8.17, the factors considered in making the
decision, and how the
decision is consistent with the principles underpinning recruitment and
selection under section 44 of the Act.
Recruitment Directive also outlines the following in respect of appeals:
13.1 A person may appeal against a promotion decision under
section 131(1)(e) of the Act and in accordance with the relevant provisions
the directive relating to appeals.
13.2 An appeal may not be made against a directive decision under section
131(1)(b) of the Act where it is in relation to a decision:
(a) to fill a vacancy as an identified role, the process for assessment and
the decision about whether the mandatory attribute is
held or not held
(b) about recruitment and selection, unless it is a decision not to:
(i) employ an employee requiring placement because they are assessed as
(ii) employ a public service employee because of their disciplinary
13.3 A person may not appeal against a fair treatment decision under section
132(4)(c) of the Act relating to the recruitment or
selection of a public sector
Appeals (Directive 04/23)
(‘Appeals Directive’) provides
information on the appeal rights of public sector employees under the PS Act,
and is also
of relevance to the present appeal. In respect of fair treatment
decisions, it provides that:
9.1 Section 131(1)(d) of the Act
provides that a fair treatment decision may be appealed.
9.2 Section 129 of the Act provides for the definition of fair treatment
9.3 Who may appeal a fair treatment decision under section 133 of the
(a) a public sector employee aggrieved by the decision.
9.4 Further to clause 9.3, a public sector employee must first comply with
their entity’s procedures under the directive relating
to individual
employee grievances (where the individual employee grievance directive applies
to the entity), unless:
(a) the fair treatment decision was made by the chief executive of that
(b) where the fair treatment decision relates to a finding under section 91
of the Act that a disciplinary ground exists for the
9.5 Despite clause 9.4, section 562A(1)(b) of the IR Act provides that the
QIRC may decide it will only hear an appeal against a
fair treatment decision if
the QIRC is satisfied that it would not be unreasonable to require the appellant
to comply with the procedures
set out in clause 9.4.
9.6 Decisions that cannot be appealed as a fair treatment decision under
section 132 of the Act:
(a) a decision made under chapter 3, part 8, division 5 of the Act (mental
or physical incapacity)
(b) a decision made under chapter 3, part 8, division 3 of the Act
(disciplinary action), other than a finding under section 91
that a disciplinary
ground exists for the person
a decision relating to the recruitment and selection of a public
sector employee
emphasis added)
[22] Clause 17
of the Appeals Directive stipulates the following:
Non-appealable appointments
17.1 In consideration of the definition of ‘non-appealable
appointment’ provided for in section 132(5) of the Act, it
is declared
that an appeal may not be made against the following appointments or
employment:
(a) an appointment or employment that is not a promotion
(b) to a role remunerated in excess of:
(i) the maximum salary applicable to the AO8 classification level within
the relevant entity (or the full-time equivalent for part-time
(ii) in cases where an entity does not have a remuneration scale that
includes an AO8 classification level, the maximum salary
applicable to the AO8
classification level provided for in the
Queensland Public Service Officers
and Other Employees Award- State 2015
, or the core State Government Entities
certified agreement, whichever is the higher rate (or the full time equivalent
for part time
to a role to which a person is directly appointed to or employed
in accordance with the directive relating to recruitment and selection,
(d) to a role which is entry level as defined in the directive relating to
recruitment and selection.
Submissions on jurisdictional objections
Appellant’s submissions on jurisdictional objections
[23] In response
to the Respondent’s first jurisdictional objection regarding s 132(1)(f)
of the PS Act, the Appellant relevantly
submitted that:
prevents a person from appealing a decision about the classification level of
employment;
the decision
Appellant’s position, “is the decision that
the position be
classified at the OPOT5 (OO5) classification rather than staying at the OO4
classification level or being reclassified
to the OO6 classification
level”, which was made long before the Appellant’s paypoint request
the paypoint
request is a separate decision, as the Award’s definitions and structure
suggest in separately defining ‘classification
‘increment’ and ‘paypoint’;
a decision to
employ a person at a higher paypoint under clause 12.1(g) of the Award does not
impact or decide the classification
level of the employment;
the inclusion of
‘reduction of classification level and a consequential change of
duties’ and ‘forfeiture or deferment
of a renumeration increment or
increase’ as different disciplinary actions under s 92(1) of the PS Act
further supports that
these are separate and distinct matters;
the decision
subject of this appeal did not decide or impact, and is therefore not about, the
classification level of the Appellant’s
position, but rather is about the
paypoint within that level; and
treatment decision is not excluded by section 132(1)(f) of the PS Act, and can
therefore be appealed.
[24] In respect
of the second jurisdictional objection raised by the Respondent concerning
132(4)(c) of the PS Act, the Appellant relevantly submitted that:
the contention
that the decision about paypoint under 12.2 of the Award, is a decision relating
to recruitment and selection is also
misconceived;
Respondent’s submissions are not consistent with anyone involved in this
process having ever considered the decision now
appealed against to be a
recruitment decision;
the decision
appealed against is about the paypoint to which the Appellant, already recruited
and selected for the position, is to
be employed at; and
the decision of
Industrial Commissioner Power cited by the Respondent in support of their
Parmar v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
’), is not apposite to the current
Respondent’s submissions in reply
[25] Further to
their submission that Mr Quick’s appeal is one “against a decision
and thus “statutorily
barred unless a directive expressly authorises the
the Respondent
refers to clause 3 of the Award. That clause provides a definition of
‘classification level’ as “compris[ing]
a minimum salary rate
plus a range of increments in a particular stream through which employees will
be eligible to progress”,
and further defines ‘increment’ as
meaning “for all employees an increase in salary from one paypoint to the
highest paypoint within a classification level”.
Respondent submits, in light of those definitions and when put into context,
terminology ‘increment’ is the verb used when an employee moves
within a classification level from one pay-point
to the next highest pay-point.
The terms ‘classification level’, ‘increment’ and
‘pay-point’
cannot be separated; they are inextricably linked. Given
these definitions, the Respondent submits the subsequent definitions noted
the Applicant are irrelevant to the present consideration. The disciplinary
considerations under Section 91 of the
Public Sector Act 2022
) are also irrelevant, as the ‘classification level’ must
include ‘incrementing through pay-point’s’
by its very
definition. Further, the Respondent respectfully submits the ‘pay-point
request’ is not a separate decision,
as given the above definitions,
the discretion under Clause 12.2(e) of
employment at any pay-point within a classification level is inherently a
decision about the classification level of employment.
The Respondent
also submits
the authority to appoint the applicant at the higher
pay-point under both
Recruitment and Selection
Directive 07/23 (the Directive)
is founded by the direct appointment of the
Applicant to the position, and as such, it is not a separate
(emphasis added)
Respondent further submits that the Appellant’s argument that the paypoint
decision is distinct from any decision about
classification level is
fundamentally flawed, stating:
Clause 12.2(e)
upon which the Applicant relies provides the
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in the Award, prior to engagement,
an applicant who is employed in a position
may, at the discretion of the
relevant employer, be offered and employed at any paypoint within a level based
on recognition of skills,
knowledge and abilities”.
A plain reading of this provision reveals the ability
to offer employment at a particular pay-point is inherently contingent upon
Applicant being engaged and employed in the position.
s132(4)(c) then provides:
person cannot appeal against a fair treatment decision-
......(c) relating to the recruitment or selection of a
public sector employee”
It is clear from the wording of this provision there is a jurisdictional bar
from bringing both proceedings about the actual decision
to recruit or select a
public sector employee, and also proceedings ‘relating to the recruitment
or selection of a public sector
Respondent additionally submits that
is “authority for the
fact (already obvious from the wording of the provision itself) that an appeal
is jurisdictionally barred
if it relates to the recruitment or selection of a
public sector employee, and the bar is not just for the actual decision to
the public sector employee.” Accordingly, it is contended that a
decision of which paypoint to appoint an employee at is inherently
related to recruitment or selection of an
Consideration of jurisdictional objections
Is the decision appealed against one about the classification level of
employment?
acknowledged by both parties, s 132(1)(f) of the PS Act, the Recruitment
Directive, and the Appeals Directive prevent a decision
level of employment from being appealed. However, there is significant
disagreement between the parties
as to whether the 8 March 2024 decision was
indeed a decision within the meaning of
s 132(1)(f).
instance of contention arises from the Appellant’s submission that the
decision of
8 March 2024 was not about the Appellant’s classification
level, but about the Appellant’s paypoint within that classification
level. The Appellant submits that drawing this distinction is necessary, with
reference to the Award’s separate definitions
for ‘classification
level’ and ‘paypoint’, because “the decision about the
classification level of
employment in relation to the Appellant's position, is
the decision that the position is to be classified at the OPOT5 (005)
classification
level rather than staying at the 004 classification level or
being reclassified to the 006 classification level”. The Appellant
that the decision to classify the position accordingly was a decision made long
before the Appellant’s paypoint request,
and thus must viewed as distinct
submission is erroneous in its failure to distinguish the Respondent’s
decision to reclassify the Weapons Maintenance
Officer position from the OPOT4
level to the OPOT5 level, from the Respondent’s later decision to employ
the Appellant at a
higher classification level by directly appointing the
Appellant to the reclassified OPOT5 position. Section 132(1)(f) of the PS
not concerned with how the Respondent has decided to describe or classify a
position prior to an employee being appointed
to such a position; any such
decision would be better characterised as a role evaluation undertaken for the
purpose of determining
the work value and applicable classification level and/or
remuneration under, e.g., clause 7.10 of the Recruitment Directive. Rather,
132(1)(f) is specifically directed towards decisions about how an
has been classified, i.e., what
classification level they are employed at.
Appellant further submits that a decision under cl 12.2(g) of the Award to
employ a person at a higher paypoint is not a
decision about the classification
level of employment. Essentially, the Appellant distinguishes between movement
within a classification
level, and movement between classification levels. In
doing so, the Appellant submits the decision appealed against was concerned
with the Appellant’s request to move to a higher paypoint within a
classification level it had already been determined
they would be appointed to,
and thus it was not a decision about the classification level at which the
Appellant was employed.
persuaded by the Respondent’s submission in this regard that “when
put into context, the terminology ‘increment’
is the verb used when
an employee moves within a classification level from one pay-point to the next
highest pay-point”, and
thus “the terms ‘classification
level’, ‘increment’ and ‘pay-point’ cannot be
they are inextricably
However, the true
difficulty in the Appellant’s submission is that the circumstances in
which an employee can move between
classification levels, and within a
classification level, under the Award are limited.
[34] The general
position of the Award is that movement between classification levels will be
based on employment on merit to
Clause 12.9(c) of the
Award then provides that an employee promoted to a position at a higher
classification level within the same
stream shall be employed at paypoint one of
that higher classification level, subject to clause 12.2(g). This captures the
Appellant’s
circumstances, given he was an existing employee appointed to
a higher classification level position within the same Operational
Unless clause 12.2(g) applies, the Award clearly stipulates that, in such
circumstances, the Appellant is to begin at paypoint
one upon his appointment to
the OPOT5 position.
[35] Clause
12.2(g) of the Award provides that “prior to engagement, an applicant who
is employed in a position may, at the
discretion of the relevant employer, be
offered and employed at any paypoint within a level based on recognition of
skills, knowledge
and abilities.” An employer’s ability to employ a
person at a higher paypoint under clause 12.2(g) is therefore contingent
employer having concurrently decided to offer that person employment at a
certain classification level.
[36] Movement
within a classification level (i.e., between increments) in the Operational
their engagement at the classification level, is addressed
by clause 12.11 of the Award. That clause stipulates that the salary of
full-time or part-time employee employed in level 4 or above of the Operational
stream (such as the Appellant) will not be increased
until that employee has
received a salary at a particular classification
paypoint for a
period of 12 months,
the chief executive has certified that the employee has achieved their
performance objectives.
Award otherwise provides no other mechanism for an employee’s movement
within a classification level, reflective of an
apparent intention to allow for
a structured pathway for employees to increase their earnings over time within
their classification
decision appealed against is plainly not one in which the Respondent is
considering whether the Appellant, having received
a salary at the same
classification and paypoint for a period of 12 months, is eligible to receive a
salary increase under clause
12.9(c). Rather, the Respondent’s decision
(as originally communicated on 12 June 2023, written reasons for which were
on 8 March 2024) was one determining the Appellant’s application
for, in their representative’s own words, “appointment
reclassified position at any pay point within the
classification.”
decision to appoint an employee to a position at a classification level is part
and parcel of any decision regarding that employee’s
paypoint within that
classification level.
‘classification level’ and ‘paypoint’ may well be
separately defined by the Award, they are terms
that are often inextricably
linked, as they are in a decision made under cl 12.2(g) of the Award. A decision
regarding an employee’s
request to be employed at a higher paypoint is
made within the context of a decision to appoint that employee to a
classification
level. Further, the Appellant has not identified any provision in
the Award to the contrary that would allow the employer to consider
made under clause 12.2(g) in circumstances where the Appellant’s request
for appointment to the higher classification
level was not simultaneously being
considered.
Is the decision appealed against a fair treatment
decision relating to the recruitment or selection of a public sector employee?
[39] Even if I
am incorrect in concluding that a decision under cl 12.2(g) inherently involves
a decision about the classification
level of the Appellant’s employment
such that it is jurisdictionally barred, I consider that the appeal of the 8
decision is an appeal of a fair treatment decision relating to the
recruitment or selection of the Appellant within the meaning of
s 132(4)(c) of
the PS Act.
Respondent submits in relation to this second jurisdictional objection that the
direct appointment of the Appellant to the
higher classification level position,
and the determination of their paypoint upon that appointment, amounts to a fair
decision relating to the recruitment or selection of a public sector
employee, and is thus not included within the appellate processes
under the PS
Act. In support of this submission, the Respondent cites the observation of
Industrial Commissioner Power in
that an appeal is
decision to
select a public sector employee, but also if the decision
recruitment or selection of a public sector employee. I agree with the
Respondent’s submission that, although the decision
addressed different circumstances to that of the Appellant, this finding
remains relevant to the present appeal.
Parmar v State of Queensland (Queensland Health),
her Honour, Deputy
President Hartigan considered (and ultimately dismissed) an appeal of the
decision in
, and outlined the following in relation to
interpreting s 132(4)(c) of the PS
Parmar’s appeal of the ESU decision is an appeal of a fair treatment
decision. Section 132(4)(c) provides that a person
cannot appeal against a fair
treatment decision “relating to the recruitment and selection of a public
service employee.”
[68] Whether the ESU decision was a decision “relating to the
recruitment or selection of a public sector employee”
will require
consideration of the phrase “relating to”.
[69] I accept the Respondent’s submissions that the words
“relating to” have a wide import.
Oceanic Life Ltd v Chief Cmr of Stamp Duties
it was held
The width of the phrase “relating to” is undoubted. Lord
Macnaghten stated that ‘[t]here is no expression more general
... The difficulties of construction presented by such
language have also been noted. Taylor J observed that “... the expression
‘relating to’ ... is ... vague and indefinite ...” and
“... leaves unspecified the plane upon which the relationship
sought and identified” ... One area of debate has been whether, in
particular legislation, a relationship need or
need not be “direct”
or “direct and immediate” ... Overall, the position judicially
adopted has been that
the operation of the phrase “relating to” is
determined by the statutory context and purpose...”
Accordingly, the construction given to the phrase
“relating to” will be determined by the statutory context and
[72] In this matter, the words “relating to the recruitment or
selection of a public sector employee” appear in the context
of s 132 of
the PS Act. The purpose of s 132 of the PS Act is to identify a decision against
which an appeal cannot be made.
[73] Specifically, s 132(4)(c) of the PS Act provides that a
person can not appeal a fair treatment decision relating to the recruitment
selection of a public sector employee.
[74] In the context of the PS Act,
this would include a
decision relating to the recruitment and selection process set out in Chapter 3,
Part 3 of the PS Act.
[83] On this appeal, Mr Parmar continues to contend that the ESU
decision is an unfair decision as the decision to “not investigate
recruitment and selection process based on the selection report prepared by the
committee, is not fair treatment to the appellant,
as per s 44(3)(b) of the PS
Act, recruitment and selection processes must be fair and transparent; and s
44(3)(c) of the PS Act,
recruitment and selection processes must reflect the
obligations under chapter 2 to relating to equity, diversity, respect and
inclusion.“
[84] It is apparent that Mr Parmar contends that the recruitment
and selection process did not accord with the PS Act including
the principles
referred to in s 44(3)(c) and the matters that may be considered in the process
as set out in s 45(2)(b) of the PS
[85] As relevantly noted by the Commission, the “practical
reality is that the grievance to the ESU solely related to the
appointment of a
candidate to the relevant position, which is a decision about the recruitment
and selection of a public sector employee”,
and further that “[t]o
consider this appeal would require an assessment of the Appellant’s claims
regarding the process
of selecting the successful candidate.“
[86] It is apparent on the terms of the concerns raised by Mr
Parmar and the ESU’s subsequent decision that they each related
recruitment and selection of a public sector employee.
[87] Consequently, Mr Parmar seeks to appeal a decision relating
to the recruitment and selection of a public sector employee.
emphasis added
uncontroversial that the Respondent promoted the Appellant to the OPOT5 position
at paypoint 1 via direct appointment.
Part 3 of the PS Act, concerning
recruitment and selection, applies to the “employment of an eligible
person in or to a public
Section 46 of the
PS Act allows for the public service commissioner to make a directive about
recruitment and selection under Part
3 that stipulates, e.g., the way in which
recruitment or selection processes in public sector entities must be carried
out. The resulting
directive, the Recruitment Directive, relevantly provides at
cl 8.16 that a chief executive may decide to directly employ a person
advertising a vacancy, a discretion exercised when it was decided to directly
appoint the Appellant to the higher classification
position at paypoint 1.
[43] Even if I
was willing to accept the Appellant’s submission that no decision about
the Appellant’s classification
level of employment was made in the
decision appealed against, I regardless consider that a decision about the
Appellant’s
starting salary upon their direct appointment to and
commencement in the OPOT5 position, is one that directly relates to their
for promotion to (and thus, employment in) the OPOT5 position. By
appealing the Respondent’s decision to directly appoint the
Appellant to
the higher classification position at the first paypoint of that level, the
Appellant is essentially seeking to contest
the terms of employment (namely, the
remuneration) offered by the Respondent to the successful applicant deemed to be
best suited
for selection to the OPOT5 position.
Is the decision
against a non-appealable appointment?
[44] While not
raised by either party in their submissions, I further note that s 132(1)(l) of
the PS Act provides that a person cannot
appeal a decision of a non-appealable
appointment. Section 132(5)(b) provides that a non-appealable appointment
includes an appointment
or employment that the public service commissioner has
declared by directive to be an appointment or employment against which an
may not be made.
consideration of s 132(5) of the PS Act, cl 17.1 of the Appeals Directive
declares that an appeal may not be made against
appointment or employment to a
role “which a person is directly appointed to or employed in accordance
with the directive relating
to recruitment and
selection”.
found above, the decision appealed against is one to directly appoint the
Appellant to the OPOT5 position at the first
paypoint, I find that the decision
is one that falls within the meaning of ‘non-appealable
appointment’, and thus cannot
be appealed.
[46] In light of
the jurisdictional objections raised by the Respondent, I provided the Appellant
the opportunity to make submissions
in support of their appeal, and the
Respondent the opportunity to file submissions in support of their objections
Having carefully
considered these submissions in their entirety, I am satisfied that the decision
appealed against is a decision
within the meaning of s 132(1)(f) of the PS Act, and alternatively is a fair
decision relating to the recruitment or selection of the Appellant
within the meaning of s 132(4)(c) of the PS Act.
[47] On the
basis that I consider both s 132(1)(f) and s 132(4)(c) of the PS Act to be
insurmountable jurisdictional obstacles for
the Appellant, I have determined
that the appeal will not be heard, pursuant to
s 562A(3)(b)(ii)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
order accordingly.
Pursuant to
s 562A(3)(b)(ii)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld), the appeal will not be heard
As clarified in the
parties’ further submissions, the Appellant did not originally commence at
this top paypoint in November
2000, but later received backpay as if he had
commenced at this paypoint.
Email from Mr D. Goldman (Director, Industrial Policy, Together Queensland,
Industrial Union of Employees) to Superintendent D. Harland,
dated 4 April 2023
(Attachment 1 to Appeal Notice, filed 28 March 2024, 1).
Appeal Notice, filed 28 March
It is uncontroversial
between the parties that the decision appealed against is indeed a fair
treatment decision. With reference
to the definition of such decisions in s 129
of the PS Act, I have similarly treated the Appellant’s Appeal Notice as
an appeal of a fair treatment decision.
Public Sector Act 2022
Employees (Queensland Government Departments) and Other Employees Award –
State 2015,
Submissions of the
Respondent, filed 13 June 2024, [33].
Submissions of the Respondent,
filed 1 August 2024, [4].
Submissions of the Respondent, filed 1 August 2024,
Submissions of the
Respondent, filed 1 August 2025, [4].
General Employees
(Queensland Government Departments) and Other Employees Award – State
cl 12.9(a).
cl 12.11(a)(i).
12.11(b)(ii).
Email of Mr
D. Goldman (Director, Industrial Policy, Together Queensland, Industrial Union
of Employees) to Superintendent D. Harland,
dated 4 April 2023 (Annexure 1 to
Appeal Notice, filed on 28 March 2024, 1).
[2024] ICQ 014
Public Sector Act 2022
(Directive 04/23)
cl 17.1(c).
Industrial Relations Act
s 562A(3)(b).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (318 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter