URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2003/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:48:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Chief Executive, DTRFT v Stevenson, D. A. [2003] QPAMDT 3 (24 June 2003)
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal
[2003] QPAMDT
The Chief Executive, DTRFT v Stevenson [2003] PAMDT X010-03
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
DEPT OF TOURISM, RACING & FAIR TRADING
STEVENSON David Anthony
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
24 June 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
4 June 2003
DECISION OF:
Mr J Gallagher
Ms S Christensen
Mr B Vickers
CATCHWORDS:
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Act 2000
– disciplinary
proceedings; conviction of offences against Act; suitability to hold motor
dealer’s licence; fit and
proper person; appropriate penalties
REPRESENTATION:
SOLICITORS:
RESPONDENT:
No Appearance
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
On 31 March 2003 the Chief Executive of
the Department of Tourism, Racing & Fair Trading (“the
Applicant”) started
disciplinary proceedings under section 497 of the
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Act 2000
(“the Act”)
against David Anthony Stevenson (“Stevenson”) by filing a complaint
with the Registrar of the
The Applicant relied on the following
ground for bringing the disciplinary
proceedings:
“Section 496(1)(a)(i) of the Act
– the licensee has been convicted of an offence against this
The complaint listed 43 instances of
alleged offences against the Act in relation to which the Applicant was charged
at the Magistrates
Court at Wynnum. The charges related to offences under the
Act in respect of ten (10) separate sales of motor vehicles to members
The matter was listed for hearing on 4
June 2003. Mr AR Edwards appeared on behalf of the Applicant. There was no
appearance by
Stevenson. He had written to the Tribunal on 26 May 2003 advising
that he was
“currently employed and therefore am unable to attend the
and that he no longer required a motor dealer’s
licence. The Tribunal replied to his facsimile stating that unless the other
party consented to an adjournment, the hearing would proceed. The Tribunal is
satisfied for the purposes of section 487 of the Act
that Stevenson had been
given an attendance notice for the hearing. The Tribunal therefore decided to
hear and decide the matter
in his absence.
Mr Edwards applied to amend the complaint
in relation to the ground given in the complaint for starting the disciplinary
proceedings.
He applied to amend the description of the section involved to
section 496(1)(a) in lieu of section 496(1)(a)(i). The Tribunal
there is no sub-paragraph (i) to section 496(1)(a). The Tribunal agreed to this
amendment because it was satisfied that
it was of a formal or minor nature and
that Stevenson was not unfairly prejudiced by the amendment. It does not
involve a change
of the ground relied on and Stevenson had knowledge of the
Magistrates Court proceedings.
Mr Edwards tendered a statement of
Jennifer Hancott, an investigations officer of the Office of Fair Trading. This
was accepted into
evidence and marked Exhibit 1. Mr Edwards also supplied
written submissions to the Tribunal and supported those submissions with
submissions. After hearing those submissions, the Tribunal reserved its
The objects of the Act are relevant in
disciplinary proceedings and these are set out in section 10 as
main object of this Act is to provide a system for licensing and regulating
persons as restricted letting agents, real estate
agents, pastoral houses,
auctioneers, property developers, motor dealers and commercial agents, and for
registering and regulating
persons as registered employees, that achieves an
appropriate balance between—
(a) the need to regulate for
the protection of consumers; and
(b) the need to promote freedom
of enterprise in the market place.
significant object of this Act is to provide a way of protecting consumers
against particular undesirable practices associated
with the promotion of
residential property.
The objects are to be
achieved mainly by—
(a) ensuring—
only suitable persons with
appropriate qualifications are licensed or registered;
persons who carry on business
or are in charge of a licensee’s business at a place under the authority
of a property agents
and motor dealers licence maintain close personal
supervision of the way the business is carried on;
(b) providing—
protection for consumers in
their dealings with licensees and their employees;
a legislative framework
within which persons performing activities for licensees may lawfully operate;
(c) regulating fees and commissions that can be
charged for particular transactions; and
(d) providing protection
for consumers in their dealings with marketeers; and
(e) promoting
administrative efficiency by providing that—
responsibility for licensing
rests with the chief executive; and
responsibility for minor
claims against the fund rests with the chief executive;
responsibility for claims,
other than minor claims, against the fund rests with the tribunal;
responsibility for reviewing
particular decisions of the chief executive rests with the tribunal;
responsibility for
disciplinary matters rests with the tribunal;
(f) establishing a claim fund to provide
compensation in particular circumstances for persons who suffer financial loss
their dealings with persons, other than property developers and their
employees, regulated under this Act; and
(g) providing for the
enforcement of matters involving marketeers by the tribunal and the District
(h) providing increased flexibility in enforcement
measures through codes of conduct, injunctions, undertakings, and, for
contraventions
by marketeers, preservation of assets and civil
penalties.”
Section 496 of the Act sets out the
grounds for starting disciplinary proceedings and provides as
496 Grounds for
starting disciplinary proceedings
following are grounds for starting a disciplinary proceeding against a licensee
or registered employee—
(a) the licensee or employee has
been convicted of an indictable offence or an offence against this
(b) the licensee or employee has contravened or
(i) this Act, including a code of conduct;
(ii) an undertaking given under chapter 16, part 2;
(iii) a corresponding law; ...”
The relevant provisions of the various
sections of the Act that were involved in the offences listed in the complaint
are as follows:
300 Notice to
be given about used motor vehicle—no prior
This section applies if a used
motor vehicle is not subject to any prior contract with a prospective buyer for
A motor dealer must give to the
prospective buyer of the vehicle a written statement in the approved form under
this section.
Maximum penalty—200 penalty
The statement must include the
(a) the motor vehicle, clearly identified, to
which the statement relates;
(b) the names and addresses of the
motor dealer and prospective buyer;
(c) a clear statement, in
the way prescribed under a regulation, that the prospective buyer may avoid any
contract for the purchase
of the vehicle from the motor dealer during the
cooling-off period;
(d) the day and time when the statement is
(e the day and time the cooling-off period
(f) the amount of non-refundable deposit forfeited by the
prospective buyer if the buyer avoids the contract;
other thing prescribed under a regulation.
statement must be signed and dated by the prospective buyer and the motor dealer
or someone authorised or apparently authorised
to sign for the motor
The motor dealer or authorised person
must give the original of the statement to the prospective buyer immediately
before the buyer
signs any contract for the purchase of the
Maximum penalty—200 penalty
The motor dealer must keep a copy of the
statement and make it available for immediate inspection by an inspector who
asks to see
Maximum penalty—100 penalty
317 Buyer to be given
notice about statutory warranty
dealer must, immediately before the sale of a warranted vehicle, give the buyer
of the vehicle a notice in the approved form
(a) the name, business address and hours of
business of the warrantor of the vehicle; and
(b) the length of
the warranty period for the vehicle; and
(c) defects to which
the statutory warranty does not apply.
Maximum penalty—100
penalty units.
A motor dealer must, immediately
before the sale of an unwarranted vehicle, give the buyer of the vehicle notice
in the approved form
that the vehicle does not have a statutory
Maximum penalty—100 penalty
The buyer must acknowledge receipt of a
notice given under subsection (1) or (2) by signing a copy of
For this section, a warranted vehicle is
when property in the vehicle passes from the seller of
the vehicle to the buyer of the
330 Motor dealer to keep
transactions register
A motor dealer must
keep, at each place the motor dealer carries on business, a register of
transactions (
“transactions
Maximum penalty—200 penalty units or
1 year’s imprisonment.
The motor dealer
must enter, and keep entered, in the transactions register the particulars that
may be prescribed under a regulation
for each transaction entered into in the
course of business within 24 hours after the transaction is
Maximum penalty—200 penalty units or 1
year’s imprisonment.
The form of the
register may be prescribed under a
regulation.
If the register is kept in
electronic form, the motor dealer is taken to comply with subsection (1) if
information in the register
can be accessed electronically and as hard copy from
the place of business.
(a) means a motor dealer who is
a principal licensee or a person in charge of a licensee’s business at a
(b) does not include a motor dealer whose licence is
conditioned to allow the dealer to perform only the activity of negotiating,
under a consultancy arrangement, for a person who is not a motor dealer or
auctioneer for the purchase of a motor vehicle for the
“transaction”
means any of the
(a) a sale;
(c) accepting a deposit;
(d) giving an
option to purchase;
(e) accepting a
(f) accepting a motor vehicle for sale on
consignment;
(g) a transfer of a motor vehicle from 1 place of
business to another place of
333 Contract of
A motor dealer must ensure that a
contract for the sale of a motor vehicle by the motor
(a) is in writing;
(b) contains the particulars that may be prescribed under a
regulation in the way prescribed under the regulation.
penalty—200 penalty units.
dealer must—
(a) give 1 copy of the contract to each other
person signing the contract immediately after it is signed;
(b) make a copy available for immediate inspection by an
inspector who asks to see it.
Maximum penalty—200 penalty
A contract for the sale of a motor vehicle
by a motor dealer that is not in writing is not enforceable against the buyer of
Regulation 32 of the
Property Agents
& Motor Dealers Regulation 2001
(“the Regulation”) was also
involved in the
32 Motor dealer
If a motor dealer receives a
payment from a buyer, a prospective buyer or an option holder in relation to the
purchase of a used motor
vehicle, the motor dealer must give promptly to the
buyer a receipt headed ‘Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act 2000’
that contains the following particulars—
(a) the name of
the motor dealer;
(b) the name of the buyer, prospective buyer
or option holder;
(c) the vehicle’s purchase
(d) the date of the payment;
amount of the payment;
(f) if the buyer, prospective buyer or
option holder pays for the vehicle by cheque, the drawer of the
(g) the vehicle’s make;
vehicle’s body model;
(i) the vehicle’s
(j) the vehicle’s engine number or, if the vehicle
is a caravan, the vehicle’s chassis number;
vehicle’s identification number;
(l) the vehicle’s
registration number;
(m) the vehicle’s year of
manufacture;
(n) the name and signature of the person giving the
Maximum penalty—10 penalty
The motor dealer must keep a duplicate
of a receipt issued under this section in the motor dealer’s
Maximum penalty—10 penalty
The orders the Tribunal can make on a
disciplinary charge hearing are set in section 529 of the Act which is as
529 Orders tribunal may make on
disciplinary charge hearing
The tribunal
may make 1 or more of the following orders against a person the tribunal finds
guilty of a disciplinary charge brought
(a) an order reprimanding the
(b) an order that the person pay to the chief executive,
within the time stated in the order, a fine of not more than 200 penalty
(c) an order that the person’s licence or
registration certificate be suspended for the period stated in the
(d) an order—
(i) if the person is
the holder of a licence or registration certificate at the time the order is
made—that the licence or
registration certificate be cancelled;
(ii) whether or not the person is the holder of a licence or
registration certificate at the time the order is made—that
the person be
disqualified permanently, or for the period stated in the order, from holding a
licence or registration certificate;
(e) an order, for a
licensed individual who is an executive officer of a corporation, that the
individual be disqualified permanently,
or for the period stated in the order,
from being an executive officer of a corporation that holds a
(f) an order imposing conditions on, or amending or
revoking the conditions of, the person’s licence or registration
certificate;
(g) another order the tribunal considers
appropriate to ensure the person complies with this
The tribunal may not make an order under
subsection (1)(d)(ii) disqualifying the person from holding a licence or
registration certificate
if the tribunal is satisfied that a court has, in
relation to the matter giving rise to the disciplinary
(a) been asked to make an order under section
592(2) disqualifying the person from holding a licence or registration
certificate;
(b) declined to do so.”
As noted, the evidence consisted of a
statement made by Jennifer Hancott, investigations officer with the Office of
Fair Trading.
The following Exhibits were attached to her
Exhibit JH1
Certificate of Conviction dated 2 May 2003 filed in the Magistrates Court
Exhibit JH2
Details of Licence No. 1002510 for David Anthony Stevenson
Exhibit JH3
Statement of Michael Guettler dated 11 September 2002
Exhibit JH4
Transcript of tape recorded interview with David Stevenson
Exhibit JH5
Justices Act
complaint dated 28 August 2002
Exhibit JH6
Summons to David Anthony Stevenson dated 20 April 2002
There was no dispute about the following
(i) Stevenson was the holder of a motor
dealer’s licence 1002510.
On 20 September 2002 Stevenson was
charged with 43 offences relating to various sections of the Act and the
Regulation. He pleaded
guilty to the charges, was convicted and fined the sum
of $4,000 together with costs, in default of payment to serve 70 days
imprisonment.
Discussion and Findings
The Tribunal is satisfied on the evidence
that the ground for bringing the disciplinary proceedings has been made out.
has been convicted of 43 offences against the Act as evidenced by the
Certificate of Conviction (Exhibit JH1). In these circumstances,
the Tribunal
must consider what penalties are appropriate for orders under section 529 of the
Suitability to continue to hold a
Mr Edwards submitted that there were
“grounds that disqualify the Respondent as a suitable person to hold a
. The submission noted that the term
is not defined in the Act, and that there was little, if any,
case law relating to that term. He submitted that guidance could be
terms used in similar legislative regimes, in particular the common term
“fit and proper”
The Tribunal agrees with this submission.
“suitable person”
is not defined in the Act and the
only comparable references are to a person’s suitability to hold a licence
set out in Part
4 of the Act. Sections 26 and 27 list the various matters that
make a person or a corporation not suitable to hold a licence and
they relate to
bankruptcy matters, convictions of a serious offence and current
disqualifications, none of which apply here. Section
28 lists a number of
matters that the Chief Executive must consider when deciding whether a person is
a suitable person to hold a
licence. Matters relevant to these proceedings are
the character of the person and his business associates, whether a licence has
been suspended or cancelled before, whether an amount has been paid from the
claim fund because of actions of the person, whether
the person has been
disqualified before from being a licensee, whether the person has been convicted
of an offence against the Act
and whether the person is capable of
satisfactorily performing the activities of a licensee. It is apparent that
character is an
important aspect, along with any previous history and the
ability to satisfactorily perform the activities relevant to the
There is authority, moreover, for the
proposition that “
are equivalent terms. In
(1965) WAR 167
, Hale J said:
“It is true that
‘fit and proper’ must be interpreted in the light of the
subject-matter of the Act in which the
expression appears. It, and the
equivalent ‘suitable’, appears in a wide variety of licensing Acts,
and it normally
comprises the three characteristics of honesty, knowledge and
Mr Edwards referred the Tribunal to two
(2) cases that discussed the term
“fit and proper”
first was the High Court case of
Hughes and Vale Pty Ltd v New South
[1955] HCA 28
(1955) 93 CLR 127
(“Hughes’ case”) where
at 156-7 the Court said:
“The expression
‘fit and proper’ is of course familiar enough as traditional words
when used with reference to offices
and perhaps vocation. But their very
purpose is to give the widest scope for judgment and indeed for rejection.
(or ‘idoneus’) with respect to an office is said
to involve three things, honesty, knowledge and ability ... When the
was whether a man was a fit and proper person to hold a licence for the sale of
liquor it was considered that it ought not
to be confined to an inquiry into his
character and that it would be unwise to attempt any definition of the matters
which may legitimately
be inquired into; each case must depend upon its own
circumstances.”
The term was also considered in
Sobey v Commercial and Private Agents Board
(“Sobey’s case”) where Walters J
“In my opinion what is meant by that
expression is that the applicant must show not only that he is possessed of a
knowledge of the duties and responsibilities evolving upon him as the
holder of a particular licence ... but also that he is possessed
of sufficient
moral integrity and rectitude of character as to permit him to be safely
accredited to the public ... as a person to
be entrusted with the sort of work
which the licence entails.”
Mr Edwards submitted on a consideration
of these authorities that the Tribunal could have regard to the following
factors when deciding
whether a person is a suitable person for the purposes of
“§ An enquiry into all the
circumstances of the case is required;
(suitability) with respect to an office requires an assessment of honesty,
common knowledge and ability. Honesty
to execute it truly, without malice,
affection or partiality. Knowledge to know what he ought duly to do. Ability
as well in estate
as in body, that he may intend and execute his office, when
need is, diligently, and not for impotency or poverty neglect
Protecting the
rights/interests of the public is paramount;
Honesty, integrity and
reliability are all central issues;
Have acceptable standards
been maintained; and
Sufficient moral integrity
and rectitude of character are relevant.”
Other Tribunals have also addressed this
term when considering cases in their jurisdictions involving the motor car
industry. In
the New South Wales Administrative Decisions Tribunal in the
Trlin v Department of Fair Trading
(1999) NSWADT 72
(“Trlin’s case”) Judicial Member Fleming made the following
“5. The expression ‘fit and
proper person’ in the context of the issuing of a motor dealer’s
licence has
not previously been considered by this Tribunal. In the matter of
Haining v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Service
(1999) NSWADT 6
the President of this Tribunal made the following comments on the issue, in
the context of the security industry:
‘Whether a person
is ‘fit and proper’ to hold a licence in a regulated industry will
be affected by general considerations
relating to the character of the person,
special considerations that take account of the nature of the industry in issue
public policy objective leading the legislature to regulate the
the President also referred
to the comments of Mason CJ in
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
(1990) 170 CLR 321.
The finding of whether a person is ‘fit and
proper’ is ‘one of value judgement. In that process the seriousness
or otherwise of particular conduct is a matter for evaluation by the decision
maker. So too is the weight, if any, to be given to
matters favouring the
person whose fitness or propriety are under consideration’. Mason CJ
referred to the breadth of the
concept of ‘fit and proper’ and the
need to have regard to the particular social importance of the industry which
being regulated.”
In the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal in the matter of
Raymond Robbins v Business Licensing
(2000) VCAT 457
(“Robbins’ case”), the
President of the Tribunal, the Kellam J made the following
“The nature, the number and the date
of the convictions is relevant to the issue of whether or not the applicant is a
proper person to be permitted to deal with the public in a motor car
sales capacity ... In the circumstances of this case the conduct
applicant is such that he cannot be seen as presently fit to deal with members
of the public in the motor car trade. The
convictions and his behaviour go to
the very heart of matters of honesty, integrity and reliability of a motor car
trader. The Act
has established a system which entitles a purchaser of a motor
car to rely upon the honesty and integrity of a motor car trader or
salesperson.
If that is undermined, the very structure of the Act is eroded. The offences in
this case were not of a trivial or
minor nature such as, some minor failure to
keep proper books or records or of trading outside hours which were not
permitted. The
offences in this case are such that they are capable of eroding
the confidence the community should have in relation to the motor
car trade and
in relation to the legislation which is structured to protect the public who
might buy or sell motor cars.”
Clearly, apart from honesty, knowledge
and ability the following factors need to be examined in the light of the
particular circumstances
of each case:
The person’s moral integrity
and rectitude of character (Sobey’s case);
The nature of the industry involved
and the public policy objectives of the legislation (Trlin’s
The seriousness of the conduct
involved (Trlin’s case and Robbins’ case):
Whether the person in question can be
safely accredited to the public as a person to trust (Sobey’s
The tribunal is satisfied that the
conduct of Stevenson is such that he could not be seen to be suitable to deal
with members of the
public in the motor car trade. His conduct and the offences
in question go to the heart of conduct which the Act is attempting to
in the motor car industry. The Act includes amongst other things provisions
designed to protect members of the public who
buy motor cars and the system
established entitles them to rely upon the honesty and integrity of licensees.
Conduct such as Stevenson’s
undermines that purpose and erodes the
confidence of the community, the standing of the industry and the foundations of
the Act (Robbins’
For these reasons, the tribunal finds
that Stevenson is not a suitable person to hold a motor dealers
Where the tribunal finds a person guilty
of a disciplinary charge it may make one or more of the orders set out in
section 529 of
the Act. Mr Edwards submitted that, as this case was one of the
first disciplinary proceedings and was based “
on a plethora of
technical and regulatory breaches”
, the tribunal could gain some
guidance in imposing a suitable penalty by recourse to the reasons and penalties
imposed by the Queensland
Building Tribunal under the
Queensland Building
Tribunal Act 2000
and the former Auctioneers and Agents Committee under the
Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971
Mr Edwards outlined his conclusions by
summarising the factors that he proposed the Tribunal should have regard to when
deciding penalty:
“§ Protecting
Preventing a repetition of
the offence;
The Respondent’s
culpability;
The conduct complained of
is not of an acceptable standard;
The harm to the industry as
While the tribunal agrees that penalties
imposed by like tribunals and the reasons therefore can assist it in reaching
its decision,
at the end of the day the tribunal must consider the circumstances
of each case and exercise its discretion in the light of the objects
and the provisions of the Act relating to offences and possible penalties. The
objects of the Act, in particular, give
the tribunal the best guidance.
The tribunal notes that two of the
important objects relevant to these proceedings are the protection of consumers
in their dealings
with licensees and their employees and the protection of
standards in the industry by ensuring that only suitable persons are licensed
registered. Clearly, they also interrelate. In this regard, the Tribunal
refers to the following comments of the President of
the New South Wales
Administrative Decisions Tribunal, O’Connor DCJ in the matter of
Jabar v Director of Department of Fair Trading
(2002) NSW ADT
“42. The object of the disciplinary system
(of which these proceedings form part) is the protection of the public and the
maintenance
of standards of unlicensed persons. The focus in these proceedings
must therefore primarily be on the applicant’s conduct
of his business.
This is a case where only limited weight can be given to the testimonials that
he has presented.”
In the tribunal’s opinion, the five
(5) factors summarised by Mr Edwards, in his submissions that the tribunal might
have regard
to when deciding a question of penalty, are appropriate. Other
factors which the tribunal considers might be relevant in a particular
the nature, number and date of previous convictions (Robbins’ case), the
number of offences in the complaint in question,
the monetary value involved in
the offences and any profit gained by the licensee, the motivation behind the
offences, any reparation
and remorse evidenced. The list is not prescriptive or
exhaustive and, as already noted, each case must be looked at in the light
its own individual circumstances.
Mr Edwards stated in his submissions that
he could find no case law that was similar to the facts in this case. He
submitted that
“not as serious and do not relate to the
intentional misrepresentation of the substance of the vehicle”
However, he submitted that the Tribunal should view Stevenson’s actions as
. In support, he submitted that Stevenson had
conducted his business
“as if the Act had never come into
and in his contracts had deleted all references to the Act
and the Regulation. He therefore submitted that the Tribunal should take
account the danger to the consumers from such conduct and the risk to consumers
and the motor car industry in having Stevenson
involved in that industry. He
also pointed to the fact that, although Stevenson initially accepted liability,
it took detailed investigations
into the matter before the extent of his
offences was revealed. Mr Edwards submitted that there were no mitigating
The Tribunal generally agrees with Mr
Edwards’ submissions. It does, however, regard the offences concerned as
very serious
in the light both of the nature of the offences and the duration
over which they were committed.
The notice required under section 300 is
clearly intended to provide protection to consumers, especially the provision of
off period. Stevenson was convicted of ten (10) breaches of this
The statutory warranty involved in
section 317 is also designed for the protection of the consumer and many members
of the public
would be unaware of that warranty, with consequent detriment
should repairs be necessary. Stevenson was convicted of ten (10) offences
against this section.
The requirement to keep a
transactions’ register under section 330 is regarded as serious enough by
the Legislature to warrant
a possible penalty by the courts of one (1)
year’s imprisonment. This register is an important cog in keeping track
of purchases
and sales and of the details of the motor vehicles in question,
odometer readings and the names of the parties. For this reason
it is often
referred to in the trade as the “police book”. Clearly it is a
protection for both members of the public
and members involved in the industry.
Stevenson was convicted of ten (10) offences against this
Section 333 contains provisions relating
to contracts of sale and is clearly designed for consumer protection. Stevenson
was convicted
of three (3) offences against this section.
Regulation 32 deals with motor dealer
receipts and again is designed for consumer protection as well as for providing
detailed records
of a licensee’s transactions. Stevenson was convicted of
ten (10) offences against this Regulation.
The offences took place over a period of
one (1) year and therefore display a pattern of behaviour and a complete
disregard for the
provisions of the Act. The Tribunal is satisfied that there
are no mitigating factors. Stevenson operated his own business. He
licence for 23 years. He chose not to participate in the Tribunal proceedings
or to otherwise make submissions about
the penalty that should be
In all the circumstances of this case,
the Tribunal is satisfied that Stevenson should be disqualified for a
significant period from
holding a licence or registration certificate and from
being an executive officer of a corporation that holds a licence. Despite
fact that he has already been fined by the Magistrates Court, the Tribunal is
also satisfied that he should pay a substantial
fine. The Tribunal notes that
disciplinary proceedings are not penal and are not intended to punish, but are
to protect the public
or members of the organisation concerned. Mansfield LCJ
Ex parte Brounsall
[1778] EngR 95
explained that disciplinary
proceedings after a court case are
“not in the nature of a second trial
or a new punishment”
and the High Court in
New South Wales Bar
Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
at 183 has stated that a
disciplinary power is
“entirely protective and notwithstanding that its
exercise may involve a great deprivation to the person disciplined, there
element of punishment involved”
. The tribunal therefore accepts Mr
Edward’s submission that
“a clear signal be sent to the general
public and the industry at large, that even where the Courts deal severely with
an offender,
the industry regulator will not allow such persons to be licensed.
Ultimately the risk involved in having a person in the industry
far outweighs
the benefit specifically in the protection of consumers and the
The Tribunal is satisfied that the
following orders are warranted in this case:
That David Anthony Stevenson is
disqualified for a period of ten (10) years from the date of this order from
holding a licence or
registration certificate.
That David Anthony Stevenson is
disqualified for a period of ten (10) years from being an executive officer of a
corporation that
holds a licence.
That David Anthony Stevenson is to pay
the Chief Executive within thirty (30) days of the date of this order a fine of
..................................................
J GALLAGHER – CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents & Motor
Dealers Tribunal
Mr B Vickers Mr J Gallagher Ms S
Christensen
Member Chairperson Member
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal
[2003] QPAMDT
Application No
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
Dept of Tourism, Racing & Fair Trading
SPRING HILL Q 4004
DAVID A STEVENSON
27 Belcaro Street
UPPER MT GRAVATT Q
Sections 487 & 509
- Property Agents & Motor Dealers Act
The Respondent did not attend the
hearing today. The Tribunal is satisfied that the Respondent had due notice of
the time, date and
venue of the hearing and therefore intends to proceed
pursuant to section 487 of the Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act
Upon hearing Mr Edwards on behalf of the Applicant and there
being no appearance on behalf of the Respondent, the Property Agents
Dealers Tribunal makes the following orders:
That David Anthony Stevenson is
disqualified for a period of ten (10) years from the date of this order from
holding a licence or
registration certificate.
That David Anthony Stevenson is
disqualified for a period of ten (10) years from being an executive officer of a
corporation that
holds a licence.
That David Anthony Stevenson is to pay
the Chief Executive within thirty (30) days of the date of this order a fine of
units ($4,500), namely by:
4.00PM ON 24 JULY 2003
.....................................................
GALLAGHER – CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents & Motor
Dealers Tribunal
Date: 24 June 2003
Mr B Vickers Mr
J Gallagher Ms S Christensen
Member Chairperson Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (145 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter