URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2025/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Aesthete No. 15 Pty Ltd & Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Cielo Property Group Pty Ltd [2025] QPEC 18 (3 September 2025)
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT
OF QUEENSLAND
Aesthete No. 15 Pty Ltd & Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast
& Cielo Property Group Pty Ltd
[2025] QPEC 18
AESTHETE NO. 15 PTY LTD (ACN 627 545 019) and AESTHETE
NO. 20 PTY LTD (ACN 627 946 356)
(Appellants)
COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GOLD
(Respondent)
CIELO PROPERTY GROUP PTY LTD (ACN 644 682 717)
(Co-Respondent)
Planning and Environment
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning and Environment Court, Southport
DELIVERED ON:
3 September 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
9, 10, 11, 12, 16, 17 & 20 June 2025.
Prskalo KC DCJ
The appeal is returned to the applications list for
review in Brisbane on 20 October 2025.
CATCHWORDS:
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT – APPEAL – where the co-respondent
seeks approval of a development permit for a material change
of use for a
multiple dwelling – where the respondent approved the development
application subject to conditions – where
the appellants appeal against
the respondent’s decision – where the development exceeds the height
prescribed in a Building
height overlay map in the planning scheme –
whether the development complies with the height up-lift provision in the
scheme – whether the development complies with the planning
scheme – whether there are relevant matters that support
approval – whether the development should be approved in the exercise of
the discretion
LEGISLATION:
Planning Act 2016
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
Planning Regulation 2017
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Abeleda v Brisbane City Council
(2020) 6 QR 441
[2021] QPELR 1003
[2020] QCA 257
Acland Pastoral Co Pty Ltd v Rosalie Shire Council
[2007] QPEC 112
[2008] QPELR 342
Archer & Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2024] QPELR
[2022] QPEC 59
Ashvan Investments Unit Trust v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[2019] QPELR 793
[2019] QPEC 16
Bell Co Pty Ltd & Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2023] QPELR 1160
[2022] QPEC 32
Brisbane City Council v YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
[2021] QPELR 987
Dajen Investments Pty Ltd & Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast
& Anor; Ruffin & Ors v City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2023] QPEC
G R Construction & Development Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council
[2022] QPEC 9
Elan Capital Corporation Pty Ltd & Anor v Brisbane City Council
[1990] QPLR 209
; [1990] LG 679
Heidelberg Business Park Pty Ltd & Ors v Council of the City of Gold
Coast & Anor
[2025] QPEC 14
Kangaroo Point Residents Association Inc v Brisbane City Council
[2015] QPELR 203
[2014] QPEC 64
K Page Main Beach v Gold Coast City Council
[2011] QPELR 406
Lynch v Commissioner of Police
[2022] QCA 166
McLucas & Ors v Council of City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2022] QPEC 56
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
S & S No. 4 Pty Ltd v Council of the City of the Gold Coast &
[2024] QPEC 42
SDW Projects Pty Ltd
Gold Coast City Council & Anor
[2007] QPELR 24
[2006] QPEC 74
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection & Anor
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
The Body Corporate for 62 Pacific Community Titles Scheme 45586 &
Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor; Sexton
v Council of the
City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2025] QPEC 13
Tricare (Bayview) Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2022] QPEC 31
Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council & Ors;
Dexus Funds Management Limited v Fabcot Pty Ltd & Ors
[2022] QPELR 309
[2021] QCA 95
Undershaft (No 1) v Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] FCA 41
253 ALR 280
WBQH Developments Pty Ltd v Gold Coast City Council & Anor
[2010] QCA 126
WBQH Developments Pty Ltd v GCCC
(2009) QPELR 748
[2009] QPEC 054
Wilhelm v Logan City Council & Ors
[2021] QPELR 132
Zappala Family Co Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council
(2014) 201 LGERA
[2014] QPELR 686
[2014] QCA 147
E Morzone KC and K Wylie for the appellants
S Hedge for the
M Batty KC and J Bowness for the co-respondent
SOLICITORS:
Yates Beaggi Lawyers for the appellants
Hopgood Ganim Lawyers for the
Connor O’Meara Solicitors for the co-respondent
Introduction
[1] This is a
submitter appeal against the respondent Council’s approval of a
development application permitting the co-respondent
Cielo Property Group Pty
Ltd to construct a 10-storey residential apartment building (the proposed
development) at 90-92 Pacific
Parade, Bilinga (the site).
development application was properly made on 28 August 2023. At that time, the
planning scheme in effect was the
Gold Coast City Plan 2016 (version 10)
(City Plan).
development application was impact assessable and required public notification.
The public notification attracted 32 properly
made submissions and the majority
were in opposition to the proposal.
The development application was approved with conditions on 5 March 2024.
appellants have interests in land at 89-91 Golden Four Drive, which is located
immediately behind the site. On 27 October
2023, the second appellant obtained
a development permit for a material change of use for a multiple dwelling on two
adjoining parcels
of vacant land at 89-91 Golden Four Drive (the vacant land).
The appellants, between them, own the parcels of land. The vacant
land has the
benefit of an approval for an 11-storey, 34.4-metre-tall residential tower,
which has not yet been acted upon.
[5] In the City
Plan, the site is within the Medium density residential zone (MDRZ), with a
maximum building height designation of
23 metres on the Building height overlay
map. The proposed development is a tower rising to approximately 33.79
It is uncontroversial that
the proposed development does not comply with the quantitative height standard
designated in the Building
height overlay map.
[6] Specific
outcome 3.3.2.1(9) of the City Plan permits increases in building height up to a
maximum of 50% above the Building height
overlay map in limited circumstances in
urban neighbourhoods provided a cumulative list of requirements are met.
appellants contend for refusal, arguing that the proposed development does not
comply with the Council’s planning scheme,
in particular the height uplift
provision in s 3.3.2.1(9) of the City Plan, amongst other non-compliances.
Deciding development applications under the Act
[8] The appeal
to the Planning and Environment Court is by way of hearing anew:
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
(Qld) (PECA). Pursuant to
PECA, it is for Cielo Property Group Pty Ltd to satisfy the court that the
appeal should be dismissed. The court’s power
to decide the appeal is
contained in
[9] Pursuant to
of PECA, the court must assess the development application under
Planning Act 2016
(Qld) (the Act) as if it were the assessment
manager for the development application. The statutory framework assessment is
by the Act. The Act requires, amongst other things, the development
application to be assessed in accordance with s 45(5) and decided
in accordance
with s 59(3) and s 60.
[10] Section
45(5)(a)(i) of the Act requires an impact assessment to be carried out against
the assessment benchmarks in a categorising
instrument for the
development.
[11] Pursuant to
s 45(7), the assessment manager must assess the development application against
or having regard to the statutory
instrument, or other document, as in effect
when the development application was properly made. The City Plan (version 10)
a categorising instrument: s 43(3) of the Act.
[12] Pursuant to
s 45(5)(a)(ii), the impact assessment must also be carried out having regard to
any matters prescribed by regulation.
Section 31(1)
Regulation 2017
(Qld) requires the court to have regard to, amongst other
(a) any development approval for, and any lawful use of, the premises or
adjacent premises, pursuant to
(b) the common material, pursuant to
[13] The court
must therefore have regard to the appellants’ Golden Four Drive approval
and the properly made submissions by
the submitters.
permits weight to be given to a planning scheme amendment that took effect
after a development application was properly made. No
party advanced a
submission that there was a relevant amendment to be considered.
, in combination with
, confers a broad discretion to approve a
development application, be it in whole or in part, or to refuse it.
discretion is to be exercised in accordance with the approach derived from the
appellate cases:
Brisbane City Council v YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
Abeleda v Brisbane City Council
[2020] QCA 257
(2020) 6 QR 441
Logan City Council & Ors
[2020] QCA 273
[2021] QPELR 1321
Trinity Park
Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council & Ors; Dexus Funds Management
Limited v Fabcot Pty Ltd & Ors
[2021] QCA 95
[2022] QPELR 309.
From these cases, it
can be observed:
(a) When carrying out an impact assessment under
of the Act, the
ultimate decision calls for a ‘broad, evaluative judgement’.
(b) The discretion conferred by
admits of more flexibility for an
assessment manager (or this Court on appeal) to approve an application in the
face of non-compliance
with a planning document in contrast to its statutory
predecessor.
(c) The exercise of the discretion under
is subject to three
requirements, including that it be based upon the assessment carried out under
(d) The Act does not alter the characteristic of a planning scheme, which
remains a reflection of the public interest. Despite its
broad nature, the
discretion must be exercised having regard to the fact that the planning scheme
is the embodiment of the public
[17] This Court
may in its discretion approve a development even where specific outcomes of the
planning scheme regarding building
height exceedance are not met: see
(Bayview) Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2022] QPEC 31
[2023] QPELR 1073.
application must be assessed against the applicable assessment benchmarks, which
will invariably include a planning scheme
for appeals before this Court. That
assessment will inform whether an approval would be consistent, or otherwise,
with adopted statutory
planning controls. The existence of a non-compliance
with such a document will be a relevant ‘
circumstance
’ in the exercise of the planning discretion under s 60(3)
of the Act. Whether that fact and circumstance warrants refusal
application, or is determinative one way or another, is a separate and distinct
question. It will be a matter for the assessment
manager (or this Court on
appeal) to determine how, and in what way, non-compliance with an adopted
statutory planning control informs
the exercise of discretion conferred by s
Abeleda v Brisbane City Council
[19] In forming
an evaluative judgement, I have had the benefit of opinion evidence from town
planners, architects, visual amenity
experts, economic need experts, and solar
and wind engineering experts, as well as access to photographs of the area,
plans, elevations,
sections, renders, landscape design plans, visual
representations of other approved developments, maps, and a photomontage
compilation.
[20] At the
commencement of the hearing, the parties arranged a site inspection of the local
area. Observations on the site inspection
do not form part of the evidence.
The site inspection did however enhance my appreciation of the photographic
evidence and the various
visual aids tendered on appeal.
site and the surrounding locality
[21] The site
consists of two contiguous residential allotments at 90-92 Pacific Parade, which
is at the southern extent of the Gold
Coast suburb of Bilinga. Bilinga is
considered a southern beach suburb of the City’s well known coastal strip.
Across Pacific
Parade is Joe Doniger Park and North Kirra Beach, which affords
the site extensive beach and ocean views.
[22] The site is
properly described as Lots 1 and 2 on RP 87297. The combined lots have a
rectangular shape and a total area of 1,012
square metres with an approximate 20
metre frontage to Pacific Parade. Consistent with the local topography, the
site is relatively
[23] The site is
currently improved by two dwellings, an older 2 storey dwelling at the front and
a single storey dwelling on the
‘battle axe’ lot at the rear, both
with access from Pacific Parade. Ornamental shrub species exist within the
setback, and the canopy of a Royal Poinciana extends between the two
[24] The site is
immediately surrounded by the following land uses:
to the north-east
(towards the beach): across Pacific Parade is Joe
Doniger Park, which forms part of the open space that extends continuously along
Pacific Parade to the north-west and south-east. The park has a combined
pedestrian and cycle path that meanders along its alignment.
Vegetation within
the park is typically characterised by single or sparsely spaced trees and pine
specimens, the Norfolk Pines being
the most prominent of these and which are
primarily located close to the edge of Pacific Parade. The open space adjoins
with the Coral Sea beyond.
to the south-east
(along Pacific Parade, towards Kirra): 88 Pacific
Parade is an older 2 to 3 storey brick multiple dwelling with a flat roof.
to the south-west
: at the rear boundary of the site was previously a
car hire business, which has now been demolished, with the appellants’
at 89-91 Golden Four Drive now vacant and ready for development.
to the north-west
: at 94-96 Pacific Parade, the site is adjoined by a
narrow driveway that provides access to the battle axe block at 94 Pacific
which accommodates a 4-storey multiple
. Adjoining the driveway to
the north-west at 96 Pacific Parade and at the front of the block, is a recent
6-storey multiple dwelling
with a roof terrace and of contemporary
[25] Broadly,
the site is located in Bilinga at the southern end of the Gold Coast, between
the Pacific Ocean and the Gold Coast Highway
(and the Golden Four Drive service
road parallel to the highway). Across Golden Four Drive to the south-west is
the Special Purpose
Zone, which includes the Gold Coast Airport and Southern
Cross University. The suburb of Tugun lies to the north-west and Coolangatta,
including the Coolangatta major centre, to the south-east.
[26] The town
planning experts identify the locality of the site as:
locality, in a town planning sense, is described as the land in Bilinga
north-east of the Gold Coast Highway (to the foreshore
including the wide beach)
Mills Street
in the north-west and
Musgrave Street
south-east, which shares the 23m height category on the Building height overlay
mapping and the RD6 category on the Residential
density overlay mapping, and is
predominantly zoned Medium density residential: Town Planning Joint Report at
[27] While the
local area is part of a longer band of residential development that extends
further to the north-west (up to at least
Mills Street), the visual amenity
experts settled on
Graham Street
as marking the northern boundary.
Graham Street marks a “conspicuous narrowing of the band of development
(from 100m to 60m)
compressing the depth of the blocks and influencing the form
of development on those lots: Visual Amenity Joint Report at [14] and
architects describe the urban area to the north-east of the Gold Coast Highway
as a relatively narrow coastal strip that
includes land within the suburb of
Bilinga to the south-east of Short Street and land within Tugun to the
north-west of Short Street.
Persons travelling along the Gold Coast Highway and
Golden Four Drive will experience this area as a visual continuum, with the
suburbs appearing as one contiguous coastal urban area, due to the continuity of
the settlement pattern, the consistency of the
MDRZ land use designation, and
the general similarity and variety of the residential built form.
[29] However,
the site is located within an area which has a height overlay of 23 metres that
abruptly changes to 15 metres (3-storeys)
to the north-west of Mills Street and
29 metres to the south-east of Musgrave Street in Kirra. Future development, if
the different height overlay designations, is likely to increasingly
differentiate localities within the contiguous urban strip.
architects agree that the changes to the height overlay designations and the
separation provided by the Gold Coast Highway
and the coastline assist to
delineate and characterise the local area of primary relevance to the site.
While the identification
of the ‘consolidated’ local area may assist
to focus discussion of the proposed development’s impact, the architects
believe the local area remains part of the extended coastal strip. This
extended coastal strip will be understood as part of the
coastal strip’s
broader identity and sense of place: Architecture Joint Report at [29] to
The character of the local area
[31] Whether the
local area is defined by a longer or shorter part of the coastal strip, the
overall impression is the same. The character
of the area is one which is
predominantly residential in nature, but of varying built forms, including
taller apartment buildings,
interspersed with lower rise houses and multiple
character of a locality is the aggregate impression formed having regard to the
individual features and traits of the development
and the natural environment in
the locality:
G R Construction & Development Pty Ltd v Brisbane City
[2022] QPEC 9
[33] Regardless
of the precise location of the immediate locality’s northern boundary
whether Mills or Graham Street, the local
area is characterised by:
(a) The visual prominence and focus of the beach foreshore and the park along
Pacific Parade;
(b) A mix of building types and styles, whose built form, scale, and bulk are
not highly prominent and do not result in visual dominance
over the parkland and
foreshore setting along Pacific Parade. These buildings include older modestly
scaled dwelling houses, larger
contemporary dwellings, older 2 and 3 storey
flats and apartment buildings, and a mix of newly completed and approved
apartment buildings.
[34] The local
area in this appeal was recently considered in
The Body Corporate for 62
Pacific Community Titles Scheme 45586 & Anor v Council of the City of Gold
Coast & Anor; Sexton
v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2025] QPEC 13
The Body Corporate for 62 Pacific
Consistently with the evidence in the present appeal, Kefford DCJ considered
that Pacific Parade, Golden Four Drive and Musgrave
Street provided a clear and
logical demarcation of the boundaries of the local area. As to the northern
boundary, her Honour stated
“Regardless of whether
one considers the northern extent of the local area to be defined by Mills
Street, Graham Street, or
Cahill Street, the overall impression of the existing
character of the local area is the same. It is informed by the aggregation
the individual features and traits of the existing development, the
infrastructure and the natural environment context in which
that built form
[35] The beach
and foreshore park are important landscape features that define the structure,
character, and amenity of the area.
There is a difference in the
characteristics of each of Pacific Parade and Golden Four Drive and the
contribution or impact which
each of those make to the overall character of the
area. Pacific Parade enjoys a higher level of amenity being adjacent to the
and park. Built form development on Pacific Parade is also likely to
have more influence on the beach and foreshore.
[36] Golden Four
Drive is nearer to and associated with the Gold Coast Highway and presents more
as a transport orientated corridor
rather than an esplanade with a scenic
foreshore setting. This is further reinforced by the presence of elements such
as bus stops
and access points to the Gold Coast
[37] I adopt the
observations of Kefford DCJ in
The Body Corporate for 62 Pacific
[31] Although there are differences in the amenity
experience of Golden Four Drive and Pacific Parade, the taller built form along
Golden Four Drive contributes to the character of the immediate locality. From
viewing locations in Pacific Parade, Joe Doniger Park,
the foreshore and the
beach, the development on Golden Four Drive provides a backdrop to that located
in Pacific Parade.
[32] From distant locations, such as the beach, the building form on Golden
Four Drive and Pacific Parade merge into a single layer
and one cannot readily
identify their precise location. In addition, from more distant viewpoints, the
buildings in Golden Four Drive
appear similar in height to buildings of lesser
height on Pacific Parade. That is because of the angle of view from such
That said, as one moves closer to the buildings in question, the
parallax diminishes and the building forms and relative heights
[38] In the
present appeal, the observations in that case are supported by my review of the
Digital Photomontage Methodology Report
(Ex 5) and were also adopted by Mr
Buckley in evidence, with whose opinion in that respect I
An area in transition
[39] The visual
amenity experts recognise that the local area is progressing through a period of
transition from relatively low intensity,
predominantly low-rise development, to
larger medium and high-rise built form: Visual Amenity Joint Report at
[40] The town
planning experts agree that the local area is in transition:
City Plan’s intent for the locality is for it to transition from a
smaller-scale and lower-rise built form to a larger-scale
and medium and
high-rise built form. The increased number of taller buildings having been
constructed and approved is considered
to progress achievement of the ultimate
built form character: Town Planning Joint Report at [30].
[41] Having
regard to the City Plan and the expert evidence, in my view, it is
uncontroversial that the local area is transitioning
towards a planned character
of buildings consistent with the Medium density residential zone and the
opportunities for increased
height afforded by s 3.3.2.1(9) of the City Plan.
This finding mirrors that of Kefford DCJ in
The Body Corporate for 62
[42] Exhibit 45,
prepared by Mr Mewing, gives a fuller picture of the changing nature of
buildings in the locality. Buildings, existing,
under construction and approved
in excess of 8 storeys are of regular occurrence amongst other building heights.
The buildings in
excess of 8 storeys are all above 23m in height: Town Planning
Joint Report at [26] to [28].
[43] Exhibit 37
documents the either approved or constructed taller buildings in the local area
between Mills and Musgrave streets;
it identifies 22 such buildings, ranging
from 4 to 11 storeys.
Pacific Parade, the presently constructed taller buildings are predominantly 7
to 8 storeys. Those existing buildings
that exceed the 23m height overlay do so
either only marginally or moderately. The exception is ‘Porta
Pacifique’, which
is an 11-story, 31m high older building at 134 Pacific
Parade on the corner of Cahill Street, some 400 metres to the north-west of
Golden Four Drive, the Pavilion development comprises of two constructed high
rise 10-storey towers, both rising to approximately
34 metres. The Pavilion 1
development on the corner of Golden Four Drive and Lang Street is designated
partly in the Neighbourhood
centre zone with commercial/retail space at ground
level providing a neighbourhood centre function. Pavilion 2 on the adjoining
site is integrated with Pavilion 1.
[46] Exhibit 45
documents the renders and typical floor plans of not yet constructed
developments which have height uplift
(i) 2 Pacific Parade – 34.4m – 11 storeys;
(ii) 8 Pacific Parade – 27.9m – 7 storeys;
(iii) 55 Golden Four Drive – 34.4m – 10
(iv) 89-91 Golden Four Drive – 34.4m – 11 storeys (the
appellants’ approval);
(v) 107-109 Golden Four Drive – 33.7m – 10 storeys.
approved, the proposed development will be the only high rise building on
Pacific Parade, other than 2 Pacific Parade, located
some 300 metres south-west
of the site.
[48] Given the
lot pattern, land uses, and access to views, the more contemporary multiple
dwellings in the area (including a number
of approved but unbuilt developments)
are characterised by vertically stacked, generally rectilinear floor plates,
with prominent
balconies directed towards the beach. A number of taller
buildings incorporate recessed or contracted upper floor levels: see the
Amenity Joint Report at [22].
example, existing buildings to the north of the site on Pacific Parade
demonstrate physical or visual recessing of upper
levels: see Joint Visual
Amenity Report – Figure NP12 at p 38. This design feature, amongst
others, was considered to be an
important feature of the existing built form (as
a general although not necessarily uniform characteristic) and was held to
to the character of the local area in
The Body Corporate for 62
: [38], [140] – [141].
evidence in the present appeal indicates that the recessing of upper levels of
tall buildings is present in relation to some
but not all of the existing
developments, and obviously present on only one of the five approved
developments shown in Ex 45.
[51] The present
built form exhibits a variety of architectural styles. The taller buildings to
some degree adopt various devices
to minimise bulk, some more successfully than
architectural character of the locality is neither unique or distinctive, and
not necessarily of a consistent high quality.
The photomontages reveal the wide
variety of architectural forms and expressions in the locality. Recent
buildings exhibit a contemporary
coastal character, typical of other coastal
areas in the region. These new developments consist of generally vertically
flat stacked
floor plates of similar form, with visually prominent and generous
balconies that capitalise on the views towards the coastline.
There are also
balconies with views to local streets as well as the hinterland to the west: Mr
Richards, Architecture Joint Report
at [244] to [245].
[53] Overall,
the character of the local area is that of a coastal, predominantly residential
area that is in transition to a greater
intensity of built form. There are a
range of building heights and forms which seek to maximise views to the ocean,
and taller buildings
which include elements to reduce the impact of their bulk
The site within the City Plan
[54] The City
Plan maps the site as:
(a) within the ‘Urban area’ on Strategic framework map
1 – designated urban area;
(b) within the ‘Urban neighbourhoods’ and ‘Investigation for
light rail urban renewal area’ and near the
‘State and major road
network’ on Strategic framework map 2 – settlement pattern;
(c) within the ‘Coastal tourism/urban strip’ and
‘Investigation for future light rail’ on Strategic framework
– focus areas for economic activity;
(d) near the ‘High frequency public transport routes’ and
‘Coastal pedestrian and cycle network’ (and ‘Specialist
– airport’) on Strategic framework map 6 – integrated
(e) in the ‘Consolidation area’ on Strategic framework map 9
– consolidation and expansion areas.
indicated, the site has Medium density residential zone designation and a
maximum building height designation of 23 metres
on the Building height overlay
map. The properties neighbouring the site also have a MDRZ designation except
for the property at
3 Lang Street, Bilinga, which is within a Neighbourhood
centre zone. The site is included in the RD6 category on the Residential
overlay map.
The town planning framework
[56] Zones in
the City Plan organise the area in a way that facilitates the location of the
preferred or acceptable land uses. Assessment
benchmarks for each zone are
contained in a zone code. Each zone code identifies the following:
(a) the purpose of the code;
(b) the overall outcomes that achieve the purpose of the code;
(c) the performance outcomes that achieve the overall outcomes and purpose of
(d) the acceptable outcomes that achieve the performance and overall outcomes
and the purpose of the code;
(e) the performance and acceptable outcomes for the
[57] Pursuant to
s 5.3.3(4)(c) of the City Plan, a development that complies with the purpose and
overall outcomes of the code complies
with the code; and a development that
complies with the performance or acceptable outcomes complies with the purpose
and overall
outcomes of the code. Although this section relates to code
assessable development, it remains applicable in the context of impact
assessable development: see
Archer v Council of the City of Gold Coast &
[2024] QPELR 387
) at [452].
Projects Pty Ltd v Gold Coast City Council & Anor
[2006] QPEC 74
[2007] QPELR 24
Rackemann DCJ stated at [48]:
It is not legitimate to regard
departure from acceptable solutions as necessarily indicating non-compliance
with the code. In this
regard, acceptable solutions differ from development
standards which were often a feature of town planning schemes under the former
regime. Compliance with such standards was commonly required unless a
relaxation or dispensation was granted. Under the performance
based approach,
the acceptance of an alternative solution does not represent a
‘relaxation’ or ‘dispensation’.
It is another way of
achieving compliance with the relevant performance criterion.
compliance with an acceptable outcome is not mandatory, that does not mean that
the content of an acceptable outcome is
irrelevant. It may indicate what the
planning scheme desires or prefers as development in a particular
WBQH Developments Pty Ltd v Gold Coast City
Council & Anor
[2010] QCA 126
acceptable outcomes in a planning scheme may be relevant in ascertaining the
legislative intention of a planning scheme
in a particular area, it depends on
the terms of the provision itself:
Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns
Regional Council & Ors; Dexus Funds Management Limited v Fabcot Pty Ltd
[2022] QPELR 309
[2021] QCA 95
per Brown J at [110].
[61] The purpose
of the MDRZ Code is to provide for a range and mix of dwelling types including
Dwelling houses and Multiple dwellings
supported by Community uses and
small-scale services and facilities that cater for local
The purpose of the
code will be achieved through the overall outcomes expressed at s 6.2.2.2(2),
which include:
Built form (excluding Dwelling houses on small lots):
(i) has a building height that does not exceed that indicated on the Building
height overlay map;
(ii) contributes to a transitioning density from lower intensity areas to higher
intensity areas near centres, the high rise coastal
spine and areas well
serviced by public transport;
(iii) is setback from road frontages to promote an urban setting and interface
with the street;
(iv) is setback from side and rear boundaries to protect the amenity of
adjoining residences; and
(v) has varying site cover to reduce building dominance and provide areas for
landscaping.
[62] Performance
outcome 3 (PO3) of the MDRZ Code is one of the performance outcomes that achieve
the overall outcomes:
“PO3 Building height and structure
height does not exceed that shown on the Building height overlay
exceeding the height in the overlay map, the proposed development does not
comply with the overall outcome in s 6.2.2.2(2)(d)(i)
and PO3 of the MDRZ
[64] Part 3 of
the City Plan contains the Strategic framework. The framework sets the policy
direction for the City Plan and has
a planning horizon of
specific outcomes for building heights in urban neighbourhoods, s 3.3.2.1
(8) The Building height overlay map shows the building height pattern and
desired future appearance for local areas within urban
neighbourhoods. This map
also shows areas where building heights change abruptly to achieve a deliberate
and distinct contrast in
built form within and between low, medium or high-rise
(9) Increases in building height up to a maximum of 50% above the
height overlay map
may occur in limited circumstances in urban
neighbourhoods where all the following outcomes are satisfied:
(b) a reinforced local identity and sense of place;
(c) a well managed interface with, relationship to and impact on nearby
development, including the reasonable amenity expectations
of nearby residents;
(d) a varied, ordered and interesting local skyline;
(e) an excellent standard of appearance of the built form and street edge;
(f) housing choice and affordability;
(g) protection for important elements of local character or scenic amenity,
including views from popular public outlooks to the city’s
significant
natural features;
(10) Increases in building height, beyond 50% above the Building height
overlay map, are not anticipated in urban neighbourhoods.
Note: No criteria have been identified for building heights which are more
than 50% above the Building height overlay map, because
such increases are in
conflict with City Plan.
provision has been comprehensively analysed in numerous cases:
(Bayview) Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2022] QPEC 31
[2023] QPELR 1073
Bell Co Pty Ltd & Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2022] QPEC 32
[2023] QPELR 1160
Archer v Council of the City of Gold Coast &
[2024] QPELR 387.
respectfully adopt the summary by Kefford DCJ in
at [295]. For
reasons explained in greater detail in the cases, with respect to impact
assessable development in “
Urban neighbourhoods
” and in the
Medium density residential zone:
(a) non-compliance with the quantitative standard expressed through the
building height overlay map is a matter of significance
under City Plan;
(b) building height in excess of the quantitative standard is not anticipated
in the Medium density residential zone;
(c) the building height overlay map, read with s 3.3.2.1(8) of the Strategic
framework, indicates that development that is non-compliant
quantitative standard is inconsistent with the intended building height pattern
and desired future appearance for a local
(d) where the exceedance of the height designated on the building height
overlay map is up to 50 per cent, s 3.3.2.1(9) of the Strategic
framework admits
of a degree of flexibility with respect to building heights, subject to close
scrutiny of the development in the
context of the identified outcomes;
(e) if support for the proposed height is established by reference to s
3.3.2.1(9) of the Strategic framework, by operation of the
hierarchy of
provisions in s 1.4 of City Plan, the nature and extent of non-compliance with
City Plan, in terms of building height,
is materially diminished; and
(f) diversity of appearance is contemplated across different urban
neighbourhoods and, as such, each case will turn on the facts
and circumstances
relevant to that case; but
(g) if there is not compliance with s 3.3.2.1(9) of the Strategic framework,
non-compliance with s 6.2.2.2(2)(d)(i) and performance
outcome PO3 of the Medium
density residential zone code is serious and entitled to significant weight as a
reason for refusal in
the exercise of the discretion; and
(h) City Plan does not support an outcome where the degree of exceedance is
greater than 50 per cent of the quantitative standard
expressed through the
building height overlay map: development of that nature conflicts with City Plan
and any resultant non-compliance
with s 3.3.2.1(10) of the Strategic framework
and s 6.2.2.2(2)(d)(i) and performance outcome PO3 of the Medium density
residential
zone code is serious and entitled to significant weight as a reason
for refusal in the exercise of the discretion.
[68] The parties
did not challenge the correctness of the analysis in these cases. The overlay
maps are an important metric. To exceed
the height on the overlay map, a
proposal must meet all of the requirements in s 3.3.2.1 (9) to avail itself of
planning support.
Whether these requirements are met in any given case turns on
matters of judgement, impression, fact, and degree.
The proposed
development
development application sought a development permit for a material change of use
for a multiple dwelling on the site.
proposed development is a multiple dwelling of 20 units, made up of six 2-
bedroom units; two 3-bedroom units; eleven 4-bedroom
units and one 6-bedroom
unit, totalling 68 bedrooms. The “bedrooms” calculated as part of
Council’s delegated assessment
report include multi-purpose rooms, and
therefore are different to what is indicated on the development
[71] In terms of
built form, the proposed development comprises a single building which is 10
storeys and approximately 33.79 metres
in height. The proposal also
incorporates: (a) two levels of basement carparking; (b) nine levels of
residential dwellings/apartments;
and (c) a roof terrace with a pool and
[72] The metrics
of the proposed development are set out at page 11 of the Visual Amenity Joint
Development Aspect
Ground floor: 37%
Levels 1-3: 48%
Levels 4-7: 47.8%
Level 8: 34.8%
Rooftop: 22%
Total site cover: 56%
Setbacks to Pacific Parade
Ground level: 0m (water metre); 2.5m (wall)
Levels 1-3: 4.1m
Level 4: 5m
Levels 5-8: 4.5m
Setbacks to rear (89-91 Golden Four Drive)
Ground level: 5.95m
Levels 1-3: 4.7m
Level 4: 5.6m
Levels 5-8: 5m
Setbacks to north-west side neighbour (94-96 Pacific Parade)
Ground level: 0m (water tank); 1.5m
Levels 1-3: 3.5m
Level 4: 3.5m
Levels 5-8: 3.5m
Setbacks to south-east side neighbour
Ground level: 0m
Levels 1-3: 3.5m
Level 4: 3.5m
Levels 5-8: 3.5m
1 bed per 14.9 square metres
Communal open space
172 square metres
Private open space per unit
Between 12 square metres – 179 square metres per dwelling
Car parking
41 resident
[73] As depicted
in the plans, the building form is characterised by its elongated external
envelope that responds to the size and
shape of the site, presenting its
narrower dimension to the Pacific Parade frontage. The floor plates are all
essentially alike
in size and
The significantly
narrower north-east facing (Pacific Parade) and south-west facing (rear) facades
are distinguished by the four
storey high arches at the base of each
While mostly
open to the sky, the roof terrace is partially sheltered by the
‘flat’ projecting roof over the gym, service
core, lift lobby and
sitting area. The roof is set back from the perimeter of the roof
issues in dispute
[74] Despite the
large number of planning scheme provisions in issue, approval or refusal of the
proposed development turns on the
resolution of four key issues:
(a) whether the proposed development complies with Specific outcome 3.3.2.1(9)
– the uplift provision;
(b) whether the setbacks, site cover, and separation of the proposed development
have unacceptable impacts on residential amenity
including in terms of
overlooking, overbearing, loss of outlook, shadowing, natural light or
ventilation;
(c) whether the density of the proposed development causes unacceptable impacts;
(d) if non-compliance with the relevant benchmarks is established, whether there
are any other relevant matters that support approval
or refusal.
provisions in issue have been grouped into categories which the appellants say
are largely subsumed by the various sub-paragraphs
of Specific outcome 3.3.2.1
(9), save for issues associated with excessive residential density and adverse
amenity for future occupants:
see the Appellants’ Amended Benchmark
Groupings (Ex 56). The appellants continue to rely upon the benchmarks listed
the various sub-paragraphs of Specific outcome 3.3.2.1(9) headings to
support or buttress the overall allegation of non-compliance
with the particular
sub-paragraphs of s 3.3.2.1(9) in issue.
appellants contend that the majority of the non-compliances they rely upon,
particularly of the lower order provisions of
the planning scheme, including in
the Medium density residential zone code, the High rise accommodation design
code and the General
development code, can largely be subsumed into the
consideration of Strategic outcomes 3.3.1(3) and (5) and Specific outcome
3.3.2.1(9).
appellants continue to rely upon these subsumed lower-order provisions as
secondary non-compliances to buttress or support
the nature or extent of the
non-compliance with Specific outcome 3.3.2.1(9).
appellants submit that there is non-compliance with six sub-paragraphs of
Specific outcome 3.3.2.1(9) and that these non-compliances
are decisive reasons
for refusal. Non-compliance is alleged with sub-paragraphs (9)(b), (c), (d),
(e), (f) and (g), which correspond
to the amended benchmark groupings at
paragraphs (2) to (7) in Ex 56.
[79] To focus
the real issues in dispute, the appellants accept that non-compliance with
(9)(g), namely “protection for important
elements of local character or
scenic amenity”, does not require separate determination – if
compliance is found with
the other uplift criteria, the appellants accept that
compliance with (9)(g) will follow.
appellants also concede that if compliance is found with the uplift provision,
having considered that provision in the context
of the corresponding group of
lower-order benchmarks, it is unnecessary for the court to give these other
provisions their own separate
consideration because non-compliance will not in
that event separately warrant refusal. Conversely, the appellants submit that
the court finds non-compliance with the uplift provision, it will inevitably
find non-compliance with most of the other benchmarks;
together this will
constitute serious non-compliance with the planning scheme justifying refusal.
[81] I have
considered the Appellants’ Amended Benchmark Groupings (Ex 56) and have
assessed the proposed development having
regard to each of the assessment
benchmarks. I accept that it is unnecessary for the court to individually
assess each of the other
assessment benchmarks as they do not, of themselves,
materially impact the outcome of the proceeding. As I have said, approval or
refusal of the proposed development turns upon the resolution of the four key
issues identified in [74] above.
[82] As a matter
of legal construction, the appellants also submit that compliance with Specific
outcome 3.3.2.1(9) can only occur
where all eight sub-paragraphs in that
provision are complied with and that non-compliance with any one of those
sub-paragraphs should
be a decisive reason for
respondent and co-respondent submit that the proposed development complies with
the uplift provision.
respondent concedes non-compliances only in relation to height and density on
the overlay maps. The height non-compliance
is overtaken by the uplift
provision and the density non-compliance is submitted not to warrant
co-respondent submits the proposed development is architecturally meritorious
and does not result in any unacceptable character
or amenity impacts. It
warrants approval subject to the imposition of lawful and appropriate
conditions.
[86] A number of
submitters objected to the development application, although they have not all
appeared on the hearing of the instant
appeal. Their concerns rest in the
height, bulk, and scale of the proposed development and consequent detriment to
the amenity of
the area. The concerns, conveniently summarised in the Town
Planning Joint Report
(a) Height and whether the proposal qualifies for a 50% uplift in accordance
with 3.3.2.1(9);
(b) Overlooking, loss of outlook, and shadowing;
(c) The performance outcomes for residential density, site cover, and
(d) The adequacy of parking; and
submissions made to Council in response to the publicly notified development
provide a source of evidence about community
expectations. Ultimately, the
submitters’ concerns must be considered through the prism of the relevant
statutory provisions,
the planning scheme, and the evidence. The main themes of
the submissions include matters of relevance which largely mirror the
advanced by the appellants on the appeal. In dealing with the issues in
contention, I have remained conscious of the matters
raised by the submitters.
The determination of each issue calls for value-laden judgements about which
reasonable minds may differ.
A particular construction of the uplift provision
appellants argue that the uplift provision should be construed to intend that a
development offer more than what is otherwise
expected under the planning scheme
to justify an increase in building height. This is said to make sense given
that the planning
scheme, by its other provisions (be they Strategic framework
provisions or zone and other development codes), already seeks outcomes
development in relation to the matters in issue in this case, such as impacts on
character and amenity, built form, and the attractiveness
or appearance of the
built form.
[89] During the
opening, the appellants submitted that the uplift provision provides an
incentive to developers, which seeks from
them a higher standard than is
otherwise expected by the planning
appeared to suggest
that the phrase “in limited circumstances” required the building to
be particularly excellent or
exceptional to justify the application of the
[91] While those
outcomes may naturally be achieved by a development which meets the criteria for
the uplift, in my view, that is
not the test for compliance with the uplift
McLucas & Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
at [132], Rackemann DCJ considered a similar submission as it related
to the housing choice and affordability criterion. There it
was submitted that
the bar for compliance was set too low to get the reward of the uplift and that
the proposal should meet the criteria
in a way that “sets it apart”
from other development. Rackemann DCJ did not consider that the criteria should
be affected
by a preconceived assumption as to how high the bar should be.
Further, it was held that the “limited circumstances”
in which the
uplift is available are the circumstances in which all criteria are met.
Heidelberg Business Park Pty Ltd & Ors v
Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2025] QPEC 14
appellants contended that a well managed interface for the uplift provision
requires something more than the bare minimum anticipated
by the planning scheme
for a code compliant development. The point was further developed to suggest
that compliance required “a
superior outcome than what is provided by a
code compliant approval”. Williamson DCJ had misgivings as to whether
such a submission
should be accepted because it involved, impermissibly, reading
words into the uplift provision.
uncontroversial that the uplift provision seeks a standard which is achieved by
applying the words of the provision itself.
For example, I accept the
appellants’ submission that “well managed” means something
more than merely acceptably
managed or acceptable and that the uplift provision
is seeking a higher standard than average or usual
management.
[95] Similarly,
an excellent standard of appearance presents a higher standard than some other
standard which, for example, might
seek to mitigate negative visual impacts.
Reinforce represents a stronger standard than a requirement which merely seeks
or retain or not detract from a local sense of identity and
[96] In my view,
the words of the provision don’t call for a demonstration of a better
outcome on all criteria identified in
lower order provisions, but simply that
the proposed development meet the criteria in the provision. The words of the
criteria should
be applied. They call for value laden judgements to be made.
The criteria do not prescribe a process to be followed in making the
judgements such as appears to be suggested by the appellants. The assessment is
to be undertaken having regard to the
facts and circumstances that pertain by
reference to the evidence.
Specific outcome 3.3.2.1(9)(b)
– local identity and sense of place
appellants allege that the proposed development does not satisfy outcome
3.3.2.1(9)(b) of the City Plan: a reinforced local
identity and sense of place.
[98] The phrase
“reinforced local identity and sense of place” is not defined in the
planning scheme, and so is to be
given its plain and ordinary meaning:
S&S No 4 Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Ors
constitutes the relevant local identity and sense of place are questions of fact
to be determined having regard to the circumstances
of the case. The phrase
calls for consideration of both the
identity and sense of place:
Archer v Council of the City of Gold Coast &
[2024] QPELR at [299].
[100] The use of
the word “reinforce” requires the strengthening of local identity
and sense of place. The factors that
go to make up local identity and sense of
place vary according to the facts and circumstances of the case. The factors to
be considered
are not limited to what exists at the time of the assessment. The
size of the local area should not be unduly narrow. The extent
of the local
area considered should be informed by existing circumstances, the adopted
planning controls and extant development approvals
that have been granted but
not yet acted upon:
Heidelberg Business Park Pty Ltd & Ors v Council of
the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2025] QPEC 14
, [106]. Having
regard to these comments, I find the local area to be that depicted in Mr
Buckley’s Ex 37.
[101] One of the
planning concepts that informs the local identity and sense of place of an area
is building height. The desired
future appearance for local areas within urban
neighbourhoods is shown on the Building height overlay map. Building form and
is also relevant:
Archer v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Ors
at [302], [305].
appellants’ case is that the proposed development fails to comply with
Specific outcome 3.3.2.1(9)(b), including for
the following reasons:
(a) The proposed development will exceed the 23m height limit by nearly 11m
(being 48% above the limit) in circumstances where that
degree of exceedance is
atypical along Pacific Parade, is centrally located within the local area or
locality, is located only 9
metres from another development that has already
been approved to exceed the height limit and will be imposing and will dominate
its surrounds.
(b) The proposed development will dominate the most important elements of the
local identity and sense of place and character, being
the coastal edge (the
ocean, the beach, and the dune system) and the Joe Doniger parkland, including
the prominent pine trees.
(c) The proposed development will dominate the drive along Pacific
(d) Other buildings on Pacific Parade alongside the parkland and foreshore
typically do not exceed 8 storeys, and if they exceed
23m in height they do not
exceed the height limit or dominate their surrounds by as much as the proposed
development (approximately
11m), are on larger sites and generally mitigated or
softened through elements of articulation, colouration, setbacks particularly
the upper levels and landscaping.
appellants accept, as agreed by the town planning and visual amenity experts,
that the character of the local area is in
a state of change and is informed by,
amongst other things, recent approvals, including those which exceed the
building height overlay.
It is also agreed that the sense of character is
developing and changing and that is determined by the built form of the area.
[104] However,
the appellants argue that the reasonable expectations of local residents must be
gleaned from the planning scheme and
that the intended character of the locality
is not of ‘regular’ approvals in excess of 8 storeys or 23m. Under
examination on this point, Mr Buckley posited the issue in this way: a
person looking at the planning scheme reasonably wouldn’t
expect there to
be no buildings taking advantage of the 50 per cent
established by Mr Buckley’s review of the existing and approved taller
buildings in the area (Ex 37), the proposed
development will not be the tallest
building in the area, nor the widest, nor most dense.
[106] As pointed
out by the appellants, the proposed development will however be the only high
rise building on Pacific Parade, other
than 2 Pacific Parade. The approved
development at 2 Pacific Parade is at the southern end of the defined local area
edge of the change in height limit from 23m to 29m in the overlay
[107] While not
a high rise as defined, Porta Pacifique (at 134 Pacific Parade and rising to
31m) is an older building on a larger
allotment, surrounded by a tennis court,
pool area, and landscaping. The appellants also point out that developments
which generally
have a larger bulk, scale, and form are located on larger
parcels of land. While it is true that, for example, the Pavilion 1 and
developments and 2 Pacific Parade are on larger parcels of land, it is also true
they are larger buildings.
[108] Three
other high-rise towers have been approved along Golden Four Drive, as outlined
at [46] above. The appellants accept that
the planning scheme draws no
distinction between Pacific Parade and Golden Four Drive in respect of zoning
designation, height limit,
or density. It is argued however that the impact of
these developments on the overall coastal character is dissimilar to the impacts
of the proposed development, by reason of their more distant location from the
parkland and foreshore. From the parkland and foreshore,
and driving along
Pacific Parade, it is argued these buildings do not visually intrude upon the
parkland or foreshore due to their
more distant location and the parallax of
appellants’ essential point is that due to its height, scale, and location
on a narrow allotment, the proposed development
will negatively dominate the
local area particularly from the public realm. Further, by reason of its poor
separation with the adjoining
Golden Four Drive development, the proposed
development will result in a conglomeration or massing of two high rise towers;
will be another unique feature of the locality, and by dint of that will be
out of character. The appellants argue that no other
built form within the
local area dominates its surrounds to the same degree as the proposed
development will with its combined height,
inadequate upper-level side and front
setbacks, high density, and highly visible location; the dominance of the
building will be
out of character with the identity of the local area. As such,
the appellants submit that the proposed development is at odds with
and does not
reinforce the local identity and sense of place.
appellants argue that the proposed development fails to comply with the related
benchmarks identified in Ex 56 at paragraph
2. The development is said to
negatively impact upon the amenity, character, and living conditions both within
the development (due
to rear unit treatments) and for neighbouring properties
and the broader public realm (due to its dominant height, bulk, and form),
thereby failing to align with the planning scheme’s desired outcomes for
promoting well-being and potentially cohesion: this
fails to comply with
Strategic framework SO 3.3.1(3) and (5). In respect of the remaining
benchmarks, the appellants argue that
the proposed development’s prominent
location and design attributes (height, bulk, scale, and minimal setbacks at the
levels) result in a dominant and uncharacteristic building that is not
appropriately cognisant of the desired future character or
the distinct identity
of the Pacific Parade locality and fails to adequately reinforce or reinterpret
its relaxed seaside residential
co-respondent argues that the appellants’ contentions are predicated on
the court ignoring the properties and approvals
located on Golden Four Drive as
an influential part of the local identity and sense of place. This, the
co-respondent submits, is
not the appropriate approach and would result in an
undue narrowing of the local area.
[112] The local
character of an area should be interpreted broadly and not by reference to a
narrow inquiry. Without good reason,
the court should not adopt an overly
restrictive approach or confine consideration to a narrow radius around the
WBQH Developments Pty Ltd v GCCC
at [25]. However, a consideration of a more localised context may be
relevant to ensure characteristics to the immediate locality
are not glossed
over by the use of a broad descriptor applying to a broader study area:
Co Pty Ltd & Ors v City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2022] QPEC 32
[2023] QPELR 1160
[113] I do not
consider there is any logical reason to split the locality between Pacific
Parade and Golden Four Drive, although I
also do not apprehend the
appellants’ argument seeks to do so.
[114] I accept
that by its location on Pacific Parade, the proposed development will have a
more immediate visual connection to the
foreshore than a development which is
further removed from the beach on Golden Four Drive. The fact that the
development is centrally
located on Pacific Parade does not tell against
approval, nor does the fact that it adjoins another uplift development. If the
is found to satisfy the uplift provision (which includes criterion (c)
and requires a well-managed interface with nearby development),
that is a matter
which weighs heavily in support of an approval.
[115] I do not
accept that the height exceedance is “atypical” on Pacific Parade,
where both 134 Pacific Parade (existing)
and the two towers at 2 Pacific Parade
(approved) are of a similar height. The fact that Golden Four Drive has
transitioned to medium
and high-rise buildings quicker than Pacific Parade is
unremarkable. Similar to what was described in
Heidelberg Business Park Pty
Ltd & Ors v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2025] QPEC 14
, it will take time to achieve the planned character for Bilinga. The
transition is happening at a more accelerated rate on the Golden
Four Drive side
of the local area, but the character of the Pacific Parade side of the locality
is not static. The planning scheme
encourages change, which is to be reasonably
expected throughout the locality and not just on land parcels with a frontage to
Four Drive.
[116] In my
view, the photomontages demonstrate that the proposed development will not
overly dominate the coastal environment, the
foreshore, or Pacific Parade in a
visual sense: see Ex 5, pp 20 and 29, where the layering of built form from
Golden Four Drive and
Pacific Parade are both apparent from Pacific Parade and
[117] Consistently
with that view, Mr Mewing describes the reinforcement of the local identity and
sense of place by “urban
consolidation with taller
buildings”.
appellants’ town planning expert, Mr Holt considered that the proposed
development generally complied with this
assisted by the opinions of the architects, Mr Curtis and Mr Richards and the
visual amenity experts, Dr McGowan and Mr
[119] Mr Curtis
considers the proposed development is shown to be consistent with and reinforce
the differences in the appearance,
bulk, and scale between neighbouring
buildings that creates an eclectic mix of old and new development. The proposed
development
responds to the setting and sub-tropical climate with prominent
private outdoor space and fenestration that characterises the building’s
appearance and provides access to views, sunlight, and breezes to support a
lifestyle that is engaged with the setting. The proposed
development has an
overall form that is consistent with recent taller multiple-dwelling building
developments that are characterised
by elongated floor plans that generally
reflect the longitudinal shape of the lots: Architecture Joint Report at
consider, as identified by Mr Curtis in evidence, that the design of the
proposed development has been resolved to address
its site constraints,
including through what he describes as a “rich palette of varied
architectural elements”
articulation and modulation which incorporates:
(a) the tripartite
breakup of the composition of the Pacific Parade frontage;
(b) layering of the front façade by the projecting balconies which erode
the mass of the building;
(c) the setback and crowning of the top part of the building, with the design
of the penthouse area;
(d) the well-established device of distinctive columns and arches at the base
of the building at the Pacific Parade frontage which
animate the appearance of
it and alludes to the coastal location of the
(e) subtly projecting floor plate edges, fenestration and batten screening
which modulate the length of the longer
(f) integrated landscaping to soften the interface with the
Richards considers that the proposed development exhibits a contemporary coastal
and beachside character which he believes
draws its cues from a range of
buildings on the Gold Coast, for example including Burleigh Heads and Main
Beach. These contemporary
design elements include the stacking of similar floor
plates, expressed floor slabs, curved balconies, arched forms, and emphasis
the horizontal line broken up by vertical expressions. Wall elements include
full height glazing and screening to windows: Architecture
Joint Report at
[122] There was
substantial evidence as to the architectural features of the local area. Mr
Powell said that the characteristics
and features which contribute to local
identity and sense of place
(a) The wide range of building forms and heights, including buildings which
exceed the building height overlay and range in height
from 8 to 11 storeys;
(b) The beach and foreshore which influence the street patterns and assist to
define the structure, character, and amenity of the
(c) The beachfront location and north-east orientation of lots which invite
large balconies facing towards the ocean;
(d) The upper level or levels of mid to high rise buildings being physically
recessed via stepping and/or visually recessed via
use of finer grain or
recessive colours/materials.
[123] Dr McGowan
identified a wider range of characteristics including balconies, rectilinear and
stacked floor plates, high quality
materials, extensive glazing, screening,
contrasting colours, material treatments and visually or physically recessed
upper levels.
Dr McGowan noted that the visual or physical recessing of upper
levels was common to a number of existing and approved medium and
[124] Mr Powell
[191] and Dr McGowan [198] essentially consider that the proposed development
reinforces the local identity and sense
of place because:
(a) it achieves scale compatibility with a number of other medium and high-rise
buildings in the area;
(b) it capitalises on and references its coastal setting, through building and
balcony orientation, and contextually appropriate
materials and landscaping;
(c) it incorporates large balconies that capitalise on coastal views and are
climatically responsive; and
(d) the upper levels adopt a combination of physically and visually recessed
architects did not necessarily identify the recessed upper levels of buildings
as significant. Mr Curtis said the design
of the built form responds to the
setting and sub-tropical climate with private outdoor space and fenestration to
access views, sunlight,
Mr Richards said that
while recent buildings showed a coastal contemporary character, there was no
unique or distinctive architectural
character of the locality, and the built
form was not of a consistently high
[126] Figure
NP12 at p 38 of the Visual Amenity Joint Report provides a visual representation
of physical or visual recessing of upper
levels on constructed built forms, a
design feature which assumed prominence in
The Body Corporate for 62
. In that case, as to the existing character of the local area,
Kefford DCJ found at [38]:
“Overall, the existing character of
the local area is that of a coastal, predominantly residential area that is in
to a greater intensity of built form. It contains buildings of
varying height, which adopt a design that is generally characterised
(a) prominent balconies oriented towards the coast;
(b) pronounced modulation in the street-fronting facades in the form of deep
recesses or stepping or both; and
(c) visually recessed or contracted upper floor levels on taller
[127] At [141],
Kefford DCJ considered that these finer grained aspects of the existing built
form significantly contributed to the
local identity and sense of
... The extensive provision of balconies reinforces the
locality’s coastal aspect. The pronounced modulation and recesses in
street-fronting facades and the physical and visual recessing of upper levels
reduce the visual scale and bulk of the taller
buildings. In combination, these
design features ensure that the experience of the area from the public realm
near development of
substantial height, bulk and scale is not overwhelmed or
overborne by the height and scale of the built form.
general proposition it may be accepted that there are a range of architectural
devices which can be used to reduce the
impact of the bulk and scale of taller
buildings, including visually or physically recessed upper levels. Excluding
the proposed
development, the evidence presently before this court does not
permit a detailed analysis as to the use of such devices on other
existing and
approved built forms in the local area.
planning scheme seeks to achieve outcomes such as slender bulk form and
contribution to skyline
protecting amenity or not detracting or unreasonably impacting upon
, without necessarily
prescribing all the architectural devices which may be used to achieve that
outcome. The planning scheme encourages
sub-tropical design outcomes, including
private open space, communal open space, and
co-respondent ultimately submits that, unlike the proposal in
Corporate for 62 Pacific
, the proposed development here will reinforce local
identity and sense of place, in particular because, as identified by Mr Powell,
it reflects the finer-grained building design features identified in
Corporate for 62 Pacific
[131] In the
present appeal, the local identity and sense of place is characterised as a
medium density residential area near the
beach, with a range of building heights
and styles, and taller buildings including elements to reduce the impact of
their bulk and
[132] Assessing
the proposed development for its reinforcement of that identity and sense of
place, I consider that:
(a) The proposed development is, and presents as, a medium density residential
development;
(b) The proposed development maintains a coastal style by reference to
balconies, colours, and textures;
(c) The building maximises views to the ocean, by the significant balconies on
the north-eastern side of the building, corner balconies
at the rear, and
fenestration;
(d) The building uses a range of architectural devices to reduce the impact of
its bulk and scale including the elements identified
by Mr Richards: recesses
and screening on the long facades to break the bulk into four elements, scaled
archways at the front and
rear, generous and visible balconies, landscaping
recesses, curved recesses, narrow profile to the beach, expressed floor slabs
rounded corners to soften the building
[133] The only
expert who contended that the proposed development did not meet this criteria
was the appellants’ visual amenity
and architecture expert, Mr Carter. Mr
Carter’s approach to this criteria was to consider whether the identity
and sense of
place that the proposed development would reinforce was
“desirable” or one that should be
reinforced.
He relied upon the
deleterious amenity impacts of the interface with the Golden Four Drive
development as a reason why he considered
the building was not deserving of the
height uplift and why it did not reinforce the identity and sense of place of
the locality.
Mr Carter’s opinion appeared to be informed by his overall
approach of seeking design excellence. Mr Carter’s opinion
considered, but I do not find it persuasive.
satisfied the proposed development complies with s
3.3.2.1(9)(b).
Specific outcome 3.3.2.1 (9)(c) – a
well-managed interface
appellants allege that the proposed development does not comply with outcome s
3.3.2.1(9)(c) of the City Plan. That outcome
is expressed
“a well managed interface with, relationship to and impact
on nearby development, including the reasonable amenity expectations
residents”.
[136] The term
relationship is broad enough to include a visual
relationship
as well as matters
of privacy, overlooking, and shadowing.
[137] Consideration
of amenity in a town planning context is not in the abstract. It is informed by
the planning controls applying
in the area under consideration and the notion of
reasonableness. Proposed development will often affect existing amenity. What
is unacceptable is a detrimental effect to an unreasonable extent according to
the reasonable expectation of other landholders in
the vicinity given the sorts
of uses permitted under current town planning controls. While the subjective
views of those whose amenity
may be affected by a proposed development are not
to be ignored, in the final analysis the question must be answered according to
the standards of comfort and enjoyment which are to be expected by ordinary
people of plain, sober, and simple notion not effected
by some special
sensitivity or eccentricity. The weight to be accorded to subjective views can
only be judged in the light of all
the evidence about the subject: see
Acland Pastoral Co Pty Ltd v Rosalie Shire
Council & Ors
[2007] QCA 444
[2008] QPELR 324
(citations and footnotes
[138] The use of
the term ‘overbearing’ in an amenity and character context typically
refers to the visual relationship
between built form and a potential receptor.
The receptor can be a person or other built form. An overbearing visual
relationship
is one characterised by excessive visual dominance in light of the
relevant circumstances. The relevant circumstances include the
character of an area, the content of adopted planning controls, and rights
conferred by extant development approvals that,
at the time of the assessment,
have not been acted upon:
Heidelberg Business Park Pty Ltd & Ors v
Council for the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2025] QPEC 14
summary, the appellants contend that the proposed development will not achieve a
well-managed interface with nearby development
(i) the proposed development does not increase its setbacks as the building
increases in height with the result that the proposed
development results in a
flat façade with limited articulation and the building being
overbearing
, particularly with respect to its higher levels;
(ii) the absence of increased side setbacks and increased height unreasonably
affects the views that the residents of 89-91 Golden
Four Drive could expect of
the beach and ocean particularly at upper levels;
(iii) the apartment design for the rear apartments does not offset living rooms
between apartment buildings nor turn the apartments
to the preferred outlooks
away from its rear neighbours thereby creating unacceptable amenity impacts;
(iv) the rear facade of the proposed building is predominantly a habitable
façade meaning it contains windows and/or doors
to habitable rooms (such
as living rooms and some bedrooms) and balconies that compromise amenity due to
visual and privacy issues;
(v) the proposed development fails to incorporate any or any sufficient blank
walls, screens, angled louvres, or non-habitable rooms
(e.g. bathrooms,
laundries) to mitigate visual, amenity, and privacy impacts;
(vi) the increased height combined with the absence of variation in setbacks
will block exposure to prevailing winds for 89-91 Golden
Four Drive, resulting
in adverse ventilation amenity for those residents;
(vii) the increased height combined with the absence of variation in setbacks
will cause adverse impact to the solar access of 89-91
Golden Four Drive and
other surrounding areas.
[140] Mr Carter
identified aspects of the building design which, in his view, cause negative and
unreasonable visual and acoustic
amenity impacts in particular upon 89-91 Golden
Four Drive:
(a) Inadequate rear setbacks;
(b) Poor apartment planning and orientation that results in balconies and some
habitable rooms facing the rear development;
(c) Lack of screening and non-habitable façade; and
(d) Height.
[141] While Mr
Carter’s focus was predominantly on the interface with 89-91 Golden Four
Drive, in the conclusion expressed at
[89] of the Visual Amenity Joint Report,
he opines that the amenity impacts on neighbouring buildings are unreasonable
not meet the expectations of nearby residents.
[142] Similarly,
Mr Holt considers the development does not comply with outcome 9(c): Town
Planning Joint Report at [126].
[143] For Mr
Holt, the significant issue with amenity is a result of the design and placement
of habitable spaces and balconies that
directly overlook adjoining dwellings.
The resultant building bulk and scale is overbearing and impacts amenity in the
form of light,
noise, shadowing, and privacy: Town Planning Joint Report at
[182]. Mr Holt considers that shadowing and visual amenity are the
raised in this appeal. When coupled with other areas of non-compliance such as
site cover and building height, the development
presents large for the subject
site and not appropriate in scale or form to suit the site characteristics and
surrounding development:
Town Planning Joint Report at [183].
indicated at [94] above, I accept the appellants’ submission that
“well managed” means something more than
merely acceptably managed
or acceptable. I also accept that the relevant codes already require a high
standard to ensure a development
appropriately complements adjoining existing
and approved
development.
with the Medium density residential zone code setbacks
[145] The visual
amenity experts
The side setbacks typically comply with the acceptable outcome for setbacks
at MDRZ Code AO1, up to and including level 4 (with the
exception of some
structures at ground level). Dr McGowan notes that level 5 substantially
satisfies the acceptable outcome having
a predominant setback of 4 metres to
both sides: see Figure 5, enlarged in Ex 10.
Front setbacks
The front setbacks typically comply with acceptable outcome for setbacks at
MDRZ Code AO1 up to an including level 6 (with the exception
of some structures
at ground level), with the balconies at levels 7 and 8 intruding into the AO
setback by 1.5 meters: see Figure
6, enlarged in Ex 10. The intrusion is
visually represented in Figure NP1 of the Joint Report at p 23, enlarged in Ex
Rear setbacks
The rear setbacks typically comply with the acceptable outcome for setbacks
at MDRZ Code AO1, except for a 0.5 metre projection into
that setback by the
level 8 balcony: Figure 6, enlarged in exhibit 10. The intrusion is visually
represented in Figure NP3 of the
Joint Report at p 25, enlarged in Ex 10.
[146] As shown
in Figure NP1 (Ex 10), up to and including level 6 of the proposed development,
the rear setbacks perform better than
required by MDRZ Code AO1. A comparison
of the incursions of the proposed development and the Golden Four Drive
development is visually
depicted in Figure NP3 (Ex 10). The proposed
development displays increased stepping at upper levels, although there is an
at level 8.
[147] From a
town planning perspective, Mr Mewing’s view is that the development
presents a well-managed interface and relationship
to nearby sites and
development and is in keeping with the reasonable amenity expectations for the
Medium density residential zone.
This view is formed having regard to the
development’s scale, built form (including setbacks to the boundaries) and
the interface/design
in the context of other developments within the
neighbourhood and the provisions of the planning scheme: Town Planning Joint
greatly assisted by Figures 34 and 35 prepared by architect Mr Richards in the
Architecture Joint Report at pp 36 and 37.
These identify the key design
elements that in his view contribute to a well-managed interface. These
elements include:
(a) a clearly defined pedestrian entry from
Pacific Parade;
(b) arched recessed balconies over three floors provides a strong street
presence with a human scale and are supported by a generous
(c) vehicle entry is set back from the street under the building with a
treatment as an urban plaza instead of a driveway;
(d) landscaping elements on the upper levels provide a distinctive crown;
(e) vertical blades of the side facades contribute to privacy, sun screening,
and add finesse to the façade;
(f) planting at ground level and level 1 provides a green setting and buffer to
neighbours on lower levels;
(g) eastern balconies are generous and visible at all residential levels; and
(h) living spaces are set back from the rear boundary; the balcony is setback
5m, with 9.3 m to the living room wall on the lower
levels and 8.9m to the
living room wall on the upper levels.
Richards identifies various architectural devices which, in his view, contribute
to a well-managed interface:
(a) Along the side façades, there are expressed floor slabs reducing the
potential monolithic scale of the building. Vertical
solid panels at regular
intervals as well as vertical sun screening provide sun shading and also reduce
direct overlooking and improve
(b) The living spaces are set back from the rear boundary and on lower levels
are beneficially positioned on the corners. Views
are in a number of directions
to the side and rear including along the rear boundary, and due to the extension
of the balconies afford
glimpsed views to the beach and ocean: [95].
(c) The bottom half of the building mass is broken up into three parts by scaled
archways on the eastern and western facades. These
accentuate the recessed
living areas and balcony ends and lessen the visual impact on neighbours. The
heavier based to the lower
half helps to ground the building and its contrasting
structure creates a lightness to the expressed upper balconies. This interface
with the street and rear neighbour creates a greater sense of privacy with the
lower balconies feeling recessed behind larger building
elements. Recesses, a
variety of materials and screening on the longer northern and southern facades
break up the length: [96].
(d) On upper levels, the balconies extend along the entire façade past
the bedrooms thus reducing the direct overlooking to
and from the bedroom
windows. The main balcony space is embedded in the plan so is therefore quite
private with less views to the
main activity spaces: [97].
Overlooking and overbearing
[150] I am also
greatly assisted by the visual amenity experts, Mr Powell and Dr McGowan who
gave detailed consideration to the issues
of overlooking, overbearing,
overshadowing, and outlooks or views.
[151] Mr Powell
and Dr McGowan consider that the prospect of unreasonable overlooking is
mitigated by the combination of a narrow
south-west elevation, and relatively
generous rear setbacks which comply with AO1 of the MDRZ Code, except for a 0.5m
by the level 8 balcony: Visual Amenity Joint Report at [97] and
[152] Mr Powell
and Dr McGowan take further guidance on appropriate setbacks from AO13 of the
HRAD Code, whereby all habitable room
windows comply with AO13(b) and (c) and
comfortably exceed the 10m metric of AO13(b). However, due to the absence of a
metric at AO13(a), both experts agree that the proposed rear facing
windows will result in some degree of overlooking of neighbouring
balconies, so
do not currently comply with AO13(a). While Mr Powell has provided a solution
to satisfy AO13(a) by glazing or privacy
screens [NP2], both Mr Powell and Dr
McGowan are of the opinion that the prospect of unreasonable overlooking is
already mitigated:
Visual Amenity Joint Report at [98] – [100],
[153] Mr Powell
and Dr McGowan consider that the prospect of unreasonable overbearing on the
Golden Four Drive development is adequately
mitigated by the combination of a
narrow south-west elevation, and relatively generous setbacks which
predominantly comply with the
setbacks at MDRZ Code AO1, stepping back at the
upper parts of the building: [102], [119].
[154] Regarding
the neighbouring developments to the north and south, I am assisted by Dr
McGowan’s evidence that the impacts
of overlooking are adequately
mitigated as a result of the factors expressed at [117] of the Visual Amenity
Joint Report, including:
(a) AO1 compliant setbacks for levels 1-5, with a minor intrusion at level 5,
such that any overlooking from these levels would be
consistent with reasonable
expectations;
(b) Extensive screening for most of the windows on the northern and southern
facades up to level 7, which would limit any potential
for overlooking;
(c) A separation of 10.5 metres with the neighbouring 7 storey building.
[155] For the
neighbouring developments to the north and south, Dr McGowan considers that
while the upper levels of the building will
cause some sense of overbearing for
parts of the neighbouring properties, because of the acute angle at which these
upper levels
are seen, the extent of the overbearing will not be substantially
greater than would be caused by a building to a height of 23 metres.
also considers the lower levels Ground to Level 5 achieve or surpass the
acceptable outcomes for the side boundary setbacks
and this assists with
offsetting any sense of overbearing caused by the upper levels of the proposed
development: [120].
[156] Mr Carter
placed reliance on the NSW Apartment Design Guide, although that document is not
called up by the planning scheme.
I accept, as submitted by the respondent,
that what is reasonably expected in the zone and locality is (significantly)
by the planning intentions for the area, which the Apartment Design
Guide does not account for.
[157] I also
accept, as submitted by the respondent, that Mr Carter appeared to seek the
elimination of amenity impacts and on improving
the building, rather than
focusing on whether the building meets the assessment criteria in the planning
scheme. When asked directly
in re-examination, Mr Carter was somewhat unclear
marks in the City Plan.
noted though that Mr Carter did refer to relevant aspects of the City Plan in
the joint reports and expressed in oral evidence
that the proposed development
fails the test in the City Plan.
Mr Carter’s opinions have been considered as part of the evaluative
process required by the Act, but ultimately his opinions
on this criterion were
not persuasive.
High Rise Accommodation Design Code
[158] As the
proposed development exceeds 32 metres above ground level, it is a ‘high
rise building’, as defined in the
By that exceedance, the
High rise accommodation design code (HRAD Code) is engaged. The benchmarks most
relevant to the reasonable
amenity expectations of the Golden Four Drive
development and neighbouring properties comprise HRAD Code PO4 and PO5.
[159] I accept,
as submitted by the appellants, that HRAD Code PO5 is a highly relevant planning
control, it being a benchmark that
relates to the physical interrelationship
between two high rise towers.
[160] Performance
outcome PO5 requires the tower form to mitigate negative visual impacts,
including impacts upon privacy, by setting
back from streets, parks, open space
and adjacent properties and tower forms. Overall outcomes 2(a) and (2)(c) seek
to protect the
mitigate negative visual and physical impacts through appropriate
setbacks and
relevant corresponding acceptable outcomes are:
(a) AO5.2 which requires new towers to be separated a minimum distance of 25
metres from any existing or approved adjacent and on-site
(b) AO5.3 which requires the tower form to be off-set with adjacent existing and
proposed towers to ensure (a) prominent tower views
to natural features like the
beach and rivers are not obstructed and (b) views of the sky and access to
sunlight from the public
realm and private open space areas are maximised.
proposed development substantially exceeds the quantitative requirement in
AO5.2. It is not off-set from the proposed Golden
Four Drive tower as required
Page Main Beach v Gold Coast City Council
[2011] QPELR 406
, Rackemann DCJ
observed at [36]:
“A proposed building which exceeds the
acceptable solution as substantially as this one does would ordinarily attract
closer scrutiny than one which exceeded the designation to only a minor
extent, but ultimately the test is not whether the proposal
approximates the
acceptable solution, but rather whether it meets the performance
criterion.” (footnotes omitted)
[164] Consistently
with Mr Buckley’s evidence, I consider that the proposed development meets
Where a development
achieves the corresponding performance or overall outcome, a separation of 25m
is not required, given it is
merely an acceptable outcome.
[165] As to the
tower form design, compliance with PO4 can be demonstrated by compliance with
AO4.1 and AO4.2. The proposed development
is compliant with AO4.1, which
requires a tower floor plate to be limited to 750 square metres per tower,
excluding balconies. AO4.2
requires the tower form to provide a unique profile
when compared to nearby existing and proposed towers of similar height.
[166] In my
view, the photomontages show the tower form to possess a unique profile when
compared to in particular 89-91 Golden Four
Drive, the nearby proposed tower of
similar height.
My view accords
with that of Mr Richards.
unique profile is achieved by the combination of design features identified at
[187] to [190] and [199] to [201], [204] below.
Outlooks and
considering the impacts of the proposed development on outlook and views from
the appellants’ building, Mr Powell identified
that views of the ocean
from below the height overlay of 23m are less likely to be obtained into the
future as the area is developed.
Mr Powell considered that even from these
levels which are situated below the height overlay, elongated views of, or
towards, the
ocean from the balconies of 89-91 are invited, due to the proposed
development adopting better than acceptable outcome setbacks,
development interface in the north comprising a driveway, and due to the stepped
configuration of side balconies at 89-91:
[104] Visual Amenity Joint Report and
Figures NP4 and NP5 at p 26.
[168] On the
levels above the height overlay (being levels 7, 8 and 9) of the proposed
development, Mr Powell considers the prospect
of unreasonable impacts on
outlooks or views is again adequately mitigated by a combination of the
relatively generous rear setbacks
and of a narrow south-west elevation, notably
tapering towards the top, with the uppermost level shifting alignment to benefit
neighbouring
upper level balconies. Impacts are further mitigated by the
neighbouring building having an internal arrangement which focusses
from the northern most unit at an angle to the rear boundary as demonstrated in
Figure NP9: [105] to [107] & p 29.
As can be seen in Figures NP6 and NP7 at
pp 27 and 28, there is a slight reduction in open views on levels 7 and 8
compared to the
AO setback, with the proposed development providing a semi-open
view across the balcony corner.
Richards notes that the proposed development maintains a view corridor through
to the beach from the Golden Four Drive development.
This view would also be
maintained if a similar scale development on the neighbouring lot were proposed
at 88 Pacific Parade, as
opposed to a single development at the same scale as
the 89-91 Golden Four Drive development: Architecture Joint Report at [102].
Those maintained view lines between buildings are helpfully depicted by Mr
Richards in Figure 388 at p 41.
planning controls do not provide absolute protection for loss of views from
private development. Rather, they seek to protect
the amenity of neighbouring
residents. PO4 of the HRAD Code seeks to promote “view corridors between
nearby towers”.
In my view, that is achieved by the proposed development,
having regard to Mr Richards’ diagrammatic
Overshadowing and access to sunlight
[171] The issue
of access to sunlight and overshadowing were the subject of evidence from Mr
King (regarding light amenity) and Mr
Powell (regarding overshadowing). Mr
Peddie also expressed views about shadowing and solar access, as did Mr Carter.
[172] Mr King
opined that the proposed development would provide adequate access to natural
lighting and direct sunlight.
He also identified that even when shadows are cast over an adjacent building,
there remains access to natural light as reflected
light, rather than direct
In terms of the
impact on the Golden Four Drive development, Mr King accepted there would be
shadowing caused by the proposed development,
which would change throughout the
course of the day and throughout the season and time of year. In his opinion,
at all times adequate
light will be available to the apartments in both
developments. At certain times, direct sunlight will be available and at other
times reflected light. Mr King considered appropriate amenity will be achieved
for both developments with respect to
[173] Mr Powell
understands that the season with the greatest potential to impact daylight
access is winter, with the greatest potential
impact to surrounding properties
being during the mid-winter morning (9 am to 12
For context, Mr Powell
notes that the mid-winter afternoon shadows (3pm), including those of 23m high
buildings, are expected to
extend a substantial distance into the rear of
properties to the south. With respect to the mid-winter morning shadows, the
of unreasonable overshadowing impacts is largely mitigated by the
narrow south-west elevation, which promotes a fast-moving shadow
that will move
quickly across and down the face of the neighbouring building at the rear.
Figures NP10 and NP11 demonstrate that
the shadow is fast moving, likely
impacting the northernmost corner balcony of the rear neighbour just before 9
am, but starting
to move off that balcony, and the north-west face of that
building, before 12 noon mid-winter: Visual Amenity Joint Report at [108]
[111], pp 29 – 30.
addition, Mr Powell analysed the level of shadowing in mid-winter that would
result from the proposed development as compared
to a code assessable
development.
The impacts are
visually depicted in Figures 1 and 2 in his separate report. Mr Powell
ultimately opined that, with regard to the
additional height above the 23m
overlay, the impacts arising from the proposed development are limited in extent
and duration.
In his analysis,
Mr Powell had regard to the actual impacts on the ground, including the likely
use of those areas where additional
shadow would impact, including a shared
driveway, shade trees, and the roofs of 80 and 88 Pacific
I prefer the evidence
of Mr Powell over that of Mr Peddie, who did not undertake such an analysis,
although he did undertake a sun’s
comparison.
Natural ventilation
[175] The wind
engineers gave evidence regarding natural ventilation. In Dr Cochrane’s
opinion, the proposed development would
either maintain or potentially improve
ventilation for the rear corner units of the Golden Four Drive development once
it was built.
His views were not shaken in cross-examination, and he was able
to express conclusive views without a full wind tunnel model being
[176] Mr Peddie
expressed a contrary conclusion with reference to the diagram in Ex 49. He
maintained that conclusion under cross
examination,
although in his
separate report also maintained that wind modelling was required to determine
the impacts.
With reference to
Ex 41, Dr Cochrane explained the fluid dynamics which would lead to comparable
or possibly even improved flow,
but which would not result in any negative
[177] Having
regard to Dr Cochrane’s extensive experience, I accept his evidence that a
wind tunnel assessment for a building
of this height and geometry is not
Ultimately, in
keeping with Dr Cochrane’s opinion, I find that the proposed development
will not result in adverse wind and
ventilation impacts to the Golden Four Drive
development.
satisfied the proposed development complies with s
3.3.2.1(9)(c).
Specific outcome 3.3.2.1 (9)(d) – a varied,
ordered and interesting local skyline
appellants allege that the proposed development does not comply with outcome
3.3.2.1(9)(d) of the City Plan: a varied, ordered
and interesting local
[180] The local
skyline is influenced by more than one building. The criterion therefore calls
for an assessment of the effect of
the proposal in the context of other
development. The provision requires both variety and order, in addition to an
interest. In
those circumstances order cannot mean uniformity. Order is to be
assessed by reference to whether there would be a harmonious arrangement:
Dajen Investments Pty Ltd & Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2023] QPEC 32
per Rackemann DCJ at [64].
achievement of a varied, ordered, and interesting local skyline is a matter that
calls for a value judgement. It is a matter
The Body Corporate for 62 Pacific
appellants allege that the proposed development does not comply
(i) the degree of height exceedance is atypical along Pacific Parade resulting
in a building which will dominate the skyline along
Pacific Parade;
(ii) the proposed development lacks differentiation at the top level; and
(iii) the proposed building does not offer a clear distinction of built form
when viewed from various positions including along Pacific
Parade, the parkland
and foreshore and from neighbouring residences.
[183] Mr Holt
considers that the proposed development does not comply with this outcome: Town
Planning Joint Report at [126]. Mr
Holt conceded under cross examination that
the three-dimensional form of the building was acceptable, such that it followed
(d) of the uplift
[184] The visual
amenity experts agree that the proposed development possesses some qualities of
character and form that advance certain
aspects of a varied, ordered, and
interesting skyline. They otherwise disagreed as to whether the proposed
development, in a visual
amenity sense, provides a contribution to the skyline
that is appropriate or inappropriate: Visual Amenity Joint Report at [133]
[185] Mr Carter
considered that the proposed development has some good qualities, however the
impacts of the design imposed upon neighbouring
buildings are too great for it
to be considered acceptable from a visual amenity point of view. Mr Carter
considered that the proposed
development could satisfy this criterion if it
removed the deleterious impacts as a result of the features which were
by him to result in a poorly managed interface: Visual Amenity Joint
Report at [135] to [140].
[186] As Mr
Carter’s view was largely premised on the negative amenity impacts, his
opinion does not materially assist the court
in evaluating compliance with
specific outcome 9(d).
[187] Mr Powell
and Dr McGowan considered that the proposed development:
(a) maintains an order to the skyline by fitting within the range of expected
and existing heights in the area; and
(b) by incorporating a recessed upper level, achieves an interesting and varied
skyline profile.
[188] At [148],
Dr McGowan adds that the proposed development achieves this criterion, amongst
other features, by:
(a) Incorporating balconies to the front and rear facades which give the
building visual interest when seen from all directions;
(b) Utilising material treatments, such as curved building corners, balconies
creating feathered building edges, expressed slabs,
containerised landscaping,
and vertical screening which create visual interest, variation, and order.
[189] In my
view, the renders, elevations, and photomontages show the proposed development
to possess a variation of building form
and materials which, in combination with
landscaping on the upper levels, achieves a varied, ordered, and interesting
local skyline.
[190] AO8 of the
HRAD Code requires a signature cap strengthening the building’s identity
as a landmark. As observed by Mr
Curtis, the scheme postulates that as a
potential acceptable outcome in the absence of some more considered approached
by a quality
architect. In Mr Curtis’ opinion, a better approach would be
to cap the building with an integrated form, as the proposed
development does. I
agree with Mr Curtis’ opinion that the roof of the proposed development is
a tower cap, which adds
satisfied the proposed development complies with s
3.3.2.1(9)(d).
Specific outcome 3.3.2.1 (9)(e) – an
excellent standard of appearance
appellants allege that the proposed development does not comply with outcome
3.3.2.1(9)(e) of the City Plan: an excellent
standard of appearance of the built
form and street edge.
[193] Something
is excellent if it has superior merit or is remarkably good. An excellent
standard can be said to be one that is especially
high. That is not to say that
perfection is required. The assessment of whether a proposed development
achieves an excellent standard
obviously involves matters of evaluative
judgement upon which reasonable minds may differ:
McLucas & Ors v Council
of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
[2024] QPELR 283
requirement for excellence should be seen in the context of what other
provisions require in any event, as listed in paragraph
Appellants’ Amended Benchmark
summary, the appellants submit the proposed development will not achieve an
excellent standard of appearance of built form
and street edge as:
(i) It has a height and scale that is excessive for its location and will
dominate Pacific Parade and the public realm.
(ii) The deficient rear facade, insufficient setbacks, and street-level
interface, all exacerbated by its excessive height, means
it has less than an
excellent standard of appearance of built form and the street edge.
(iii) The front door and lobby area are not sufficiently visible or inviting and
are cluttered by services and too far removed from
the street edge.
(iv) The front façade is dominated by non-habitable uses, such as fire
stairs, services, and basement car park entry/exit
ramps that are inadequately
screened or landscaped.
(v) The rear façade, involving poor apartment planning and amenity
impacts, means that the proposed development cannot be
considered an "excellent
standard of appearance of built form" despite any potentially pleasing external
appearance from other angles.
[196] In Mr
Carter’s opinion, an excellent standard of apartment building appearance
can only be achieved if all other aspects
of the design are also excellent:
Architecture Joint Report at [214]. Mr Carter’s assessment of this
criterion appears to
have been heavily informed by his overarching amenity
concerns. As the building did not properly manage the amenity impacts, he
opined it was not of an excellent
appearance.
[197] Mr Holt
considers the proposed development does not comply with this outcome: Town
Planning Joint Report at [126].
[198] I accept
Mr Richards’ opinion that excellence in design is an expression of how the
design integrates and resolves a range
of ideas that combine to inform the
architectural expression. Each idea in itself may be straight forward or
unremarkable but can
achieve excellence in combination with other design ideas.
The combination of these attributes demonstrates a thoughtful, elegant
that achieves excellence in architectural expression and streetscape
relationships: Architecture Joint Report at [203].
Richards considers the proposed development has a consistent architectural
language of curved forms which overall softens
the built form within its
setting. At [205] to [211] of the joint report and visually depicted at Figures
54 and 55, Mr Richards
identifies the various design elements that combine to
produce a building of excellent appearance.
[200] The street
façade has a strong vertical proportion, with expressed columns and
arched openings in the lower storeys that
frame the lower balconies and break up
the mass of the front and rear facades. The slender profile presenting to the
street minimises
the visual impact of the building when viewed from the beach.
Generous visible balconies capture views to the street and beach.
façade comprises of full width cantilevered balconies creating a light
feathered end to the most visible facade:
[205], [212].
[201] Curved
recesses break up the longer façade, which allows the building to read as
four connected vertical elements. This
verticality is enhanced by the full
height solid windows, window walls, and vertical screening, creating vertical
striping through
the façade as a counterpoint to the section of
horizontal expressed floor slabs. The vertical sunscreens provide shading
additional privacy to bedrooms and living areas along the side boundaries.
Landscaping recesses and additional curved recesses
break up the length of the
façade: [206], [212].
[202] The floors
slabs are expressed at various intervals by extending beyond the façade.
This achieves a convincing human
scale to the façade and, with the
balconies and windows, demonstrates the way that people can occupy this
building: [207].
[203] At ground
level, the building is grounded by a solid base that has the appearance of being
sculpted from the mass of the archways
above. The building’s primary
entrance is from Pacific Parade, with the pedestrian entrance flanked by curved
forms and planting.
The driveway is setback from the front boundary and
separated from the pedestrian entrance by low level landscaping: [208].
[204] The curved
forms in the plan soften the building edges and contribute to a dynamic skyline:
see Figure 55 – note 4 at
[205] Mr Curtis
agrees with Mr Richards. He adds that the vertical forms are accentuated by
variations and combinations of materials
and colour. The vertical forms assist
to balance the proportions of each façade’s length with the
height and contributes to the visual fragmentation of the
building’s overall bulk: Architecture Joint Report [178].
Curtis’ detailed analysis of the features which result in an excellent
appearance of built form appear at [177] to
[184] of the Joint Report.
Mr Curtis also helpfully provides a detailed analysis of the landscaping
elements at [185] to [195]. Based on those observations,
Mr Curtis concludes
the proposed development:
(a) will not be unacceptable with respect to its visual bulk and site cover;
(b) will not be unacceptably visually dominant; and
(c) will have an excellent standard of appearance of the built form: [196].
satisfied the photomontages and visual representations, read with the
architectural and landscape plans, demonstrate that
the proposed development
achieves an excellent standard of appearance of the built
Street edge
[208] The visual
amenity experts agree that the front and side facades, as they are documented,
display reasonable composition that
is consistent with the character of the
local area and that these facades would be visually pleasing and would
contribute positively
to the appearance of the street edge: Visual Amenity Joint
Report at [152]. The point of contention is whether the standard of appearance
of the street edge is merely good, as opined by Mr Carter, or excellent, as
opined by Mr Powell and Dr
[209] In my
view, the perspective renders and diagrams produced by Mr
show that the street
façade is well landscaped and visually pleasing. I agree with Dr
McGowan’s opinion
proposed development achieves an excellent standard of appearance of the street
edge due to deep and containerised planting,
as well as by:
(a) providing a well-defined and engaging street interface for the height of the
building, with generous balconies directed towards
the street;
(b) modulating Levels 1 – 3 with unique and distinctive arched colonnades
that partition and distinguish these lower levels,
giving them a more
comfortable human scale;
(c) utilising high quality and contextually appropriate materials, including
timber palings, tone, tiles, and rendered masonry at
the lower levels; and
(d) effectively disguising the plant and refuse stores, which are common
features of multiple dwellings and which can, if not appropriately
detract from the streetscape.
satisfied the proposed development complies with s
3.3.2.1(9)(e).
Specific outcome 3.3.2.1 (9)(f) – housing
choice and affordability
appellants allege non-compliance with outcome 3.3.2.1 (9)(f): housing choice and
affordability.
appellants argue that the proposed development will not provide housing choice
and affordability as:
(i) the proposed housing will not be affordable housing or affordable to any of
the relevant target groups (low and moderate-income
households, and very
low-income working people who are not eligible for social housing) or make any
contribution to housing affordability
for either rental or purchase;
(ii) the most pressing need in the locality is for an increase in studio and
one-bedroom apartments;
(iii) the proposed development will not provide either housing choice or
diversity nor a generous mix to meet current and future
local housing need.
appellants contend that the proposed development will have a negligible impact
on housing choice and mix of housing form
in the local area. While the
development provides for a mixture of 2 and 3-bedroom apartments, it does not
provide studio or 1-bedroom
apartments. The provision of 2 and 3-bedroom
apartments is said to meet a demand from one market segment which already enjoys
choice in the local housing market, with 2 and 3-bedroom apartments
accounting for more than 84% of apartments in the local area:
see Chart 4 and
Table 7 in the Economic Joint Expert Report at pp 44 to 45.
proposed development will provide 20 units, which represents a tiny fraction of
the total stock in the local area, with
the incremental increase of 4 to 6 units
above 23 metres representing an even smaller fraction. The appellants contend
that by only
providing 2 and 3-bedroom units and failing to provide 1-bedroom or
studio apartments, the proposed development fails to provide
for housing choice.
This failure is to be considered in the context that, by grant of uplift, the
development will yield only an
additional two levels of very expensive
apartments.
[215] It is
uncontroversial that the proposed development will not provide affordable
housing for low to moderate income earners;
it is a luxury development product
catering to a more affluent segment of the
[216] The term
housing choice and affordability
” is not defined in the City
Plan. The term “
affordable housing
” is defined and
Housing that is appropriate to the needs of households with
low to moderate incomes, if the members of the households will spend no
than 30 per cent of gross income on housing costs: City Plan Extracts at p
[217] The term
affordable housing
” does not appear in the uplift provision,
although it is used elsewhere in the City Plan, for example:
(a) 3.3 Creating liveable places – Strategic outcomes 3.3.1(4) refers to
affordable housing
while 3.3.1(5) refers to
housing choice and
affordability
: City Plan extracts at p 26.
(b) 3.3.2 Element – Urban neighbourhoods – Specific outcomes
3.3.2.1(21) refers to
affordable housing
, while the uplift provision in
3.3.2.1(9) refers to
choice and affordability
: City Plan
extracts at pp 32 and 29.
(c) 3.3.3 Element – Suburban neighbourhoods – Specific outcomes
3.3.3.1(4) refers to
affordable housing
: City Plan extracts at p 33.
Planning and Environment Court has considered the construction of this provision
in previous decisions. In
at [389] to [415], having regard to the
prior cases of
Bell Co Pty Ltd
, the court construed
the corresponding provision in the City Plan (version
. In summary, it was
(a) The absence of a qualifying verb is problematic and appears to deny (9)(f)
the status of an outcome that is capable of satisfaction
by a development,
consistently with the observation in
Bell Co Pty Ltd
. Nevertheless, the
provision is to be given some meaning.
(b) Planning for housing choice and affordability is linked to the planned
settlement pattern, being one that concentrates development
in well-serviced
urban places. This informs affordability.
(c) Planning for compact urban neighbourhoods that have a public transport hub,
community facility, park or mixed use centre, specialist
centre or neighbourhood
centre as their focal points helps reduce the transport costs associated with
where people live.
(d) In the City Plan, affordable housing, which is separately defined in the
planning scheme, is a different planning concept than
housing choice and
affordability.
(e) Housing choice and affordability is achieved by ensuring the height and
building form is consistent with the planned settlement
pattern, not height
(f) In terms of building form, the parameters that guide the planned density in
an area are likely to assist where the delivery
of less density than planned may
be unlikely to support housing choice and affordability.
(g) In the City Plan, whether development supports housing choice and
affordability is not determined by considering matters such
as the average
income of Australians (or that of the needs of low to moderate income
households) and the likely price point of a
proposed development.
The appellants’ submissions on the interpretation of s
3.3.2.1(9)(f)
[219] In the
present appeal, the appellants press for a different interpretation of s 3.3.2.1
(9)(f), such that compliance requires
the provision of at least a component of
affordable housing as that term is defined in the City Plan.
[220] While I am
not bound to adopt the construction in
, any departure from an
earlier decision as to the interpretation of a provision is to be approached
cautiously. For the appellants
to succeed, they must demonstrate that the
construction in
While the City Plan
(version 7) was applicable in
, the relevant provisions mirror
those in the City Plan (version 10).
appellants rely upon a number of policy and legislative documents which were not
before the court in
. It is also submitted that evidence was not
led in the earlier cases of the current customary usage of the term
“housing affordability”.
appellants contend that the word “affordability” in “housing
choice and affordability” quite clearly
should be qualified by the word
“housing”, such as to read “housing affordability”. The
term housing affordability
is not defined in either the Act, the
Regulation 2017
or the planning scheme definitions.
[223] Applying
the usual principles of statutory construction, the appellants submit that the
term housing affordability in both the
purposes of the Act and in the City Plan
should have the same meaning as can be derived from the outcomes expressed in
Planning Policy and Regional Plan. The purpose of the
Planning Act
is set out in
Pursuant to
(2)(f), advancing the purpose of
the Act includes providing for housing choice, diversity and affordability.
[224] Further,
leaving that aside, the choice in the City Plan to use language of such
generality means the court, in the absence
of a contrary intention, should
construe the provision to have a contemporary meaning which may vary over time.
The court should
adopt an ambulatory approach, embracing changes that occur in
the subject matter.
necessary inquiry then is of the current ordinary or customary meaning of
affordability”.
appellants submit that Ex 32 to Ex 36 show that the current meaning and
customary usage of the term “housing affordability”
is of providing
affordable housing or, at least, of comprising as a measure the relationship of
a person or household’s gross
income compared to their housing purchase or
rental cost. The relevant exhibits summarised are as follows:
(a) Exhibit 32:
Housing Availability and Affordability (Planning and Other
Legislation Amendment) Act 2024
(Qld), which inserts s 65A into the
Planning Act
(b) Exhibit 33:
Planning Regulation 2017
for affordable housing component – Act, s 65A.
(c) Exhibit 34: Australian Bureau of Statistics – Housing Occupancy and
(d) Exhibit 35: Australian Bureau of Statistics – Survey of Income and
Housing, User Guide, Australia.
(e) Exhibit 36: Gold Coast Homelessness Action Plan 2024.
addition, the appellants point out that the term “housing
affordability” has been used in other legislation,
both before and after
the promulgation of the City Plan and the purpose in the Act, in the context of
providing affordable housing.
The appellants contend that it should be presumed
that parliament has used those terms consistently unless the contrary appears.
For example, the
Building Boost Grant Act 2011
(Ex 31), is an Act to
assist “housing affordability”, amongst other things.
[227] The better
construction is said to be that criterion (9)(f) exists as an incentive to
encourage particular developments to provide
affordable housing options within
the project or to directly contribute in some other way to affordable housing,
as provided for
in the State Planning Policy. Such a construction provides the
developer with the opportunity to gain and profit from extra development
at the cost of providing some affordable housing, either by including 1 or 2
studio or 1-bedroom affordable units or by entering
into an arrangement whereby
that can be practically delivered through a trust or housing supply body.
appellants’ argument requires me to construe s (9)(f) as reading
“Housing choice and
housing affordability
” and then to find
“housing affordability”
has the same meaning and is
interchangeable with the meaning of “
affordable housing
defined in the City Plan. In that way, the provision assumes a narrower meaning
than the broader interpretation adopted
Statutory construction
[229] The same
principles which apply to statutory construction apply to the construction of
planning documents. The modern approach
to statutory interpretation insists that
the context be considered in the first instance, and context is to be used in
Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council
[2021] QCA 95
[2022] QPELR 309
at 311, applying
Zappala Family Co Pty Ltd
v Brisbane City Council
[2014] QCA 147
[2014] QPELR 686.
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
to [70], McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and
Hayne JJ stated:
“The primary object of statutory construction
is to construe the relevant provision so that it is consistent with the language
and purpose of all the provisions of the statute. The meaning of the provision
must be determined "by reference to the language
of the instrument viewed as a
Commissioner for Railways (NSW) v Agalianos
, Dixon CJ pointed
out that "the context, the general purpose and policy of a provision and its
consistency and fairness are surer
guides to its meaning than the logic with
which it is constructed". Thus, the process of construction must always begin
by examining
the context of the provision that is being construed.
A legislative instrument must be construed on the prima facie basis that its
provisions are intended to give effect to harmonious
goals. Where conflict
appears to arise from the language of particular provisions, the conflict must
be alleviated, so far as possible,
by adjusting the meaning of the competing
provisions to achieve the result which will best give effect to the purpose and
of those provisions while maintaining the unity of all the statutory
provisions.” ... (Footnotes omitted)
[231] The word
“affordability” is not defined in either the Act
Regulation 2017
or the planning scheme definitions. As such, pursuant to s
1.2.1(1) of the City Plan, and consistently with
at [398], the
word is to be given its ordinary meaning.
[232] Pursuant
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
, ordinary meaning means
the ordinary meaning conveyed by a provision having regard to its context in the
Act and to the purpose of
[233] Pursuant
to s 14B(1), consideration may be given to extrinsic material capable of
assisting in the interpretation of a provision
in the circumstances specified in
(a) to (c). The list of materials to which regard might be had is not expressed
to be exclusive:
s 14B(3). It is thus open to a court to seek guidance from
whatever might seem to it to be the appropriate source: see
Interpretation in Australia, 10
non-exhaustive list of material referred to in s 14B(3) includes only material
that was in existence when the provision
in question was enacted. However,
material not in existence at the date of enactment may be admitted at common
tate Planning Policy, Regional
Plan and the Act
[235] Pursuant
to s 8(4) of the Act, to the extent of any inconsistency, a State planning
policy or regional plan applies over the
Point Residents Association Inc v Brisbane City Council & Anor
[2014] QPEC 64
[236] The term
“housing choice and affordability” appears, unqualified, as the
title in Part 8.5 of the South East Queensland
Regional Plan 2009 – 2031
(Regional Plan): Ex 29 at p 95. The stated principle is to provide a variety of
housing options
to meet diverse community needs, and achieve housing choice and
affordability.
[237] At 8.5.2,
a stated policy is to provide housing choice through a range and mix of dwelling
developments. At 8.5.4, another stated
policy is to encourage all major development to incorporate affordable housing,
appropriate housing for the entry buyer and low-income housing
markets. The notes state, amongst other things, that providing diverse
affordable housing options is an important issue and key challenge both
nationally and in SEQ. The notes also state that household
change is creating
demand for more housing options, including more affordable housing.
[238] Under the
State Planning Policy 2017, one of the state interest policies under Part E is
planning for liveable communities and
housing, which encompasses housing supply
and diversity and liveable communities: Ex 30 at p 1 and pp 22 – 26. One
amongst others, that must be appropriately integrated into planning and
development outcomes is expressed as: the development of
residential land is
facilitated to address and cater for all groups in the current and projected
demographic, economic and social
profile of the local government area, including
households on low to moderate incomes: Ex 30 at p 24.
[239] A fair
reading of the policy objective in Part 8.5 of the Regional Plan is to provide
for a variety of housing options, including,
but not exclusively, affordable
housing. The state interest policies in the State Planning Policy equally cast
the notion of ‘affordability’
in broader terms. For example, at p
22 it is stated: While housing affordability is influenced by many factors, the
planning system
has a role to play in facilitating
affordable housing
outcomes and, more broadly,
living to ensure Queensland is a
great place to live, work and enjoy.
Regional Plan is explicitly called up by the terms of the City Plan: see Part
2.2. The State Planning Policy 2017 (Ex 30)
post-dates the commencement of the
City Plan, although pursuant to s 2.1 the (then existing) state planning policy
is identified
as being appropriately integrated into the City Plan as it relates
to liveable communities and housing supply and diversity. Irrespectively,
neither document advances in any meaningful way the appellants’ contention
that the construction in
is plainly wrong.
[241] Nor do
these higher order documents warrant reading into s 5(2)(f) of the Act a
restraint on “affordability” such
that it means exclusively
“affordable housing” for low to moderate income earners, rather than
affordability in a broader
[242] During
oral submissions, the appellants’ counsel accepted as true that the State
Planning Policy, the Regional Plan, the
planning scheme and other documents
refer to housing choice and mix. The appellants’ construction point was
directed at what
was meant by the word “affordability”, which was
said to be separate and distinct from choice.
In pari materia
Building Boost Grant Act 2011
is an act to assist “housing
affordability, increase housing supply, and support employment in the housing
construction industry
by establishing a scheme for the payment of grants to
persons building or purchasing new homes.”
[244] Statutes
in pari materia
, in the sense that they deal with the same subject matter
along the same lines, may form part of the context for the process of
construction.
Acts of this kind are said to form a kind of code or scheme,
which arises from the degree of similarity involved. Without this
feature there
is no warrant to transpose the meaning of a word from one statute to another or
to assume, where the same words are
used in a subsequent statute, that the
legislature intended to attach the same meaning to the same words:
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection & Anor
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
Building Boost Grant Act 2011
in pari materia
with the City
Plan. It is not, with the City Plan, part of a statutory scheme. Absent that
feature, there is no warrant to transpose
the meaning of the words used in that
act into the City Plan.
Recent amendments to the Act and
regulations
Housing Availability and Affordability (Planning and Other Legislation
Amendment) Act 2024
and the associated amendments to the
Regulation 2017
(Ex 32 and Ex 33) fall within the
Planning Act 2016
regime although the amendments post-date the commencement of the planning
scheme. These new sections do not mandate the provision
of affordable housing,
but rather facilitate conditions of approval to secure an “affordable
housing component” in circumstances
where such a proposal is included in
the development application in the first place (when here it is not).
[247] Pursuant
to s 65A of the Act, a regulation may provide that a development condition
imposed on certain development approvals
may relate to the provision of an
“affordable housing component”. The dictionary in schedule 24
defines “affordable
housing component” as expressed in s 65A(3) of
the Act and notes a reference to s 43C of the regulation.
[248] Pursuant
to s 43C(1), for s 65A(3) of the Act, definition
affordable housing
, paragraph (b), the component of development must include 1 or
more of (a) housing that is appropriate to the needs of households
with low to
moderate incomes, if the members of the households will spend no more than 30%
of gross income on housing costs, or one
of the other stated components listed
in (b) to (e). The use of the words “affordable housing” as defined
is consistent
with the definition of affordable housing in the City Plan. The
use of the words “affordable housing” within the related
regime does not advance the appellants’ argument. The point remains that
the uplift provision does not use the term
“affordable housing”, as
defined in the City Plan nor as subsequently defined in the statutory
Other economic documents
[249] The phrase
“housing affordability” appears in various documents within which
the words are used in the narrower
sense, for example:
(a) Exhibit 34 – Australian Bureau of Statistics (Reference period 2019 to
2020) – Housing Occupancy and Costs. Under
the heading “Housing
affordability”, at p 7, it is stated: One measure of
affordability
is a ratio of housing costs to gross household income, also
known as a housing affordability ratio.
(b) Exhibit 35 – Australian Bureau of Statistics (Reference period 2019 to
2020) – Survey of Income and Housing, User
Guide, Australia. Under the
heading “Housing affordability” at p 15, it is stated: One way of
housing affordability
is to look at households whose spending
on housing is likely to impact on their ability to afford other living costs
such as food,
clothing, transport, and utilities. A common threshold applied is
the proportion of households spending more than 30% of their income
(c) Exhibit 36 – Gold Coast Homelessness Action Plan 2024. In part 1.4 at
p 16, under the heading “Local factors contributing
person’s risk of homelessness. Part 1.4.1, “Housing
affordability” refers to housing stress, which is defined as those
occupied private dwellings with low or very low household
income and who are
spending more than 30% of that household income on either rent or mortgage
[250] In the
economic literature, one measure of housing affordability is the ratio of
housing costs to gross household income. Both
in society and within economic
policy, the phrase housing affordability is commonly interchangeable with
affordable housing.
[251] In my
view, the phrase housing affordability does not assume a particular meaning in
the field of economics which differs from
its ordinary commonly understood
contemporary meaning. When used in the narrow sense, it is doubtful that the
commonly understood
meaning of housing affordability has changed over time.
There is no warrant to resort to an ambulatory approach in the construction
planning scheme defines “affordable housing” in terms of a ratio but
does not use that defined term within the
uplift provision. As previously held
by this court, choice and affordability are relative concepts. The criterion is
in the context of what the City Plan otherwise provides about choice
and affordability. Affordability is a broader concept, which
includes both the
initial and ongoing cost of housing and has a link to, amongst other things, the
provision of choice and the city’s
Dajen Investments Pty Ltd
& Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast &
[2023] QPEC
per Rackemann DCJ at [82].
[253] In the
case of the MDRZ, the scheme seeks not only a generous mix of housing form and
but also a generous mix of
affordability outcomes that meet the needs for the locality. A given proposal,
on a particular site,
might well contribute towards that generous mix within the
zone even though the product within the development is not itself mixed:
Dajen Investments
explained by Mr Buckley, areas of a large, locationally, and socially diverse
city such as the Gold Coast are not homogenous;
the cost of housing in one part
of the city has no direct comparison to other parts and will be subject to its
own supply and demand
fluctuations: Town Planning Joint Report at
Conclusion on the statutory construction point
documents which have been placed before this court do not persuade me that the
construction of “housing choice and
affordability” in
and like cases is plainly wrong.
Economic need
[256] At [39] of
the Economic Joint Report, the subject site is stated to be in an area
appropriate for higher density development.
The site is well located to the
proposed future light rail expansion to Coolangatta and is within a growing
urban area close to
(and as part of) major employment nodes/activity
assisted by Mr Duane’s evidence. In his view, the proposed development
will provide larger apartments together with
a mix of smaller apartments at a
highly sought after beachside location, adding to diversity and choice both on
the site and in the
local area. The site has many desirable attributes for those
seeking coastal living opportunities. They include the site’s
proximity to
Coolangatta and the Gold Coast Airport, a highly desirable frontage to the
ocean, proximity to social and community
infrastructure and proximity to public
transport (including future light rail): [137].
[258] Mr Duane
considers the proposal will provide housing choice in terms of larger attached
apartments than typically exists, particularly
in the study area. At [140] and
[141], he notes the proposal will:
(a) increase the number and proportion of 2-bedroom and 3-bedroom units;
(b) introduce a modern product into an area that is dominated by attached
dwellings of various ages and older unit products; and
(c) introduce a product with a price point that will sit above the existing
attached unit product, but likely below that of detached
housing within close
proximity of the site.
reference to the concept of “affordable living opportunities”
articulated in s 3.2.1 of the planning scheme,
Mr Duane considers the proposal
will contribute to housing affordability by creating density around well-located
places with good
infrastructure, transport, and proximity to employment
Overall, the proposal
will provide affordable living opportunities in a location with a high degree of
existing and future infrastructure:
[260] Mr Duane
says that while the proposed development will provide a particular net community
benefit to a more affluent segment
of the market to meet their housing needs and
choices, that in turn frees up more modest accommodation or other sites to be
for a less affluent population: [73].
[261] In Mr
Duane’s opinion, even if the housing choice and affordability limb
required the provision of affordable housing,
it would not be economically
sensible or efficient to provide affordable housing in a beachfront development.
That is because the
price point of any such dwelling would not be affordable for
people in the lowest income
Turnbull’s evidence appeared, in part, to invite an assessment of need and
housing choice and affordability based on
the difference in height between the
23m overlay and the height of the proposal. He agreed that adding 4 to 6
additional 3-bedroom
units would contribute (albeit negligibly) to housing
choice but maintained that affordability was not addressed by the provision
new housing product targeting the affluent end of the market and at a
significantly higher price point than the surrounding
stock in the local
In the result, he
concluded there would be a negligible impact on housing choice and that
affordability would not be improved.
It is not entirely clear if Mr Turnbull
applied the broader interpretation of s 9(f) as construed by past decisions of
this court.
I have considered Mr Turnbull’s evidence as part of the
evaluative assessment, but I am not persuaded by it.
Turnbull considers the area is undersupplied for retail and services and that
the medium density residential zoning might
actually exacerbate travel issues
associated with a lack of local convenience retail and services. Mr Turnbull
agrees that leveraging
existing public and private infrastructure is sound
planning, but notes that the stage 4 extension of the G:link is not yet funded
and is not likely to be realised within the next five years or
relevant infrastructure is depicted in the Economic Need Joint Report at pp 22
– 23, Maps 3 and 4, as well as a map
prepared by Mr Duane (Ex 27). Mr
Duane notes that the retail at Kirra is more extensive than indicated by Mr
Turnbull in his separate
report at Map 1 (Ex 24). Mr Duane further marked on
his map the new Kirra Point development which has approval for retail floor
He also notes that the
Gold Coast Airport Master Plan 2024 (Ex 28) anticipates a future retail
[265] Mr Duane
highlights Maps 3 and 4 which illustrate the major infrastructure within the
surrounding area, including shopping centres,
public transport, schools,
education facilities, and sporting facilities. Mr Duane notes there are major
employment nodes within
the surrounding area, including the Airport, Southern
Cross University, the Coolangatta/Tweed area, and John Flynn Hospital. Mr
considers that shopping facilities are conveniently located near the site. The
closest major supermarket is within 2 km at
Coolangatta/Tweed, and the shops at
Kirra are within 1 to 1.1km.
[266] I accept
Mr Duane’s comprehensive analysis of the existing and anticipated
infrastructure and services.
[267] From a
town planning perspective, Mr Mewing considered that the development would
contribute to housing choice and diversity
by providing an infill product and
contribute to housing affordability through the provision of additional housing
stock, assisting
in the planning ambition to alleviate pressures on
[268] Mr Buckley
considered the affordability dimension in relative terms and opined that the
provision of additional stock assists
positively in this
The appellants’
town planning expert, Mr Holt considers the proposed development generally
complies with this outcome.
[269] Finally,
the appellants point out that a proposed development seeking a height uplift
would almost always satisfy the broader
construction presently applied by the
cases; this, they submit, renders the criterion almost meaningless. On this
point, the uplift
provision is not confined to a building of this height and
within this overlay. It applies to all height overlays and to single and
multiple dwelling approvals. It is not for the court to second guess the various
other circumstances in which the provision may or
may not be satisfied.
satisfied the proposed development complies with s
3.3.2.1(9)(f).
Elements of local character or scenic amenity
– Specific outcome 3.3.2.1 (9)(g)
appellants allege that the proposed development does not comply with the outcome
in s 3.3.2.1(9)(g) of the City Plan: protection
for important elements of local
character or scenic amenity, including views from popular public outlooks to the
city’s significant
natural features.
appellants’ case is that the proposed development will not protect
important elements of local character and scenic
amenity as:
(a) the proposed development will be imposing upon and dominate the most
important elements of the local identity and sense of place
and character being
the coastal edge (the ocean, the beach, and the dune system) and the Joe Doniger
parkland, including the prominent
pine trees, adjacent Pacific Parade;
(b) the proposed development will dominate the drive along Pacific Parade;
(c) the proposed development’s exceedance in height results in a highly
prominent building that is visually dominant within
the surrounding public realm
areas and not consistent with local character.
[273] From a
town planning dimension, Mr Mewing is of the view the proposed development will
not detract from existing views from
any popular public outlooks towards the
city’s significant natural features, or specific local character or scenic
considers the proposed development generally complies with this
[274] The visual
amenity experts agree that the proposed development does not unreasonably impact
views from public outlooks: Visual
Amenity Joint Report at [202]. In my view,
these opinions are borne out by the photomontage report showing in particular
from Kirra Hill: see Ex 5 at p
Further, for reasons
already stated, the proposed development will not dominate Pacific Parade, the
coastal edge, or the Joe Doniger
Carter’s opinion in the Visual Amenity Joint Report relates to the
protection of views from the Golden Four Drive development
to the beach and
ocean. His concern is to protect the existing view potential of the
appellants’ development. The issue of
outlook and loss of views is dealt
with in criterion (c).
satisfied the proposed development complies with s
3.3.2.1(9)(g).
[277] Because
the proposed development’s residential density is materially more intense
than that permitted by the planning
scheme, the appellants contend the
development application ought to be dismissed on this basis also, apart from,
and separately to,
the asserted non-compliance with s 3.3.2.1(9).
[278] Performance
outcome PO5 of the MDRZ Code requires that density not exceed that shown on the
Residential density overlay map.
The site is within the RD6 designation on the
overlay map.
density of the proposed development is 1 bedroom per 14.9 square metres,
compared to the overlay map provision for 1 bedroom
per 33 square metres. Other
existing and proposed developments in the local area also exceed the density
shown on the overlay map:
Ex 37 and see, for example, the appellants’
proposed development with a density of 1 bedroom per 11.7 square metres.
appellants’ case is that the exceedance of 121% from the prescribed
maximum, represents a serious non-compliance with
the planning scheme which is
not answered by compliance with the uplift provision (if proved). The
appellants point out that the
proposed development falls within the
precinct, although has a
density that accords with the RD8 precinct, which is the highest density
precinct recognised by the Residential
density overlay map.
performance outcome is a quantitative benchmark, against which the appellants
contend there is no alternative complementary
solution which can be measured or
realised. The appellants seek to contrast the MDRZ Code planning control with
the Centre Zone
Code, which expressly contemplates in overall outcome 2(f)
density in excess of that shown on the Residential density overlay map,
to meeting prescribed outcomes.
& S No 4 Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Ors
, overall outcome 2(f) of the Centre Zone Code was stated by Williamson
DCJ at [129] to be akin to a density uplift provision. The
appellants argue
that the absence of an analogous provision within the MDRZ Code is a strong
indicator that the densities prescribed
by the overlay map are not intended to
be exceeded within this zone.
paragraph 8 of the appellants’ amended benchmark groupings (Ex 56),
non-compliance with overall outcome 6.2.2.2(2)(b)(v)
of the MDRZ Code is
Design and amenity
... “whether intended outcomes for building form/city form and
desirable building height patterns are negatively impacted, including
likelihood of undesirable local development patterns to arise if the cumulative
effects of the development are considered”
appellants argue that because the proposed development is materially
inconsistent with the forward planning policy established
by the Residential
density overlay map, the starting point must be refusal of the development
application. Even if compliance with
the uplift provision is achieved, the
appellants contend that the density of the proposed development cuts directly
across the scheme’s
forward planning policy; and it is not the role of the
court to gainsay the correctness of a planning instrument:
Elan Capital
Corporation Pty Ltd & Anor v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[1990] QPLR
[285] To inform
the planning purpose of MDRZ Code PO5, it is appropriate, as the appellants
submit, to consider the complementary
higher order MDRZ Code overall outcomes.
Within those outcomes, the appellants submit the only outcome that relates to
residential
density is overall outcome 6.2.2.2(2)(d)(ii) which provides: that
built form:
“Built form ... contributes to a transitioning
density from lower intensity areas to higher intensity areas near centres, the
high rise coastal spine and areas well serviced by public transport.”
[286] Because
the subject site is within one of the higher density precincts, the appellants
accept it potentially falls within a
locality serviced by public transport.
However, it is argued that the site does not fall within the City’s
coastal spine” and is not sufficiently near centres.
This is said to reinforce the planning intent that the subject site is
to be developed at the scale proposed.
[287] While not
defined, the ‘high rise coastal spine’ is said to be described in
the Strategic framework Strategic intent
City shape and urban
tion, which explains where taller buildings will be delivered.
Within that framework, the site is not located within Southport, Surfers
Paradise, Broadbeach, nor within a mixed use or specialist centre, nor within
one of the seven additional prescribed urban neighbourhoods
which are designated
to accommodate high rise
respondent and co-respondent contend that the site is within the “high
rise coastal spine”, which is to be interpreted
more broadly as the
connected coastal area. The use of the words ‘high rise’ is said to
connect the phrase to an area
where a high-rise building is acceptable; this
includes the subject locality by virtue of the uplift provision (in the context
the height overlay at 23m).
coastal spine may be understood as the connected coastal area of the City of
Gold Coast, which consists of both high rise
and low rise built
For the purposes of
this appeal, it is not necessary to determine whether the high rise coastal
spine should be interpreted in the
narrow sense urged by the appellants.
overall outcome in 6.2.2.2(d)(ii) does not require the transition to higher
intensity areas to be located exclusively
centres, or
the high rise coastal spine, but rather near to both, assuming a
narrow interpretation of the latter phrase. If the phrase “high
coastal spine” is understood in a broader sense, the proposed development
is within it.
[291] Irrespectively,
as identified in
at [454], complementary higher order provisions
which address intensity and density include ss 6.2.2.2(2)(a)(i) and (ii), b(i)
(ii), and (d)(ii), which
(i) include a range of medium density residential uses, predominantly permanent
accommodation;
(ii) such as Multiple dwellings, Dual occupancies, Dwelling houses on small lots
and Community residences are included in the zone
to provide a mix of dwelling
(b) Housing is provided at a form, scale and intensity that is appropriate for
the zone and each particular locality it is in where
the following outcomes are
Orderly and economically efficient settlement pattern
(i) degree of public transport service within a 400 metre walking distance,
being the most desirable distance for pedestrian access,
and the ease and safety
of pedestrian access to that service;
(ii) proximity to major employment concentrations, centres, social and community
infrastructure facilities and important amenity
features, including the coast,
recreational waterways and parkland;
(d) Built form (excluding Dwelling houses on small lots) –
(ii) contributes to a transitioning
from lower intensity areas
to higher intensity areas near centres, the high rise coastal spine and areas
well serviced by public
[292] As held in
Archer at [455], these provisions indicate that the underlying planning
intention is to locate higher density residential
development in locations that
centres, the high-rise coastal spine, social and community
infrastructure facilities, and areas well-serviced by public transport.
planning intention is also evident in 3.2.2 of the Strategic intent relating to
“City Shape and urban transformation”,
renewal and transformation will see an intentional city shape emerge. Growth and
development will be concentrated in an integrated
network of well serviced urban
places – places with good access to public transport, services and
infrastructure assets, or
places where improvements to public transport provide
a catalyst for mixed use development and higher density living. Our city shape
will be characterised by a diversity of well-connected, liveable urban places
and business efficiency and productivity. Avoiding
sprawl outside our urban
areas will protect our world-class environment and spectacular scenic amenity
and help to ensure our investment
in public infrastructure is environmentally
and financially sustainable.
planning intention is further supported by Strategic outcomes in Part 3.3
“Creating liveable places” pursuant
(6) High intensity urban activity optimises land well serviced by public
transport, infrastructure and community facilities and provides
centres and specialist centres and urban neighbourhoods with improved amenity.
(7) Medium and higher intensity housing occurs in mixed use centres and
specialist centres and urban neighbourhoods.
(9) Urban neighbourhoods accommodate a diverse and well connected network of
urban places. Development is focused on mixed use centres
and specialist centres
and public transport hubs, and densities are higher in areas with high frequency
public transport, community
facilities and infrastructure capacity.
The town planning experts
[295] In Mr
Mewing’s experience, residential density is not an accurate indicator of
development intensity because it is influenced
more by the number of bedrooms
than by gross floor area. He also notes it is a metric which is typically
exceeded by multiple dwellings
in the Medium density and High density
residential zones, whether code or impact assessable. The major town planning
implications
of any excessive density are likely to be for capacity of urban
services – primarily water supply, sewerage, stormwater, and
the transport
network: Ex 7 at [193], [194].
[296] Mr Holt
agreed that residential density and exceedances in density are largely a
contributor to an unreasonable load on the
infrastructure demand and capacity
within a locality. He agreed that the site location in relation to transport
accessibility, proximity
to centres, parkland and open space, and health and
education facilities generally support an exceedance in dwelling density: Ex
at [201], [204].
[297] Mr Mewing
described the intent for development along the coastal spine of a scale that is
medium to high rise, within an urban
neighbourhood.
re-examination, he explained that the subject site has good connectivity to
public transport services. It is close to major
employment concentrations and
centres, and social and community infrastructure, including the airport and the
university. It is
very close to a small neighbourhood centre and close to the
Kirra and Coolangatta centres
appellants argue the site is sufficiently distant from the Coolangatta precinct
and from other retail and non-retail services,
such that it does not warrant a
town planning outcome at this scale of density. While given in the context of
housing choice and
affordability, the appellants rely upon Mr Turnbull’s
evidence that the location is sparsely provided for in terms of local
and infrastructure. The local amenities are detailed at [264] to [265] above,
with Mr Turnbull’s map not quite capturing
their full extent. While I
accept that the Coolangatta centre is not within walking distance, the planning
scheme does not impose
this as a requirement.
[299] I accept
Mr Mewing’s and Mr Holt’s evidence that the site location supports
an exceedance in density.
[300] Further,
as is evident from the findings above with respect to the built form and its
impact, even though the proposed development
exceeds the density limit, the
exceedance does not sound in unacceptable planning and amenity impacts.
[301] Although
the proposed development does not comply with performance outcome PO5 of the
Medium density residential zone code,
the non-compliance is not a weighty
consideration telling against approval.
[302] I have
reservations about the appellants’ characterisation of this single
assessment benchmark as a planning strategy.
Even if it could be so regarded, I
am satisfied that the approval of greater density in this case would not of
itself cut across
future achievement of the planned density in the Medium
density residential zone, either in this location or more broadly across
internal amenity impacts for future occupants
appellants argue a final standalone reason for refusal as being internal amenity
outcomes, because:
(a) the design of the rear apartments concentrates living rooms westward,
directly facing the Golden Four Drive development and
obliquely towards the
airport, thereby ignoring valuable ocean views, breeze, and sunlight to the east
while also creating overlooking
and privacy conflict with the adjoining
development;
(b) there is inadequate communal open space for residents and functional
private open space; and
(c) the proposed development’s front door and lobby area is not
sufficiently visible or inviting, is cluttered by services
and is too far
removed from the street edge.
appellants further argue that the bedrooms and living spaces of the proposed
development will not enjoy adequate natural
light access, particularly during
the winter months.
relevant benchmarks appear in the Appellants’ Amended Benchmark Groupings
at paragraph 9. This issue is assessed
against those benchmarks.
[306] As to the
building interrelationship issues, the appellants rely upon the submissions
related to the “well managed interface”
uplift criteria. This issue
was the subject of considerable evidence and has been considered in the analysis
of compliance with uplift
criterion (9)(c).
complaint regarding the front door and lobby has been considered and rejected in
the finding that the proposed development
complies with uplift criterion
[308] As is
evident from the findings in respect of the uplift criteria, in my view the rear
apartments of the proposed development
do not result in unacceptable privacy and
overlooking impacts. I consider that the internal amenity of the rear
apartments is appropriate
given the zoning of the land and the development
intensity sought by the planning instruments. There is appropriate internal
(a) To the extent the rear apartments will have oblique views to the airport and
hinterland beyond, such views are likely to be availed
of by some people. This
is consistent with the evidence of Mr Curtis who considered that, while maligned
to some degree, there were
people who would avail themselves of views to the
Hinterland, even though there is an airport
(b) Responding to the sub-tropical climate, the apartments to the rear have
balconies, as an extension of indoor living space.
(c) Future residents can elect to purchase the rear apartments, no doubt at a
different price point to the beach side apartments.
[309] I accept,
as stated by Dr McGowan, that the proposed development provides a high standard
of amenity for users in terms of accessibility
and quality of open space, the
quality of the design of the building and landscape, and the amenity afforded by
the location: Ex
9 at [251].
[310] Mr Mewing
considers the proposed development includes a high standard of communal and
private open space, which is accessible,
usable, safe, functional, attractive,
suitably designed, and of good sizing and utility in compliance with PO11 and
PO12 of the HRAD
Code: Ex 7 at [124].
[311] As to
natural light, Mr King considers that daylight will be available to all units of
the proposed development when the sun
is up, and direct sunlight will be
available at different times of the day as the sun moves over the development.
In his opinion,
acceptable amenity will be
[312] During
cross examination, it was suggested to Dr Cochrane that non-operable windows
would make for poor cross flow ventilation.
As submitted by the co-respondent,
there is no reason why the windows depicted on the plans could not be made
operable at the detailed
design stage. I do not consider the evidence
establishes non-compliance with PO4(d) of the HRAD Code, which requires a
slender tower
form promoting efficient interior climate control. In any event,
there is deemed compliance with PO4 due to my finding there is
compliance with
AO4.1 and AO4.2.
Other relevant matters
appellants do not appear to press the relevant matters originally notified in
the Notice of Appeal, but rather now simply
raise that there are no relevant
matters that outweigh the serious non-compliances with the planning scheme and
that there are no
conditions offered that will cure the
non-compliances.
co-respondent raises a number of relevant matters in support of approval. Many
of these have been dealt with by reference
to the uplift criteria, and it is
unnecessary to traverse them further.
Approval of the development
in the exercise of the discretion
[315] I find
that the proposed development complies with s 3.3.2.1(9) of the City Plan. To
the extent that the proposed development
does not comply with assessment
benchmarks, the non-compliances are not such as to warrant refusal in this case.
In my assessment,
the proposed development is highly meritorious and should be
approved subject to lawful conditions.
satisfied that the co-respondent has discharged the onus.
[317] In due
course, the development application will be approved subject to conditions.
facilitate the preparation of a suite of conditions, the appeal will be returned
to the applications list for review on 20
October 2025. The appeal will remain
on that list unless and until a dispute arises about conditions of
Ex 19; and see the list of
principal submitters at pp
At 33.3 metres in the
plans, but due to a sag in the natural ground line, formally admitted by the
co-respondent to be 33.79 metres:
Pursuant to s 45(5)(b)
of the Act, the impact assessment
be carried out against, or having
regard to, any other relevant matter, although this is not mandatory: see
Abeleda v Brisbane City Council
[2020] QR 441
This is defined to include any
properly made submissions about the development application which have not been
withdrawn: Schedule
Dictionary.
Investments Unit Trust v Brisbane City Council
[2019] QPEC 16
[2019] QPELR 793
Described as
‘recent’ in the Architecture Joint Report (Ex 11) and as
comparatively ‘older’ in Visual Amenity
Joint Report (Ex 9).
Described in the Visual
Amenity Joint Report (Ex 9) as a recently constructed 7-storey multiple
See generally the
photographs captured by Dr McGowan on 10 June 2025 for the existing built form
north to Graham Street (Ex 44);
the taller building height analysis (Ex 37) and
renders of ‘height uplift’ approvals (Ex 45).
Consistently with Dr
McGowan’s opinion at [193] of the Visual Amenity Joint Report (Ex
Mr Buckley –
The height analysis
originally included 23 buildings, but number 20 on the list (a 12 storey, 34.5m
tower at 99 Golden Four Drive)
was struck out. The list also does not include 66
Pacific Parade: the development approval by Council for a 10 storey, 31.8 m
was set aside on appeal to the Planning and Environment Court in
Body Corporate for 62
The development
at 133 Golden Four Drive is stated in Ex 37 (and also the Town Planning Joint
Report at p 51 and the Visual Amenity
Joint Report at p 7) to be a 7-story, 23m
building; this was corrected during evidence to be a 9-story building at
approximately
32m and the subject of an
Said to be an
11-storey building in Ex 37.
See for example: Mr Curtis at T3-92; Mr Holt at T5-65; Mr Richards at
Town Planning Joint
Report (Ex 7) at [43].
Plan Extracts (Ex 8) – Part 6 at 6.1(8) at p
City Plan Extracts (Ex
8) – Part 6 at 6.2.2.2 at p
City Plan Extracts at p
City Plan Extracts at p
City Plan Extracts
– Part 3 Strategic framework at p
See extract from
Council’s delegated report, Visual Amenity Joint Report at p
Architecture Joint
Report – Mr Curtis at
Architecture Joint
Report – Mr Curtis at
Architecture Joint
Report – Mr Curtis at
Appellants’
Part A Submissions at [32].
Town Planning Joint Report at p 10,
Appellants’ Part
B Submissions at [8].
for example at T1-48, L40.
Architecture Joint Report at
See for example, the
Appellants’ Part B Submissions at
See for example the
submissions at T7-37.
Buckley – T2-51.
Planning Joint Expert Report at
Town Planning Joint
Expert Report at [128].
Visual Amenity Joint
Report at [190].
Amenity Joint Report at
Architecture Joint
Report at [231].
Architecture Joint Report at [244] to
City Plan Extracts
– HRAD Code Overall outcome (2)(b), PO4,
City Plan Extracts
– MDRZ Code Overall outcome (2)(a)(vii), (b)(vii); HRAD Code Overall
outcome (2)(a), (c), PO5.
City Plan Extracts – HRAD Code Overall outcome 2(e), (k), PO6,
Architecture Joint
Report at [212] – Figure
Architecture Joint
Report at [256] –
Dajen Investments
Pty Ltd & Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor
Appellant’s Part A
Submissions.
– Separate Report (Ex 23) at [54]; Visual Amenity Joint Report at [46] and
p 15 – 20; Architecture Joint Report
See for example MDRZ
Code Overall outcomes (2)(a)(vii), (2)(b)(vi) and (vii), (2)(c)(ii), 2(d)(iv)
and PO1(a), PO2(b); HRAD Code
Overall outcomes (2)(a), (2)(c) and (2)(e); GDP
Code Overall outcome (2)(a) and PO2(e) and (g) and PO8: conveniently extracted
Ex 56 at paragraph 3 and [45] of the Appellants’ Part B
Submissions.
Visual Amenity
Joint Report at p 13.
City Plan Extracts
– definition at p 193.
See also Ex 45 at pp
Light Amenity
Separate Report at [13].
Light Amenity Separate Report at
See also Ex 40
– Comparison of Sun-Eye
Mr Powell –
Separate Report (Ex 16) at pp 3 & 4, Figures 1 and
Mr Powell –
Separate Report at [3].
Powell – Separate Report – Figure 2; see also
Mr Peddie –
Separate Report (Ex 26) at pp 15 &
Ex 26 at p 11, [4.18]
and p 13, [4.26].
Submissions.
Visual Amenity Joint
Report at [143] and [147].
T4-22 – 23.
As approached by Rackemann DCJ in
Investments Pty Ltd & Anor v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor;
Ruffin & Ors v City of Gold Coast &
[2023] QPEC 32
See for example T6-37,
L10; T6-39, L40.
Powell and Dr McGowan defer to the architects on the built form aspect of this
Architecture
Joint Report at pp 57, 61 and
Visual Amenity Joint
Report at p 44.
Amenity Joint Report at p
Economic Joint Report at
In version 7 of the
City Plan, this provision, in exactly the same terms, was
Undershaft (No 1) v Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] FCA 41
(2009) 253 ALR 280
to [74] and
Lynch v Commissioner of Police
[2022] QCA 166
– [70], the latter expressing these principles
for intermediate Courts of
Appellants’
Part B Submissions at [183].
With the State planning policy in turn applying over the regional
See for example, Mr
Duane’s evidence at T2-26,
6.2.2.2(2)(b)(iv) at City Plan Extracts p
Economic Need Joint
Report (Ex 12) at pp 55 & 56 [144] –
Economic Need Joint
Report at p 21 [64], [65].
Economic Need Joint
Report at pp 19 & 20 [56] –
Town Planning Joint
Report at p 27 [116].
Planning Joint Report at p 23
Town Planning Joint
Report at p 30 [128].
Planning Joint Report at p 27
Town Planning
Joint Report at p 30
See also Figure
NP14 at p 55 of the Visual Amenity Joint
Town Planning
Joint Report at p 17 [63]: Figure
This is stated in the
Appellants’ Part B Submissions at [194] and elsewhere as RD5, which I take
to mean RD6 as stated at [207]
Appellants’ Part B Submissions at [199],
See for example
at [43] where it was said the City Plan intends that the
character of Palm Beach is to change from predominantly low-rise coastal
to one that is medium density, with opportunities for high rise development in
limited circumstances, subject to satisfying
(version 7) applied in
, but the relevant provisions mirror those
in City Plan (version
As stated in
at [456] under City Plan (version 7): the relevant provisions
mirror City Plan (version
As stated in
at [456] under City Plan (version 7): the relevant provisions
mirror City Plan (version
Capital Corporation Pty Ltd & Anor v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[1990] QPLR 209
, which concerned a re-zoning
application.
Appellants’ Part A
Submissions.
Appellants’ Part B Submissions at
Appellants’
Part B Submissions at [228]; Part A at [38].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (760 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter