URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLC/2025/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Walker Road Pty Ltd v Valuer-General [2025] QLC 19 (5 September 2025)
LAND COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Walker Road Pty Ltd v Valuer-General
[2025] QLC 19
Walker Road Pty Ltd
(appellant)
Valuer-General
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Appeal against objection decision on valuation under the
Land Valuation
DELIVERED ON:
5 September 2025
DELIVERED AT:
29 July 2025 and 6 August 2025
PG Stilgoe OAM
appeal is allowed.
unimproved value of Lot 42 on Registered Plan 704153, Lot 47 on Survey Plan
295100, Lot 803 on Survey Plan 324597; Lot 804 on
Survey Plan 333304 (formerly
part of Lot 804 on Survey Plan 273355) as at 1 October 2021 is reduced to
$1,200,000.
be no order as to costs.
CATCHWORDS:
REAL PROPERTY – VALUATION OF LAND – UNIMPROVED VALUE –
GENERALLY – where appellant appealed respondent’s
valuation on the
basis the land qualified for the farming concession under
Valuation Act 2010
– where parties agree on the valuation should the
land be valued as land for farming – whether the third-party farming
business is the ‘dominant use’ of the land – whether the
third-party farming business is ‘carried out for
whether ‘for profit’ in
requires the business to be carried
out for the intention to make a profit or that it actually made, or was capable
of making, a
REAL PROPERTY – VALUATION OF LAND – UNIMPROVED VALUE –
GENERALLY – where the land is operated on by a third-party
business under agistment agreements – whether agistment agreements with a
third-party operating on the subject land
form part of a ‘farming
business’ – whether the third-party managing agistment agreements
between related companies
and third parties on land owned by related parties
form part of a ‘farming business’ – whether the income from
agistment agreements on land owned by related parties should be considered when
evaluating whether the appellant’s business
was carried out for
Land Valuation Act 2010
Valuation of Land Act 1944
v Chief Executive, Department of Natural Resources
[1998] QLC 128
Buntine v Hume
[1943] VicLawRp 11
[1943] VLR 123
Godolphin Australia Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State
[2024] HCA 20
Graham v Lewis
[1888] UKLawRpKQB 171
(1888) 22 QBD 1
Mreef Project Company No 15 Pty Ltd v Department of Natural
Resources and Water
[2007] QLC 13
Nelson v Evans
, considered
Sturgess v Valuer-General
(2013) 34 QLCR 1
Taylor v Owners – Strata Plan No 11564
(2014) 253 CLR,
Thomason v Chief Executive, Department of Lands
[1995] QLAC 4
(1994-1995) 15
APPEARANCES:
K Wylie instructed by Bennett & Philp Lawyers for the appellant
J Ware instructed by Clayton Utz for the respondent
[1] Walker Road
Pty Ltd owns various lots
Bentley Park, a suburb south-west of Cairns (‘the land’).
Eventually, the land will be further subdivided and become
part of the Cherry
Brook residential development. In the interim, Fortress Rural Investments Pty
Ltd a company related to both Walker
Road and the Cherry Brook developer,
Fortress Management Services Pty Ltd, has been grazing cattle on the land.
Sheahan and his family live in the four-bedroom house on the land. Mr Sheahan
manages the cattle, spending about 2 –
3 hours per day on that task.
[3] Subdivision
2 of Chapter 2 Division 5 of the
Land Valuation Act
applies for deciding the value of land used only as a single dwelling house or
for farming.
If either of those
situations apply, any enhancement in value because of a potential for
subdivision must be disregarded.
Valuer-General valued the land as “farming” until the valuation
issued as at 1 October 2021. When the Valuer-General
determined that the land
was no longer used for farming, unsurprisingly, she valued the land at a much
higher figure.
[5] Walker Road
challenges the Valuer-General's decision on two grounds. Firstly, it says that
the land is used for farming. In the
alternative, it says that the land is used
as a single dwelling house.
Was the land used for
[6] What is
farming is set out in
of the LVA. There are four elements:
(a) a farming business must be the dominant use of the
(b) the business must be carried out for
(c) the business must be carried out on a continuous or repetitive
(d) the business must have a substantial commercial purpose or character shown
by having an average gross annual return, worked out
over a 3-year period, of at
least $5,000.
[7] The parties
agree that:
(a) Fortress Rural carried out a farming business;
(b) the farming business was carried out on a ‘continuous or repetitive
basis’; and
(c) the business had a substantial commercial purpose or character.
[8] There are
three issues the parties want me to determine:
(a) Does Fortress Rural managing agistment agreements between related companies
and third parties on land owned by the related parties
form part of a farming
(b) Was the farming business the dominant use of the land?
(c) Was the farming business carried out for profit?
The agistment agreements
[9] Fortress
Rural leased other properties from companies related to Fortress Investments and
then issued grazing licences to third
parties. The income from that exercise was
between $7,500 and $14,000 p.a., about 20% of Fortress Rural’s total
Valuer-General submits that this income is derived from managing agistment
agreements, not from grazing, as that term is
understood from
therefore, should not be considered when evaluating whether the business was
carried out for profit.
question of whether agistment agreements can form part of a farming business has
been partly answered in the affirmative
by the Land Appeal Court in
v Chief Executive, Department of
The Court held that
animals agisted onto the subject land met the definition of a grazing business
because they feed themselves on
the grasses or pastures for the purpose of later
sale as part of an enterprise and they benefit from pasture grown on the subject
[12] This leaves
the question of whether managing agistment agreements on other land can form
part of the grazing business on this
[13] Walker Road
We have concluded that the use of the
subject land for the purposes of grazing, considered in isolation from any other
not have a significant and substantial commercial purpose or
character. Considered as part of the dairying enterprise of Leslie Sellin
Co, the subject land is being used as part of a business which has a significant
and substantial commercial purpose or
President MacDonald in
Sturgess v Valuer-General
...if the appellants establish that the subject land is used
in conjunction with other lands as part of a business or industry with
significant or substantial commercial character, as shown by an average gross
annual return of $5,000, calculated over a 3 year
period, this criterion will be
[15] Walker Road
submits that Fortress Rural’s business can be characterised as a singular
business because:
(a) All aspects of the business relate to a common subject matter – cattle
(b) The same person manages all aspects of the business;
(c) There is a single set of business records;
(d) Fortress Rural’s income tax records identify its main business
activity as ‘beef cattle and sheep farming’.
[16] I accept
that Fortress Rural is conducting a singular business which, for the purposes of
taxation, is ‘beef farming’.
[17] Walker Road
submits that the agistment business may still be considered a ‘farming
business’ within the meaning of
the LVA because it falls within the
meaning of ‘the business or
of grazing’ under
[18] It submits
that ‘business’ and ‘industry’ must have separate
meanings. It has referred me to the Macquarie
Dictionary definition of
‘industry’ as:
1. a particular branch of trade or
manufacture:
the steel industry
. 2. any large-scale business activity:
the tourist industry
. 3. manufacture or trade as a whole:
of industry in underdeveloped countries
[19] As the
Valuer-General points out, however, that definition is incomplete. The
definition continues:
4. the ownership and management of companies
factories etc.:
friction between labour and industry
. 5. systematic work
or labour. 6. assiduous activity at any work or task:
To win 3-2 showed a lot
of courage, great industry
discussion about the difference between ‘business’ and
‘industry’ is unhelpful as, largely, the dictionary
definitions are
[21] There is
some force in the Valuer-General's submission that, whichever definition
applies, the activity must involve doing farming
as opposed to facilitating
farming. Support for that proposition can be found in the definition of
‘farming business’
as it lists activities that require engagement
with the land. It does not, for example, list ‘managing’ a farming
is also support for that proposition in the statements from relevant Ministers
Valuation of Land Act
was introduced in 1971. The Honourable WAR
The Bill also provides that land used exclusively for
primary production in a potentially higher-use area is to be valued without
regard to the potential. ... The provision regarding primary production has been
inserted to ensure that a primary producer caught
up in urban development is not
valued on the potential until he ceases using the land for primary production.
This will enable a
primary producer to carry on economically for as long as
possible, and is parallel to the single-unit residential owner in a higher
, the business was conducted by a third party on the
appellant’s land. In
, the business was conducted by the
appellants on third party land. Here, we are concerned with income from a
business that is not
conducted on the subject land and is not conducted by the
appellants. It is stretching the analogy too far to suggest that the third
agistment agreements on land remote from the subject land should form part of
the farming business.
[24] I find
Fortress Rural's management of the agistment agreements, on land remote from the
subject land and with parties not connected
with the subject land, to be a
separate business.
[25] The income
from the agistment agreements should not be considered when evaluating whether
the business was carried out for profit.
Was the farming business the dominant use of the land?
relevant time for determining the relevant use of the land is the period between
1 October 2021 and 19 October 2022.
[27] Walker Road
submits that the dominant use of the land was grazing. There is clear evidence
that Fortress Rural had between 10
and 15 head of cattle on the land during that
Valuer-General submits that, at the relevant time, the land was actively being
used for the development of Cherry Brook and
that this was the dominant use of
the land. To support that proposition, the Valuer-General points to fill being
scraped from the
subject land and used in Cherry Brook; truck movements on the
land; pipes and other materials being stored on the land; and, a bitumen
stub, similar to the roads constructed on Cherry Brook. I will refer to these
activities collectively as ‘the works’.
[29] Once again,
the parties have referred me to
in which the Land Appeal Court
In our opinion, the expression "dominant use" implies that
some other use may be made of at least part of the land. Further, it does
necessarily follow that the other use must be incidental or ancillary to the
dominant use before section 17(1) can apply to the
land. Uses of land which were
distinct from but incidental to the business of primary production (such as
dairy farmer's home on
the land) did not exclude the operation of section
11(1)(vii) to the land
In our view, the proper approach to be taken when ascertaining the dominant
use of land is to consider such matters as the amount
of land actually used for
any purpose, the nature and extent and intensity of the various uses of the
land, the extent to which land
is used for activities which are incidental to a
common business or industry of a type specified in section 17(2), the extent to
which land is used for purposes which are unrelated to each other, and the time
and labour and resources spent in using the land
for each purpose. When
undertaking this exercise, one cannot ignore the conclusion that an objective
observer would reach from viewing
the land as a
considering the words ‘dominant use’ in a land tax context, the High
defined them this way:
Whether land is
being used for the dominant purpose of maintaining animals for their sale or the
sale of their natural increase or
bodily produce is a question of
characterisation of the use or uses to which the land is put. The proper
approach is to consider
the amount of land used for any purpose, the nature and
extent and intensity of the various uses which are taking place, and the
and labour and resources spent in using the land. In some cases, the financial
gain from a given activity may be an indicator
of predominance. And in all cases
one should not ignore the conclusion reached by an objective observer who is
viewing the land as
Where land has more than one use, for a given use to be dominant it must
exhibit such predominance as to impart to the whole of the
land the necessary
exempting character.
Valuer-General submits, and Walker Road largely agrees, that
demonstrate that the following factors are relevant to a
consideration of the dominant use:
(a) The amount of land actually used for any purpose;
(b) The nature, extent and intensity of the various uses of the land;
(c) The extent to which land is used for activities which are incidental to the
business of grazing;
(d) The extent to which land is used for purposes that are unrelated to each
(e) The time, labour and resources spent in using the land for each purpose;
(f) When undertaking this exercise, I cannot ignore the conclusion that an
objective observer would reach from viewing the land as
[32] The total
area of the land is 21.944 ha. Of that, 9.6 ha is used for grazing. The balance,
according to evidence from the Bar
table is the residence and its curtilage. The
area subject to the works is somewhere between 1% and 3.4% of the total
[33] I accept
the Valuer-General's observation that grazing is a ‘quite passive’
activity but that is not the test. Grazing
is a continuous activity on the land.
It uses all the available 9.6 ha, albeit in rotation. In grazing terms, carrying
15 head may not be intense, but the evidence suggests that it is the
land’s capacity. As I have already noted, Mr Sheahan spends
a couple of
hours per day attending to the grazing business.
contrast, the works were for a limited period. The scraping was a one-off
activity. According to Messrs Southwell and Sheahan
the vehicle movements and
storage were conducted over a period of 2 to 4 weeks, or no longer than ‘a
few weeks’.
limited traffic movements across the subject
Valuer-General used satellite imagery to demonstrate that the effect of the
works lingered long after the works were completed.
In particular, the
Valuer-General focussed on the absence of a fence to one of the paddocks. If the
fence was missing for a long
period then, the Valuer-General submits, that would
affect the productivity of the grazing business. Mr Sheahan did not agree with
that proposition
and I accept
his evidence in that regard.
[36] It is true
that Mr Southwell underestimated the amount of land involved in the works and,
probably, underestimated the duration
of the works. Even if I accepted the
Valuer-General's best case, the works amounted to a small proportion of the use
of the land.
Southwell told the Court that the works were not associated with the development
of the subject land.
probably true but there is no doubt that the works were associated with the
development of Cherry Brook, of which the subject
land will ultimately form a
[38] Looking at
all factors objectively, I find that the dominant use of the subject land was
grazing. The extent, duration and character
of the works was not, then, enough
to displace grazing as the dominant use of the subject land.
Was the farming business carried out for profit?
What does ‘for profit’ mean?
[39] The first
question is to determine the meaning of ‘for profit’. This is
particularly important because the accounting
experts – Timothy Lunn and
Grant Williams – undertook different exercises when examining the books of
account. Mr Lunn
assessed whether the farming business was profitable as a
matter of fact. Mr Williams examined the books of account to determine
the business was carried out with the intention to make a profit.
Valuer-General says that ‘for profit’ means making a profit or
capable of making a profit. Walker Road says that
whether the farming business
was, in fact, making a profit is only one factor in determining whether the
business was carried on
‘for profit’. It submits that the test is
whether the farming business was being carried out ‘for the purpose of
[41] The Land
Court has decided a number of cases using the concept of ‘for the purpose
of profit’.
All of them,
however, were decided under s 17 of the
Valuation of Land Act 1944
(‘VOLA’), which preceded the LVA.
[42] Section 17
of VOLA allowed the farming exemption if, inter alia, the farming business was
‘engaged in for the purpose of
profit on a continuous or repetitive
[43] For the
exemption to be engaged now, the ‘business must be carried out for profit
on a continuous or repetitive basis’.
Section 48(2) no longer includes the
words ‘for the purpose of’. It refers to ‘carried out’
instead of ‘engaged
in’. For these reasons, the Land Court cases
that interpret VOLA do not assist in interpreting s 48(2).
[44] The High
Taylor v Owners – Strata Plan No 11564
cautioned against
inserting words into legislation:
The question whether the court is
justified in reading a statutory provision as if it contained additional words
or omitted words
involves a judgment of matters of degree. That judgment is
readily answered in favour of addition or omission in the case of simple,
grammatical, drafting errors which if uncorrected would defeat the object of the
provision. It is answered against a construction
that fills "gaps disclosed in
legislation" or makes an insertion which is "too big, or too much at variance
with the language in
fact used by the
legislature".
[45] Section 48
does not involve a drafting error, and I cannot see a gap in the legislation.
There is no basis for reinserting the
words 'for the purpose of’ after
they were omitted from s 48(2) when the Legislature had the benefit of the Land
Court decisions
on s 17 of VOLA.
Valuer-General submits that the omission of the words ‘for the purpose
of’ indicates a deliberate tightening
of the profit test. I agree.
[47] I also note
the change in language from ‘engaged in’ in VOLA to ‘carried
out’ in the LVA.
[48] ‘Engaged
in’ appears to be of wide application, requiring at least a substantial
part of any period of time being
directed to some thing, excluding a ‘mere
casual or intermittent’ commitment to that
[49] The phrase
’ has not been the subject of judicial
consideration or statutory application; however, there have been decisions that
’. Fry LJ said in
I think that the expression has a narrower meaning than
that of doing business or having business to do. In my opinion it imports
the person has control and direction with respect to a business, and also that
it is a business carried on for some pecuniary
[50] Shand J
Nelson v Evans
For, in my opinion, just as
residing connotes some fixed place in which a man personally lives, so carrying
on business connotes a
fixed place in which a man personally transacts his
business, and in my opinion a grazier cannot be said to carry on business ...
every place on which he has stock
decisions support a conclusion that ‘carried out for profit’ means
something more than carrying out with the
intention to make a profit. The test
under s 48 must be whether the farming business was making a profit or capable
of making a profit.
Was the farming business carried out for
[52] The second
question is whether the farming business, as a matter of fact, was carried out
in a way that was either profitable
or capable of making a profit.
calculating the actual profit (or loss) of the business, Mr Lunn added in an
expense of about $22,000 p.a. representing Mr
Sheahan’s wages. Mr Williams
[54] Mr Lunn
justifies the addition of a wages component because, he says, that will show the
‘true nature' of the business
and is a standard adjustment he makes when
valuing a business for sale.
Fortress Rural accounts do not show any expense for Mr Sheahan’s wages.
There is clear evidence that Mr Sheahan occupies
the house on a contra deal; he
will look after the cattle in exchange for free housing. There is some
difficulty in this arrangement
because the documents evidencing the contra deal
are between Walker Road and Mr Sheahan not Fortress Rural and Mr Sheahan but if
Fortress Rural is fortunate enough to have ‘free’ labour, then there
is no reason for either an accountant or the Court
to look behind that
arrangement.
Lunn’s task was not to value the business for sale but to assess whether
it was making a profit or capable of making
a profit based on the actual
accounting records, not on an adjustment to reflect a theoretical real profit
trend of that business.
[57] Walker Road
submits that I should only look at the valuation year when assessing whether the
farming business was carried out
for profit. Because Fortress Rural made a
profit in 2022, Walker Road says that the test in s 48(2) is satisfied.
Valuer-General submits that this is a flawed approach for two reasons. The first
is that the financial year and the valuation
year cover different periods so
that the financial year results are not a true representation of the financial
position during the
valuation year.
[59] The second
submission lies within the terms of s 48(2): the business must be carried out
on a continuous or repetitive basis.
The Valuer-General
submits that this means the profitability of the farming business must be
assessed over a period.
[60] I agree
with both propositions. Whether or not the farming business was carried out for
profit cannot be considered by looking
only at the valuation year. To do so
would be unfair to Fortress Rural: on that test, it would not have been within
the farming exemption
for four of the seven years examined.
[61] Because I
have excluded the agistment income from a consideration of whether the farming
business was profitable, Fortress Rural’s
trading results for the
financial years 2015 to 2022
Cattle sales
Costs of Cattle Sold
Opening stock
Closing stock
Total costs of sales
Gross profit
[62] Mr Williams
submits the figures show Fortress Rural is capable of making a profit as:
(a) a gross profit was derived in 3 of the 7 periods or 42.86% of the time.
(b) there is a cumulative gross profit of $26,969 across the 7 periods.
(c) the average gross profit across the 7 periods was $3,853.
(d) the cumulative gross profit across the last 3 periods (i.e. FY20, FY21 and
FY22) highlights the business’s improved performance
in recent years.
[63] Mr Lunn
asserts that Fortress Rural was never capable of making a profit because Mr
Sheahan’s labour had to be brought
to account. I have already stated why I
do not agree with Mr Lunn on that issue.
[64] I agree
that the farming business was capable of making a profit which is demonstrated
by the business in fact making a profit
for some of the years under review.
Section 48(2) does not require a substantial profit, or even a profit that makes
commercial sense.
Like most rural enterprises, the farming business’s
fortunes waxed and waned but, as Mr Williams observed, it was in profit
last three financial years. It follows, therefore, that the farming business
satisfies the test in s 48(2).
Was the land used only as a single dwelling house?
[65] Because
of my conclusions about whether Fortress Rural carried out a farming business
within the meaning of s 48(2), it is not
necessary to answer this question.
[66] Before
Walker Road bought it, the land was used for cane farming until the construction
of a school nearby meant that cane farming
on the land was no longer
[67] Given the
extract in paragraph
might be argued that the farming business on the land ceased when Walker Road
bought it. However, that is how the Valuer-General
has assessed value in the
past and there was no submission that this should change. If change is to occur,
it is for the Legislature,
not for me.
[68] Although
the legislation has been amended since the decision in
that Court’s observations about the drafting of the definition of
‘farming’. Subdivision 2 is still ‘difficult
reconcile’. There is still ‘an infelicity of drafting to which
further attention may need to be given’.
decision shows that there are more complications in the drafting that require
consideration. And, a threshold of a gross
annual return of $5,000 to indicate a
‘substantial commercial purpose’ is farcical. A person selling
leftover eggs or
fruit could easily have a gross annual return of $5,000 but it
would not be a ‘business that has a substantial commercial purpose
character’. The Valuer-General might give serious consideration as to
whether a monetary limit imposed fifteen years ago
is still apposite.
[70] Despite
these comments, I am satisfied that the subject land falls within the ambit of
Subdivision 2 and Walker Road is entitled
to the farming exemption.
[71] The parties
have agreed on the value of the land in the event that I find the farming
exemption applies. The agreed figure is
$1,200,000 and I accept that figure as
appeal is allowed.
unimproved value of Lot 42 on Registered Plan 704153, Lot 47 on Survey Plan
295100, Lot 803 on Survey Plan 324597; Lot 804 on
Survey Plan 333304 (formerly
part of Lot 804 on Survey Plan 273355) as at 1 October 2021 is reduced to
$1,200,000.
be no order as to costs.
Lot 42 on RP704153; Lot 47 on
SP295100; Lot 803 on SP324597; Lot 804 on SP333304 (formerly part of Lot 804 on
Land Valuation Act 2010
s 46(1)(b).
s 48(1)(a).
s 48(3)(a).
Joint Expert Report, 14
[7.5]–[7.6].
[1995] QLAC 4
(1994-1995) 15 QLCR 286
(2013) 34 QLCR 1
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Assembly, 1 December 1971, 2401-2.
Thomason v Chief
Executive, Department of Lands
[1995] QLAC 4
(1994-1995) 15 QLCR 286
, 299, 303.
Godolphin Australia Pty
Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2024] HCA 20
[34] (citations
Affidavit of Christopher
Paul Southwell affirmed on 25 July 2025 [11(a)]; Transcript 1-40, lines
T1-59, lines 20-35.
T1-33, line 3-10.
T1-50, line 42 to
See, for example,
Project Company No 15 Pty Ltd v Department of Natural Resources and Water
[2007] QLC 13
v Chief Executive, Department of Natural
[1998] QLC 128
Taylor v Owners –
Strata Plan No 11564
(2014) 253 CLR 531
, 546-9 at [35]-[40] (citations
Buntine v Hume
[1943] VicLawRp 11
[1943] VLR 123
, 128 (O’Bryan J).
[1888] UKLawRpKQB 171
(1888) 22 QBD 1
[1923] St R Qd 158
T1-78, lines 1–23.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (292 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter