URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/205.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stevens v Nicholson [2025] QCA 205 (28 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
[2025] QCA 205
STEVENS, Nathan Luke
(applicant)
NICHOLSON (WORK HEALTH AND SAFETY PROSECUTOR)
(respondent)
CA No 53 of 2025
DC No 34 of 2024
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Application for Leave s 118 DCA (Criminal)
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Rockhampton –
[2025] QDC 17 (Clarke
DELIVERED ON:
28 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
19 September 2025
Bond and Doyle JJA and Crowley J
applicant is granted leave to appeal.
appeal is allowed.
orders of the District Court judge are set aside.
decision of the Magistrate at first instance, finding the applicant not guilty
of the offence, is confirmed.
respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs of and incidental to the
application for leave to appeal.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – VERDICT UNREASONABLE OR
INSUPPORTABLE HAVING REGARD TO EVIDENCE – where the
applicant was a
pineapple farmer who owed an electrical safety duty to workers to ensure that
his business or undertaking was conducted
in a way that was electrically safe
– where an incident occurred where a number of workers were electrocuted
when the harvester
they were operating entered the exclusion zone of a
low-hanging overhead power line – where two days prior to the incident,
the applicant’s father had made a comment to the applicant which expressed
that the power line appeared lower than usual –
where it is uncertain when
the power line sagged to the height that it was at the time of the incident
– where the District
Court judge found the applicant guilty of breaching
his electrical safety duty under
Electrical Safety Act
(Qld) and thereby exposing an individual to a risk of death or serious
illness or injury contrary to
of the ESA – whether the District
Court judge erred in finding that the failure by the applicant to eliminate or
minimise electrical
risks so far as is reasonably practicable exposed the
workers to a risk of death or serious illness or injury arising from an
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
Electrical Safety Act 2002
Electrical Safety Regulation 2013
Cleanaway Operations Pty Ltd v Hanel
[2025] SASCA 112
Director of Public Prosecutions v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd
(2016) 49 VR 676
[2016] VSCA 55
, considered
Kirk v Industrial Relations
Commission of New South Wales
(2010) 239 CLR 531;
[2010] HCA 1
Paradise Outdoor Building Company Pty Ltd v Steward
R v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
[2016] HCA 35
Walton v The Queen
(1989) 166 CLR 283
[1989] HCA 9
D P Jones KC, with R A Pearce, for the applicant
J R Hunter KC, with S E
Harburg, for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Butler McDermott Lawyers for the applicant
Office of the Work Health and
Safety Prosecutor for the respondent
I have had the benefit of reading in draft the reasons for judgment of
both Crowley J and Doyle JA.
[2] I too would
allow the appeal on the basis of the reasons expressed by Crowley J at [57] to
[64] of his judgment.
[3] I agree with
the additional remarks made by Doyle JA reserving to a subsequent occasion an
assessment of the significance to what
Crowley J has described as the Breach
Element of proof of a hearsay statement which is not admissible as proof of the
truth of any
fact expressly or impliedly asserted by the statement.
I have had the benefit of reading in draft the reasons for judgment of
[5] I agree with
his Honour that leave to appeal should be granted. The discretion to grant
leave pursuant to
District Court of Queensland Act
unfettered one, informed by the interests of justice. As to the matters stated
by his Honour in paragraph 19 of his Reasons,
whether there is an important
point of law or an issue of general importance, or whether it is necessary to
correct a substantial
injustice and that there are reasonable arguments that an
error has occurred which needs to be corrected, are all factors which will
relevant to the exercise of the discretion. But while these are usually
circumstances in which leave to appeal is granted, they
are not exclusive
criteria for the grant of leave.
[6] Otherwise I
gratefully adopt his Honour’s summary of the facts and the arguments in
this case as well as his Honour’s
description of the elements of the
relevant charged offence.
circumstances where the hearsay statement reportedly made by Colin Stevens is
not admissible as proof of the truth of any fact
asserted or implied in that
statement, I wish to reserve for a case where it might be determinative,
whether the fact of such a statement
can be relied upon (as was done by the
District Court Judge) for the purposes of alerting the applicant to the
possibility of an
issue with the height of the powerline or clearance of that
line over the harvester such as to require the applicant to have done
one of the things particularised by the respondent: cf paragraph 54 of
the Reasons of Crowley J.
[8] I would join
with allowing the appeal on the basis of the Reasons given by Crowley J in
paragraphs 57 to 64.
[9] For these
reasons, I agree with the orders proposed by Crowley J.
[10] CROWLEY
The applicant was one of three members of a family trust that operated a
pineapple farm near the Capricorn Coast called “Lake
[11] On 14 July
2021, the applicant, his father Colin Stevens, and other workers were harvesting
a field when the harvester either
came into contact, or nearly came into
including the
applicant, were electrocuted. One worker, Cody Smith, died.
[12] After a
subsequent investigation of the incident, the respondent, the Work Health and
Safety Prosecutor, charged the applicant
and his father each with an offence of
failing to comply with the electrical safety duty owed by a person conducting a
business or
undertaking (
[13] After a
joint summary trial of the charges in the Magistrates Court, both the applicant
and his father were found not guilty,
and the charges were dismissed. The
respondent then appealed to the District Court against the Magistrate’s
orders, pursuant
Justices Act 1886
appeal was heard by his Honour Judge Clarke.
February 2025, Judge Clarke delivered his judgment, dismissing the appeal in
respect of Colin Stevens but allowing the
appeal in respect of the
The applicant was
thereby found guilty of the offence charged.
applicant now seeks leave to appeal his conviction under
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
(Qld). He initially relied upon
the following three proposed grounds of appeal:
(1) The decision (to allow the appeal and record a finding of guilty against the
applicant) was unreasonable, contrary to the evidence,
supportable;
(2) The decision involved a reversal of the onus of proof; and
(3) The decision involved the drawing of inferences from circumstantial evidence
where conflicting inferences are equally open.
[16] In his
written submissions, the applicant conceded that Ground 3 raised the same
argument as Ground 1, albeit differently worded.
Consequently, Ground 3 was
abandoned. It is therefore only necessary to consider the other two proposed
grounds of appeal.
[17] If leave to
appeal is granted, the applicant seeks orders that his appeal be allowed; that
the judgment of the District Court
judge be set aside or changed; that the
decision of the learned Magistrate at first instance be confirmed; and that the
pay the costs of and incidental to the application for leave to
[18] In support
of his application for leave, the applicant contends that the decision of the
District Court judge to overturn the
decision of the Magistrate involves basic
but substantial errors that significantly impacted the decision to reverse the
Magistrate’s
finding, resulting in a miscarriage of justice.
District Court of Queensland Act
application for leave and any permitted appeal. It is well-established that the
discretion to grant leave to appeal will
usually only be exercised where there
is an important point of law, or an issue of general importance or where it is
necessary to
correct a substantial injustice and there is a reasonable
argument that there is an error to be
[20] If leave is
granted, the appeal is an appeal in the strict sense. The Court’s sole
duty is to determine whether error
has been shown on the part of the District
Court, on the basis of the material before the District Court. The appeal is
not limited
to errors of law. Nevertheless, it is not for this Court to
substitute its own findings of fact for those of the District Court
Court is not engaged in a rehearing. A factual finding made by the District
Court judge may only be reviewed on appeal
to this Court if there is no evidence
to support it or it is shown to be
unreasonable.
Amongst other
things, if such error is shown the Court may make any order it thinks proper, to
ensure the determination on the merits
of the real questions in controversy
between the parties.
[21] With those
principles in mind, and for the reasons that follow, I would grant leave to
appeal and would allow the appeal on the
basis that Ground 1 is established.
I am satisfied the applicant’s conviction is unreasonable or
unsupported by the evidence.
The alleged duty and offence
[22] By its
charge, the respondent alleged that between 11 July and 14 July 2021, the
applicant, being a PCBU, had an electrical safety
duty pursuant to
Electrical Safety Act 2002
to ensure that his
business or undertaking was conducted in a way that was electrically safe; that
he failed to comply with that duty;
and that the failure exposed an individual
to a risk of death or serious injury or illness, contrary to
imposed an electrical safety duty upon a PCBU in the following
Primary duty of care
(1) A person conducting a business or undertaking must ensure the
person’s business or undertaking is conducted in a way that
electrically safe.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the duty includes—
(a) ensuring that all electrical equipment used in the conduct of the
person’s business or undertaking is electrically safe;
(b) if the person’s business or undertaking includes the performance of
electrical work, ensuring the electrical safety of
all persons and property
likely to be affected by the electrical work; and
(c) if the person’s business or undertaking includes the performance of
work, whether or not electrical work, involving contact
with, or being near to,
exposed parts, ensuring persons performing the work are electrically
[24] Whilst
there was an issue about the matter in the original summary trial before the
Magistrate, there is no remaining controversy
that the applicant was a PCBU and
thus owed the electrical safety duty imposed by
provided the following relevant
definitions:
Meanings of
electrical risk
electrically safe
electrical safety
(a) in relation to a person, the risk to the person of death, shock or injury
caused directly by electricity or originating from
electricity; or
Electrically
(e) for the way a business or undertaking is conducted, that all persons are
free from electrical risk from the conduct of the business
or undertaking; and
, for a person or property, means the person or property is
electrically safe.
(4) In this section—
electrical risk
, for a person or property, means that—
(a) electrical risk to the person or property has been eliminated, so far as is
reasonably practicable; or
(b) if it is not reasonably practicable to eliminate electrical risk to the
person or property, the risk has been minimised so far
as is reasonably
practicable.”
[26] As to what
was “reasonably practicable” for a person to do to comply with an
electrical safety duty,
practicable
in ensuring electrical safety
In this Act,
practicable
, in relation to a duty to ensure electrical safety, means
that which is, or was at a particular time, reasonably able to be done
relation to ensuring electrical safety, taking into account and weighing up all
relevant matters including—
(a) the likelihood of the hazard or the risk concerned happening; and
(b) the degree of harm that might result from the hazard or the risk; and
(c) what the person concerned knows, or ought reasonably to know,
(i) the hazard or the risk; and
(ii) ways of eliminating or minimising the risk; and
(d) the availability and suitability of ways to eliminate or minimise the risk;
(e) after assessing the extent of the risk and the available ways of eliminating
or minimising the risk, the cost associated with
available ways of eliminating
or minimising the risk, including whether the cost is grossly disproportionate
to the risk.”
[27] The offence
with which the applicant was charged and later convicted in the District Court
was an offence against
which relevantly
40C Failure to comply with electrical safety
duty—category 2
A person commits a
(a) the person has an electrical safety duty; and
(b) the person fails to comply with that duty; and
(c) the failure exposes an individual to a risk of death or serious injury or
complaint and summons contained the following statement of the particulars of
the charge:
“1. NATHAN LUKE STEVENS (“the
Defendant”), as trustee for the Stevens Family Trust, ran a pineapple farm
Mary Pines at Bungundarra (“the Farm”).
running of the Farm included workers (“the Workers”) harvesting
pineapples using a tractor and harvester (“the
Plant”) at a part of
the Farm traversed by a live overhead powerline (“the Power Line”)
(“the Harvesting”).
Workers comprised the Defendant, Colin Stevens, Cody Smith, Joshua Fritz, Simone
Ranchi, Michela Valsecchi, Ian Page, Raymond
Sheriff and Ryan Doak.
Harvesting posed an electrical risk, as defined in
of the Act, to the
Workers (“the Risk'”).
performing the Harvesting, the Workers was [sic. were] not electrically safe, as
of the Act, because they were not free from electrical
risk, as defined in
of the Act, because the Risk had not been eliminated
or minimised, so far as was reasonably practicable.
Defendant could have ensured the electrical safety of the Workers while
performing the Harvesting by ensuring the exclusion of
both the Workers and the
Plant from that part of the Farm that was beneath, or three metres either side
of, the Power Line until
(i) the height of the Power Line had been measured and checked against the
height of the Plant to ensure that there was at least
a three-metre difference;
(ii) the electrical entity, the works of which the Power Line formed part, had
de-energised the Power Line.
Defendant failed to implement the controls stated in the preceding paragraph, in
contravention of his duty (“the Failure”).
Failure exposed the Workers to a risk of death or serious
three-metre distance referred to in paragraph 6(i) of the particulars derived
Electrical Safety Regulation 2013
imposed a duty upon a PCBU at a workplace, concurrent with
the duty under
, to ensure, so far as is reasonably
practicable, that no person, plant or thing at the workplace came within an
“unsafe distance”
of an overhead electric line.
Section 69(2)
further provided that any operating plant, or a vehicle, comes
distance of an overhead electric line if it came within the prescribed
“exclusion zone” for the operating plant
or vehicle for the line.
Under Schedule 2 of the
, the relevant exclusion zone here was three
[30] In short,
the respondent’s particulars alleged that the applicant could have
complied with his electrical safety duty under
ensuring that the three-metre exclusion zone between the harvester and the
overhead SWER was maintained until either the distance
was measured and checked
to ensure the three-metre distance or the power line was de-energised. It is
convenient to refer to the
proposed actions in paragraph 6(i) and (ii) of the
particulars as the control measures the respondent alleged the applicant should
have implemented.
three-metre exclusion zone was also specified in the “Electrical Safety
Code of Practice 2020 – Working near
overhead and underground electric
Code of Practice
) issued by the Electrical Safety Office,
approved and published in accordance with s 44 of the
[32] Section
44(1) of the
provided that the Minister may make a code of practice
that states a way of discharging a person’s electrical safety duty.
s 45(2) of the
, the Code of Practice was admissible in the proceeding
against the applicant as evidence of whether or not he had complied with his
alleged electrical safety duty. By s 45(3) of the
, the Magistrate at
first instance, and the District Court judge on appeal, were permitted to have
regard to the Code of Practice
as evidence of what was known about a hazard or
risk, risk assessment or risk control; and could rely on it in deciding what was
reasonably practicable for the applicant to have done in respect of the
discharge of his alleged duty.
[33] Under the
heading of “Unsafe distances”, the Code of Practice reiterated the
obligation to keep persons and plant
outside the relevant exclusion zone while
an overhead electric line was energised. Under the heading “Operating
overhead electric lines” the Code of Practice relevantly
“The most effective way to eliminate any risk of
electric shock is by turning off the power. The person conducting a business
undertaking, principal contractor or the operating plant owner should discuss
options for de-energising or re-routing the electricity
supply with the relevant
electricity entity. These options are the most effective control measures and
should be considered before
anything else. The person conducting a business or
undertaking, principal contractor or the operating plant owner should also
with each other to ensure the electricity entity has been contacted.
De-energising or re-routing powerlines should be arranged with the
electricity entity as quickly as possible as this can take some
time to arrange.
Where overhead powerlines have been de-energised, confirmation should be sought
from the person in control of the
powerline before undertaking any work.
If it is not reasonably practicable to turn off the power or re-route the
powerline, the most effective control measure to reduce
the risk is to establish
‘exclusion zones’ that prevent people, plant, equipment and
materials from coming close enough
to energised overhead powerlines for direct
[34] Under the
heading “Risk management process for agricultural work near overhead
electric lines”, the following risk
was identified, “operating high
machinery or machinery with height changeable attachments in paddocks where
electric lines
exist.” A listed factor to be considered in any risk
assessment for such a risk was, “the possibility of sway and sag
overhead powerlines...”.
The prosecution case
District Court judge provided the following summary of the prosecution case,
which provides a convenient overview for consideration
of the present
application:
“[19] The learned prosecutor confirmed in the
opening statement that the elements to be made out against each of the
respondents
were conducting a business or undertaking; and
owed an electrical safety duty in ensuring the business or undertaking was
conducted in a way that was electrically safe; and
failed to comply with that duty; and
failure exposed an individual to a risk of death or serious
[20] I have considered the evidence of the witnesses. In
addition to the farm workers, the prosecution relied on the evidence of Work
Health and Safety Queensland inspector Ms Hitchcock, Mr Arnold a
senior electrical safety inspector, an Ergon electrical distribution
linesperson
Mr Den Exter, and a surveyor Mr Hiron. Documents tendered included the
Electrical Safety Code of Practice 2020, photographs,
maps, survey plans, and
police body worn camera footage of field interviews with the respondents, relied
on as (mixed) statements
against interest. The field interviews were not able to
be edited, and so contained other irrelevant and inadmissible hearsay
statements.
The prosecutor tendered a document identifying the passages relied
upon, which was admitted as part of that exhibit.
[21] In addition to the evidence of the witnesses, the prosecution case
depended on facts admitted pursuant to s 148A
Justices Act
(Qld). That provision has similar operation to s 644
Criminal Code
, such that an admission of a fact is sufficient proof of
the fact without other evidence. I shall return to the significance of the
admitted facts.
[22] The pineapple farm is situated on undulating land. The field has been
divided into numbered bays, each surrounded by a path or
service road. A farm
worker drives a tractor pulling a harvester trailer. There is a boom attached to
the harvester, which has a
conveyor belt. Ordinarily, the boom extends
across half of the width of each bay, with the tractor circling the bay by use
service roads. Farm workers walk in the vicinity of the boom, picking
ripe fruit and placing it on the conveyor belt. Workers positioned
harvester sort the picked fruit into bins. On occasion, a Manitou forklift is
utilised to remove or load the bins onto the
[23] There is an overhead 12,500-volt Single Wire Earth Return (
power line running over the
[24] On 12 July 2021, two days before the incident, the harvester was being
operated in the vicinity of bays 3, 4 and 5. Colin Stevens
was behind the
harvester and operating the Manitou, coming in to take a full bin of fruit, when
he made a comment about the height
of the power line. Mr Fritz was the leading
hand farm worker. He was sorting fruit on the harvester that day. Mr Fritz
gave evidence
that Colin made a comment about the fact ‘we’ (the
harvester) had almost touched the power line. His recollection was
Stevens said, ‘We almost touched that.’ Mr Fritz’ evidence was
that Nathan Stevens asked what his father
had said, and Mr Fritz responded:
“He said we almost touched the power line.” Mr Fritz’ evidence
was that Nathan
replied, “He doesn’t know what he’s talking
line; his view was obscured by the overhead corrugated roof on the harvester. He
said that when he looked a few minutes later
when they were well passed [sic.
past] the power line, it didn’t look like there was a problem to him. He
accepted the harvester
would have passed under the SWER power line more than
once that day.
[25] Mr Sheriff was not working on 12 July and so did not give evidence about
that event.
[26] On the day of the incident on 14 July, the witness Ryan Doak was
operating the tractor that was pulling the harvester trailer
in the path between
bays 1 and 2. Farm workers Joshua Fritz, the deceased man Mr Smith, Simone
Ronchi, Ian Page and Raymond Sheriff,
along with Nathan Stevens were working on
the ground in the vicinity, picking and loading pineapples onto the boom on the
where Michela Valsecchi and Colin Stevens were sorting the collected
produce into bins. The forklift was not in use that day.
[27] The high voltage overhead power line was approximately 4.52 metres
above the ground at the point the harvester came into contact
with, or close
proximity to, the harvester. Consequently, Mr Fritz, the deceased man
Mr Smith, Mr Ronchi, Mr Page, Mr Sheriff and
Nathan Stevens
all suffered electric shock. Mr Doak, Ms Valsecchi and Colin Stevens were not
caused electric shock. The power line
was usually 7.8 metres above the ground at
that point. The highest point of the harvester was measured to be approximately
4.36 metres
above the ground. Prior to the incident, the harvester was
ordinarily operated within approximately 0.46 metres (460 millimetres)
the power line, making allowance for the 3 metre exclusion zone mandated by the
Regulation.
[28] The power line was supported by power poles at either end, which were
each supported by counteracting stay wires. The harvesting
work was being done
at about the mid-point of the overhead SWER power line. The pole on the
respondent’s property was near
a shed. The investigation confirmed that
a stay wire on the pole which was on an adjoining property owned by a
neighbour had listed,
after one of the stay wires had failed or completely
broken apart.
Ergon employees had
last inspected that stay wire in September 2020 and recorded some corrosion; an
examination was not performed
of the part under the plastic guard at the base of
the stay wire. A repair or replacement of the stay wire was not deemed necessary
at that time.
[29] The investigation confirmed that at some indeterminate time, the stay
wire had failed, and the pole consequently listed, causing
the height of the
power line to lower. There had been high rainfall prior to the day of the
incident, and it was still wet and damp
on the day of the incident, which Mr Den
Exter conceded may have contributed to high voltage flashover, or tracking.
[30] After describing the incident on 14 July, Mr Sheriff’s
unchallenged recollection was that within 10 to 20 seconds Colin
shouted, ‘We’ve hit the fucking power line.’ He said that a
few minutes later, when the electricity had
dropped out, after everyone had
stopped screaming and the men had tried to resuscitate Mr Smith, Colin Stevens
yelled at his son
Nathan in an agitated voice, ‘I knew that power line was
too fucking low.’ He said Nathan Stevens did not respond.
[31] Mr Fritz’ unchallenged recollection was that Colin Stevens said,
‘We hit the fucking power line’, and that
was directed towards his
son. He said he was ‘not aware’ if Nathan responded.
[32] Mr Sheriff was transported by ambulance from the farm with Mr Fritz
and Nathan Stevens, so they could be assessed at the hospital
for any injuries
from their electric shock. Mr Sheriff was making calls on his mobile
telephone and did not engage in a conversation
with the others on the way.
Mr Fritz’ accepted evidence was that he raised the topic of what
Nathan’s father had said
on 12 May and Nathan Stevens responded,
‘You shut your mouth. No one knows about it.’
[33] The admitted facts confirmed the pineapple farming business was owned
and operated by The Stevens Family Trust. It was formally
admitted that employee
induction forms identified the hazard of working near overhead power lines. It
admitted undisputed facts surrounding
the events of 12 and 14 July 2021. It
confirmed relevant heights and measurements. There was the formal admission of
the death of
Mr Smith by electrocution. The admissions confirmed the inability
to ascertain the precise time the stay wire failed, but that metallurgical
showed the corrosion may have progressed over a period of 2.5 years. There had
been a subsequent change of policy for the energy
supplier to check under the
stay wire guard.
[34] The SWER power line runs diagonally across the bays. The scale plan
appears to confirm there was about 60 metres between where
the work was
being done on each day and the contour markings on the survey show the rise and
fall through the paddock, which Mr Fritz
estimated to be a difference of between
one and two metres. As the Magistrate accepted, there is a possibility that
Colin Stevens’
observation on 12 July was impacted by an optical illusion
due to the undulating topography between the bays, which was confirmed
Hiron and Mr Den Exter. Mr Hiron confirmed the harvester could well have
previously ‘connected’ with the SWER line,
but for the varying
height of the ground, relative to the power line.
[35] In any event, it seems to me inevitable there was going to be an adverse
incident. The issue for determination is whether there
was evidence that the
respondents bore the obligation to ensure safety, were aware of the risk to
safety, and did nothing to address
the issue, thereby exposing an individual to
[36] An unsuccessful ‘no case’ submission at the conclusion of
the prosecution case confirmed that just because there
was no evidence whether
the height of the power line had been checked, or arrangements made for Ergon to
de-energise it, that the
circumstantial prosecution case against the respondents
should fail. On appeal, in the absence of any evidence, I am unable to accept
contention on behalf of the respondents that they may have done something about
the power line after Colin Stevens’ comment
on 12 July. There is no
complaint that relevant evidence about that was not led by the prosecution.
[37] Both respondents elected to neither give nor call evidence in their
The applicant’s conviction is unreasonable or unsupported by the
[36] There is no
issue that the evidence adduced by the respondent was capable of proving beyond
reasonable doubt that the applicant
was a PCBU (
PCBU Element
) and as such
he owed the electrical safety duty alleged (
Duty Element
challenged by this appeal is the sufficiency and adequacy of the evidence
adduced to prove that the applicant failed to
comply with that duty (
) and, by extension, that his failure exposed an individual to a risk
of death or serious injury (
Exposure Element
[37] I have
designated the fourth element as the “Exposure Element” in order to
avoid some of the confusion often experienced
in cases of this kind when the
term “causation” is used. That issue was previously discussed in
Director of Public Prosecutions v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2016] VSCA 55
(2016) 49 VR
, at [78]-[91] and more recently considered in
Cleanaway Operations Pty
Ltd v Hanel
[2025] SASCA 112
, where, in respect of a like element of a
similar statutory offence created by the
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(Cth), the Court stated at [287]:
“Respectfully, it is
preferable to describe the third limb as the ‘exposure element’
rather than a test of causation.
That better reflects the text of the provision
and avoids the potential for confusion with the use of the concept of
causation in
other contexts.”
Vibro-Pile,
the Court had stressed that breach of a workplace safety duty
imposed on an employer under a provision of the
Occupational Health and
Safety Act 2004
(Vic) did not require proof that the breach caused actual
harm to any person, as the offences under the Act were “risk-based”,
not “outcome-based” offences. For that reason, the occurrence of
death or injury was of evidentiary significance only
and was not an element of
the offence.
reiterating that the “exposure element” under consideration in
was concerned with exposure to, and not manifestation of, risk,
the Court relevantly observed, at [292]:
Act is contravened when there is a failure by the person conducting a
business or undertaking to take particularised
measures to prevent exposure to
an identifiable risk. At the heart of any prosecution for offending under s 32
for a breach of the
duty under s 19 is the exposure of workers and others
to the risk of death or serious injury, and that does not require proof that
there has been the manifestation of that risk, still less that a relevant
accident or incident has actually caused death or serious
pertinent to bear these matters in mind here as it seems to me that at times the
distinction was overlooked. An offence
against s 40C of the
committed regardless of whether any electrocution incident in which a person
suffers death or serious injury occurs. In a
case where such an incident does
occur, that will of course have evidentiary significance in determining whether
the elements of
the offence are established. However, it must clearly be
understood that in terms of proof of the Exposure Element that the focus
alleged exposure to a risk of death or serious injury and not the actual death
or serious injury that eventuated when the
risk materialised.
[41] It is not
necessary to further canvass the entirety of the evidence adduced by the
respondent in the summary trial before the
Magistrate, nor all of the arguments
put before this Court. The critical evidence upon which the respondent’s
case ultimately
depended at first instance and on appeal to the District Court,
and which is determinative of the present application, concerns the
events of 12
July 2021 described above and their relevance to the incident that occurred on
14 July 2021.
significance of that evidence in the respondent’s case against the
applicant and his father was outlined in the prosecution’s
written closing
submissions in the Magistrates Court, which put the case this
“18. The prosecution case is that a potential change to
the height of the powerline came to the attention of both defendants
12 July 2021. In the context of the exchange that occurred on that day, it
can be inferred that the height of the powerline had
changed sometime prior to
It is not known precisely what height the powerline sat at on 12 July
2021, or indeed when and/or at what rate the powerline moved
before the incident
that occurred on 14 July 2021.
However, based on the exchange that occurred
on 12 July 2021, and the observation by Colin Stevens on that day, the only
inference is that the height of the powerline had changed to some
appreciable extent prior to that. In circumstances where the stay
some unknown time prior to the incident on 14 July 2021, and where Colin Stevens
noticed and commented on the powerline
being in close proximity to the top of
the harvester on 12 July 2021, a suggestion that the powerline had not
moved at all on 12
July 2021 must be rejected as fanciful.
prosecution case is that in circumstances where a potential issue had been
identified, it was reasonably practicable to ensure
at least the 3 metre
exclusion zone from the powerline was maintained in all directions
height of the powerline had been measured and checked to ensure the 3 metre
difference to the top of the harvester was maintained;
electrical entity had de-energised the powerline.
to the incident that occurred on 14 July 2021, it can be inferred that neither
of these things were done prior to the work activities
that took place on that
day. Plainly, the line was live and therefore had not been de-energised. So too,
had the height not been
measured and checked to ensure the exclusion zone was
maintained. It certainly wasn’t maintained at the required 3 metre
distance as at the time of the incident on 14 July 2021. Once it is
accepted, as the prosecution submits, that there must have been
some appreciable
change to the height of the powerline to prompt Colin Stevens’ concern and
comment on 12 July 2021, the only
available inference thereafter is that no one
measured and checked to ensure the exclusion zone was maintained before the work
conducted directly underneath the energised powerline on 14 July 2021.
prosecution case is that in the context of what was known, or ought to have been
known, arising out of Colin Stevens’ observation
and comment on 12 July
2021, it was reasonably practicable to do those things particularised. The
failure to do so by each of the
defendants constituted a breach of their duty to
ensure their work at Lake Mary Pines was electrically safe. That failure had the
effect of exposure of the group of workers involved to the risk of death or
serious injury as alleged.” (emphasis added)
respondent reiterated these same submissions in the District Court appeal.
undisputed facts emphasised in the extract of the prosecutor’s submissions
highlighted above are critical to the outcome
of this matter. Notwithstanding
those undisputed facts, the submissions reveal that the respondent’s case
was that Colin Stevens’
statement, “We almost touched the
powerline”, necessarily showed that the height of the power line must have
changed to some appreciable extent by 12 July 2021; and that when
Mr Fritz told the applicant what his father had said, the applicant
or ought reasonably to have known, of the particular risk of electrocution posed
by the lowered overhead power line.
It followed that it was therefore incumbent
upon the applicant to take the particularised control measures in order to
the electrical safety duty he owed under s 30 of the
failing to do so, the respondent contended, he exposed workers to the risk of
death or serious injury or illness.
Magistrate at first instance accepted Mr Fritz’s evidence concerning the
comment made by Colin Stevens was accurate
and reliable. On that basis, the
Magistrate relevantly concluded:
“I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that Colin Stevens made a comment about the harvester almost
hitting the powerline and
that Nathan Stevens dismissed the comment. However,
what I cannot be satisfied is as to whether it did represent a danger or that
appreciable drop had occurred on 12 July. The statement made by Colin is not
admissible against Nathan Stevens unless it has unequivocally
been adopted by
him as the truth, and this did not occur. So we are left alone with
Nathan’s dismissive statement in response.
There is no corroborating evidence regarding a drop in the powerline prior to
the incident of 14 July. For example, Fritz does [sic.
say that on 12 July, after he
heard Colin’s comments, that he observed the powerline to be lower than
usual. His response to
the question, ‘It wasn’t evident from where
you were standing that there was a problem with the wire’, was ‘No,
not to me.’
Remembering that Colin Stevens’ statement of 12 July is not admissible
against Nathan, it is not clear why Nathan dismissed
any concern expressed by
Colin. It may well have been the case that he looked up and saw nothing unusual
as Fritz’s evidence
suggests may have been the case. The statement in the
ambulance by Nathan does not necessarily, of itself, indicate guilt. It may
indicate that Colin made a statement about the powerline. There is a possibility
that Colin thought there was a drop and there
was not, and that subsequent to
12 July, the power pole then listed. This possibility cannot be reasonably
and totally discounted
and, therefore, I find it a reasonable possibility. The
prosecution case is hampered here by the fact that the timing of the list
power pole is simply not known, and there is a lack of admissible evidence
as to knowledge of a possible manifestation of
that problem or risk.
There can be no doubt that Nathan Stevens owed an electrical safety duty. But
as to the element that both defendants failed to comply
with that duty, I am not
satisfied that this element has been proved beyond reasonable doubt and,
accordingly, I find both defendants
not guilty.”
apparent from the reasons given that the Magistrate was ultimately not satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the respondent
had proven the Breach Element of the
alleged offence in either case. It is also to be noted that earlier in his
reasons, the Magistrate
had also stated that he was not satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt in the case against Colin Stevens that the respondent had
the PCBU Element and had thus already failed to prove an essential
element of the offence in its case against him. The District
Court judge upheld
that finding and dismissed the respondent’s appeal in respect of Colin
Stevens on that basis.
respect to the case against the applicant, on appeal to the District Court the
respondent contended, amongst other things,
that the Magistrate had erred in
finding that the comment made by Colin Stevens on 12 July 2021 was not
admissible in the case against
the applicant. The District Court judge accepted
the Magistrate had erred in that respect, relevantly
“[56] The comment on 12 July was an obviously
important part of the prosecution case. The prosecutor had conceded in closing
submissions that the case failed if that evidence was not accepted. It was
relevant to the assertion that Nathan Stevens was made
aware of the risk and
failed in his duty to eliminate or minimise that risk of electrical harm. It was
relevant to prove what Colin
Stevens shouted at him or in his presence. It was
also relevant to the conversation Nathan Stevens had with Mr Fritz in the
after the incident on 14 July, which amounted to an admission or
statement against interest.
[57] There was no dispute that Colin Stevens made a comment on 12 July
to the effect that there was an issue with the height of the
power line. That
evidence was directly admissible against Colin Stevens as a statement against
interest; it showed that he appreciated
the risk of electrical harm.
[58] As against Nathan Stevens, the basis for admissibility was of
that the comment was made in his presence, to gauge
Nathan’s state of mind and conduct afterwards, and not as to the truth
accuracy of the comment. The Magistrate reasoned he could not use the
comment as being admissible evidence in the case against
Nathan Stevens because
he did not agree with the comment, or adopt it as being truthful or accurate.
Ordinarily, that proposition
is undoubtedly correct; a hearsay comment such as
this made by a witness or co-defendant, would not be admissible as an admission
or statement against interest, unless it was accepted and adopted as being
truthful and accurate, by him.
[59] With respect, it seems to me that a confusion about the basis for
admissibility has led to an error, compounded by a dispute
in the summary
hearing about the content of the comment, notwithstanding the acceptance there
was a comment made to that effect.
The fact that Colin Stevens made a comment
what precisely
was said, or whether what was said was accurate, or whether
Nathan Stevens agreed with it or not. That is beside the point. The Magistrate
accepted the evidence of Mr Fritz that Colin Stevens made the comment and
so should have found the fact it was said was admissible
against Nathan
[60] I am satisfied the fact that Colin Stevens made a comment about the
height of the power line on 12 July is admissible in the
circumstantial case
against Nathan Stevens.
Accordingly, there was a basis upon which to assert
Nathan Stevens was made aware of the electrical risk.
The fact that he
disagreed, or did not appreciate there was a risk, is irrelevant. If not, any
person who has the duty would escape
prosecution or responsibility simply
because they claim they didn’t think there was a problem.
[61] The Magistrate correctly determined that it was unknown precisely when
the stay wire failed, but should not have found that he
could not have regard to
the evidence about the comment on 12 July about that, and consequently
incorrectly reasoned it could not
be shown that Nathan Stevens was alerted to
[62] In my view, the Magistrate was led into error by the assertion that a
conviction of the respondents required proof of knowledge
that the stay wire had
broken, causing the pole to list, or that the breaking of the stay wire was
imminent. That test was impossible.
The obligation cast upon a person conducting
the business was to ensure electrical safety. Evidence tending to prove the
respondents
were made aware of the risk and failed to do anything to ensure
safety was sufficient.
[63] I am satisfied that upon being alerted to that risk, Nathan Stevens
should have acted to ascertain the height of the power line,
made sure that the
harvester was not being utilised and that workers were not within the exclusion
zone, or arranged for the power
supplier to de-energise the line. In failing to
do any of those things, he has failed to discharge his duty.
[64] There is support on the circumstantial case for the realisation of
Nathan’s failure to comply with his duty when he made
the comment to Mr
Fritz in the ambulance, and perhaps by his silence when his father called out,
after the incident. It would be
arguable that is also what he meant when he
stated in the recorded field interview, ‘I didn’t realise the line
low’ but I am prepared to defer to the Magistrate’s finding
that statement was perhaps equivocal.
[65] I am satisfied the circumstantial facts go to prove guilt to the
exclusion of any inferences consistent with innocence.
[66] I am prepared to find the elements of the complaint against Nathan
Stevens have been proved beyond reasonable doubt. Accordingly,
respondent Nathan Stevens guilty.” (emphasis added)
District Court judge correctly determined that the evidence of the comment made
by Colin Stevens was admissible in the case
against the applicant for
non-hearsay purposes. It was otherwise inadmissible second-hand hearsay if
relied upon as proof of the
truth of any fact asserted or implied by Colin
Stevens by the making of the
In other words, in the
case against the applicant it was not admissible to prove the asserted fact that
the harvester almost hit
the power line, nor to infer that the power line had
sagged and was therefore sitting lower than its usual height of 7.8 metres
ground. The evidence was proof of Colin Stevens’ state of mind.
Furthermore, in the case against the applicant, the evidence
provided proof of
what he had been told by Mr Fritz about what Colin Stevens’ had said; and
that he was thereby made aware
that Colin Stevens thought there was a potential
issue with the height of the power line. The sentence in bold in the above
encapsulates the importance of the evidence in the prosecution
[49] Although
the respondent accepted during the hearing of the present application that Colin
Stevens’ comment could not directly
provide evidence that the power line
was sagging on 12 July 2021, it seemed to suggest that it might circumstantially
prove the same
fact. The respondent submitted that the occurrence of the making
of the comment on 12 July and the subsequent occurrence of the
electrocution
incident two days later on 14 July was such an extraordinary coincidence of
events that Colin Stevens could not have
been mistaken in his observation.
Although this argument was raised in response to an argument put by the
applicant that there was
a reasonable possibility that Colin Stevens may have
been mistaken in his observations of the height of the power line that led to
his comment on 12 July 2021, the respondent’s submission again
impermissibly seeks to rely upon the making of the comment to
prove the fact
that the power line had actually sagged at that time. I do not accept the
evidence can be used in that way or that
this form of inferential reasoning may
be legitimately employed here to prove such a fact.
[50] Some of the
District Court judge’s reasoning suggests that his Honour did in fact
impermissibly treat the evidence of the
applicant being told of Colin
Stevens’ comment as providing the basis upon which he became aware of a
heightened risk posed
by the power line sitting at a lower height. If that were
so, then his Honour erred. The non-hearsay bases upon which the evidence
admissible did not prove those facts.
[51] Regardless
of any such error, there is a more fundamental point which in my view makes
plain that the District Court judge erred,
and that the applicant’s
conviction cannot stand. Before I come to that, I will deal briefly with the
Breach Element.
[52] I do not
consider the District Court judge erred in concluding that upon being made aware
of the electrical risk through the
comment made by Colin Stevens, the applicant
should have acted to ascertain the height of the power line, made sure the
was not being utilised and that workers were not within the exclusion
zone, or arranged for the power supplier to de-energise the
power line; and that
by failing to do so he failed to discharge his electrical safety duty.
[53] It is to be
recalled that the duty owed by the applicant under s 30 of the
ensure his pineapple farm business or undertaking was conducted in a way that
was “electrically safe”. That meant
he was to ensure that all
persons, including his workers, were “free from electrical risk”
from the conduct of his business
undertaking.
The “electrical
risk” was the risk of death, shock or injury caused by electricity or
originating from electricity.
The applicant would keep persons free from electrical risk if he eliminated
electrical risk to them, so far as is “reasonably
practicable”, or
if it were not reasonably practicable to eliminate electrical risk to persons,
if he minimised the risk, so
far as is “reasonably
practicable”.
reasonably practicable was that which was “reasonably able to be
done” in relation to ensuring electrical safety,
taking into account and
weighing up all relevant
[54] In my view,
irrespective of the actual height of the power line on 12 July 2021, once
alerted to the possibility of an issue
with its height the applicant should have
excluded workers and plant from that part of the farm that was beneath, or three
either side of, the power line, until at least one of the alleged control
measures particularised by the respondent was done. They
were steps that were
reasonably able to be done by the applicant in the circumstances to ensure any
electrical risk was eliminated
or minimised, so far as reasonably practicable.
Whilst the electrical safety duty imposed on a PCBU by s 30 of the
not absolute, it is one that requires strict observance in order to achieve the
stated purpose of the Act, as set out in s 4 of
“...eliminating the human cost to individuals, families and the community
of death, injury and destruction that can be
caused by electricity”. The
non-delegable duty of a PCBU under s 30 of the
is not expressed in
terms of the standard recognised by the common law, to take reasonable care. It
is higher. So much is evident
from the requirement that a PCBU “must
ensure” their business or undertaking is conducted in a way that is
electrically
Hazards and
risks of electrical harm are not necessarily static. The
and the Code of Practice require a PCBU to proactively identify hazards, assess
risks and implement, maintain and review control
measures. Whether it was true
or not, the applicant should have responded to Colin Stevens’ comment by
ensuring the relevant
exclusion zone was maintained until he did one of the
further particularised actions, which were reasonably able to be done, to ensure
the electrical safety of workers.
[55] Although
much of the argument below and in this Court was directed at whether the
prosecution case was able to prove the Breach
Element beyond reasonable doubt,
in my opinion the real problem with the respondent’s case against the
applicant actually lies
with proof of the Exposure Element.
observed, the respondent argued in this Court that Colin Stevens’ comment
was effectively a warning, which put the applicant
on notice of the electrical
risk posed by the overhead power line; and that the District Court did not err
in so concluding. So
much may be accepted. But what was the objective evidence
of the risk at that time?
overhead power line running across the pineapple farm was a hazard. Because it
traversed a property where harvesting work
would be done using large machinery,
it always posed a risk of electrocution to workers, regardless of its height.
However, the
objective nature of the risk and the likelihood of it eventuating
at any given time depended, amongst other things, on the proximity
of any person
or plant to the power line. At its usual height of 7.8 metres, the power line
sat comfortably outside the three-metre
exclusion zone that would ensure that
the harvester would not come within an unsafe distance, and that the applicant
would therefore
be compliant with his electrical safety duty. As the respondent
accepted during the hearing, at that height the risk of electrocution
the power line was “negligible”. When the power line sagged, and
the distance shortened, the risk of electrocution
obviously increased. That
risk materialised with fatal consequences on 14 July 2021.
[58] However, in
circumstances where the respondent was unable to prove when the power line had
actually sagged, the respondent was
unable to prove there was any greater
objective level of risk posed by the power line at any time before occurrence of
the incident
on 14 July 2021. Colin Stevens’ comment was not capable of
providing evidence of the actual position of the power line on
12 July 2021. It
was therefore not capable of providing evidence of any increased objective risk
posed by the power line at that
[59] That being
so, it seems to me that the evidence adduced by the respondent in the summary
hearing before the Magistrate was simply
incapable of proving the charge against
the applicant beyond reasonable doubt. The Exposure Element required proof of a
causal relationship
between the applicant’s alleged failure to maintain
the three-metre exclusion zone until he actioned either of the alleged
measures particularised; and the risk of death or serious injury by
electrocution posed to his workers by the overhead power
line between 11 and 14
July 2021. The respondent was required to prove beyond reasonable doubt that
the applicant’s failure
in that regard was a significant or substantial
cause of the workers being exposed to that
opinion, the District Court judge could not have been satisfied that the
applicant’s failure to do any of those things
exposed an individual to a
risk of death or serious injury, as required by s 40C of the
[61] Because it
was not known when the power line sagged to the position it was in when the
incident occurred, the prosecution was
unable to prove beyond reasonable doubt
that the applicant’s failure to ensure the three-metre exclusion zone was
until either of the particularised control measures were taken led to
the exposure of his workers to the risk of death or serious
injury through
electrocution by the overhead power line. Even accepting that each of those
actions were things he was reasonably
able to do to ensure the electrical safety
of his workers, if there was no proof of an appreciable objective change in the
by the overhead power line because it had sagged to a lower than
usual height, then it would not have mattered whether the applicant
actioned the
control measures or not. His failure to do them would not have exposed his
workers to electrical risk. They were already
exposed to such risk, albeit to a
negligible degree, when the power line sat at its usual 7.8 metres height. It
was only at the
point where the height of the power line had actually lowered to
a point where the highest point of the harvester would come within
the 3-metre
exclusion zone, and the objective risk had thereby increased, that it could be
said that any failure by the applicant
to do that which was particularised in
the complaint would have exposed his workers to the risk of death or serious
injury by electrocution.
[62] That is an
insurmountable problem for the respondent. Because it could not prove when any
such change in height had occurred,
the respondent was simply unable to exclude
as a reasonable possibility that the power line had dipped to its lowered
position at
any time up until immediately before the incident on 14 July 2021.
That deficiency in proof was a solid obstacle to conviction which
could not be
cured by the evidence of the applicant being told of Colin Stevens’
comment on 12 July 2021.
applicant framed his argument in this Court that the respondent was unable to
exclude as a reasonable hypothesis consistent
with innocence that the stay wire
supporting the SWER power line failed on 14 July 2021, leading to a sudden
lowering of the power
line just before the harvester came within proximity of
it. Whilst he pointed to evidence given by one of the workers, Mr Page,
had seen a “flash of lightning” just before the incident occurred,
as evidence supporting such an inference,
in my view it is not necessary for
that possibility to be further explored. As the respondent could not prove on
its own case when
the power line sagged, it always remained a reasonable
possibility, unable to be excluded by the evidence adduced by the respondent,
that it happened on 14 July 2021 immediately before the incident occurred. For
the prosecution’s circumstantial case to succeed,
it was required to
exclude all reasonable hypotheses consistent with innocence beyond reasonable
By the evidence adduced,
it failed to do so.
[64] In my view
the District Court judge did not properly consider whether the Exposure Element
had been proven beyond reasonable
doubt. In part this is explicable because
Colin Stevens’ comment and its relevance to proof of the Breach Element
were largely
the focus of the appeal from the decision of the Magistrate in the
applicant’s case. The parties seemed to have wrongly approached
as if proof of the Breach Element would axiomatically prove the Exposure
Element. As a result, it appears that having determined
that the first three
offence elements, up to the Breach Element, were proven beyond reasonable doubt,
his Honour then simply concluded
that it followed the offence was proven beyond
reasonable doubt. That was an error. The evidence was not capable of
establishing
the Exposure Element beyond reasonable doubt. The District Court
judge erred in concluding otherwise.
[65] Ground 1 is
established. The District Court judge’s decision to find the applicant
guilty of the offence was unreasonable
and not supported by the
Conclusion and orders
[66] In the
circumstances, there is no need to consider Ground 2. Leave to appeal should be
granted to correct a substantial injustice.
[67] I would
make the following orders:
applicant is granted leave to appeal.
appeal is allowed.
orders of the District Court judge are set aside.
decision of the Magistrate at first instance, finding the applicant not guilty
of the offence, is confirmed.
respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs of and incidental to the
application for leave to
Nicholson v Stevens
[2025] QDC 17.
McDonald v Queensland
Police Service
[2017] QCA 255
[2018] 2 Qd R 612
Sanchez v Commissioner of
(2022) 12 QR 263, [10].
According to the statement of
agreed facts admitted pursuant to
Justices Act
, the power
line was a 12.7kV SWER high voltage overhead power line.
This should simply read that
the pole on the adjoining property had listed.
It is obvious in context that
the word “not” is missing here in the transcript of the
Magistrate’s decision.
Walton v The Queen
[1989] HCA 9
(1989) 166 CLR 283
, 288, 292-293 (Mason CJ);
R v Ryan Churchill
(A pseudonym)
(2025) 99 ALJR 719
, [46] (Gageler CJ, Gordon, Gleeson,
Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ).
Section 10(2)(e)
Section 10(1)(a)
Section 10(4)
Kirk v Industrial Relations Commission of New
South Wales
(2010) 239 CLR 531, [10] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan,
Kiefel and Bell JJ). Although the Court there was making observations
nature of an employer’s duty under the
Occupational Health and Safety
(NSW), they are apposite to describe the nature of the duty under s
Paradise Outdoor
Building Company Pty Ltd v Steward
[2022] QCA 118
, [32]-[34].
R v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
, [46]; citing
Barca v The Queen
(1975) CLR 133 CLR 82,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (355 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter