URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/210.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v HDB [2025] QCA 210 (31 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
[2025] QCA 210
(applicant)
CA No 216 of 2025
DC No 219 of 2023
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Sentence Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at [Redacted] – Date of Sentence: 3 September 2025
DELIVERED ON:
Date of Orders: 24 October 2025
Date of Publication of Reasons: 31
October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
24 October 2025
Bond and Boddice and Doyle JJA
Date of Orders: 24 October 2025
Application
for leave to appeal against sentence is refused.
court orders that there be no publication to the public in connection with the
proceeding before the court of the name of the
applicant, or of the complainant
or identification of the Queensland town in which the offending conduct
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE
– GROUNDS FOR INTERFERENCE – SENTENCE MANIFESTLY
EXCESSIVE OR
INADEQUATE – where, on 3 September 2025, the applicant pleaded guilty to
one count of unlawful stalking –
where the offence was a domestic violence
offence – where the applicant was sentenced to 9 months’
imprisonment –
where the applicant had a parole release date fixed at 2
December 2025 – whether the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive
– whether the sentencing judge conflated the harm to the complainant from
the offence and the harm arising out of her own offending
R v Maxwell
M Hibble for the applicant
M A Green for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
[Redacted] for the applicant
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Queensland) for the respondent
For the reasons given by Boddice JA, I joined in the making of the
orders on 24 October 2025.
[2] BODDICE
On 3 September 2025, the applicant pleaded guilty to one count of
unlawful stalking. The offence was a domestic violence offence.
[3] On the same
date, the applicant was sentenced to 9 months’ imprisonment. His
parole release date was fixed at 2 December
applicant sought leave to appeal sentence. Should leave be granted, he relied
on two grounds. First, that the sentence was
manifestly excessive. Second,
that the sentencing judge conflated the harm to the complainant from the offence
and the harm arising
out of her own offending.
24 October 2025, the Court ordered that the application for leave to appeal
sentence be refused and that there be no publication
to the public in connection
with the proceeding before the Court of the name of the applicant or of the
complainant or identification
of the Queensland town in which the offending
conduct occurred.
[6] These are my
reasons for joining in those orders.
[7] The offence
was committed between 2 December 2020 and 24 December 2020. At that
time the applicant was aged 57 years. The complainant,
who had been in
a relationship with the applicant for approximately eight years between
2012 and 2020, was aged 33 years. There
were two children from that
relationship.
[8] The offence
was particularised as conduct extending over a period of approximately three
weeks, during which the applicant exhibited
controlling, harassing and
threatening behaviour. That behaviour involved the applicant sending the
complainant messages containing
abuse, threats and demanding information about
her private life. Within these messages, the applicant frequently called the
complainant
derogatory names, described her as an irresponsible mother,
questioned her ability to properly care for the children and consistently
denigrated her intelligence, worth and appearance.
[9] According to
the Agreed Statement of Facts, the relationship between the applicant and the
complainant ended on 16 November 2020.
The decision to end the
relationship was not mutual. The applicant wanted the relationship to
[10] During the
relationship, the applicant and the complainant had engaged in sexual activities
involving their dog. Those activities
were captured in videos and photographs,
copies of which had been retained by the applicant.
[11] Over the
period of offending, the applicant sent at least 78 text messages that included
some sort of threat to tell the complainant’s
friends and family about the
complainant having engaged in sexual conduct with the dog. He also sent
multiple text messages confirming
that he had followed through with the threats,
listing the people he had told. In one of the text messages, the applicant said
he so despised the complainant that he wanted to “destroy her
reputation with everyone” and that he did not “give
a shit about any
consequences”. In addition to those text messages, the applicant also
sent messages indicating that he had
been monitoring the complainant’s
[12] The Agreed
Statement of Facts contained the following in relation to the effect of the
conduct on the complainant:
“22. Messages on the
[applicant’s] phone indicate that he followed through on his threats and
actually told multiple people
This included people the complainant was friends and worked with.
complainant became fearful of leaving the house due to retribution from the
public. She was scared that the [applicant] wouldn’t
stop telling people
and her family and children would become aware. The complainant received
comments on her Facebook page where
She ceased attending certain locations in public as she was aware the
[applicant] had told them information about
her. One on [sic] occasion when out
with friends, the complainant was waiting for a taxi when a complete stranger
started to abuse
her, calling her a ‘
complainant was also fearful of the [applicant] committing violence against her
because she was living by herself, and he was
driving past her house throughout
the night. She was fearful that he was going to take her back to his place or
commit violence
against her. She was aware he was angry and
unpredictable.”
effects were supported by a victim impact statement tendered at the sentence
hearing. In that statement, the complainant
described the abuse as leaving her
feeling worthless and powerless. She said she had struggled with anxiety,
hypervigilance and
occasional bouts of depression. She had been fearful to go
out and had received a lot of hate messages
Sentencing remarks
sentencing judge recorded that the applicant had pleaded guilty to the charge on
the eve of trial, over four and a-half years
after the offending itself. The
sentencing judge accepted that the plea was to be taken into account in the
applicant’s favour,
as the plea did have utility, saving the complainant
from having to ultimately give evidence and be cross-examined. However, the
sentencing judge did not accept that the plea exhibited much remorse as it was
in the face of a very strong prosecution case with
the applicant’s
offending being revealed by an analysis of his mobile phone.
[15] Further,
the complainant, although being saved from having to give evidence, therefore
suffered much more anxiety than would
otherwise have been experienced by pleas
of guilty at an earlier time. The sentencing judge noted that the matter had
been listed
for trial on three occasions and that the complainant had been
conferenced on each occasion.
sentencing judge found that the applicant’s unlawful stalking was
“appalling grubby behaviour”, showing
a complete disregard for the
complainant’s wellbeing, as well as the wellbeing of the applicant’s
children. The applicant
“just wanted to inflict maximum damage out of a
sense of vengeance and
sentencing judge recorded that the applicant was currently employed, had not
committed any offences since the offending and
that there had been no breaches
of court orders relating to the complainant and other family members. Further,
the applicant’s
criminal history contained no entries for domestic
violence offending, although it did contain entries for weapons offences and
offences, including having been sentenced in 2021 for multiple counts of
bestiality for which the applicant had been fined.
sentencing judge said:
“It is true that the agreed statement
of facts discloses that the complainant was also sentenced for multiple counts
of bestiality
on 14 September 2021. But what is clear is, at the time of
the offending before me, this was a private thing that you had both engaged
and there was no apprehension that the offending was going to come to light, and
much less result in the public humiliation which
your conduct the subject of
this sentence ensured.”
setting out the purposes of sentencing, the sentencing judge
“You wanted to cause maximum reputational and
psychological damage to the complainant. You had, on your mobile phone,
particularly
degrading and humiliating images and you were prepared to disclose
them. You threatened her that you would disclose information
particularly humiliating and degrading and you did so. I am imposing this
sentence to make it clear that the community,
acting through the court,
absolutely denounces your
sentencing judge referred to a Court of Appeal decision of
R v Maxwell
which concurrent terms of imprisonment of 18 months for attempting to
pervert the course of justice and 15 months for unlawful
stalking, were
imposed in respect of a 62 year old offender with a limited relevant
criminal history, who had pleaded guilty in respect
of the offending over a
period of six weeks.
sentencing judge noted that an aggravating feature in that case was that the
offending was in breach of a domestic violence
order and that there was an
offence of attempting to pervert the course of justice. The sentencing judge
accepted that those aggravating
features were not present in the
applicant’s offending. Further, the maximum penalty for the offending in
was 7 years’ imprisonment, whereas the maximum penalty
for the applicant’s offending was 5 years’ imprisonment.
sentencing judge concluded:
“Balancing the aggravating
features, which include the extreme betrayal of trust; the significant number of
threatening messages;
the disclosures you made and the damaging threats that you
made; the fact the offending was domestic violence offending; and the
significant impacts on the complainant’s wellbeing as a consequence of
this, with the fact that you have not committed any
offences in the four
and a-half years after the offending for which I am sentencing you; the absence
of domestic violence history
in your criminal history; and the utility of the
plea in saving the complainant from giving evidence, I am of the view that,
notwithstanding
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
states that a sentence of imprisonment should only be imposed as a last resort,
it is appropriate to sentence you to a term of actual
imprisonment.
You are convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for nine months. I set
a parole release date of 2 December
Consideration
applicant submits that the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive, as the
applicant’s offending did not occur whilst
subject to a domestic violence
order, took place over only 21 days and did not involve any threats of
physical harm. Further, the
applicant had a criminal history of little
relevance, had not engaged in any further conduct involving the complainant
over a period
of some four and a-half years, was in full-time employment, and
had pleaded guilty.
[23] Whilst it
may be accepted that those factors all exist, there is no well-defined or
constraining range for unlawful stalking
offences, as those offences include
a particularly wide variety of cases. Allowing for that fact, an
application of relevant sentencing
principles to the circumstances of the
applicant’s offending and his many mitigating circumstances, supports a
conclusion that
a sentence of 9 months’ imprisonment, with parole
release after 3 months, fell well within a sound exercise of the sentencing
discretion.
aggravating circumstances of the applicant’s offending included that the
offence was a domestic violence offence and
involved threats to disclose
humiliating personal details about sexual conduct which had taken place in
private, about which others
would not know. The threats included statements
that he had made actual disclosures to named persons. Reprehensibly, that
was engaged in vengefully, to cause maximum reputational harm to the
complainant, all because she left the relationship.
circumstances made the applicant’s conduct particularly serious and
supported a conclusion that a sentence of imprisonment
was the only
appropriate sentence.
[26] Further,
the applicant’s mitigating factors, including the entry of a plea of
guilty, albeit late but with utility, lack
of relevant criminal history, lack of
further offending over an extended period of time, were not such as to warrant a
that the applicant ought not serve actual time in custody. The very
nature of the applicant’s offending and its serious circumstances,
for a sentence which reflected the relevant sentencing principles of
denunciation and deterrence.
[27] Against
that background, a sentence of 9 months’ imprisonment, with parole
release after serving 3 months of that sentence,
was neither plainly
unreasonable nor unjust. Further, such a sentence does not exhibit any
misapplication of sentencing principles.
[28] The other
proposed ground of appeal is also without merit.
[29] First, the
sentencing judge’s reference to images possessed by the applicant was
correct. The assertion that they were
stored on the applicant’s mobile
phone was erroneous, but of no moment to the gravamen of the applicant’s
conduct, namely,
the threat to disclose those images to others.
[30] Second,
whilst the applicant submits that the complainant’s humiliation and harm
flowed from her subsequent conviction
of offences of bestiality, at the time
that the applicant committed the offence, the complainant’s private
actions were something
[31] Although it
may be accepted that a conviction for such offences involved significant public
humiliation, a consideration of the
sentencing judge’s remarks supports
a conclusion that the sentencing judge properly sentenced the applicant on
the basis that
the applicant’s conduct had been engaged in to cause
maximum reputational and psychological damage to the complainant, and
disclosures that were particularly humiliating of the complainant.
[32] Third, the
applicant’s threat to disclose them and then doing so, involved a huge
betrayal of trust. It was that betrayal
of what was privately engaged in
conduct, that caused the complainant the harm referred to in the Agreed
Statement of Facts.
[33] As the
proposed grounds of appeal were devoid of merit, a grant of leave to appeal
sentence was futile.
[34] Having
regard to the nature of the disclosures and their impact on the complainant, it
was also appropriate to make the non-publication
order. The making of such an
order was supported by both the applicant and the respondent.
I have had the advantage of reading the draft reasons for judgment of
Boddice JA. I agree with his Honour’s statement of
the reasons with
which I agree for having joined in the orders given on 24 October 2025
refusing leave to appeal and for non-publication
AB 39/16–22. The date
on which the complainant was sentenced was actually 23 June 2022, but that error
was not material.
[2018] QCA 17.
AB 40/28–40.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (175 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter