URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2005/472.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Ping [2005] QCA 472 (16 December 2005)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
[2005] QCA 472
PING, Shane
(applicant/appellant)
CA No 207 of 2005
DC No 208 of 2004
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Appeal against Conviction and Sentence
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Mackay
DELIVERED ON:
Orders delivered ex tempore on 2 December 2005
Reasons delivered 16
December 2005
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
2 December 2005
Williams and Jerrard JJA and Chesterman J
reasons for judgment of each member of the Court, each concurring as to the
orders made
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – VERDICT
– OTHER MATTERS – where the applicant/appellant
was convicted on one
count of torture and sentenced to three years’ imprisonment –
whether the evidence was capable of
proving the applicant/appellant intended to
inflict severe pain and suffering; whether the trial judge erred in summing up
CRIMINAL LAW – JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
JUDGMENT AND PUNISHMENT – SENTENCE – FACTORS TO BE TAKEN
ACCOUNT – FACTUAL BASIS FOR SENTENCE – PROOF AND EVIDENCE –
GENERALLY – whether the trial judge erred
in admitting the evidence of an
expert witness or did not properly direct the jury with respect to that expert
Criminal Code Act
1899 (Qld) s 16, s 17, s
(1982) 41 ALR 64
Makita (Australia)
Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
, discussed
[2000] QCA 201
; CA No 399 of 1999, 30 May 2000, discussed
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642
, discussed
A J Glynn SC for the applicant/appellant
M R Byrne for the
SOLICITORS:
Primrose Couper Cronin Rudkin for the applicant/appellant
Director of
Public Prosecutions (Queensland) for the respondent
WILLIAMS JA:
I agree with the reasons of Chesterman
JERRARD JA:
I have read the reasons for judgment of Chesterman J
and respectfully agree with them.
CHESTERMAN J:
After a four day trial the applicant was, on 21 July
2005, convicted of torturing Michael Loncar between 26 September 2002 and 5
October 2002. The circumstances constituting the offence occurred on a prawn
trawler, the
Captain Alex
, in coastal waters off Mackay in Central
Queensland.
[4] The appellant’s appeal against conviction was heard on 2 December
2005, whereupon the Court quashed the conviction and ordered
that a verdict of
acquittal be entered. No reasons were given for that decision but the Court
announced that written reasons would
be prepared and published.
[5] The appellant was the skipper of the
Captain Alex
. Mr Loncar, the
complainant, was the deckhand. He was 29 years old and relatively inexperienced
in the role. He had sailed on
two previous voyages which he described as
‘tucker trip(s)’. In return for his food and, of course,
accommodation on
the vessel, Mr Loncar was taught how to perform the tasks
expected of a deckhand. His instructors were the appellant and Bryan Currie,
paid deckhand. Mr Loncar appears to have performed satisfactorily on the two
voyages and he was engaged by the appellant as a
paid deckhand for a third
voyage. It was on this voyage that he claimed to have been tortured by the
[6] The complainant described the duties of a deckhand:
‘Getting all the nets ready and ... going out on the booms ... when the
booms get released down ... getting everything ready
for [the night’s
trawling]. Sorting prawns ... cleaning up ... hosing down ... cleaning
cuttlefish ... packing away ... prawns
[sorting] squid, fish, bait ... [packing]
fish into cardboard boxes, making up boxes ... to put the prawns in ... cleaning
round the deck ...’.
He thought that a deckhand was engaged in ‘a fairly complicated sort of
Captain Alex
Mackay Harbour on 23 September 2002. The only crew were the appellant and the
complainant. The complainant could not swim
and he had told the appellant of
that inability. A few days into the voyage, on 25 September 2002, the
Captain Alex
was boarded by water police officers on a routine patrol.
Mr Loncar made no complaint about the appellant’s conduct before
encounter with the water police. The complainant gave evidence of a number of
incidents on the voyage which were said to constitute
the acts of torture. He
could not remember the sequence of the events he described, although he
remembered that the first week of
the voyage ‘was fine’. The
appellant, he said, became angry and violent ‘just near the end
[8] The complainant was a laconic witness. This is his account of the
‘... [A]fter the Water Police left, how did things go between the two of
you ...? - ... I started getting a bit ... jumpy
and all that, forgetting
things to do ... what I was taught to do, I was starting to lapse down and
forget how to do things ...
because ... going out there [I] was just trying to
get used to things that I should have remembered, but I started to slacken off
little bit.
... It wasn’t that good at all [the day after the water police left] ...
because [the appellant] started getting angry with
me, because I was forgetting
things that I should have learnt, should have known what to do.
What was the first thing you remember ... that he got angry about? – Just
not tying up the cod ends [of the fishing nets].
What happens if you don’t tie the cod ends up properly? – The prawns
will get out of the net.
And did that occur ...? – Yes.
What happened ...? - ... [W]e brought the nets back up because I didn’t
actually have it properly tied. ... [The appellant]
just got angry with me.
... [W]hat happened that night? - ... [H]e grabbed me ... [f]rom the front,
like, under the shirt ... [H]e used an open hand and
hit me around the head part
... [a]nd the mouth. Drew blood.
How many times did he hit you? – I’m not sure. ... Two or three
[times]. I’m not real sure.
Did he say anything to you ...? – Yes. He said “Michael Loncar,
you’re nothing but a stupid cockhead.” ...
Now that night, ... where did you sleep? - ... Outside on the boat ... [b]ecause
[the appellant] said he wasn’t ready enough
to see me so I stayed out
there for the night.’
interrupt the narrative to point out that the evidence last rehearsed is
probably false. There was evidence that the
Captain Alex
, in common with
all prawn trawlers, spent the night trawling the prawn grounds. Both skipper
and deckhand would work throughout
the night and get what sleep they could
during the day after they had attended to their respective duties of cleaning,
cooking and
packing prawns, cleaning the vessel and preparing for the next
night’s fishing.
[10] The complainant’s evidence continued:
‘... [W]hat ... generally happens with the prawns after they’re
caught ...? – [Y]ou cook then, sort them; ... you
cook them up and pack
them and put them in a snap ... freezer. ... [T]hat’s my job as a
And did you get that right, stacking ... the freezer? – No, I did not
because (the appellant) ... wasn’t happy with me.
He woke up and ...
called me names like “stupid cockhead” and all that because I
didn’t have them stacked properly.
Did he do anything? – Yes, he hit me ... [a]round the face ... then (he)
went and ... grabbed me (at) the throat and put me
on the ground and spat in my
And while you were down on the ground, did he hit you ...? – I’m not
Did his hitting you either when you were up or down ... cause any injury ...?
– Yes, like face, like bleeding round the face,
... Now, as well as hitting you with his hands, did he ever hit you with
anything else? – Yes. ... A gaff.
... Anything else? – Rubber hose.
Anything else? – Star fish.
You say you were hit with a starfish...? – Yes.
When did that happen? – At some time during the trip.
Did that cause any injury ...? – Just pain in my ... (lower) back.
And you say that he put a crab on your ear at one stage? – Yes.
Do you know what kind of a crab it was? – A little sand crab.
... And how did that happen? – He just grabbed it out of the sorting tray
and stuck it on my right ear.
... And what happened ...? – It bit into my ear ... with the little claws
... [D]id that cause any injury...? – Yes, (it) bled my ear.
And you say there was a gaff at some stage used? – Yes, he used the
How did that come about? – He’s grabbed it and smashed it, and
grabbed the horn of it and put it towards my throat ...
Are you saying at the bottom of your neck ... [w]here your neck ... meets your
chest? – ... Yes.
... [D]id that gaff cause any injury to your neck ...? – No, just like,
cut it and it bled.
Do you know what had happened just before him smashing that gaff? – He got
angry with me because I wasn’t doing my job
[11] The complainant
explained that the
Captain Alex
was equipped with two fibreglass dip
tanks, which were filled with fresh seawater. They were used to clean the
prawns before they
were cooked and frozen. The complainant said this about
‘... [D]o you remember anything happening with the dip tanks? –
What was that? – I had my head dunked in it twice. ... He’s grabbed
me by the back and put me head in the water.
... [H]ow long were you held under the water? – I’m not sure.
... [W]hat were you doing while you had your head forced into the water? –
[T]rying to get my head out of the water ...
Were you able to...? – No I couldn’t.
... [Y]ou eventually got your head out? – Yeah ... well, he’s pulled
me out of the water.
How many separate occasions did that happen ...? – Twice.
[W]hat was in your mind while you were having your head held under the water?
– I was going to
[12] The complainant gave
evidence of some conversations he had with the appellant. He said:
Can you remember him saying some things to you while you were out at sea?
– Yes ... He called me a stupid cockhead... I wasn’t
doing my job
properly. ... I was like useless ... [a]t my job.
Did he talk about things that happen at sea? – Yes, “[a]ccidents do
happen ... and no-one would ever find you if an accident
happened out there ...
you could fall and they could say you’ve fallen overboard or anything ...
and ... I panicked then.
What was the scariest thing he said ...? – Probably that ...
“[n]o-one would ever be able to find you”. That really
[13] The complainant also gave
evidence that:
‘[A]s well as throwing you around ... did the (appellant) do anything
else? – Yeah, like hit me around the head. ...
plastic buckets were
smashed on the back of my head. They’ve got lumps in them.
This hitting you with the rubber hose? – Yes.
Where did that hit you ...? – Around the (lower) back ... and left marks
on my back.
And you say that the (appellant) was pushing you around the deck. Did he ever
try and push you anywhere else? – In the rib.
I thought I had a broken
rib at one stage ...’
other events occurred on the voyage. A prawn trawler is equipped with metal
spars, called booms, which are hoisted into
a vertical position at times when
the vessel is not actually trawling. When it does trawl the booms are lowered
into a horizontal
position by means of cables and a winch. The nets are trawled
from the booms which, when lowered, protrude well beyond the sides
vessel. The nets are lowered from the boom, again by cables and a winch. There
is a skid on the outboard end of the boom.
Its function is to hold the mouth of
the net open. On one occasion the complainant clambered out on the boom to
attach a rope to
the skid. While he was in that precarious position the
appellant operated the winch to lower the net and the skid, and the complainant,
into the sea. He held tightly to a chain attached to the skid until the
appellant winched the net back to the boom and Mr Loncar
was able to scramble
complainant, ‘just grabbed me
and (threw) me down’.
[15] The last event occurred as the
Captain Alex
returned to her berth
in the Pioneer River on 4 October 2002. The complainant was required to lift
the boom from the horizontal
to the vertical position so the trawler could
berth. The complainant’s account was:
‘... I tried to pull it up first but I couldn’t, and I went around
to tell (the appellant) that I couldn’t ...
move at all ’cause I was
that sore in that rib and he grabbed me from the front of my shirt and pulled me
straight down and
hit the ... floor of the boat on my
[16] When, eventually, the
Captain Alex
was safely berthed the appellant told Mr Loncar to
‘get (his) gear and get off the boat’. The complainant obeyed so
promptly that he took his bag but left his clothes behind.
[17] Two other facts should be mentioned. During the course of the voyage
Captain Alex
encountered another trawler, the
skipper and the deckhand of that boat came separately onto the
. Mr Loncar had an opportunity to complain to either or both of them
complainant could have asked the skipper of the
if he could
take passage on her as a means of escaping the appellant’s cruelty. He
did not say anything to either skipper
or deckhand about his plight. The second
fact is that the appellant performed some acts of kindness to the complainant,
which interspersed
the acts of cruelty. The appellant provided some rudimentary
first aid when Mr Loncar hurt his foot. He cooked meals both for himself
the complainant during the voyage and he gave the complainant cigarettes when Mr
Loncar’s own supply ran out.
[18] Mr Loncar suffered a number of injuries as a result of the
appellant’s assaults, but they are fairly described as minor.
senior medical officer at the Mackay Base Hospital, examined Mr Loncar on 4
October 2002, the day the
Captain Alex
returned to harbour. She
‘Swelling to the right jaw with associated tenderness. Tenderness without
swelling of the left jaw. Nose was swollen, tender
and a graze with fresh blood
ooze from the bridge of the nose. Graze under left nostril into moustache...
Left forehead had fresh
graze consisting of pinkened skin with fresh blood ooze.
... Right eyebrow had a three by five (centimetre) blue-black bruise...
crushing to right pinna (outside section of the top of the ear) ... Right
swollen ear with blue-black bruise along entire
length of pinna. Right internal
mouth had an area of bruising of two centimetres [in] diameter... Blue-black
bruise to left lower
lid and ... upper cheek. Tender area at the occipital
region, lumps present. ... Brown bruises to the right and left chest wall
Linear graze to the anterior chest wall ... Area of severe tenderness across
left ribs ... Graze over left ... iliac spine (hip)
... grazes to the upper
shoulder with multiple dried scabs ... Fresh grazes to the right elbow with
fresh red blood ... Tenderness
of the right wrist without
[19] Section 320A of the
Criminal Code Act
1899 (Qld) provides:
‘(1) A person who tortures another person commits a crime.
Maximum penalty – 14 years imprisonment
(2) In this section –
pain or suffering
includes physical, mental, psychological or emotional
pain or suffering, whether temporary or permanent.
means the intentional infliction of severe pain or suffering on
a person by an act or a series of acts done on 1 or more than 1
[20] The pain and
suffering which the Crown alleged the appellant inflicted on Mr Loncar was
‘mental, psychological or emotional
suffering’.
[21] To prove that the complainant had been inflicted with severe mental,
psychological or emotional suffering the Crown called Mr
Jones who is a clinical
psychologist and whom Mr Loncar had consulted on 12 October 2002 because he was
‘emotionally and psychologically
disturbed’. Mr Jones treated the
complainant for about a year, in the course of which he saw him about twenty
times. Mr Jones’
initial diagnosis was that Mr Loncar was suffering an
acute stress disorder. His symptoms were sleeplessness and irritability.
was distractible and avoided social contact out of a fear that he might meet the
appellant. Because the symptoms persisted for
more than a month Mr Jones
altered his diagnosis to post-traumatic stress disorder. The diagnostic
criteria for that disorder are
that the patient ‘has experience[d],
witnessed or was confronted with an event or events that involved actual or
death or serious injury ... and the person’s response involved
intense fear, helplessness, or horror’. This stress disorder
until February 2003 after which he ‘no longer met the criteria’. Mr
Jones described the complainant’s
symptoms as recurrent and intrusive
distressing recollections of the event; a physical or physiological reaction
when recalling the
events; a diminished interest in social activities and an
avoidance of social situations in which he might have met the appellant;
range of emotional expression; and hyper-vigilance, the sense of being more than
usually aware of one’s surroundings,
borne of fear.
[22] Mr Jones explained that whether or not an individual develops
post-traumatic stress disorder in response to a dangerous or frightening
depends upon the individual’s resilience and the nature of the event.
Some people are stronger in character than others
and better at coping with
unpleasantness. When, however, an individual does develop symptoms sufficient
to amount to post-traumatic
stress disorder the condition is serious.
[23] It emerged from the evidence that the complainant had experienced a
degree of distress in his life unrelated to his voyage on
. He had been married, but only briefly. His wife left him after about
six months’ cohabitation. He had an infant son whom
he could not see.
His wife initiated proceedings in the Family Court seeking the award of an
interest in the complainant’s
business which he shared with his parents.
That possibility was a source of particular anxiety for the complainant. In
he worried that he had failed in life and he was a disappointment to
his parents.
[24] Mr Jones described the complainant as dependant in personality and
vulnerable psychologically. He was more susceptible than
the ordinary person to
react to a threatening situation and develop a stress disorder.
[25] Two other features of Mr Jones’ testimony should be mentioned.
The first is that his evidence did not include an account
of what the
complainant told him of the events which preceded the onset of the symptoms. Mr
Jones said that he was given a history
by the complainant but he did not tell
the Court what it was. The second feature is that Mr Jones did not expressly
testify that,
in his opinion, the appellant’s acts of aggression and abuse
were the cause of the complainant’s stress disorder. That
conclusion was
implicit in Mr Jones’ evidence but he did not expressly state it. All
that was said of the point was that the
complainant ‘told (him) about what
he said had happened out on a boat at sea’ and that the discussion between
and the complainant ‘centred very much on what had
[26] It is immediately apparent that the prosecution of the appellant on the
charge of torture was difficult. The Crown took upon
itself the burden of
proving that the appellant intended to cause the complainant severe
psychological (or mental or emotional) suffering
and committed the series of
assaults to bring about that result. Subject to the admissibility of Mr
Jones’ evidence, which
I will discuss later, the Crown proved that the
complainant suffered a severe psychological disorder, post-traumatic stress
which would no doubt satisfy the definition of pain and suffering in
section 320A. It is not so clear that the Crown actually proved
that the stress
disorder was caused by the appellant’s behaviour. Mr Jones was not asked
that particular question. That critical
fact should not have been left to
inference or implication.
[27] If one assumes in the Crown’s favour that it did prove that the
appellant’s conduct caused the complainant to suffer
psychological disorder the inquiry then turns to whether it proved that the
appellant intended to cause, or inflict, that
psychological suffering upon the
complainant. Torture is, as I mentioned, the intentional infliction of
suffering by an act or a
series of acts. The words of section 320A are plain
and unambiguous; they offer no scope for misunderstanding. To make out a case
of torture the prosecution must prove, beyond reasonable doubt of course, that
an accused intended his acts to inflict severe pain
and suffering on his victim.
It is not enough that such suffering is the consequence of the acts, and that
the acts were deliberate.
The prosecution must prove an actual, subjective,
intention on the part of the accused to bring about the suffering by his
The acts in question must have as their object the infliction of
severe suffering; that must be their intended consequence.
[28] There is no doubt that torture, as defined by the
Criminal Code Act
1899 (Qld), is the intentional infliction of severe pain and suffering,
physical or mental. That point was recognised by this Court
[2000] QCA 201
in which it was said ‘the essence of that offence under
section 320A is the intentional infliction of “severe pain or
suffering” which may be mental or emotional only, and either temporary or
permanent’.
[29] ‘Intention’ has no specific legal definition. It is to be
given its ordinary, everyday, meaning. ‘Intention’
is the act of
‘determining mentally upon some result’. It is a ‘purpose or
design’. (See the Macquarie
Dictionary.) To prove that the appellant
tortured Mr Loncar the Crown had to prove that his assaults and cruelty were
designed to
inflict severe psychological harm upon him. It had to prove that
the purpose of those assaults was to inflict that harm on the complainant.
had to prove that the appellant consciously decided to beat the complainant in
order to cause him severe psychological distress
(or suffering). Nothing else
would suffice.
[30] Ordinarily the Crown will only be able to prove such an intention by
what an accused said and/or what he did. In this case the
appellant said
nothing relevant. He did not give evidence. He was interviewed by police
officers and the record of interview was
put into evidence. The appellant
denied ever assaulting Mr Loncar. The jury plainly disbelieved him but the
point remains that
nothing the appellant said provided any evidence of an
intention to inflict severe psychological suffering upon the complainant.
[31] That leaves only the appellant’s conduct as described by Mr Loncar
as facts from which an inference of the requisite intention
might be inferred.
It is immediately apparent that the evidence is insufficient for that purpose.
Mr Byrne, who appeared for the
respondent on the appeal, very fairly conceded
the point. The concession was rightly made. The reasons are not hard to find:
, the complainant’s own evidence showed that the appellant
had a motive for the assaults. Motive and intention are different
the existence of a motive may be a sufficient explanation of conduct, which,
because of the motive can be seen not to
be the expression of a different
intention. In this case the appellant’s motive tends to explain his
conduct. The motive
was anger and frustration at the complainant’s
ineptitude as a deckhand. The assaults followed immediately upon some failure
by the complainant to perform his duties properly and the appellant gave as his
express reason for the assault the complainant’s
errors and omissions.
The motive was unworthy and provides no justification at all for the
appellant’s violence, but it does
indicate that the violence was no more
than an expression of the appellant’s indignation.
, it is objectively improbable that a series of assaults,
more or less minor, would cause a severe stress disorder. To borrow a phrase
from a different context, the conduct was not apt to achieve the postulated
goal, the infliction of psychological pain. In this
regard one recalls that the
complainant was psychologically vulnerable to the onset of a stress disorder and
had problems in his
life other than his treatment at the hands of the appellant.
The point is that the appellant’s episodic batterings would not,
likelihood, have brought about a stress disorder in the ordinarily robust
individual. The complainant was particularly susceptible
to such a disorder.
The appellant’s conduct does not therefore support an inference that he
intended by his violence to bring
unlikely to achieve.
, the complainant did not tell the appellant that he was
experiencing emotional distress as a result of the assaults. Had there been
such an intimation, and a continuation of the attacks, one might well infer that
the appellant intended to inflict that distress.
In the absence of such an
intimation the appellant remained ignorant of the results of his conduct.
Associated with this point
is the fact that the appellant had the opportunity to
complain of his mistreatment to the skipper and deckhand of the
, or even to escape with them. He did neither, thereby giving the
appellant no reason to believe that his conduct was having a deleterious
emotional effect on the complainant.
, there is simply no evidence that the appellant’s
attacks were part of a purpose or design to bring about a state of nervous
disorder in the complainant. What was proved was a number of apparently
spontaneous assaults each occasioned by the appellant’s
impatience with an incompetent deckhand.
[35] It is obvious that the jury’s attention should have been drawn
particularly to the difficulty in the prosecution case and
the need to be
satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that there was a design or purpose to the
assaults, that being the infliction
of severe mental suffering upon the
complainant. The jury had to be warned, in terms, that they had to be
satisfied, beyond reasonable
doubt, that the assaults were not the result of
episodic anger but were part of a pattern or design, the purpose of which was to
inflict severe mental suffering. No such warning was given. Indeed the
prosecutor does not appear to have understood that proof
of such a design was
necessary. The trial judge did not advert to the deficiency in the prosecution
case and did not draw the jury’s
attention to the difficulty. Indeed his
Honour inadvertently misdirected the jury when he explained to them how
intention might
be inferred.
[36] His Honour said (at AB 274-275):
‘... a person tortures another person, if they intentionally inflict
severe mental, psychological or emotional pain or suffering
on that other
person. ... The infliction, however, must be intentional and the pain or
suffering must be severe. These are all
questions of fact and it’s a
matter for you. ...
An intention resides in the consciousness of a person. It’s not something
like the pen in front of you, you can hold up ...
and look [at] it ... If it is
to be proved ... it’s proved by a process of inference or deduction from
surrounding circumstances,
for instance, what the person did, what a person of
ordinary knowledge and commonsense would realise, would follow or flow from what
they did, what they said about, what they’d done..., if they have said
anything about it before or after they inflicted it;
that sort of
[37] The passage
‘what a person of ordinary knowledge and common sense would realise would
follow ... from what they did’
is misleading. It suggests that intention
to bring about a result is to be presumed where the consequence of an act is
foreseeable,
and the act is performed. Alternatively it suggests that intention
is to be assessed by an objective evaluation of what is a likely
consequence of
an act, so that if a result is intended it was objectively likely to follow the
[38] What the jury should have been told was that the Crown had to prove that
the appellant had an actual subjective intention to
cause the complainant to
suffer severe mental distress and that his conduct was designed to achieve that
result. The difficulties
in proving these facts from the evidence should have
been drawn specifically to the jury’s attention.
[39] On the crucial issue in the case all that the trial judge said was (at
‘The prosecution must also prove that the accused man intentionally
inflicted the severe psychological, mental or emotional
pain and suffering on
him. Those are essential elements of the offence of torture which must be
proved if a person is to be found
guilty of that
This direction comes from the Bench Book and may be sufficient in a
straightforward case. The direction was quite inadequate in
this case. It gave
the jury no hint as to their real task, and offered them no understanding of
what the evidence had to prove before
they could be satisfied that the appellant
tortured Mr Loncar.
[40] These considerations are
sufficient to explain why the Court allowed the appeal at the conclusion of
argument. The concession,
in which I concur, that there was no evidence
sufficient to prove the requisite intention explains why the Court ordered that
of acquittal be entered rather than a retrial.
[41] One other point should be mentioned; it concerns the evidence of the
psychologist, Mr Jones. His evidence was improperly admitted.
That now is of
no consequence because of the orders already made, but the reason for the
admissibility should be examined in the
hope that the error which led to its
admission will not be repeated in other cases.
[42] Mr Jones expressed his expert opinion that Mr Loncar suffered a severe
stress disorder. It may be assumed that he also expressed
the expert opinion
that the cause of the disorder was the appellant’s violent mistreatment of
the complainant.
[43] Mr Jones was a properly qualified clinical psychologist. He was,
relevantly, an expert whose opinion might be admitted into
evidence. Before it
could be accepted, however, the factual basis for the opinion had to be
explained to the court. Mr Jones had
to recount the facts on which he based his
opinion. To do that he had to give in evidence the history he took from the
complainant
rehearsal of those facts would not prove them but once he had said what
understood the facts to be on which he formed his opinion that opinion could be
provisionally admitted into evidence. If the
facts were proved by someone who
had knowledge of them, in this case the complainant, the opinion would be
admitted unconditionally.
It the facts were not proved the condition on which
the admission depended would be unsatisfied and the opinion could not be acted
on by the tribunal of fact.
[44] There is nothing new in any of this. It should be well understood by
all counsel. The rules relating to the admission of expert
opinion evidence
were recently reviewed by Heydon JA in
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
at 729-742. His Honour noted (731-2):
‘The basal principle is that what an expert gives is an opinion based on
facts. Because of that, the expert must either prove
by admissible means the
facts on which the opinion is based, or state explicitly the assumptions as to
fact on which the opinion
is based. If other admissible evidence establishes
that the matters assumed are “sufficiently like” the matters
established
“to render the opinion of the expert of any value”, even
though they may not correspond “with complete precision”,
opinion will be admissible and
material...’
[45] This has been the
law for many years. In
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642
at 648-9 the
High Court pointed out that a medical specialist ‘is ordinarily allowed to
state the “history” he
got from the patient’ because
‘statements made to an expert witness [are] admissible if they are the
foundation, or part
of the foundation, of the expert opinion...’ Such
statements are not evidence of the existence of the facts recounted and
‘if the man whom the physician examined refuses to confirm in the witness
box what he said in a consulting room’ the
opinion will have little or no
value, depending upon the facts of the case. The same rule is true for a
psychiatrist: see
(1982) 41 ALR 64.
[46] This elementary rule having been overlooked, Mr Jones’ opinion was
inadmissible.
[47] One last comment is called for. It may be open to the Crown to
prosecute the appellant for the assaults, some of which occasioned
bodily harm,
he committed upon the complainant. To such charges the appellant could probably
not successfully plead either sections
16 or 17 of the
Criminal Code
Nevertheless, in my opinion, it would be a misuse of the prosecutor’s
discretion to indict the appellant with the assaults.
On his conviction on the
charge of torture on 21 July 2005 the appellant was sentenced to three
years’ imprisonment and he
remained in jail until 2 December, when this
Court quashed the conviction. If he were convicted of the assaults it is
that the appellant would be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
greater than the time he has already spent in custody.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (99.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter