URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTBCCM/2009/42.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Surace v Commiso [2009] QCCTBCCM 42 (25 September 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
SURACE V COMMISSO
[2009] CCT KA002-09
SURACE Dominic
COMMISSO Rita
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
25 September 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
22 June 2009
DECISION OF:
Mr K Mackenzie QC
CATCHWORDS:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW- Body Corporate and Community Management- appeal from
adjudicator- duty to give reasons- sufficiency of reasons-
appointment of
administrator- making decision outside committee meeting- whether doing so
reasonable- “emergency”- protection
of body corporate legal
professional privilege
REPRESENTATION:
Mr Tim Matthews
RESPONDENT:
No appearance
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1 This is an appeal pursuant to
section 289
Body Corporate and
Community Management Act 1997
(“the BCCM Act”) against orders of
an adjudicator made on 10 December 2008. The applicant in the proceedings
the Tribunal was the respondent to applications in which orders were
sought in circumstances where there had been a troubled relationship
between the
applicant and the respondent in connection with the affairs of the Body
Corporate. The premises are owned by a Community
Titles Scheme governed by the
BCCM Act and
BCCM (Accommodation Module) Regulation 1997
(“AM”), as it was in force at the time of relevant events in
August 2008. The premises consisted of six units, three
owned by Mr Surace and
three by Ms Commisso
section 99(1) of the BCCM Act the committee must be composed in the way provided
for in the relevant regulation module. AM
provides, by section 12(4), that in a
situation where three or more lots included in the scheme and there are only two
owners for all the lots, the committee consists of the two individuals
who are owners (subject to some qualifications which are not
relevant for the
purposes of this matter). There was a body corporate Manager, Sargeant Strata,
and a caretaking service contractor,
Rita Commisso Enterprises Pty Ltd of which
Ms Commisso was director.
of the issues in the dispute between the parties in this matter, although not
formally a ground of appeal, is whether, because
of her relationship with the
service contractor, Ms Commisso is entitled to vote at committee meetings.
There were two aspects of
this. The first was an allegation that Ms Commisso
was an associate of the service contractor by virtue of section 309(2)(g) and
(h), in combination with section 309(4) of the BCCM Act. It was not suggested
that Ms Commisso was not entitled to be a member of
the committee. Mr
Surace’s position was that because she was an
” within the meaning of section 309 of a caretaking
service contractor, section 11(2)(a) rendered her ineligible to be a voting
member of the committee.
4 The second issue before the adjudicator was whether the power to
just and equitable
” order under section 276(1)
extended to directing that she be entitled to vote at meetings. However no
argument based on a
strict textual analysis of the relevant provisions with a
view to establishing that she had a statutory right to be a voting member
addressed to the adjudicator. The argument was rather that the consequence of
denying her the right to vote could not have been
legislatively intended. These
issues will be revisited later.
The Adjudication – orders made
25 August 2008, Ms Commisso applied for adjudication. In summary, she sought to
establish that the motion of 15 August 2008 was
invalid and that the Body
Corporate was so dysfunctional that it required an administrator to be
appointed. The following interim
orders were sought:
pending the resolution of the application, the lawyers appointed under the
resolution of the committee passed on 15 August
2008 takes no further action
based on the purported resolution.
(ii) That a
special levy of $10,000.00 be immediately raised to allow the Body Corporate to
meet its anticipated expenses over the
next three months.
until such time that a final order was made, Sargeant Strata (then Body
Corporate Manager) be appointed as the administrator.
final relief sought was an order that the motion purportedly resolved by the
committee on 15 August 2008 was invalid and that
the then Body Corporate manager
be appointed as administrator certain behind powers.
4 September 2009, interim orders were made (in summary):
(i) Restraining
the solicitor appointed under the resolution of 15 August 2008 from taking any
further action in respect of his purported
engagement pursuant to a vote on a
motion outside a committee meeting taken by the committee on 15 August 2008
pending final order.
(ii) Restraining
the carrying out of resolutions if any passed by the committee on 3 December
notices for a special contribution of $2204.00 be sent within seven days to lot
owners to meet the August account of the
service contractor.
the application for interim orders was dismissed.
9 On 19 September 2008, a further application was made by Ms
Commisso seeking an interim order that the applicant be declared a valid
member of the committee and entitled to vote on motions to be decided by the
committee. Final relief was sought in the form
of a declaration that she was a
voting member. Principally, the submission made by the applicant relies on the
“just and equitable”
basis that she had been, until the present
dispute arose, allowed to participate and have an “
on committee issues and had voted (although it was conceded that in a poll
called by Mr Surace she would be in the minority
because of the greater loss of
entitlement to which he was entitled). There was also a submission that strict
reliance on the terms
of the legislation, leading to the consequence that Ms
Surace a non-voting member of the committee would create an unjust and
inequitable
situation by excluding her from voting on issues before the
10 Stated in that way the proposition is problematical. In the similar
context of deciding questions of fact according to equity
and good conscience,
there is authority that supports the conclusion that the application of that
method of deciding issues before
the decision maker must be performed within the
framework of the legislation. If the order sought would involve reaching a
that is not authorised by the legislative framework, there is a
Walter Reid & Co Ltd v Murphy
(1924) St R Qd
Taranaki Hospital Board v Woodward & Brown
(1941) NZGLR 330).
any event, on 16 October 2008, the adjudicator dismissed the application for
this interim relief, principally because there was
no compelling evidence before
him that it was contemplated that a committee meeting would be held in the
period up to the hearing.
At the end of the reasons it was said that the issue
of the declaration that the applicant was a valid voting member of the committee
would be considered when the final orders were made.
10 December 2008 the adjudicator made the following orders following the final
the motion purportedly resolved by the committee on 15 August 2008 is
Ian D’Arcy (“
administrator
” of Capitol Body Corporate
Administration) is appointed as the administrator of the scheme pursuant to
sections 276(4)(a) and
clause 23 of Schedule 5 of the Act for the period of 12
months from the date of this order;
administrator is authorised exclusively to perform all the obligations of the
Body Corporate and its committee under the Act
and community management
statement (“
obligations
administrator is given all of the powers and authority of the Body Corporate and
its committee necessary to perform the obligations,
including the authority to
determine contributions and levy those contributions on owners;
administrator is to convene a general meeting which shall be valid as the annual
general meeting for the scheme if convened
and held before
April 2009 and is otherwise in accordance with the
requirements for holding annual general meetings;
(e) the Body
Corporate and its committee must by no later than 30 December 2008 hand all of
the books, records and property of the
Body Corporate in their possession or
control to the administrator;
administrator may seek return of Body Corporate records from other entities and
perform other tasks as detailed in the reasons
for decision, with the assistance
of lot owners at his discretion;
(g) [relates to
administrators remuneration]
administrator has leave to apply for further orders or directions in relation to
this order.
all other respects the application is dismissed.
Background Facts
12 To provide context for consideration of the issues raised by the
applicant, it is necessary to explain the course of events relevant
present matter. In the course of preparing for the 2008 AGM, the Body Corporate
Manager, Sargeant Strata prepared a draft
budget which was forwarded to the
applicant under the cover of a letter which advised that the auditors of the
accounts had raised
a question about GST and the management salary. A budget
had been prepared which provided for an “
unexpected increase
of $3,000.00 in the management salary. The applicant’s solicitor verbally
requested a copy of the auditors report to
enable the applicant to respond to
the issue with regard to GST. He was told that a copy would be sent once it had
been received.
He was also told that GST was a liability of the Body Corporate.
Although it was said in a statement prepared by Ms Sargeant of
Sargeant Strata
that the audit report was received about 31 May 2008, the evidence suggests that
the report was prepared in written
form on 23 June 2008 and received by Sargeant
Strata on 24 June 2008.
Strata requested, on 24 June 2008, through the applicant’s solicitor
comment on the draft budget. The solicitor again
requested in a telephone
conversation a copy of the audit report on 24 June 2008. Ms Sargeant said that
she would send a copy once
she had received it. On 7 July 2008, the solicitors
received an email from Sargeant Strata raising the issue of a special levy
“for the Body Corporate to meet its legislated requirements”
The email included a paragraph as follows-
“Also, the auditor has advised that the management salary
should have GST added and Rita Commisso has been undercharging (without
GST). The management salary will therefore increase by around $3,000.00 and the
possibility of back-pay is another consideration.
It will be impossible, given
increases in insurance premiums (8-10%) for the levies to remain at last
year’s level and also
for there not to be a special levy.”
8 July 2008 the solicitors replied that the issue of GST would have to be
determined once a proper report was provided. It was
said that it was not
sufficient to speculate. (What the auditor’s report actually said was the
following):-
“It appears from the general ledger that the monthly fee
that appears is net of GST according to the contract. GST should have
added and forwarded to the manager before payment to the ATO....It is (the
auditors) recommendation that Sargeant Strata check
previous years payments to
the caretaker to ensure that the correct amount has and will be
24 July 2008, Sargeant Strata sent an email to the effect that if the budget was
not approved, the Body Corporate would not be
able to function because of
insufficiency of funds. The same day, the solicitors replied, saying in effect
that the applicant’s
position was that the only increase should relate to
insurance premiums. The issue of appointment of a solicitor in relation to
ongoing grease trap issue was also raised in that email. It appears that no
response was made to the correspondent by and on
behalf of the respondent.
28 July 2008, the applicant’s solicitor again phoned Sargeant Strata
requesting a copy of the auditor’s report. Ms
Sargeant apologised and
said she would send it as soon as possible. When it had not been received by 5
August 2008, the solicitor
wrote again requesting it as a matter of urgency but
received no response. When a fax was sent by the solicitor on 7 August 2008
again requesting a copy urgently, a copy was provided.
13 August 2008, Sargeant Strata sent an email about water leakage and again
requested urgent advice about a response to the budget
amounts for the next
levy. The email also said that a revised budget was being sent separately and
requested a response as soon
as possible. On 14 August 2008 the
applicant’s solicitor sent a fax advising that they were attending to a
full review of
the budget and asserted that, in the interim, Sargeant Strater
were not authorised to pay Ms Commisso an amount on top of her agreed
GST. There appears to have been no response to this letter. On 15 August 2008,
the applicant’s solicitors sent a
fax to Sargeant Strata which included
the following:-
“We note on the advice of the auditor... your office has
recently made payments of GST to Rita Commisso Enterprises Pty Ltd...above
agreed monetary entitlements set out in the Resident Management agreement with
the Body Corporate for Acacia Lodge Hostel.
In accordance with “
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax)
Transition Act 1999
”, Commisso Enterprises Pty Ltd is and has always been
responsible for the payment of GST.
Accordingly the advice of (the auditor) was incorrect and in our opinion
grossly negligent.
Unfortunately, the Body Corporate may now be liable for future payments of
GST to Commisso Enterprises due to the actions undertaken
by your office on the
above mentioned advice. If so, the Body Corporate would need to seek damages
against (the auditor) which would
include repayment to the Body Corporate of any
and all GST. This of course could be a significant amount considering the
of time the Resident Management Agreement has left to run.
Noting the urgency and seriousness of this matter, our client will be
voting outside of a committee meeting today at 1:00pm on the
following motion:
That Simon Taylor, solicitor of Ramsden Faes Lawyers be urgently and
immediately retained by the Body Corporate to act on its behalf
in relation to
the wrongful payment of GST to Commisso Enterprises Pty Ltd based on advice
provided by (the auditors).
We remind your office of its duty to the Body Corporate for Acacia Lodge
Hostel and advise that it would be a
fundamental breach of your Body
Corporate Agreement with Acacia Lodge Hostel
if you were to discuss this
matter with Ms Commisso, her legal representatives or (the auditor).
Any communication with the above mentioned parties may further seriously
prejudice the Body Corporate. As such we ask that you provide
to our office your
written undertaking that neither you nor any member of your staff will discuss
this matter with the above mentioned.
We ask that you provide to our office a
copy of all correspondence and like in relation to any information provided or
from (the auditor) in relation to the audit/GST payments and to Ms
Commisso or her legal representatives, as a matter of priority.
Importantly,
please provide copies of the amounts paid to Commisso Enterprises that have
included an added amount of GST.
By way of section 59 of the Body Corporate and Community Management
(Accommodation Module) Regulation 1997...Mr Surace requests that
an EGM of the
Body Corporate be called to consider and decide the following motions by
ordinary resolution:
(1) That a lawyer be retained by the Body Corporate to do everything
necessary in relation to recovery of Body Corporate’s
debt and to bring
proceedings and do everything necessary for the recovery of GST amounts paid or
liable to be paid to Commisso Enterprises
(2) That the Committee is authorised to spend above the authorised limit
for the Body Corporate for the purposes of retaining a lawyer
for the purposes
set out in motion 1.
(3) That the Committee is authorised after satisfying the obligations set
out by section 103 of the BCCM Accommodation Module to
retain for the Body
Corporate a lawyer for the purposes set out in motion 1.”
the same day, at about 11:26am, the solicitor sent a letter to the
respondent’s solicitors which included the following:-
“We refer to the above matter and advise that our client
proposes to put the following motion to the Committee at 1:00pm today:
(1) That Simon Taylor solicitor of Ramsden Faes Lawyers be urgently and
immediately retained by the Body Corporate to act on its
behalf in relation to
the payment of GST to Commisso Enterprises Pty Ltd based on advice provided by
(the auditors).
We note that your client has a conflict of interest in relation to this
motion and accordingly is not entitled to vote.”
“We refer to your correspondence of today.
The Committee’s spending limit of Acacia Lodge Hostel is $750.00.
We consider that if Ramsden Faes is retained to advise on
this issue, the Body
Corporate Committee would incur a cost significantly more than the spending
Also we see no basis for your consideration of this matter as urgent.
In light of the above, our client strongly objects to the Committee voting
today on the motion concerning the engagement of Ramsden
Faes, and puts you on
notice that any such vote would be challenged.
We also are strongly of the view that in a Body Corporate of 2 owners your
client has just as much a conflict as our client on the
GST issue. Accordingly
any appointment of a third party to advise on the GST issue can only be done by
20 It is probably sufficient, for the purpose of understanding the ensuing
course of events to summarise what happened subsequently.
At about 1:14pm an
email sent to the respondent’s solicitors enclosed a copy of the
resolution passed and denied that the
applicant had a conflict of interest and
also the assertion that the matter was not urgent. Later that afternoon, the
respondent’s
solicitors sent a letter requesting evidence concerning the
formalities of the meeting. Then on 22 August 2008, formal notice of
to the purported motion was sent in reliance on section 33 AM. The
particularity given related to an assertion that Ms
Commisso, as the other
committee member, was not served with a copy of the resolution to be voted upon.
Also the purported resolution
was undated and did not say which Committee Member
voted on the motion or who was served with a copy of the notice to be voted
The resolution did not identify a Body Corporate that the resolution
referred to. It was asserted for all of those reasons that
the resolution did
not comply with section 33 of the Accommodation Module Regulations.
10 September 2009 there was a correspondence about whether the respondent was a
voting member or a non-voting member of the Committee
in anticipation of a
Committee meeting scheduled for the following day. Parallel to correspondence
relating to the need to fund
the Body Corporate adequately so that it’s
financial commitments could be met. There had also been correspondence
the ethical duties of the respective solicitors in the circumstances
then prevailing in relation to contact with the respondent and
Corporate Manager.
is against that background that the various issues have to be considered.
The Adjudicator’s Reasons
setting out the orders sought and the course of the interim applications, and
setting out the basis of the adjudicator’s
BCCM, the reasons recorded that:
parties were the only two lot owners and therefore by virtue of section 14(5)
AM, shared executive positions on the committee.
applicant Ms Commisso was the sole director of Rita Commisso Enterprises Pty Ltd
which had the benefit of contracts to provide
services to the Body Corporate as
cleaning service contractor including letting rights, for a monthly
Mr Surace considered Ms Commisso to be
an associate
” of the caretaking service contractor and
therefore ineligible to be a voting member of the committee by virtue of section
11(2)(b) AM. On the other hand, Ms Commisso’s solicitor considered that
such an inequitable result could not have been intended;
Section 14(5) AM was
at odds with section 11(2)(b), with the result that she was entitled to vote as
an executive member of the
Body Corporate.
24 The reasons then recounted the auditor’s advice that GST had not
been charged and advice from Sargeant Strata that the management
salary would be
$3,000.00 more with the possibility of back pay being due. Mr Surace’s
requirement on 24 July 2008 that the
committee meeting be held to appoint a
solicitor to assess the caretaking service contractor’s remuneration, and
notice on 15 August 2008 that he would be voting that day on a motion
that lawyers be “
urgently and immediately
” retained to act on
the Body Corporate’s behalf in relation to payment of the GST to the
caretaking service contractor
were noted. The assertion that Ms Commisso was
not entitled to vote because she had a conflict of interest was noted.
Commisso’s responses that she could not see any basis for urgency; that
the spending limit for the committee was $750.00;
that she objected to voting on
a motion outside the committee meeting; that if it was correct that she had a
conflict of interest
Mr Surace was equally affected by an increase in payment to
the company; and that the person to advise on the issue should be agreed
were referred to.
reasons then noted that despite Ms Commisso’s protests, the resolution was
passed and it had been denied that Mr Surace
had a conflict of interest. There
had also been an assertion that Ms Commisso was not permitted to correspond with
Sargeant Strata
27 The inability of the Body Corporate to meet the caretaking
service contractor’s salary for August 2008 and the failure to
the budget were referred to. This was one of the bases for the application to
appoint an administrator along with the lack
of notice of the motion to be voted
on outside a committee meeting and a denial of the right of Ms Commisso to vote.
It was also
relied on by Ms Commisso that there was a dispute over her right to
exclusive use of common property and an issue about the grease-trap
arising from
a notice from the Gold Coast City Council concerning non-compliance with the
Council’s requirements.
force that the two last mentioned issues may otherwise have had is lessoned,
since the decision of an adjudicator (not the adjudicator
involved in the
present proceedings) with respect to the exclusive use issue was overturned in
the District Court and the matter
remitted to the adjudicator to allow
determination of a question of fact crucial to the resolution of the
application. It is inherent
in the District Court Judge’s remarks in
adopting that course was that there was a strong case to suggest that the
before the arbitrator fell short of establishing the basic proposition
that Ms Commisso had to establish to succeed. However as
that matter had not
been addressed by the adjudicator the proper course was to remit it for
determination according to law (Surace
v Rita Commisso Enterprises Pty Ltd
[2009] QDC 198).
with respect to the grease-trap issue, is it clear on the material before the
Tribunal and before the adjudicator that it would
not be resolved by discussion
with the Gold Coast City Council on a more favourable basis than feared in the
submission on Ms Commisso’s
behalf. There was material suggesting that a
view had been expressed by a Council Officer that the grease-trap may not need
attended to in the way first suggested.
30 Mr Surace’s concerns over the independence of Sargeant
Strata and over the security of the Body Corporate’s records,
with the failure for about six weeks on the part of Sargeant Strata to produce a
copy of the audit report to him, which
Mr Surace relied on as a basis for
considering the need to appoint lawyers to advise on the GST liability as a
matter of utmost urgency
was recorded. Extensive written submissions had been
placed before the adjudicator supporting the calling of the meeting as a measure
of protecting the Body Corporate’s legal professional privilege with
regard to the issue of liability for GST.
31 Mr Surace’s submission that a “
” basis for decision making did not allow the adjudicator to
go beyond the terms of the legislative framework and that while
the caretaking
service contractor was stated in AM to be a non-voting member, an
executive member
” was not defined in the legislation in
terms of the voting right of such members. Further, it was argued, the
applicant’s
(indirect) interest in the outcome would place her in a
conflict of interest situation “
in the majority of
reasons also record Mr Surace’s submission that because he had the greater
lot entitlement and therefore spent more money
on administration of the Body
Corporate, he could be considered the “
majority lot owner
His denial of an antagonistic relationship with Ms Commisso and his assertion of
the need for committee action due to the
applicant’s actions, of which the
claim by Ms Commisso for goods and services that should have been performed by
the company
holding the service contract was an example, were noted. The
reasons said that the scheme traditionally operated without formality,
resolutions being made by telephone, fax or through solicitors and that Mr
Surace had always acted reasonably with respect to
convening meetings. When
committee meetings were held on short notice it was because of emergency
situations. Mr Surace’s
concern that Sargeant Strata may have made
unauthorised payments to Ms Commisso was mentioned.
reply, and in support of the application for the appointment of an
administrator, Ms Commisso said that despite the interim orders
of 4 September
2008, the company had not been paid for the period from August to October 2008
and that the Body Corporate had failed
to comply with the order. No annual
general meeting had been held and there was no Body Corporate Manager since
Sergeant Strater
had ceased to act as such since 8 October 2008. She submitted
that the company had not yet made any claim in respect of the GST
issue and that
the issue had never been urgent for the Body Corporate. She denied threatening
legal proceedings in relation to it.
She submitted that the affairs of the Body
Corporate were in disarray and that an administration was needed.
34 Mr Surace replied, on 1 December 2008, that the primary reason
for the Body Corporate’s lack of financial standing was that
Ms Commisso
had expended monies beyond the scheme’s limit without authority from the
Body Corporate through Sargeant Strata.
He said that he had been able to draft
a notice of the annual general meeting and had requested Ms Commisso to present
motions including
one as to the appointment of a Body Corporate Manager but she
had refused. The delay caused by the difficulty in obtaining records
former Body Corporate Manager and because some were still missing was raised.
Subsequently he had expressed no objection
to the identity of the administrator
proposed by Ms Commisso, while maintaining that there was no proper basis for
appointing one.
his determination, the adjudicator concluded, with respect to the validity of
the meeting, as follows:
“As indicated in the interim order, I am of the view that
the committee did not act reasonably in this regard, in contravention
94 Act, and that even at short notice, the applicant, voting or not, should have
been able to provide input into a decision
in part to pay. Further the motion is unclear as to the remit of the lawyers
engaged, and
there was no limit for how much the committee was to spend on this
service, whatever it was – advice or action.
I note that Mr Surace, per the committee, has redrafted this motion in the
alternative with a choice of 2 lawyers, at motion 15 of
the draft agenda, so
perhaps it is accepted by the Body Corporate that the vote on a motion on 15
August 2008 was not valid. In
any event for completeness, I so
regard to the appointment of the administrator, the adjudicator said the
“I am of the view that the scheme would benefit from a
period of time under administration of an independent third party. Mr
wears two hats and it is not easy for him to differentiate between his role as a
lot owner and as the executive committee.
The applicant also wears two (or
perhaps three) hats, although she does not have a vote on the committee. It is
clear that there
are of late disputes between the parties in their respective
capacities, about payment of accounts and responsibilities under the
contract. As the parties are aware, disputes about obligations under a contract
are heard by specialist adjudication.
Such disputes are quite common where one
person performs various roles, one lot owner is absent and on the day to day
basis running
of the scheme has been in the hands of a Body Corporate Manager.
Mr Surace hints at improper financial practices, and perhaps an
administrator
can assist in assessing the financial records which may just be in a muddle, or
incomplete. Unfortunately they often
respect of the declaration concerning the applicant’s right to vote, the
adjudicator said the following:
“Whilst this matter will not be pertinent for the next
twelve months, I am of the view that the applicant, by being the sole
of the caretaker is ‘an associate’ of the caretaker and someone in a
relationship of a corporation and executive
officer of the corporation (section
309(2)(g) Act) and thus precluded from voting. I am also of the view that the
legislation has
not considered someone in the position of the applicant and that
the chance that of only two lot owners in the scheme, one is the
director of a
caretaking service contractor, is remote.
I also agree with Mr Surace that I cannot use the ‘equitable
to vote at the
committee, I must be able to find that the legislation does not expressly
prohibit a person in the position of the
applicant, from doing what by equity I
am proposing she be allowed to do.
There is of course, no reason why the applicant should not vote in an
informal way, and I understand that this happens where both
parties are in
agreement. The applicant must also, for the committee to act reasonably within
section 94, be invited as part of
the committee to take part in discussion on
all committee matters, and to be made aware of them with notice as required by
Regretfully, I must dismiss this part of the application. The
applicant’s remedy here is perhaps to change the relationship
and the company. I say again, that the peculiar situation in which the
applicant finds herself requires an unusually
high degree of transparency and
accountability on behalf of the committee.”
Proceedings before Tribunal
38 The focus of the applicant’s submissions before the Tribunal was on
whether adequate reasons had been given for making the
orders. Section 274 of
the BCCM Act and section 27(b) of the
Interpretation Act 1954
were relied
on in support of the submission that there had been a failure to give reasons in
a manner that complied with the statutory
requirement to give reasons. It was
submitted that it was an error of law (which is a prerequisite of a right to
appeal against
an adjudicator’s order) not to give adequate reasons.
was accepted by the applicant that lengthy or elaborate explanation of the
details of the evidence or of every step in the reasoning
process was not
necessary to comply with the duty to give reasons (
Soulemezis v Dudley
Holdings Pty Ltd
(1987) NSWLR 247
at 259 and 280). It was also accepted
that reasons for decision adequate for the purpose of enabling a proper
understanding of the
basis upon which the decision had been reached was
sufficient (
Australian Telecommunications Commission v Barker
[1990] FCA 489
at 492). The duty to give reasons obliges the decision maker to, at
state generally and briefly the grounds which have led him or
her to the conclusion reached concerning disputed factual questions
and to list
the findings on principal contested issues
” (Soulemezis at 259 per
Kirby P). In the same case McHugh JA said, at 280, that it was necessary for
the essential grounds
upon which the decision rests to be articulated to ensure
that the right of appeal might be exercised.
applicant sought to categorise the reasons as a “
” without any findings of fact in relation to the
submissions made to the adjudicator. No indication had been given of what
evidence was accepted or rejected and on what grounds. No attempt had been made
to relate the facts to the law.
was submitted, by way of illustration, that no basis had been advanced for the
bare conclusion
” that it was “
not easy for the
applicant to differentiate between his role as lot owner and as the executive
”. It was submitted that there had been no basis in the
evidence for such a finding to be made. The findings of fact, especially
there was conflicting evidence, should have been made and set out. This
insufficiency of reasons materially affected the right
42 Another error of law, it was submitted, lay in the construction
of BCCM legislation. The focus of this argument was an observation
adjudicator’s reasons that “
the peculiar situation in which the
applicant finds herself requires an unusually high degree of transparency and
accountability on
behalf of the committee
”. The applicant’s
submission essentially was that the adjudicator had misdirected herself and
failed to correctly interpret
the legislation by finding that the number of
committee members of a body corporate scheme determined the level of
transparency required
or places a higher level of accountability in those
circumstances. This conclusion was erroneous because the legislation defines
the level of accountability and transparency required of Body Corporate
Committees (section 94(2)) whether the test of reasonableness
contained in
section 94 had been complied with required the application of an objective test
in which there had been balancing of
the factors in all of the circumstances of
the particular case. The fact that the decision was made in what Mr Surace
to be emergency circumstances was an important factor.
it was submitted that the decision to appoint the administrator was without any
logical basis, and in error. It was so unsupported
by evidence that no
reasonable decision maker could make it (
CA Ford Pty Ltd v
Comptroller-General of Customs
[1993] FCA 560
(1993) 123 ALR 623
at 637). It was submitted
that on the submissions before the adjudicator the Body Corporate
Manager’s appointment was not
to be renewed at the annual general meeting
because of alleged questionable conduct, which included muddling of records and
to provide documents to enable the AGM to be held. The Body Corporate
Manager subsequently resigned. In addition, before the adjudicator’s
determination was made, the parties had agreed to motions for the AGM, including
one concerning the appointment of a new Body Corporate
Manager (one of those
nominated being the person appointed as administrator). Both parties had agreed
to a timeframe for holding
the AGM. It was submitted that the decision to
appoint an administrator was premised on an error of law, that the legislation
not contemplate a Body Corporate comprising only two members.
44 Appointment of an administrator is within the power of an
adjudicator (section 276(3) and Schedule 5 of the BCCM Act), no criteria
prescribed for doing so, but it is a significant step since it takes
responsibility for the conduct of the affairs of the body
corporate out of the
hands of the committee and vests it in the administrator. An applicant must
therefore demonstrate to the required
standard that such a step is appropriate.
Typically, without attempting to be exhaustive, there will be evidence that the
body corporate
is so dysfunctional that it cannot operate properly within the
statutory framework that governs it, or that there is a well founded
on the part of an applicant for appointment of an administrator of financial
malpractice within the body corporate, or
that there is conduct that amounts to
undue oppression in the conduct of its affairs. Without more, mere disagreements
between the
members, especially when the disputes are due to reasonably held
differences of view and there are means available to resolve them
by reference
to external processes.
essential premise of the applicant’s argument was that it was necessary to
make a decision outside a meeting of the Committee
urgently, having regard to
the apparent difficult in obtaining the auditor’s report from Sargeant
Strata, the apprehension
that it may be paying or about to be paying increased
fees to the manager to reflect GST and to protect the Body Corporate’s
legal professional privilege in the case where there was an
46 It is not possible to attempt a comprehensive definition of
circumstances that might constitute an
“emergency”.
is an ordinary English word and the Oxford English Dictionary definition quoted
in the material placed before the adjudicator,
“a sudden juncture
demanding immediate action: pressing need”
captures the context. The
material before the adjudicator says that, in the period when Mr Surace was
attempting to get a copy of
the auditor’s report, he had taken advice
on the GST issue. When he eventually received the auditor’s report
(some time after Sargeant Strata had received it) Mr Surace
Counsel’s advice, which did not accord with the auditor’s opinion.
He was therefore concerned that the actions
of Sargeant Strata might amount to
an admission of liability for the payment of an additional amount equivalent to
GST and for such
a component not paid as part of the previous payments.
may be conveniently observed at this point that it seems a reasonable inference
that the events just described were what may have
led the adjudicator to use the
expression, set out in paragraph [41] above, which was said to be an appellable
error. In the absence
of any clear indication that there was not at least a
personal interest as well as one related to the interests of the body corporate
involved, my view is that the comment was not of that character.
submission in support of the validity of the resolution was to the effect that
Mr Surace was faced with an “extraordinary
situation” that there was
a genuine possibility that payments had honestly been made to compensate for GST
and that statements
purporting to confirm liability had been made, with ongoing
financial consequences over the life of the contract. Alternatively,
a situation where the Body Corporate Manager had not been acting in the
interests of the Body Corporate but in the interests
of Ms Commisso and her
step in the argument concerned the right of the Body Corporate to withhold
records (in the form, as I understand the argument
of any material that might
amount to an admission or otherwise be used by Ms Commisso to pursue a claim
against the Body Corporate
for past and future amounts representing GST). It
was submitted that it was reasonable for Mr Surace to believe that Ms Commisso
was threatening to commence legal proceedings because she had been informed by
Sargeant Strata of the GST issue, a draft budget had
been prepared reflecting
such liability, and Sargeant Strata’s actions in withholding the audit
report. Section 149(2) of
the previous Accommodation Module (now section
202(2)) speaks of a right not to allow access to records where legal proceedings
started or are threatened and the records are privileged from disclosure.
It was submitted that it would be unduly narrow to interpret
” to require a written or verbal demand directly
by Ms Commisso to Mr Surace. To impose such a requirement would enable the
Committee Member or a Body Corporate Manager who had had an intention to
commence proceedings but had not expressly said so, to obtain
Body Corporate
documents by virtue of their status as Body Corporate Committee Members.
50 It may be accepted that a threat may be manifested in many ways
other than by some formal means, but there is some difficulty with
applicant’s proposition at least on the facts of this case. It is not
persuasively established that a “
” to commence legal
proceedings had been made by Ms Commisso. Commencement of legal proceedings
might be the end point of the
issue if agreement could not be reached on the
question of liability, as to which there were two competing views as the matter
at the time that the challenged decision was made. But mere unilateral
apprehension on Mr Surace’s part that litigation might
eventually occur
over the matter is not sufficient, without more, to qualify as litigation being
”. Nor is there any cogent evidence that there was
any legal advice in a tangible form obtained in anticipation of litigation
which Ms Commisso might have had access at the crucial time.
may also be observed that if anything had been said by Sargeant Strata to Ms
Commisso that Mr Surace considered to be an admission
of liability, it was based
on an opinion as to the question of law, which was contentious, and, if wrong,
could hardly be given significant
weight as an admission of liability in the
circumstances of this case. In the circumstances, the argument with respect to
professional privilege assumes, at best, a minor role in determining
whether the decision to appoint solicitors was made in an emergency
the very short notice given was reasonable. The same may be said of the
argument pursued before the adjudicator with
respect to the obligations of Mr
Surace and other Committee Members towards the Body Corporate.
52 While it is true that there is no prescription as to the length
of notice that must be given in an emergency, it was accepted by
Mr Surace in
the material before the adjudicator that the obligation to act reasonably
imposed on the Body Corporate by section 94
BCCM must be complied with. It must
also be accepted that in the circumstances of this Body Corporate, the usual
practice was to
give notice of meetings through Ms Commisso’s solicitors
and that the terms of the proposed resolution were in clear terms.
was a motion that was bound to be controversial in the circumstances and the
notice was very short. It may also be accepted
that even assuming in Ms
Commisso’s favour (without saying that it is correct) that she was not
disqualified by the conflict
of interest and was entitled to be heard, if not
vote, the decision would nonetheless have been made because of Mr Surace’s
greater voting power. Nevertheless like the adjudicator I am not persuaded that
it was reasonable for such very short notice to be
given. It may be that the
description of a higher level of transparency, referred to in paragraph [42]
goes further, if read literally,
than the Act justifies, But it can be said that
it is correct as an observation on the pitfalls of rushing to make a decision
committee where there is not a clearly demonstrable emergency. It
effectively deprived Ms Commisso of the opportunity to make any
comment on the proposal or its basis. No error of law requiring the decision to
be set aside has been demonstrated, in
my view in the adjudicator’s
process of deciding that issue. Accordingly the appeal against the decision
will be dismissed
in that regard.
reasons given for the appointment of an administrator are very short. They are
as follows:-
“I am of the view that this scheme would benefit from a
period of time under the administration of an independent third party.
Surace wears two hats and it is not easy for him to differentiate between his
role as a lot owner and as the Executive Committee.
The applicant also wears
two (or perhaps three) hats although she does not have a vote on the Committee.
It is clear that there
are of late disputes between the parties in their
respective capacities, about payment of accounts and responsibilities under the
caretaking contract. As the parties are aware, disputes about obligations under
the contract are heard by specialist adjudication.
Such disputes are quite
common where one person performs various roles, one lot owner is absent, and the
day to day running of the
scheme has been in the hand of a Body Corporate
Manager. Mr Surace hints at improper financial practices and perhaps an
administrator
can assist in assessing the financial records which may just be in
a muddle or incomplete. Unfortunately they often are.”
54 The fundamental problem with them is that it is not explained on what
basis the fact that there have been differences of opinion
between the parties
justifies the appointment of an administrator. To justify that conclusion it
was, in my view, necessary, to
make a sufficient analysis of the nature of the
disagreements to show that they demonstrate that there is a need for an
administrator
to be appointed because for example, the attitudes of the parties
demonstrate that the Body Corporate cannot function in accordance
with the legal
framework within which it operates, or they are evidence of oppression of one by
the other. The mere fact that there
are disagreements between parties is not
enough. Analysis of the instances of differences of opinion referred to the
file before
the adjudicator suggests that, as the matter stood at the time of
the adjudication, there was:-
(a) An issue about Ms Commisso’s right to exclusive possession of part of
the common property, which was then currently before
the District Court;
(subsequent events suggested that there was some substance in Mr Surace’s
(b) An issue about a grease trap which, as a result of
discussions with the local authorities seemed to have prospects of resolving
amicably with the Council without the expensive consequences originally
An issue concerning GST as to which there were conflicting opinions from the
auditor and Mr Surace’s solicitors; and
An issue about the legitimacy of certain payments made by the Body Corporate
Manager, itemised in the material on the file.
55 The existence of legitimately held but divergent points of view which are
not unreasonable does not demonstrate that the Body was
dysfunctional merely
because the parties do not agree. In the present case, since there are only two
lot holders, the workability
of the Body Corporate is obviously more acutely
affected by disagreements but the existence of this kind of situation is not
the contemplation of the legislation. More importantly, all of the four
issues mentioned are able to be, and are properly to be
resolved externally to
the body corporate by decisions that are not dependent on the parties reaching
consensus. Issues (a) and
(c) involve questions of law. Issue (b) is dependent
on the local authority’s view of what is necessary in the circumstances
the case for compliance with its requirements. Issue (d) involves factual and
perhaps underlying legal questions as to the circumstances
of the payments and
the basis upon which it is said that they were properly made. If necessary that
could be resolved by an adjudicator.
To the extent that the disordered state of
the records is an issue, the evidence about the extent of any problem, as the
stands, is slight. More than that would be required for it to be a
decisive factor in favour of the order made.
56 While brevity of reasons has its virtues, in this instance they do not
explain, in my view, the justification for the decision
to appoint an
administrator sufficiently. Further, it is a reasonable inference that
insufficient analysis was made in the course
of the decision making process of
the proper characterisation of the disagreements, which was, in my view, an
error of principle
and error of law. In my view, there was no sufficient basis,
on the evidence as it stood, for the appointment of an administrator.
regard to costs, the parties have each succeeded on one aspect of the appeal.
The appropriate order is therefore that there
is no order as to costs.
the appeal, insofar as it relates to order 1 of the order of an Adjudicator made
in this matter on 10 December 2008, be dismissed.
the appeal, insofar as it relates to order 2 of the order, be allowed.
there is no order as to costs.
______________________________
MR K MACKENZIE QC
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (906 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter