URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2025/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wells & Anor v Brisbane City Council [2025] QPEC 22 (17 October 2025)
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT COURT
Wells & Anor v Brisbane City Council
[2025] QPEC 22
JAMIE CHARLES WELLS & JAMES STUART WRIGHT
(Appellants)
BRISBANE CITY COUNCIL
(Respondent)
Planning & Environment
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning & Environment Court, Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
17 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
7 – 9 October 2025
Everson DCJ
Appeal dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
PLANNING & ENVIRONMENT – APPEAL – appeal against refusal of
applications for material change of use and reconfiguration
of a lot to create
an extra lot and subdivide a dwelling house in the Character residential
PLANNING & ENVIRONMENT – ASSESSMENT – compliance with the
planning scheme – relevant matters.
Abeleda & Anor v Brisbane City Council & Anor
Brisbane City Council v YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
[2021] QPELR 987
Corporation of the
Synod of the Diocese of Brisbane v Brisbane
City Council & Anor
[2025] QPEC 11
Torro v Brisbane City Council
[2020] QPELR 491
LEGISLATION:
Planning Act 2016
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
Planning Regulation 2017
D C Whitehouse for the Appellants
L I Walker for the Respondent
SOLICITORS:
Colwell Wright for the Appellants
City Legal for the Respondent
Introduction
is an appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse development
applications for a material change of use and reconfiguring
a lot (“the
proposed development”) in respect of land located at 80 Arthur Terrace,
Red Hill (“the site”).
[2] Essentially
what is proposed is that the recently constructed extension to the dwelling
house on the site is to become a separate
dwelling house on a separate lot.
This would result in attached dwelling houses on two very small adjoining lots.
One of these lots
would be flood prone, being almost entirely inundated by
overland flow during severe rain events. For the reasons that follow, the
proposed development is a bad idea. While it might have superficial appeal for
the owners, it finds no support in the relevant provisions
respondent’s planning scheme, which is the Brisbane City Plan 2014,
Version 27 (“the planning scheme”).
It is otherwise unmeritorious
from a public interest perspective.
The site and surrounding
[3] The site is
a corner lot, with frontage to Arthur Terrace of approximately 10 metres and to
Vowles Street of approximately 43
It is located in the
Character zone precinct within the Character residential zone pursuant to the
planning scheme. It is also
in the Hillside character precinct of the Ithaca
district neighbourhood plan, however this assumes no significance in this
The house on the site was
constructed prior to 1946 (“the original
In circumstances
where an overland flow path extends along the Arthur Terrace frontage and covers
the majority of the site,
unsurprising that the original house was constructed at the rear of the site on
the elevated portion of it.
original house was extended pursuant to a development permit dated 18 March 2022
(“the extension”).
extension was at the front of the dwelling over a flood prone area the subject
of the Flood overlay.
The suburban
character of this residential area is comprised predominantly of traditional
building character houses like the original
The predominant lot size in
the Character zone precinct within the locality is 400m² or
proposed development
[4] In order to
separate off the extension from the original house, two square shaped lots are
proposed: Lot 13 to the north with
an area of 218m² containing the
extension; and Lot 14 to the south containing the original house with an area of
The built form will
be separated by the erection of a fire-rated wall and there will be other
associated minor building work. A
new vehicle cross-over into Vowles Street
will serve to provide car accommodation beneath both the original house and the
new separate dwelling. This will require an access easement over the
existing driveway burdening Lot 14 in favour of Lot 13 which
extends under the
original house.
This access is
far from ideal, requiring tight manoeuvring of a vehicle under the original
house to access a hard stand area proposed
to be built under the extension. It
is in my view a contrived attempt at providing vehicular access to proposed Lot
13 in circumstances
where it is almost entirely flood prone. A drainage
easement over the majority of proposed Lot 13 and a high-density easement
to the common wall is also part of the proposed
development.
The statutory assessment framework
[5] Pursuant to
Planning and Environment Court Act 2016
(Qld) (“PECA”),
the appeal is by hearing anew,
and the appellants must establish that the appeal should be
of the PECA
addresses the nature of an appeal and relevantly provides:
Planning Act
applies for the P&E Court’s decision
on the appeal as if—
(a) the P&E Court were the assessment manager for the development
application; and
(b) the reference in subsection (8) of that section to when the assessment
manager decides the application were a reference to when
the P&E Court makes
the decision.
proposed development was impact assessable,
Planning Act 2016
(Qld) (“PA”) provides that the assessment must be carried out
against the relevant assessment benchmarks in a categorising
instrument for
development which, in the circumstances before me, are the relevant provisions
of the planning scheme.
also be carried out having regard to matters prescribed by regulation. In this
Planning Regulation 2017
(Qld) (“PR”)
states that I must have regard to “any development approval for, and any
lawful use of, the premises
or adjacent
common material”,
includes the properly made submissions of which there were
These submissions
essentially allege that the proposed development is inappropriate and an
overdevelopment of the site. Further,
the assessment may be carried out having
regard to any other relevant matter other than a person’s personal
circumstances,
financial or
determining the appeal, the court is conferred a wide discretion pursuant to
of the PA to approve all or part of the application, impose development
conditions on the approval, or refuse the application. As
the Court of Appeal
observed, the ultimate decision of the court is “a broad evaluative
judgement”.
The weight to
be given to each of the factors in undertaking this assessment is a matter for
the decision-maker.
appropriate principles for the construction of planning documents were
considered by the Court of Appeal in
Zappala Family Co Pty Ltd v Brisbane
City Council
notably that
the same principles which apply to statutory construction apply to the
construction of planning
and that such
documents need to be read as a whole in a way which is practical and intending
to achieve a balance between
Relevant provisions of the planning scheme
the reconfigured lots the subject of the proposed development are each less than
450m² in the Character residential zone,
the proposed development was
subject to impact assessment against the whole of the planning
Relevantly, pursuant to
s 1.3.2 “Notes” are part of the planning
Where there is
inconsistency between provisions in the planning scheme, the Strategic framework
prevails over all other components
to the extent of the inconsistency for impact
assessment.
Code assessable
development that complies with the purpose, overall outcomes and performance
outcomes or acceptable outcomes of
the code complies with the
[10] Starting
with the Strategic framework, s 3.4.2 lists a number of specific outcomes
pursuant to Element 2.1 – Brisbane identity.
“Brisbane’s development and infrastructure strengthens local
identity”. SO8 states “Brisbane’s
backyards contribute
strongly to local character by providing green landscapes in urban
[11] In s 3.4.4,
Element 2.3 – Brisbane’s healthy and safe communities contains SO2
which states:
Brisbane adopts a risk-management approach to natural
hazards where both the planning scheme and development are responsive to
information about natural hazards and the consequential assessment of
risk. Risk management balances the economic, social and environmental
benefits to the city.
[12] In s 3.7.6,
Element 5.5 – Brisbane’s suburban living areas contains SO2 which
states “Suburban Living Areas
experience limited growth, providing
predominantly detached housing for
residents.”
The local character which is typically defined by features
such as consistent block size and house spacing, an established road pattern,
predominance of detached housing, the presence of mature vegetation and gardens
and by local topography is
maintained.
Character residential zone code
[13] Turning to
the Character residential zone code in s 6.2.1.5 of the planning scheme, s
6.2.1.5.2. states that the purpose
of the code will be achieved through overall
outcomes which differ depending on whether the lot is in the Character zone
or the Infill housing zone precinct. Pursuant to overall outcome 4.b.,
development in the Character zone precinct where the site
“provides for low density suburban and inner-city living through... a low
density and intact suburban identity...”
being maintained “in which
multiple dwellings and dual occupancy are not
accommodated”.
the following overall outcomes are relevant to the determination of this
Development
form overall outcomes are:
Development
occurs on an appropriately sized and configured lot and is of a form and scale
that reinforces a distinctive subtropical
character of low rise buildings set in
green landscaped areas.
Development
responds to land constraints, mitigates any adverse impacts on environmental
values and addresses other specific characteristics,
as identified by overlays
affecting the site or in codes applicable to the development.
zone precinct overall outcomes are:
Developmental
provides that a new dwelling house:
ii. is located on an appropriately sized and configured vacant lot;
Development
provides for a minimum lot size of 450m² to maintain a block pattern that
accommodates traditional backyards and
overlay code
following provisions of the Flood overlay code have been identified as relevant
to the determination of the appeal:
purpose of the Flood overlay code will be achieved through the following overall
Development
provides for efficient evacuation and access for evacuation resources including
emergency services during flood events,
or otherwise plans for the prospect and
impact of isolation or hindered evacuation during
[15] Further,
PO18 is also identified as relevant to the following
Development involving reconfiguring a lot:
the risk to people from flood hazard;
safe evacuation routes or avoids isolation of the development during a flood
greater than the defined flood event.
Subdivision code
[16] Finally, a
number of provisions of the Subdivision code have been identified as relevant to
the determination of the appeal:
purpose of the code will be achieved through the following overall
Development
for reconfiguring a lot proposed in conjunction with or subsequent to a material
change of use maintains or improves
i. landscape and built form character,
environmental and other values of the site or locality;
iii. amenity of intended uses and existing surrounding residential uses;
Development
for reconfiguring a lot results in lots and an arrangement of lots
i. achieve the relevant outcomes and comply with the
standards required by the planning scheme for the zones, zone precincts,
neighbourhood
plans and overlays that apply to the site;
iii. are of an appropriate size, dimensions and arrangement suited to their
intended use and proximity to infrastructure, services
and facilities needed by
the development;
iv. are arranged and configured to complement the pattern of development in
the locality;
v. address development constraints that impact land use and development and
mitigate adverse impacts to character and environmental
Development
for reconfiguring a lot of an existing building and associated land can be
separately titled either in freehold or other
title forms.
Development
for reconfiguring a lot relating to existing or approved buildings does not
apply to the reconfiguring a lot of a dwelling
house in a zone in the
Residential zones category and a dwelling house, including the main dwelling,
plus any secondary dwelling
or ancillary outbuildings, in a zone in the
residential zones category is always to remain as a sole lot by any title or
[17] The meaning
of s 9.4.10.2.f. is clarified by a Note which appears in s 9.4.10.1 in the
following terms:
Note—Where buildings are approved, they and
the land they are on can be separately titled either in freehold or other title
forms. The provisions in this code relating to reconfiguring a lot of existing
or approved buildings do not apply to the reconfiguring
a lot of a dwelling
house in a zone in the Residential zones category. A dwelling house, including
the main dwelling, plus any secondary
dwelling or ancillary outbuildings, in a
zone in the Residential zones category is always to remain as a sole lot by any
tenure. A reconfiguring a lot proposal that does separate these
components of a dwelling house and includes them on individual title
inappropriate and incompatible development and is highly unlikely to be
supported. This ensures that the expectation of residents
for a high standard of
residential amenity is
The Character residential zone is identified as being a zone in the
Residential zones category in the planning
[18] Thereafter,
the following performance outcomes have been identified as
Development results in lots and an arrangement of lots
the relevant outcomes and standards required by the planning scheme to be
complied with for the intended use;
consistent with the zones, zone precincts, neighbourhood plans and overlays that
apply to the site;
the streetscape, local context and character for the locality;
development
constraints.
Development provides for safe and healthy occupation of the
lots relative to risks, hazards and land uses that adversely affect the
occupation of the lot by the intended land use and activities associated with
Issues in dispute
[19] The agreed
list of issues for determination narrowed during the course of the hearing of
the appeal. Essentially they are:
the proposed reconfiguration and the proposed lots are appropriate having regard
to considerations arising from provisions
of the planning scheme identified
the proposed development minimises the risk to people and minimises the damage
to property from flood hazard having regard
to considerations arising from
provisions of the planning scheme identified above;
relevant matters, which are essentially an absence of impacts and the provision
of housing choice, diversity and affordability,
warrant approval of the
development in the exercise of the court’s discretion;
non-compliance with provisions of the planning scheme warrants refusal of the
proposed development; and
any non-compliances with provisions of the planning scheme can be cured by
conditions.
[20] The Council
does not contend that the material change of use component of the development
application should be refused if the
court is otherwise satisfied that the
proposed reconfiguration is
appropriate.
the proposed development is a bad idea
similar context, when construing a number of the same provisions of the planning
scheme, the court made the following observations
Torro v Brisbane City
provisions of the Strategic Framework quoted above demonstrate a clear intent,
which is consistently developed through the
planning scheme that the protection
of local character extends not only to the built form but also to the context in
which it is
situated including, specifically, backyards. This planning intent
is reinforced in the Character Residential Zone Code in circumstances
protection and enhancement of character is, understandably, a significant
consideration for development in the CRZ. Ultimately,
overall outcomes
stipulate that development provides for a minimum lot size of 450m²
“to maintain a block pattern that
accommodates traditional backyards and
large trees”.
[22] While the
appellants assert that the built form as a consequence of the proposed
development will be identical to what is there
now and there will accordingly be
no impact on local character, this ignores the observation above that local
character extends not
only to the built form but also to the context in which it
is situated. So far as this character extends to accommodating traditional
backyards and large trees, the positioning of the original house at the rear of
the site and the subsequent development of the extension
into the front of the
site are such that these assessment benchmarks are rendered otiose. As noted
above, pursuant to s 31 of the
PR, I must have regard to any lawful use of the
premises in determining the appeal. This includes the extension which is sought
to become the dwelling house for proposed Lot 13. The extent of the extension
is such that I am aware of only one large tree which
remains on the site and any
landscaping is restricted to foliage around the edges of it.
proposed development nonetheless remains in significant conflict with the
planning scheme. It is situated in the Character
zone precinct where multiple
dwellings and dual occupancy (defined as including two attached
accommodated.
It is meant to be
located on a lot with a minimum size of
As noted above, the
proposed lots are only 188m² and 218m² respectively. They are even
smaller than what is contemplated
for the much more intense level of development
in the Infill housing zone precinct which provides that development must achieve
maximum dwelling yield of one dwelling per
Indeed, the
proposed lots are so out of character for the Character zone precinct that Lot
14 would become the second smallest freehold
lot in this precinct in all of Red
Moreover, as Mr Adams the
planner who gave evidence on behalf of the appellants conceded, it is not the
intention of the planning
scheme that the lots in this precinct be subdivided
into square lots and any square lots in the precinct are a lot larger than what
is proposed.
[24] I now turn
to the problem of Lot 13 and potential flooding. Two engineers gave evidence: Mr
Hu on behalf of the appellants; and
Mr Daly on behalf of the respondents. They
each modelled flooding impacts in respect of the proposed development. I accept
evidence of Mr Daly in explaining the effect of the flood modelling
undertaken by the experts in the following terms:
Almost 68% of the
total area of proposed Lot 13 is shown to be inundated in the Defined Flood
), which for an overland flow path source is the 2% Annual
Exceedance Probability (
). If future Climate Change (
included, or indeed a flood event exceeding the DFE were to occur, proposed Lot
13 becomes what is effectively completely inundated
with almost 96% of the total
area of proposed Lot 13 shown to be
[25] There was
considerable debate about whether the extent of this prospective inundation made
Lot 13 unsafe from a flooding perspective.
Regardless, what is clear is that
the existing house on the site has flood-free access even in the worst flooding
scenario as the
original house was built on the higher ground at the rear of the
site. Conversely, the proposed Lot 13 will be inundated to at least
half a metre at the nearest potential evacuation point in such a
[26] Turning to
the relevant provisions of the planning scheme, SO2 of Element 2.3 adopts a risk
management approach to such a
Thereafter, overall
outcome 5.g. of the Character residential zone code requires that development
respond to such a constraint.
am satisfied that the height of the extension coupled with the predicted extent
of the height of inundation means that overall
outcome 2.d. of the Flood overlay
code is satisfactorily
The same is true for
the relevant generally worded assessment benchmarks identified in the
Subdivision code. However, when PO18
of the Flood overlay code is considered,
it cannot be said that proposed Lot 13 minimises the risk to people from flood
circumstances where the dwelling on proposed Lot 13 will be completely
cut off by flood water. In this regard, I note that in
Corporation of
Synod of the Diocese of Brisbane v Brisbane City Council &
DCJ observed that the “ordinary meaning of ‘
to reduce to the smallest possible amount or
’”. The creation of Lot 13 does not do this.
[27] Proposed
Lot 13, which relies upon an elevated dwelling to be habitable, is significantly
compromised as a consequence of potential
inundation. Indeed, under
cross-examination, Mr Adams conceded that if the existing extension was
demolished, it would be “very
difficult for that land owner to replace
It is a most
undesirable planning outcome to create a new lot for residential purposes which
is dependant upon the existing dwelling
structure remaining in perpetuity so
that it can be used as intended.
extremely small size of the proposed lots with their configuration, including
the creation of attached dwellings, combined
with the inappropriateness of
creating a lot which is entirely surrounded by floodwater in an adverse flooding
event, is sufficient
to warrant the appeal being dismissed. This is
particularly so when the undesirable driveway access for proposed Lot 13 and the
limited utility of proposed Lot 13 for residential purposes into the future are
also taken into account.
[29] There is,
however, a much more compelling reason for dismissing the appeal. This relates
to overall outcome 2.f. of the Subdivision
code. When this provision is read in
conjunction with the other relevant parts of the planning scheme, its meaning is
clear. When
regard is had to the fact that it is uncontentious that two
separate households are accommodated in the existing dwelling, this provision
even more compelling.
of residential occupation can lawfully occur in circumstances where the original
house is considered the main dwelling
and the extension is considered a
secondary dwelling as defined in the planning
It can also be the
other way around, as it does not matter which of the two is considered the
primary dwelling. Overall outcome
2.f., when read in conjunction with the
relevant Note which precedes it, makes it clear that:
house, including the main dwelling, plus any secondary dwelling... in a zone in
the residential zones category is always
to remain as a sole lot by any title or
As the accompanying Note explains:
A reconfiguring of a lot proposal that does separate these components of a
dwelling house and includes them on individual title is
inappropriate and
incompatible development and is highly unlikely to be
[30] Reading the
planning scheme as a whole, this desired outcome appears entirely consistent
with the intention to preserve the character
of the Character zone precinct
within the Character residential zone. Overall outcome 4.b. does not envisage
attached dwellings
and overall outcome 6.b. provides that a new dwelling house
is located on an appropriately sized and configured
There is no support in the
planning scheme for the opportunistic attempt of the appellants to hive off the
extension to the original
house as a separate lot. In this context, it is
relevant that the process of applying for an extension to a dwelling is subject
to a lesser level of regulatory control than a reconfiguration of a
proposed development is not supported by the relevant provisions of the planning
scheme. This is unsurprising as it does
not represent a good planning outcome.
Turning a renovation which extends an existing dwelling house into a separate
dwelling house
on a separate lot may have superficial economic appeal from the
perspective of the owner of the dwelling house. It, however, does
not serve any
meaningful wider public purpose and significantly detracts from the planning
controls which seek to preserve the character
of the surrounding area. The
futility of the proposed development is obvious when it occurs in the context
that, should the extension
be demolished, the residential lot sought to be
created to accommodate it would be unlikely to be approved for a residential use
in the future.
[32] Aside from
the non-compliance with the provisions of the planning scheme identified above,
the proposed development also represents
an obvious over-development of the
[33] There are
no relevant matters which would justify approving the proposed development.
Indeed, the existing dwelling apparently
lawfully accommodates a second
household, providing additional housing in circumstances where, should proposed
Lot 13 be created
and it becomes necessary to demolish the extension, there
would likely be no opportunity accommodate a second household.
[34] The appeal
is therefore
Ex. 5, para 14.
Ibid, para 15.
Ibid, para 16.
Ibid, para 17, Fig. 6.
Ibid, p 56.
Ibid, para 19.
Ibid, p 165.
Ibid, para 34.
Ibid, para 33 and Ex. 10, p
Planning and Environment
Court Act 2016
s 45(1)(a).
Planning Act 2016
s 45(5)(a)(i).
Section 31(1)(f).
Section 31(1)(g).
Ex. 7(b), pp 346 and
Planning Act 2016
s 45(5)(b).
Brisbane City Council v
YQ Property Pty Ltd
[2020] QCA 253
[2021] QPELR 987
Abeleda & Anor v
Brisbane City Council & Anor
[2020] QR 441
at 458, [43].
[2014] QCA 147.
Ibid, at [52].
Ibid, at [56].
Section 5.6
, Table 5.6.1,
Ex. 8(a), p 146.
Ibid, p 49.
Section 1.5
Section 5.3.3.4.c, Ibid p
Ibid, p 72.
Ibid, p 79.
Ibid, p 104.
Ibid, p 105.
Ibid, p 174.
Sections 6.2.1.5.5. and
6.2.1.5.6, Ibid, p 176.
Section 8.2.11.2.2, Ibid, p
Ibid, p 211.
Ibid, p 282.
Ibid, p 281. This Note was
Ibid, p 172.
Ibid, p 283.
Ibid, p 288.
Ex. 3, para 26.
[2020] QPELR 491
Ex. 8(b), p 328.
Ex. 8(a), p 174.
Ibid, p 176.
Ibid, para 7(c).
T2–41, ll 15 –
T2–36, ll 45 –
Ex. 11, para 12.
Ex. 10, para 32.
Ex. 8(a), p 79.
Ibid, p 176.
Ibid, p 201.
[2025] QPEC 11
T2–16, ll 15 –
T1-14, ll 15 –
Ex. 8(b), p 370.
Section 9.4.10.2.2f., Ibid,
Ibid, p 281.
Ex. 8(a), pp 174 and
Ex. 5, para 150a., T2-14,
ll 20 – 26.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (235 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter