URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTBCCM/2009/47.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pivotalcom Pty Ltd v Body Corporate for Pivotal Point Commercial CTS 33687 [2009] QCCTBCCM 47 (26 October 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
PIVOTALCOM PTY LTD v BODY CORPORATE FOR PIVOTAL POINT COMMERCIAL CTS
[2009] CCT KL001-09
PIVOTALCOM PTY LTD
BODY CORPORATE FOR PIVOTAL POINT COMMERCIAL CTS 33687
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
26 October 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
20 October 2009
DECISION OF:
Mr K D Dorney QC
CATCHWORDS:
Application to adjust lot entitlements in Contribution Schedule –
concurrent expert evidence given
REPRESENTATION:
SOLICITORS:
RESPONDENT:
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
application in this proceeding, filed 8 January 2009, seeks an adjustment of the
lot entitlements in the Contribution Schedule
for the community titles scheme
known as “Pivotal Point Commercial” Community Titles Scheme 33687
applicant is the owner of Lots 102 and 103 in this CTS.
respondent is the Body Corporate for this CTS.
application is brought pursuant to
section 48(1)(b)
Body Corporate and
Community Management Act 1997
facilitated by
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act
respondent’s defence was filed on 8 April 2009. While it opposed an
adjustment of the kind sought by the applicant, it
supported an adjustment of
the kind identified by it.
20 May 2009 the Tribunal ordered, by consent, that the parties be permitted
legal representation. The hearing of the proceeding
was set down for 20 October
2009, when witnesses gave evidence.
surprisingly, given that both parties supported an adjustment of some kind, an
adjustment has been ordered.
Relevant legislation and relevant principles
both the applicant and the respondent relied upon the experts who produced
reports, being respectively, Leary & Partners
Pty Ltd (“L & P
Report”) dated 11 December 2008, and Resident Building Services
(“RBS Report”) dated
3 April 2009 and prepared by Mr Del Linkhorn
and Mr Scott Simpson, where both Reports contained analyses of the relevant
legislation
and the relevant Court of Appeal authority (
Fischer v Body
Corporate for Centrepoint Community Titles Scheme 7779
[2004] QCA 214
[2004] 2 Qd R 638)
it is unnecessary to repeat in detail either the relevant legislative provisions
or the relevant principles, although reference
will be made in these Reasons to
aspects of both from time to time.
the hearing, the evidence led was limited. The only witnesses were Ms Kaylene
Arkcoll, the author of the L & P Report, and
Mr Scott Simpson, an author of
the RBS Report. Both persons were sworn and then gave concurrent expert
evidence. This approach
was facilitated by both experts having previously met
and prepared a Joint Report dated 19 June 2009 which set out, in tabular form,
the differences between the two Reports and the reasons for supporting the
different approaches.
Tribunal was much assisted by this method of proceeding.
Consideration
the questions in dispute were so narrowed by the preparation of the Joint Report
and because, as noted above, there was no
dispute as to the remainder of both
Reports which are not in contention, it will be sufficient to address the
differences by proceeding,
Item by Item, through the relevant Tables of the
Joint Report.
proceeding to do so, it should be noted that the particular CTS is contained in
a volumetric plan of subdivision and concerns
only 6 retail lots and 13 office
lots, even though it is part of a larger mixed use complex. It has, thus, been
unnecessary to investigate
the residential part and no evidence has been led of
the content of the Building Management Statement which deals with the
responsibility
for shared infrastructure and facilities jointly managed under
the conditions set out in that Statement.
particular CTS is Lot 1 in Volumetric SP 153596. It includes sections of each
of 3 basement levels, part of the building and
external areas on the ground
level, and almost all of the building at levels 2, 3 and 4. Furthermore, the
space contained within
Lot 1 has been subdivided by SP 155586 to create the
common property and private lots of the CTS.
Table - Item 1 – Fire
is the first item in dispute. The annual value of the item is $6,164.75. The L
& P Report allocates the cost equally, whereas
the RBS Report allocates the
cost as 50% to retail lots and 50% to office lots, and then allocates the
resulting cost equally within
those groups.
Simpson was unable to inform the Tribunal that the actual physical features of
the fire control were in fact located as to half
in the retail lots and as to
half in the office lots. Rather, his approach was to contend that, since in his
opinion the retail
areas generate greater fire risks due to restaurant cooking
equipment and large numbers of the public that accumulate in and around
areas, even though the space occupied by both groups is not equal, all fire
control panels, detectors, hose reels, extinguishers
and maintenance costs
should be shared on a 50:50 basis.
approach in the L & P Report contends that the fire control system benefits
all lots regardless of where they are located.
Furthermore, all lots are stated
to be connected to the central fire control in emergency evacuation systems and
a large percentage
of the equipment is physically located in communal areas or
the basement. As well, testing and maintenance costs are uninfluenced
purpose for which the area is used.
Tribunal prefers the equality approach. This is not only because section 48(6)
states that, for the contribution schedule, the
respective lot entitlements should be equal, except to the extent to which it is
just and equitable in the circumstances for them not to be equal, but also
because there is simply no basis upon which it can be
said that the costs of the
fire control system have any necessary correlation with the risk of fire, even
though it might well be
true that the risk of fire could be seen to be greater
in the areas of the retail lots. It may, of course, be different should there
have been evidence that the risks, presently intuitively guessed at, had come to
fruition in some extended period of time before
this hearing such that there
could have been an analysis done which might have justified the finding of an
existence of the relevant
correlation.
Table - Item 2 – Cleaning
(generally)
the differences are between an equal distribution of the cost of $7,800.00 and
an allocation of 50:50 (as before).
that both witnesses accepted that the internal areas of the retail lots were the
subject of obligations by the occupiers of
such lots to undertake relevant
cleaning, as cleaning of the Special Privilege retail areas is a private
responsibility, there is
simply no evidence that shows that the costs for the
areas that are actually the subject of this cleaning expense are, in fact,
equally between the groups containing the retail lots and those
containing the office lots. The problem is compounded by the fact
that there is
no evidence that the cleaning for which this costing has been done is required
to be done outside the common property
consequence, given the
prima facie
approach of equality, the Tribunal
prefers the approach that allocates such cleaning costs equally.
Table - Item 3 – Cleaning
differences between the Reports are both in the amount and in the method of
allocation.
to the method of allocation first, the L & P Report favours equality,
whereas the RBS Report favours an allocation of
43.52% to retail lots and 56.48%
to office lots, and then equally within each group.
questioned, Mr Simpson was unable to personally validate the 43.52:56.48
division as his sources of information merely stated
that that was the way in
which the costs had been incurred.
L & P Report points to many difficulties in making any distinction between
the two groups. First, there is no direct connection
between the areas of
individual lots and the cost of maintaining either the external façade of
the building as a whole, or
the glazing. Secondly, it would appear that at
least part of the costing break-up relied upon by RBS is that, for the office
which are on levels higher than the retail lots, scaffolding may well be
necessary. Since all lots owners buy into a CTS of this
kind knowing exactly
what they are getting, and since a CTS of this kind necessarily involves
something more than one storey, it
is inevitable that the cleaning of the
outside of the windows of lots is a cost incurred for the benefit of all lot
owners, no matter
on what storey, and not only the particular lot owner whose
window is being separately cleaned.
the absence of any rational basis to allocate costs unequally, it cannot be just
and equitable in the circumstances for inequality
to prevail.
for the difference in cost, since the equality method has been preferred and
since there has been no cogent attack on the sum of
$10,000.00 identified in the
L & P Report, that figure is accepted.
Table - Item 4 – Cleaning
(materials)
same approach is adopted by both Reports as for Item 2.
Consequently,
the same outcome is reached as for Item 2, namely, that the sum of $9,000.00 as
determined in the L & P Report should
be divided equally.
Table - Item 5 –
the L & P Report allocates the sum of $60,484.00 equally, the RBS Report
allocates 66.68% of the cost to retail lots and
33.32% to the office lots, with
equal division within each of those groups.
Simpson’s explanation for the 66.68:33.32 break-up is that those figures
had been given to him by the relevant person concerned
with management. The
concern that the Tribunal has, in the absence of those persons giving evidence,
is whether the communication
between them and RBS was undertaken with the same
understanding on both sides as to what the principles applicable to an
under section 48 of the
require (namely, whether the
inquiry and the responses were similarly focussed on the extent to which the
various lots “unequally
caused” costs to the body corporate).
was nothing inherently required in the general services to be provided under
such management contracts which should necessarily
mean that retail lots incur
twice the costs of management that office lots do, particularly when there are
only half as many. The
problem is not only that the figures given to RBS may
simply be impressionistic but also that such management services are available
to all lots and a snapshot of any particular period of time, particularly if it
is limited, may not provide a proper foundation for
making long term allocations
such as must be made by the Tribunal in a case such as this. It is not a matter
that can be decided
intuitively.
Consequently,
in the absence of cogent evidence as to why equality should not prevail, the
Tribunal accepts an equal division of such
Table - Items 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10
– Superstructure
five items deal with superstructure costs. In turn, they cover: repainting
exterior walls; repainting concrete roof overhang;
repainting balcony ceilings;
scaffolding allowance; and repainting ceiling over restaurant.
approach by L & P is that all such costs should be shared equally, whereas
the approach by RBS is that the allocation should
be by lot area.
problem with selecting area as a basis for allocation, where it might well be
thought in other buildings that the allocation of
the costs of external surface
maintenance should be the subject of individual measurements (such as quantity
surveying yields), is
that a quantity surveying approach is not appropriate both
because different areas of the building exterior have been constructed
substantially different materials and level of finish and the variation in
building design is largely unrelated to the function
of most of the individual
lots within this CTS. Moreover, when considering whether the costs should be
based upon lot area, there
is no clear relationship between the length of the
building façade and such lot area, particularly where some of the costs
such as for repainting the concrete roof overhang are inevitably the kind that
should be shared equally.
is also not to the point in a proceeding such as this that actual
“construction” costs might depend upon, at least
in a general
inter-relationship way, area. Rather, what the Legislature has imposed upon
Courts and Tribunals who are concerned
to make adjustments pursuant to section
is that, even when section 49(4) matters are brought
into account, they are only brought into account to the extent, if any, that
they actually affect the “cost” of “operating” the
given the particular circumstances of this CTS, the Tribunal favours an
allocation that is based upon equality, particularly
again in circumstances
where there is no cogent evidence that the area of each lot has any relationship
with the generation of the
relevant costs, with this being particularly relevant
to the scaffolding allowance.
the costs relevant to Items 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 should be those selected in the L
& P Report.
Table - Items 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19 and 20
particular costs relate to repainting, replacing or maintaining surface areas,
including flooring, apart from Item 18 which
deals with maintaining the security
access intercom.
L & P Report divides these costs equally, whereas the RBS Report allocates
the costs simply to the office lots equally.
& P acknowledge that there are grounds for considering an allocation of
office level foyer costs to just office lots. But they
contend that, since the
relevant areas are not expressly made exclusive use areas, since they contain
facilities such as tearooms
and cleaners’ rooms and since they provide
access to the first level common balcony which does not otherwise seem to be for
the particular benefit of any section of the scheme, equality should
Necessarily,
there is an interplay between these costs and the costs that appear on their
face to relate simply to the retail areas.
The problem with both is that, in
the absence of exclusive use, it may well be the case that occupiers of the
retail lots use common
facilities such as tearooms, cleaners’ rooms and
this is certainly a question where reasonable minds could justifiably differ as
to the correct approach, where, as here, there
is but one CTS and where there
are no exclusive use areas concerning the places where these costs are incurred,
the Tribunal, although
with some hesitation, accepts that in these particular
circumstances it is appropriate to maintain the equality approach particularly
where the circumstances do not show that it is just and equitable for equality
not to be adopted. This conclusion acknowledges the
matters referred to in
section 49(4) of the
but also appreciates that it is not shown
how the particular office lots cause all the costs associated with these Items
to be simply
costs generated by such lots.
is particularly apt in such circumstances to refer to the observation by Forde
Woodley & Anor v The Proprietors of Quay West Community Titles
Scheme 16610
[2006] QDC 277
that, although the area of a lot may provide an
intelligible basis to calculate some expenses, one should not do so unless there
can be shown to be disproportionate expenses arising from owning such an area.
This observation was made in circumstances where
the evidence led was that the
proportion of the cost under consideration, being a static cost (namely, the
cost of providing the
service in question), was a cost that would not vary as
areas varied and that, even if there was some portion that could be allocated,
it was impossible to tell whether that would be a significant portion or an
insignificant portion: at [35]. While that particular
statement may be more
apt to questions canvassed earlier based upon whether costs should be determined
on a lot area basis, the point
of the observation for present purposes is that
where a portion of the costs can be attributable to another group (such as the
or office lots here), but no decision can be reasonably made as to the
significance of that apportioning, the principles require
that equality should
with respect to the costs for these Items, they will be divided equally between
Table - Items 21, 22, 23, 24 and
relate to similar costs as just discussed that appear, on first blush, to apply
to the office lots but here apply to the retail
arguments in favour of equality for these Items are stronger than for the items
that appear on their face to relate primarily
to the office lots. This is
because such allowances cover the maintenance of the general access passageway
that runs through the
building from the front street to the rear delivery and
garage collection bay areas, as well as linking to the basement access paths
access paths to and from the residential section of the building. Furthermore,
although the allowances cover the maintenance
of retail toilets, such toilets
provide a substantially identical benefit to the toilets on the office levels,
although RBS point
out that the retail toilet areas can only be used by members
of the public through requesting a particular key from the occupier
retail lot in question. Nevertheless, where such toilets, such equipment doors
and such communal service areas doors are
not limited to benefiting retail lots,
and where the cost seems unlikely to be affected by lot use or design factors,
in the circumstances
of this particular CTS, and again with some hesitation
although not as much as for the question concerning the office lots, the
concludes that equality should prevail here as well.
Table - Items 26, 27 and 28
costs associated with these three items, being $190.00, $21.88 and $110.00 have
been excluded by L & P but included, and divided
equally, by RBS.
not excluded, then the equality principle should apply.
items do appear in the Sinking Fund, which includes forecast costs. L & P
contend that such inclusion in such Fund has been
by error, as all are located
in an area of the development that is part of the principal scheme and not this
subsidiary CTS.
it is clear from the various regulation modules that the mere identification of
a cost for a particular item in a particular
fund does not generate any
obligation to spend such sum, being, in general terms, not an appropriation for
that particular purpose,
the mere fact of including a cost in the Sinking Fund
does not mean that it should be a cost that should be the subject of an
allocation.
Quite obviously, if the terms of the Building Management Statement
require such costs to be on some shared basis, then that will
considered separately. All that the Tribunal can do on the present evidence is
exclude a consideration of such costs.
Since the costs are so small in a
relative sense, the exclusion will not affect the overall lot entitlement
adjustment in any way.
Table - Items 29 and 30
common feature about both of these is that RBS have excluded such costs because
they have not been provided for in the Sinking
Fund, whereas L & P have
included them because they would be costs incurred in the future as part of this
similar reasons to those adopted with respect to items that should be excluded
because they are not within the ambit of costs
incurred for the CTS in question
here, these particular costs should be included because, at least on the balance
of probabilities,
such costs will be incurred.
the reasons advanced by L & P in their Report, the sum of $5,000.00 for the
major upgrade to the lift equipment will be divided
equally and the sum of
$266.67 with respect to maintaining glazed balustrades will be allocated
according to the actual quantity
of balustrading that exists for each lot.
Table - Budget allowances
concern 10 Items, covering both the Administrative Fund and the Sinking Fund
expenses. The concern here is whether the approach
should be one of averaging
the costs over, for instance, the last 3 years’ budgets or whether the
present budget should be
selected as the more appropriate base.
all particular instances, the RBS Report has selected the average. For all but
Items 2 and 7, the L & P Report has selected
the budget figure.
Item 1, since the audit fees have only recently been started to be incurred on
an ongoing basis, although it is conceded
by L & P that both methods are
reasonably arguable, it does appear to the Tribunal to be appropriate to rely
upon the budget
the other Items in dispute, being ones that have been not been averaged, the
budget approach is favoured by the Tribunal because
there is a cogent argument
that averaging does not accurately determine the likely ongoing costs for the
even though L & P concede that the difference in approaches will only have a
small impact, as at most, on the calculations,
the Tribunal is of the view that
the budget approach for Items 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10 should be accepted.
Table - Differences in general
last part of the Joint Report deals with differences between the two experts in
their approach. Concerning RBS, all the matters
raised by them in Items 1 to 5
(inclusive) have been considered in the Reasons so far discussed.
for L & P, the decision to multiply a percentage of the total costs
allocated to each lot by 30, and then round the result,
does not, as properly
contended by them, alter the proportional relationship between the lots, being
simply a mathematical exercise
where all relevant figures are multiplied by the
same multiplier. The consequence is simply whether the result achieves a level
of accuracy that is commensurate with the limitations on accuracy inherent in
constructing the multiplicand. Where, as here, there
is inherent inaccuracy
necessarily associated with the base calculation, it presents a false accuracy
to attempt to calculate figures
simply for the purposes of having the total
number of lot entitlements reach unrealistically high figures such as 100,000
or even 10,000. The approach of L & P is appropriate, particularly
in these circumstances where any apparent accuracy is just
that, rather than
being real.
Additionally,
since there are a limited number of lots only and since, by section 47(2)(b) of
the value of the lot owner’s vote for voting on an
ordinary resolution if a poll is conducted for voting on the resolution
determined by the lot entitlement in the contribution schedule, it makes sense
to have whole numbers that, for the most part,
are equivalent, especially when
the differences between lots are, as just observed, more apparent than real.
other elements in Items 1, 2 and 3 of the General Comments concerning the L
& P Report have been previously dealt with.
the various findings that have been made, the Tribunal’s conclusion is
that the lot entitlements in the current Contribution
Schedule should be
adjusted pursuant to section 48 of the
and should be adjusted in
the way proposed by the L & P Report, in circumstances where both experts
agree that the current lot
entitlements cannot be justified on inequality
grounds on the basis of being just and equitable in the circumstances and,
each agrees that there needs to be an adjustment.
that the issues that arise in cases such as these are not capable, at least in
these kind of situations, of easy resolution
because there are competing views
which are both reasonable but about which minds differ and given that both
parties have relied
upon experts who substantially agree about many of the
factors involved, even though both parties are legally represented, the
appropriate
course should be that each party pay their own costs.
so concluding, the Tribunal has had reference to the principles enunciated in
Tamawood Limited v Paans
[2005] QCA 111
[2005] 2 Qd R 101
but concludes that the
complexity, insofar as it does arise, occurs because of the need to undertake
the extensive mechanical exercise
of identifying the relevant costs,
categorising them and then allocating them among the various lot owners.
Exactly that exercise
has been done in this case by each nominated expert. The
fact of the Tribunal preferring the approach of one expert over another
as here, it was reasonable for the respondent to obtain its own report, if only
for the purposes of discharging its duty to
all lot owners – or at least
to all lot owners other than the applicant – means that in these kinds of
cases, even though
legal representation is obtained, it is not the legal
representation which affects the outcome primarily but, instead, the
persuasiveness
of the particular experts’ view relied upon.
any event, since the parties have not been given the opportunity to address the
Tribunal on costs, both parties are given seven
(7) days in which to make
submissions, if any, that the costs should not be, as has been provisionally
determined by the Tribunal,
each party’s own costs in the proceeding.
______________________________
MR K D DORNEY QC
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (802 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter