URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2002/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:48:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Leonforte, Robert & Karen v Green, Ida [2002] QPAMDT 21 (25 June 2002)
PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR DEALERS TRIBUNAL
[2002] QPAMDT 28
25 JUNE 2002
APPLICATION NO:
FAPANI, RACHEL
FIRST RESPONDENT:
M & A FAMILY CARS
SECOND RESPONDENT:
THIRD RESPONDENT:
PRENTICE MARK
PRENTICE GORDANA
DATE OF HEARING:
[2002] QPAMDT 28
REASONS FOR
1. This is an
application by Rachel Anne Fapani under section 119(1)(a) of the
Auctioneers
and Agents Act
1971 ("the repealed Act") claiming against the former fund on
the basis of an alleged contravention of the repealed Act by Mark Prentice
Respondent) and Gordana Prentice (3
Respondent)
trading as M&A Family Cars.
The claim arises in relation to a 1990
Holden Commodore Sedan, Registration number 483 BJJ which Ms Fapani bought from
M & A Family
Cars for $7,990.00 on 5 October 1999. Ms Fapani traded in a
1987 Rover sedan Registration number 918 EIB for $5,890.00 and paid
$2,100.00 to M & A Family Cars. At the time of sale the odometer reading on
the Holden Commodore was 157,121 kms. Ms
Fapani was later advised by an
Investigations Officer from the Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading
that the true odometer
reading of the vehicle was 267,115 kms at the time of
Ms Fapani claims the amount of $8,517.00
(being the difference between the value of the car and the sale price and the
cost of repairs
to the vehicle) from the claim fund arising out of the breach of
s 72 of the repealed Act by the Respondents.
The transfer
of the claim to the Tribunal
The claim by Ms Fapani has become a claim
against the claim fund under the
Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act
2000 (“the Act”) by virtue of section 604 of the Act which provides
Former fund
The rights and
liabilities of the former fund are taken to be the rights and liabilities of the
claim fund.
A claim that has been made against the former fund,
and not finished before the commencement, continues as if it were a claim
the claim fund.
The application was transferred from the
Auctioneers and Agents Committee which had not dealt with it under the repealed
June 2001, when the Committee ceased to exist, to this Tribunal by the
Chief Executive under section 476 of the Act.
The Tribunal is satisfied that the
Respondents have been notified of the hearing and it is entitled to hear the
matter in the absence
of the respondent in accordance with s 487 of the
While the Tribunal is to deal with this
application under the Act it is to determine the claim based on section 119 of
the repealed
Act which relevantly provided as
Application of fund
A&A Act 119.(1)
Subject to this Act, the fund shall be held and applied for the purpose of
reimbursing persons who may suffer pecuniary loss because
the contravention of any provision of
section 60,69, 70, 72, 73 or 74 of part 7, division 1 by a prescribed
“prescribed person”
licensee, the licensee’s partner, employee, agent or any person having the
apparent charge or control for the time being
of the office or business of the
licensee.(s.119)
A person may claim against the
fund by giving the registrar written notice of the substance of the claim.
The notice must be given within—
(a) 6 months after the
person becomes aware that the person has suffered pecuniary loss; or
years after the commission of the breach that caused the person’s
pecuniary loss;
whichever occurs sooner.
8. In determining the
amount of any claim the Tribunal will need to consider sub-sections 120(2) and
(7) of the repealed Act which
provided as follows:
Claims against the
A&A Act 120.(1)
No person shall be
entitled to recover from the fund an amount greater than the balance of the loss
suffered by the person after deducting
from the total amount of such loss the
amount or value of all money or other benefits received or recovered or which in
the opinion
of the committee might, but for the person’s neglect or
default, have been received or recovered by the person from any source
than the fund in reduction of such loss.
shall be paid or be payable out of the fund as interest on the amount of any
judgment obtained or of any claim allowed against
process for deciding a claim against the fund is set-out in section 488 of the
Act which provides as follows:
Deciding claims other than minor
The Tribunal may allow the claim, wholly or partly,
or reject the claim.
However, the Tribunal may allow the claim
only if satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that—
(a) an event
mentioned in section 470(1) happened; and
(b) the claimant suffered financial
loss because of the happening of the event.
If the Tribunal allows
the claim, wholly or partly, the Tribunal must—
(a) take into account
any amount the claimant might reasonably have received or recovered if not for
the claimant’s neglect
or default;
(b) decide the amount of the
claimant’s financial loss; and
(c) name the person who is liable for
the claimant’s financial loss.
10. Because this is a claim against
the former fund, sub-section 119(1) of the repealed Act rather than sub-section
470(1) of the
Act applies.
The evidence
11. Ms Fapani provided the details of her claim in a statement dated 23
August 2000. Ms Fapani confirmed that statement under oath
to the Tribunal on 9
12. Ms Fapani purchased a 1990 Holden Commodore Sedan,
Registration number 483 BJJ from M & A Family Cars for $7,990.00 on 5
1999. Ms Fapani traded in a 1987 Rover sedan for $5,890.00 and paid a
further $2,100.00 to M & A Family Cars.
At the time of sale the odometer reading
on the Holden Commodore was 157,121 kms. This odometer reading was recorded on
the contract
of sale, a copy of which was provided to the Tribunal.
Ms Fapani was later advised by an
Investigations Officer from the Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading
that the true odometer
reading of the vehicle was 267,115 kms at the time of
According to the report of
Investigations Officer, Tony Jones, the Respondents purchased the motor vehicle
from RMA Motor Auctions
on 1 September 1999. An odometer reading of 267,115 kms
appeared on the invoice, The same reading was recorded on the stock book
First Respondent and on the safety certificate. The odometer reading was
however, changed to 157,121 kms on the warranty contract
and sale contract to
the Applicant.
The Applicant provided a valuation of
the vehicle by Queensland Motor Valuation as at the date of sale with an
odometer reading of
267,111 kms. The motor vehicle was valued at $5,500.00. The
valuation states that repairs undertaken by the Applicant have been disregarded
in reaching a value for the motor vehicle.
The Applicant provided evidence to the
Tribunal that had she been advised of the true mileage she would not have
purchased the vehicle.
Has a breach of the repealed Act
been committed?
The Applicant claims payment from the
claim fund for loss suffered due to a false representation by the Respondents
of the vehicle. A claim may only be paid from the fund if s
119(1) is satisfied.
Section 119(1) of the repealed Act
relevantly provides:
Application of fund
Act 119.(1)
Subject to this Act, the fund shall be held and applied for the
purpose of reimbursing persons who may suffer pecuniary loss because
the contravention of any provision of
section 60,69, 70, 72, 73 or 74 of part 7, division 1 by a prescribed person;
“prescribed person” means a licensee, the
licensee’s partner, 3employer, agent or any person having the apparent
charge or control for the time being of the office or business of the
It is clear that respondents are
prescribed persons within the meaning ascribed by s 119(2) of the repealed
A claim can be paid from the claim fund
if there is a contravention of s 72 of the repealed Act. Section 72 of the
repealed Act is
contravened if a motor dealer makes a false or misleading
representation to a purchaser of a motor vehicle concerning any vehicle
motor dealer has for sale.
In considering whether s 72 of the
repealed Act has been contravened it is necessary to also consider s 64 and s 65
of the repealed
Section 64 of the repealed Act
relevantly provides:
Tampering with odometers
A person must not tamper with a motor
vehicle’s odometer with intent to falsely represent that, at a particular
time, the vehicle
has not travelled more that a specified
distance....
In any proceeding, the distance shown at
any time on the odometer tampered with is evidence of a false representation by
who tempered with the odometer that the vehicle had not travelled
more than the distance shown on the odometer.
Section 65 of the repealed Act
relevantly provides
Evidence of tampering by a motor
Evidence that a motor vehicle’s
odometer was tampered with when the vehicle was in a dealer’s possession
is evidence that
the dealer contravened section
Evidence that a motor vehicles
odometer reading shortly after a dealer had possession of the vehicle was less
than its reading when
the dealer took possession of the vehicle is evidence the
dealer contravened section 64(1)
section – “possession” of a motor vehicle includes custody and
control of the vehicle.
The report of the Investigations Officer
establishes that at the time the Respondents purchased the vehicle from RMA
Motor Auctions
the odometer reading was 267,111 kms. The odometer reading at the
time of sale by the First Respondent to the Applicant was 157,121
evidence establishes that from the time of purchase from RMA Motor Auctions to
the time of sale to the Applicant, the motor
vehicle was in the possession of
the Respondents.
The Tribunal is satisfied that on the
basis of the evidence provided and the operation of s 65(2) of the repealed Act,
the Respondents
have contravened s 64(1) of the repealed
According to s 64(3) of the repealed
Act, a contravention of s 64(1) of the repealed Act gives rise to a false
representation by the
person who tampered with odometer that the vehicle had not
travelled more than the distance on the odometer.
Pursuant to s 72 of the repealed Act a
motor dealer is prohibited from making a representation that is false or
misleading to the
purchaser of a motor vehicle about the
The Tribunal is therefore, satisfied
that the Respondents have contravened both s 64 and s 72 of the repealed Act
The amount of the financial loss
Ms Fapani has claimed $8,517.00 being
the difference between the contract price of the car and the true value at the
time of sale
and various repairs undertaken to the motor vehicle after sale.
Section 119 of the repealed Act provides
that the fund shall be applied for the purpose of “reimbursing persons who
pecuniary loss” because of a contravention of the repealed Act.
The Tribunal considers that the primary
measure of the loss suffered by the Applicant because of the contravention of s
repealed Act is the difference between the contract price of $7,990.00
and the value of the vehicle. Based upon the valuation provided
by the Applicant
the value is accepted to be $5,500.00, resulting in a loss of
Ms Fapani has also claimed the cost of
repairs undertaken to the vehicle at the time of sale. The value of the vehicle
has been established
at the time of sale disregarding the repairs undertaken.
This should result in a lower value for the vehicle, therefore, taking into
account its state of repair at the time of sale.
The Tribunal finds that the claim for
the repairs undertaken after the sale of the vehicle is
The Applicant also claims the cost of
the valuation obtained. The Tribunal finds that this does not fall within the
meaning of loss
in s 119 and is therefore, rejected.
The Tribunal finds that Ms Fapani has
suffered a financial loss in the amount of
Reimbursement of the
Under s 119 of the former Act a person
may make a claim for a contravention of the repealed Act by a prescribed person.
is defined in s 119(2) as
“a licensee, the
licensee’s partner, employee, agent or any person having the apparent
charge or control for the time
being of the office or business of the
On a Business Names Extract dated 29
November 2000, the Second and Third Respondents are noted as carrying on the
business of M&A
Family Cars. According to the report of Tony Jones,
Investigations Officer, presented to the Tribunal, the Second and Third
Respondents
were also the holder of a motor dealers licence no
The Tribunal finds on the basis of Ms
Fapani’s evidence that the Second and Third Respondents as prescribed
persons under the
repealed Act are liable for the Applicant’s financial
40. Accordingly, the Tribunal orders that the Second
and Third Respondents are liable to compensate the claim fund in the amount of
$2,490.00. The Tribunal orders that the Second and Third Respondents reimburse
the claim fund in accordance with sections 490 and
491 of the Act.
41. The orders the Tribunal may make on a claim hearing are set-out in
section 530 of the Act which provides as follows:
Orders Tribunal may
make on claim hearing
The Tribunal may make the following
orders in relation to a claim against the fund—
(a) an order allowing
the claim, wholly or partly, or rejecting the claim;
(b) an order stating
that a named person is liable for a claimant’s financial loss and the
amount of the loss;
(c) an order about recovery of an amount payable in
relation to a claim;
(d) an order that no amount is recoverable in relation
to a claim.
42. In accordance with s 530 of the Act the Tribunal orders:
that the Chief Executive of the
Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading pay from the claim fund to the
Applicant the sum of
Two thousand four hundred and ninety dollars
($2,490.00).
that the Second and Third Respondents
reimburse the claim fund in the sum of Two thousand four hundred and ninety
dollars ($2,490.00)
in accordance with s 490 and s 491 of the
................................................
B COTTERELL - CHAIRPERSON
PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR DEALERS
Sharon Christensen Ian Herriot Kate
Member Member Member
mE:\Case Management Files\2002\W -
Claim\W012-02\Drafts\W012-02DFT20-06-02.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (58.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter