URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2018/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Austin, Re [2018] QMHC 14 (19 November 2018)
Austin, Re [2018] QMHC 14 (19 November 2018)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of Re: Rhys Michael Austin
[2018] QMHC 14
PROCEEDING:
AN APPLICATION BY SONIA ANDERSON PURSUANT TO
SECTION 160
MENTAL HEALTH ACT
0151 of 2018
DELIVERED ON:
19 November 2018
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
19 November 2018
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr E N McVie and
Dr S J Harden
DETERMINATION:
Application dismissed
Mrs Anderson in person
D Balic for the Director of Public Prosecutions
K M Hillard for the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist
L Falcongreen
for the defendant
SOLICITORS:
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
Office of the Chief
Psychiatrist
Legal Aid Queensland for the defendant
HER HONOUR: I am going to give my reasons and decision now. This is an
application by Mrs Sonia Anderson, who came to the Court
in the aftermath of
publication of a book by Donald Grant, which included a chapter on one of the
defendants who had come through
the Mental Health Court, a Mr Austin. Mr Austin
killed Mrs Anderson’s daughter. He was found to be insane at the time of
the killing, and he has been on a forensic order at The Park ever since.
Mental Health Act 2000
Mental Health Act 2016
prohibit the use of reports except for purposes approved by the Court. I think
actually this application has shown that
there is a very good reason to prohibit
that use. The reports are prepared for a hearing in this Court. Although the
in open Court, the matters dealt with in the Court cannot be
published until after the criminal proceedings are well and truly finished,
the main reason for that is that to get a defence in this Court, the defendant
must either admit to the acts said to constitute
the offence, or at the very
least not contest them. That is, it must be accepted that they occurred, and
occurred in the way the
Crown alleges. So there is a very good reason why the
proceedings in this Court cannot be published until after the appeal time.
After that, what occurs in open Court during the hearing can be published,
and in significant matters, and in this matter, there are
published reasons for
decision, and there are published reasons in the Court of Appeal for decisions.
So there is a publication,
I think, of all the matters which are legally
relevant to the matter that comes before the Court, although it is a delayed
publication.
The way the Court operates is that the Court receives
reports from numerous psychiatrists. Those psychiatrists give evidence, and
is their oral evidence that is public in the hearing, and it is their oral
evidence that may be published after all the appeal
periods have run. The
reports themselves, and other documents which are filed in the Court, are called
exhibits, but they remain
on the Court file at the registry, and they may not be
reports under the statute may not be used for any purpose other than with the
Court’s leave. So even though they are called
exhibits, because this
Court is really an adjunct to the criminal jurisdiction of the Court, just like
exhibits in criminal matters,
they are not public exhibits. Nobody can access
them without leave.
Mrs Anderson says that Dr Grant expressed views
publicly after publication of his book, and after he organised various events
to attract publicity to his book. She says that he told her in answer
to a question at a book launch that the reports of the Court
were available to
the public. Nobody contested that. I am happy enough to accept that it was
true. I think it is consistent with
some of the things that are said in the
forward to the book itself, but also some of the other press reports and so
forth that I
Certainly, when he began to be criticised for
his book, Dr Grant then, so far as I know from reports in the press, proffered
that the families of victims of acts committed by people who get a
defence in the Mental Health Court should have access to the reports.
again, Mrs Anderson relies on those views, and she has said from the beginning
in this matter that she wanted to test his
As I explained, I
think, to Mrs Anderson on the first day she came before the Court, and I have
explained again this morning, the
law is – and it is not judge-made law,
it is in the Act – that the reports are not for the public. The reports
in the hearings and then, after that, access to them is controlled by
the mechanism of this Court giving leave. So that is the position.
those circumstances, Mrs Anderson asked for leave to access the reports. She
put that application, really, on three different
grounds, I think. One is that
she said she is concerned with making submissions to the Mental Health Review
Tribunal as to its review
of Mr Austin’s forensic order. I think that is
true, and as I said to her in argument, I think that that is a valuable input
the tribunal process.
I do not think, however, that she needs access to
the reports in this matter to make effective representations to the Tribunal.
Tribunal has those reports. The Attorney-General has those reports, and the
Attorney-General appears at the Tribunal reviews to
advocate the interests of
the Crown, the State, the public interest. And I think, actually, Mrs Anderson
accepted in argument that
really was not her role to be advocating on the basis
of the reports in the Tribunal.
Then Mrs Anderson put her application,
really, on the basis of a personal desire to see the reports or, at least, parts
And she said two things particularly were hurtful to her in the way
the matter was run through the Courts: one was that it was years
found out that Mr Austin had taken responsibility for the killing. Now, he had
initially given a story that somebody
else altogether was responsible for her
daughter’s death, and it was years before she found out that, in fact, Mr
Austin took
responsibility.
I can see how it would be hurtful to her not
to know that and not to know that early. It probably was available in all the
in this Court through the time that the reference in this Court was
active. It is a difficult problem to address as to whether or
information can be released before the decision in this Court, because,
obviously enough, if the proceedings in this court
had have been to the effect
that Mr Austin was not entitled to a defence, he would have had to face
trial in the ordinary Courts
and that trial might have been irrevocably
prejudiced if there had been publication before the trial of the fact that Mr
Austin took
responsibility for the killing.
It does give me pause for
thought, though, because, certainly at the public hearing in the Mental Health
Court, it is plain to anyone
who cares to listen that the named defendant
accepts responsibility for whatever crime it is, and that occurs within the
of the Court, before the decision of the Court and certainly well before
any appeal of the decision of the Court. So that information
is actually shared
in open Court, although there are prohibitions on publication, so it does lead
me to wonder whether or not there
could be mechanisms whereby the direct victims
of crime dealt with in this Court are given more information sooner.
other particular piece of information which Mrs Anderson found, reading
Dr Grant’s book, was something that is presented
in the book as
being words that her daughter spoke very close to the time of her death and Mrs
Anderson says: how is it that she
could have been so involved in the hearing in
the Mental Health Court and paid such attention to everything that went on in
Health Court, but then learned something as personal, as compelling,
as potentially distressing as that, from reading it in a book.
I really do have sympathy for her point of view, but I think as the hearing wore
on, the difficulties with these matters
in the hearing in the Mental Health
Court became apparent. I think quite often counsel, not just in the Mental
Health Court, quite
often in the criminal Courts, censor their questions in a
way that will produce answers which give legally relevant material, but
perhaps limit what counsel assumes will be the distress caused to people
listening and, in particular, the families of victims,
and I say that having
been a barrister at one stage of my life. And I probably reason by analogy that
sometimes doctors in this Court
and witnesses in the other Courts censor what
they give in their answers for exactly the same reason. I think that might have
play in this Court, because if something is in the report and it is
very distressing, the doctor and the barrister know that the
Judges and the
assisting psychiatrists will have read it and, therefore, probably both
sometimes act in a way which they assume will
be productive of less distress to
those listening.
Certainly, distressing matters do have to be ventilated
in this Court, and they are for purposes that are legally relevant. But it
well be that matters that are not strictly legally relevant, like the one that
Ms Anderson raises here, are not ventilated in
the open Court hearing and
perhaps discretions and self-censoring of the type I have talked about play some
part in that.
The other difficulty, I think, with this particular topic
– that is, the words that apparently Mr Austin reported to Dr Grant
– this is a problem raised by Dr McVie: and he was the only doctor that
received that version. It might not have been true.
It might have been a
product of his psychosis at the time. It might have been the product of his
psychosis at the time he gave
the interview to Dr Grant. So while it may be
true that Mr Austin said those words to Dr Grant, there remains questions about
in fact, they were said by the deceased lady.
I think that
raises a difficulty about using parts of reports in circumstances other than the
Court hearing, because if it had been
relevant to something in the Court
hearing, questions would have been asked about it and those questions would have
been explored,
“Well, Dr Grant, that is maybe what he told you, but do you
think that really happened or do you think that was something that
imagining, fantasising, hearing as a hallucination?” Or, “Dr Grant,
he has never told that to any other psychiatrist
and he was quite sick when he
saw you. Do you think it was a product of his illness at the time he saw
So one just starts to realise that things that are in
reports that are not explored in a forensic way in the courtroom just sort of
lead to layer upon layer of uncertainty. And I am afraid for someone in the
position of Mrs Anderson, I do not know if that makes
things more or less
distressing to find out, probably hearing Dr McVie’s view today that while
Dr Grant has put that in his
book, maybe it did not happen.
And I would
have to say that I have read the book. I have read it a couple of times. The
chapters in there are not written –
having sat here and read –
having read dozens at least, scores, of Dr Grant’s reports for matters in
this Court, the
way those chapters are written is nowhere near the forensic
independent professional level that the reports for the Court are written.
Anyway, I think possibly all of this discussion, really, leads me to the
conclusion that probably the rule in
section 160
Mental Health Act 2016
is probably a pretty good rule of thumb that there are all sorts of problems
once you start giving leave to people to look at the
McVie has outlined how complicated the hearing of this reference and the
progress of this reference through the Court was,
and that is particularly
valuable because she was there as an assisting psychiatrist at the time. A lot
of time has passed, and
I am sure there would be things that Mrs Anderson will
never forget from that hearing, but there must be things she has forgotten
especially if there were fragmented hearings. To now have reports given at the
end, not as a cohesive whole, I do just wonder
how – how the provision
of the reports could be helpful, quite frankly.
The third argument that
Mrs Anderson puts before the Court is that because of the experience she has
been through, she has a wider
social agenda in relation to the law that relates
to the way the criminally insane are dealt with in Queensland. And I think the
bundle of documents tendered today by counsel for Mr Austin really shows that
and shows that she has been actively campaigning to
parliamentarians but also in
the press and so forth. I do not think Mrs Anderson needs the reports from this
matter to continue
that campaign. She certainly made me think about whether
there are ways this Court could address someone in her position better
do, and it is something that I will be continuing to think about in the future,
because it is not just this case. I have
had other cases that have caused me to
think the same thing.
I actually think the system in the Mental Health
Court is a really terrific system. I think it is an amazingly good system, but
can always do better and I think sometimes there needs to be some
flexibility. It would be difficult and I think Ms Balic in her
submissions made
some very good points. If the burden of that is going to fall on the DPP or
part of that burden falls on the DPP,
how does the DPP cope with that? But, as
I say, I think there may well be room for improved communication.
think certainly, as I have explained, I devote more time to the hearing of
cases involving killings in this Court. I also
now have a complex case list for
any matter involving a killing so that it is managed in a pro-active way through
the Court. I am
wondering whether we cannot allow some input into that
management by victims and the family of victims; it would have the advantage
that it would come earlier, too, in the progress of the case through the Court.
So I appreciate Mrs Anderson’s wider agenda.
I appreciate why she has it,
why she feels motivated to do those things, and I do think there are things to
consider for the way
this Court does manage these cases, but I do not see that
she needs the reports in this case to pursue it.
So I come back, having
looked at the three limbs. The one, I think, that is most compelling is the
one, really, which is the most
personal: that Mrs Anderson says, “Well,
there is information there that I do not have.” I am not inclined to
access to that information for reasons that I have explained. In this
case in particular, I do not know that there is any easy way
to access it either
in whole or in part. I do not know that it will be accurate or truthful
information if it is just even the whole
of what is contained in the reports,
divorced from cross-examination and clarification which would occur if the
information was given
orally in Court. And I think what Dr McVie said about what
seemed to be the victim’s last words, if you read the chapter in
Grant’s book, probably really cast that in very fine relief. It was not
explored at the hearing and it may not mean what
it seems to mean.
the course of the hearing, Mrs Anderson told me that she did not want, I
suppose, the halfway house of having redacted reports
or parts of reports given
to her orally in a way that she was not able to share. And I – again, I
can understand exactly why
she says that. So I think while the parties did try
to work on some accommodation of that type, which I do not think really got
the stage of being fully or satisfactorily formulated even by the time of
hearing, and not for want of trying and not for want
of goodwill. It is not
something that Mrs Anderson seeks, and for that reason, really, looking at the
whole of the matter, I am
going to dismiss the application.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (187 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter