URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2025/275.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Henschke v WorkCover Queensland [2025] QSC 275 (29 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Henschke v WorkCover Queensland
[2025] QSC 275
BRADLEY HENSCHKE
(applicant)
WORKCOVER QUEENSLAND
(respondent)
Trial division
PROCEEDING:
Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
29 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
24 September, 2 October 2025
The application for a statutory order of review is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – JUDICIAL REVIEW – REVIEWABLE DECISIONS AND
CONDUCT – DECISIONS TO WHICH JUDICIAL REVIEW LEGISLATION
GENERALLY – where the applicant applied to the respondent for compensation
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act
(‘WCR Act’) – where the respondent dismissed that application
– where, pursuant to s 326 of the WCR
Act, the applicant sought review by
the Workers’ Compensation Regulator (‘Regulator’) of the
respondent’s
decision to dismiss the applicant’s application –
where the Regulator dismissed that review application – where
applicant applies in the Supreme Court of Queensland for judicial review of the
respondent’s dismissal of the applicant’s
application for
compensation – where the Regulator was not joined to the judicial review
proceedings and the applicant did
not seek judicial review of the
Regulator’s decision – whether the application for judicial review
should be dismissed
Judicial Review Act 1991
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Deloitte Touche
Tohmatsu v Australian Securities Commission
(1995) FCR 562, cited
[2011] QSC 191
Lowis v Queensland Industrial Relations
[2019] QSC 277
Mid Brisbane River Irrigators Inc v
Treasurer and Minister for Trade of the State of Queensland
[2014] 2 Qd R
[2014] QSC 196
Van der Berg v WorkCover Queensland
The applicant appeared on his own behalf
MA Eade for the
SOLICITORS:
The applicant was not legally represented
Hall & Wilcox for the
Application
[1] On 3 June
2025, the self-represented applicant (
Mr Henschke
) commenced this
proceeding under
Judicial Review Act
). He seeks a statutory order of review in respect of a decision made by
the respondent (
) on 18 October 2021 to reject his application
for compensation under the
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act
). The basis for the rejection was that the work
injury Mr Henschke suffered – exacerbation of pre-existing post-traumatic
stress disorder (
) and anxiety – was found to have arisen out
of reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way by his employer
rejection decision
[2] The grounds
of review set out in Mr Henschke’s application are that: the rejection
decision was induced or infected by
the making of the rejection
decision was an “improper exercise of power /
unreasonableness”;
procedural fairness.
Mr Henschke
also seeks an interlocutory order that the rejection decision be stayed.
[3] WorkCover
has applied for Mr Henschke’s review application to be dismissed pursuant
to s 48 of the JR Act. The court’s
discretion to dismiss a review
application is engaged if: it would be inappropriate for proceedings in relation
to the review application
no reasonable basis for
the application is disclosed;
review application is frivolous or
or the review
application is an abuse of the process of the
[4] WorkCover
submits that it would be inappropriate for the review application to continue
(a) the rejection decision is no longer operative,
having been overtaken by subsequent decisions which Mr Henschke does not
by the review application;
(b) Mr Henschke has brought the review application more than three years after
the written statement of the reasons for the rejection
decision was provided to
him, and this is not an appropriate case in which to extend the 28 day time
period for bringing such an
application;
(c) Mr Henschke’s makes allegations of fraud against his employer (which
is not a party to the review application) which are
scandalous;
(d) in any event, the matters which Mr Henschke relies upon to assert that his
former employer engaged in fraud had no bearing upon
the rejection decision;
(e) to the extent that Mr Henschke seeks to challenge WorkCover’s finding
that his former employer’s conduct constituted
reasonable management
action, he impermissibly seeks to have the court engage in a review of the
merits of the rejection decision;
(f) Mr Henschke’s complaints about a lack of procedural fairness are
misconceived in circumstances where they arise from events
which occurred after
the rejection decision was made.
[5] For the
reasons which follow, I accept WorkCover’s submission that it would be
inappropriate for proceedings in relation
to the review application to continue
for the reason set out at
above. The review application should be dismissed.
leading to the rejection decision
[6] In 2021, Mr
Henschke was employed as a truck driver by Regius Pty Ltd trading as Cornwall
). He attended two meetings with representatives of
Regius to discuss concerns he held about having been underpaid. The first
took place in early July 2021. After that meeting, Regius sought advice
from the Chamber of Commerce and Industry Queensland (
) as to whether
Mr Henschke had been underpaid. CCIQ subsequently advised Regius that, rather
than having been underpaid, Mr Henschke
had been paid more than he was entitled
to be paid under the relevant award. Regius informed Mr Henschke of the advice
it had received
from CCIQ at the second meeting, which occurred on 18 August
[7] Mr Henschke
did not attend work while Regius was investigating the claim that he had been
underpaid. On 20 August 2021, Regius
sent Mr Henschke a letter which required
him to show cause why disciplinary action should not be taken against him in
his non-attendance at work. Mr Henschke responded to that letter on
24 August 2021.
[8] On 27 August
2021, Mr Henschke lodged his claim for compensation under s 132 of the WCR Act
for the injury (exacerbation of his
pre-existing PTSD and anxiety) he contended
was sustained in the course of his employment with Regius. He asserted that the
was the result of verbal aggression and harassment by representatives of
Regius at the meetings where he raised his concerns about
having been underpaid.
Medical certificates which Mr Henschke provided to WorkCover in support of his
compensation claim recorded
that he was suffering from PTSD said to have been
caused by his manager becoming verbally aggressive when he asked for an increase
in his pay rate.
[9] Mr Henschke,
and a support person who accompanied him in attending the second meeting on 18
August 2021, provided statements in
support of the compensation claim. Mr
Henschke also provided various payslips, the show cause letter which Regius had
sent to him,
and his response to that letter. Regius subsequently provided
WorkCover with its response to the compensation claim and a timeline
It also provided (among other documents) timesheets for Mr Henschke and the
advice it had received from CCIQ concerning
Mr Henschke’s pay. Regius
contested Mr Henschke’s assertion that his manager had been verbally
aggressive towards him.
previously stated, WorkCover made the rejection decision on 18 October 2021. In
summary, WorkCover:
(a) accepted that Mr Henschke was a “worker” for the purposes of the
and that he had
sustained a personal injury in the form of PTSD and anxiety for which his
employment with Regius was a significant
contributing
(b) nevertheless, rejected the compensation claim on the basis that this
personal injury was excluded from the statutory definition
“injury” by s 32(5) of the WCR Act because:
(i) the injury arose out of management action, comprising Mr Henschke’s
interactions and meetings with his managers to discuss
his concerns about having
been underpaid;
(ii) there was insufficient information to confirm undermining behaviours by Mr
Henschke’s managers;
(iii) instead, WorkCover found that Regius was managing Mr Henschke’s
performance and attendance at work;
(iv) although that management action might have caused Mr Henschke distress,
WorkCover had determined that the action was reasonable
and taken in a
reasonable way.
covering letter which WorkCover sent to Mr Henschke attaching the rejection
decision stated that the rejection decision had
been internally reviewed and
confirmed by a manager (as required by s 538 of the WCR Act). Both the covering
letter, and the written
reasons for the rejection decision, advised Mr Henschke
that he could request an external review and provided information about how
request such a review.
Events following the rejection
[12] A claimant
who is aggrieved by a decision to reject a compensation claim under the WCR Act
can apply for an external review of
the decision by the Workers’
Compensation Regulator (
) appointed pursuant to s 326 of the WCR
An application for
external review must be made within 3 months after written notice of the
rejection decision is received.
This right to have a decision reviewed by the Regulator forms part of what has
been described as a comprehensive legislative scheme
of reviews and appeals of
decisions on applications for compensation under the WCR
October 2021, Mr Henschke applied for external review of the rejection decision
by the Regulator.
Regulator performed that review pursuant to s 545 of WCR Act. That provision
requires that the Regulator must, within 25
business days after receiving the
review application, review the decision and decide to either: confirm the
decision; or, vary the
decision; or, set aside the decision and substitute
another decision; or, set aside the decision and return the matter to the
decision-maker
with the directions the Regulator considers appropriate. I
accept that, as WorkCover submits, a review by the Regulator under s
WCR Act constitutes a review of the merits of the decision under review.
November 2021, the Regulator confirmed the rejection decision (
confirmation
). In reaching the confirmation decision, the Regulator concluded
(a) Mr Henschke sustained an injury of a psychiatric nature – the
aggravation of his pre-existing PTSD and anxiety –
which arose out of his
employment with Regius and to which such employment was a significant
contributing factor;
(b) that injury arose out of management actions, comprising the meetings held to
attempt to resolve the dispute about Mr Henschke’s
pay entitlements and
actions taken by Regius to alert Mr Henschke to the concerns it had regarding
his absence from work;
(c) the significant conflict in the evidence concerning the conduct of both Mr
Henschke and his managers in the meeting on 18 August
2021 meant that it was not
possible to conclusively determine that the managers’ conduct exhibited
any miscarriage of management
(d) in circumstances where Regius had investigated Mr Henschke’s pay claim
through CCIQ, it was entitled to consider his absence
from work was without
authorisation;
(e) on all the available evidence, the management action taken by Regius
regarding Mr Henschke’s pay dispute and his absence
from work was both
reasonable and taken in a reasonable way.
[16] I further
accept that, as WorkCover submits, upon the making of the confirmation decision
by the Regulator, it was that decision
which operated to preclude Mr
Henschke’s claim for compensation.
[17] The written
reasons provided by the Regulator informed Mr Henschke of his right to appeal
the confirmation decision to the Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission
) within 20 business days after he received notice of that
Mr Henschke did not
file an appeal with the QIRC within the required period.
[18] In January
2025, Mr Henschke commenced proceedings against Regius in the Federal Court of
Australia seeking orders that Regius
provide him with various records relating
to his employment. Mr Henschke asserts that information he obtained through
that proceeding
demonstrates fraud by Regius in the information it provided to
WorkCover in response to his compensation claim. In summary, Mr Henschke
contends that a document obtained through the Federal Court proceeding
establishes that he had been paid less than the amounts which
Regius, on advice
from CCIQ, informed WorkCover it had paid to him and, further, that he had not
been overpaid as Regius had contended.
[19] In February
2025, Mr Henschke filed an appeal against the confirmation decision with the
QIRC. As the appeal was filed out of
time, Mr Henschke was required to ask the
Regulator to allow further time to
On 6 March 2025, the
Regulator refused to grant Mr Henschke’s request to extend the time to
appeal the confirmation decision.
Did the confirmation decision
affect the availability of review under the JR Act?
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu v Australian Securities
described a decision that is subsequently overtaken by an ultimate and operative
decision as a spent force. Where the
operative effect of an earlier decision
becomes spent upon the making of a subsequent decision affecting the rights and
of a person then that person is not “aggrieved by” the
spent decision for the purposes of s 20 of the JR
Brisbane River Irrigators Inc v Treasurer and Minister for Trade of the State of
accepted the correctness of that reasoning, but found it did not apply on the
facts of that case.
der Berg v WorkCover
Bond J (as his
Honour then was), referred to both
Mid Brisbane River
in finding that a person who engages the processes of review
under the WCR Act, such that the decision made on review overtakes the
sought to be impugned under the JR Act, can no longer be regarded as a person
aggrieved by the impugned decision.
[23] That is the
position in the present proceeding. The operative effect of the rejection
decision was overtaken by the confirmation
decision. The rejection decision is
spent. In those circumstances, based on the authorities referred to above, Mr
Henschke can
no longer be regarded as a person aggrieved by the rejection
decision and, consequently, has no right to apply under s 20 of the
he has done) for a statutory order of review in relation to that decision. For
that reason, I am satisfied that it would
be inappropriate for proceedings in
relation to Mr Henschke’s review application to continue. The review
application should
be dismissed under s 48(1) of the JR Act.
[24] When these
issues were raised with Mr Henschke during
he accepted the
correctness of WorkCover’s submission that the rejection decision was not
the operative decision. For the
reasons I have set out, he was right to do
[25] Having
reached that position, it is unnecessary for me to consider any of the further
reasons WorkCover advanced as to why it
would be inappropriate for the review
application to continue. Further, I consider it would be inappropriate to
decide those issues
given correspondence Mr Henschke sent to the court after the
hearing of the dismissal application.
Communications from Mr
Henschke since the hearing of the dismissal application
[26] After I had
heard the dismissal application and reserved my decision, Mr Henschke emailed a
draft application and supporting
affidavit to my Associate. The draft
application sought that the Regulator be joined as the second respondent to the
proceeding.
I directed my Associate to inform Mr Henschke that if he wished to
make any application, he would need to file the documents in
the Registry, but
that I would not defer my determination of WorkCover’s dismissal
application for that to occur.
[27] Mr Henschke
subsequently sent an email to my Associate which attached emails he had
exchanged with the solicitors for WorkCover.
In that exchange, Mr Henschke
stated that the decision under review in this proceeding is the confirmation
decision (not the review
decision). On that basis, Mr Henschke sought
WorkCover’s consent to orders substituting the Regulator as respondent to
proceeding.
[28] WorkCover
disputed Mr Henschke’s contention that the decision which is the subject
of the review application is the confirmation
decision. Plainly, Mr
Henschke’s contention is incorrect. The relief which Mr Henschke has
sought by his review application
concerns a decision made by WorkCover, not the
Regulator. That can only be a reference to the rejection decision. In any
the solicitors informed Mr Henschke that WorkCover could not consent to
orders which would have the effect of joining or substituting
the Regulator as
respondent to the proceeding; Mr Henschke would need to serve any application on
the Regulator.
[29] Since the
hearing of the dismissal application, Mr Henschke has not filed any application
to join or substitute the Regulator
as respondent. However, in circumstances
where Mr Henschke has foreshadowed an intention to seek a statutory order of
relation to the confirmation decision, I do not consider it
appropriate to consider any of the matters raised by WorkCover as a basis
dismissing the present review application beyond the spent nature of the
rejection decision. Such further matters as might arise
in any subsequent
proceeding for review of the confirmation decision should be determined in that
proceeding (if brought by Mr Henschke).
application for a statutory order of review against WorkCover is dismissed.
[31] I will hear
the parties as to
WCR Act, s 32(5)(a).
JR Act, s 20(2)(g).
JR Act, ss 20(2)(e),
JR Act, s 20(2)(a).
JR Act, s 48(1)(a)(i).
JR Act, s 48(1)(b).
JR Act, s 48(1)(c).
JR Act, s 48(1)(d).
JR Act, ss 26(2) and
WCR Act, s 11.
WCR Act, s 32(1).
WCR Act, ss
540(1)(a)(viii), 540(5) and 541.
WCR Act, s 542(1).
Deng v Q-Comp
Lowis v Queensland Industrial Relations Commission
, [90]-[91].
WCR Act, ss 548(1),
548A(1), 549(1) and 550(1)(a).
WCR Act, s 550(3).
(1995) FCR 562, 576-578
[2014] QSC 196
[2014] 2 Qd R 592
Mid Brisbane River Irrigators
[2021] QSC 28
Transcript 2-12:34 to
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (211 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter