URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/1999/182.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re Caldwell [1999] QSC 182 (6 August 1999)
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF QUEENSLAND
Toowoomba District Registry
OS No 5 of 1999
Before the Hon. Mr Justice Mackenzie
[Re Caldwell]
IN THE MATTER
Powers of Attorney Act
1998 ( as amended)
IN THE MATTER
of applications by GRAHAM PERCIVAL
ANDREW CALDWELL and BRAMLEY REGINALD McLENNAN for a declaration that a Power of
Attorney executed by CLIFFORD ANDREW McCLELLAND
is void for lack of capacity
and for directions pursuant to the said Act
JUDGMENT - MACKENZIE J.
Judgment delivered 6 August 1999
CATCHWORDS: PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Power of Attorney - whether a lack of
capacity existed when the Power of Attorney was executed
- whether further
medical examination is required.
Powers of Attorney Act
Counsel: Mr R Peterson for the applicants
Mr P B Rashleigh for the first respondent
Solicitors: Clewett Croser & Drummond for the applicants
Justin F O'Sullivan & Edgar for the first respondent
Wonderley & Hall for the second respondent
Hearing Date: 2 July 1999
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF QUEENSLAND
Toowoomba District Registry
OS No 5 of 1999
Before the Hon. Mr Justice Mackenzie
IN THE MATTER
Powers of Attorney Act
1998 ( as amended)
IN THE MATTER
of applications by GRAHAM PERCIVAL
ANDREW CALDWELL and BRAMLEY REGINALD McLENNAN for a declaration that a Power of
Attorney executed by CLIFFORD ANDREW McCLELLAND
is void for lack of capacity
and for directions pursuant to the said Act
JUDGMENT - MACKENZIE J.
Judgment delivered 6 August 1999
1 This is an application for a declaration that an enduring Power of Attorney
executed by Clifford Andrew McClelland is void for
lack of capacity. The
applicants are nephews of Mr McClelland and until the disputed Power of
Attorney was executed on 12 February
1999 had been donees of a Power of
Attorney executed on 28 July 1994.
2 The Attorney under the disputed Power of Attorney is a neighbour Graham
Leslie Edwards. There is also reference in the affidavits
to Mrs Binney, who
has for some years had an involvement with Mr McClelland's care. It is
apparent that the applicants have a negative
view of her role in the
development of the dispute. As is frequently the case in matters of this kind
the applicants are concerned
for Mr McClelland's welfare, and as it was put to
me, at least seek to be satisfied that he had the capacity to execute the Power
of Attorney.
3 The orders sought include orders that Wonderley & Hall, who had acted in
relation to the execution of the Power of Attorney,
produce a copy of it for
inspection and produce for inspection copies of all medical reports in its
possession prior to the execution
of the Power of Attorney by Mr McClelland. A
copy of the Power of Attorney is exhibited to the affidavit of Mr Edwards who
is represented
by a firm of solicitors other than Wonderley & Hall. A copy
of a certificate from Dr I.E. Keys, who examined Mr McClelland on
1999 was produced by Wonderley & Hall, after I ordered that it should be
produced. Wonderley & Hall's stance
was that the firm had acted for Mr
McClelland in relation to the execution of the Power of Attorney, but held no
instructions from
him in relation to the present proceedings. No argument was
addressed against production of the medical certificate, and the attitude
the firm was simply to abide the order of the court in the absence of
instructions to make the documents available for inspection.
4 Dr Keys' report was to the effect that in his opinion, Mr McClelland fully
understood the meaning of a Power of Attorney and
its full implications. Dr
Keys says that Mr McClelland stated that he wished to change his current Power
of Attorney. In the doctor's
opinion he was fully capable of understanding the
ramifications of that and was capable of changing it should he so desire. Mr
exhibited a report from Dr N.W.S. Oliver, a specialist in internal and
geriatric medicine, who examined Mr McClelland on 22 June
1999. The effect of
that opinion was that upon a mini-mental examination being performed, Mr
McClelland scored 22½ out of 30.
The main defects were in temporal
orientation and spacial dyspraxia. Dr Oliver questioned Mr McClelland about
the reasons for changing
his Power of Attorney and was told that his nephews
were not looking after his affairs properly, and that he approved of Mr Edwards
having control of his affairs. The report contains a reference to prescribed
medication and expressed the view that two of the tablets
may "impair his
performance a little". He concluded by stating the opinion that Mr McClelland
was aware of his actions and was reasonably
informed for a man of 84 without a
great deal of formal education. The report concludes: "My recommendation
would be that he is
competent to make a decision as to whom should arrange his
5 In February 1998, a report had been obtained from Dr Venugopalan, a
specialist psychiatrist, who had seen Mr McClelland on 24
October 1997, when he
was recovering from a surgical condition. On that occasion he was
disorientated in time and could not recognise
the doctor although he had been
to see him several times over the preceding two years. He concluded that Mr
McClelland was suffering
from an organic mental disorder, most probably
dementia. However, the doctor could not exclude the possibility that the
was an acute confusional state related to the surgical condition
which, unlike dementia, would be reversible. In his opinion, at
the time of
the examination there was a significant impairment of Mr McClelland's
testamentary capacity. The opinion was based on
the facts that he did not know
the nature and extent of his property, nor when he had made a will and what its
contents were, and
he did not know who the natural beneficiaries were.
However, he did know that his wife was in a nursing home and recognised Mrs
as his carer. He expressed his wish to live with Mrs Binney.
6 A further assessment was made of his mental condition on 17 March 1998. Mr
McClelland was less confused than he was on 24 October
1997. The detail in the
report indicates that the extent of his comprehension and recollection was much
improved. The doctor's
opinion was that Mr McClelland's mental state had
improved significantly since the last examination. However, he said there was
still some evidence of impairment of Mr McClelland's testamentary capacity.
The doctor expressed the opinion that he was capable
of managing his everyday
financial affairs, and noted that there appeared to be disagreements between
his carer and his family about
his finances, of which Mr McClelland was aware.
He said that Mr McClelland was capable of making decisions about his personal
social needs, and deciding where and with whom he wanted to live. He said
that his mental state could continue to fluctuate and
recommended a further
review in some months time.
7 On 4 January 1999, he was seen by Dr Venugopalan for the purpose of
completion of a functional competence report for the Intellectually
Citizens Council of Queensland. He did not carry out further testing on this
occasion. The form contained a question
whether the person had a diagnosis
which impaired his or her cognitive ability. The answer given was "long
history of recurrent
depression, senile dementia since mid-1997".
8 With regard to his condition on 4 January 1999, it was stated that there was
significant impairment in his testamentary capacity.
He was able to express
clearly where and with whom he wanted to live and was not depressed. In
another part of the form the multiple
choices ticked were that the cognitive
impairment was fluctuating and progressive. The prognosis was that a slow
deterioration was
expected. To a question whether the cognitive impairment
would interfere in any way with the person's understanding of financial
the doctor answered "yes", and commented that there was impaired testamentary
capacity, but he could manage day to day finances
for daily living. With
respect to the capacity to execute an enduring Power of Attorney, he ticked the
9 When concerns were raised by the applicants with Wonderley & Hall about
Mr McClelland's capacity to revoke his existing Power
of Attorney, and a
request was made for examination by an independent geriatrician, the firm
replied to the effect that the client
had produced medical evidence to support
the fact he fully understood the meaning and implications of a Power of
Attorney, and that
he could change it if he wished. The reply also referred to
the fact that the solicitor handling the matter questioned Mr McClelland
length on separate days, when the instructions were given and when the document
was executed, to satisfy himself of capacity.
10 The other piece of evidence bearing on the issue of capacity is a
transcript of a conversation between the applicants and Mr
McClelland in the
presence of a nursing sister on 24 February 1999. It is difficult to get a
true appreciation of how the conversation
progressed, but on the face of the
transcript Mr McClelland may have been displaying evidence of confusion. It is
not clear from
the material before me whether the tape recording itself still
exists and whether it is likely to confirm that observation or cast
a different
light on it.
11 That is the background against which the application must be resolved. I
intimated at the hearing on 2 July 1999, that I felt
unable to resolve the
conflicting evidence in a way which would finally dispose of the matter on the
material before me. The emphasis
then shifted to whether an independent
examination of Mr McClelland should be ordered.
Section 41(1)
Powers of Attorney Act
states that a
principal may make an enduring Power of Attorney only if the principal
understands the nature and affect of it. The
principal matters as to which
there must be an understanding are set out in
Importantly, in the
context of the present matter there is a presumption in schedule 1
adult has capacity for a matter.
13 Like any presumption it can be rebutted by satisfactory evidence. As the
narrative above indicates it is not a case where there
is a mere assertion of
lack of capacity. There is evidence, relatively contemporaneous with the
execution of the Power of Attorney,
to raise the issue of capacity in a serious
way. The onus lies on the applicants to prove positively that Mr McClelland
understand the nature and affect of enduring Power of Attorney at the
time it was executed. In view of the evidence positively supporting
conclusion that he had capacity, especially that of Dr Keys and the solicitor,
the onerous nature of the task of the applicants
should not be underestimated.
In the end and having regard to the protective nature of the jurisdiction
sought to be involved, it
would be inappropriate where there is conflicting
evidence on the issue, to prevent the applicants from having the opportunity to
litigate the issue of lack of consent if so advised.
14 However, it must be reinforced that the onus to be discharged is
substantial. The evidence of Dr Venugopalan is at least supportive
applicants' case but has some aspects which need greater elaboration or
clarification before its cogency can be determined.
The cogency of the
conversation between the applicants and Mr McClelland in determining the
question may well be influenced by whether
it exists in electronic form, or
whether it now exists only as a transcript.
15 I am satisfied that I would have had power to order examination of Mr
McClelland, on the basis of the submissions in writing
requested by me on the
issue at the time of the hearing. However, I have decided that it is not a
case where I should make such
an order at this point. At the time when the
present application was commenced, it was about 4½ months since the Power
of Attorney
had been executed. There is evidence close in point of time as to
the capacity of Mr McClelland, and also evidence to suggest that
his condition
may fluctuate. When the intrusiveness of the process of compulsory examination
is balanced against the possible benefits
of what will be an examination at
least six months after relevant events, I have decided not to order that he be
further examined.
16 If the applicants intend to proceed with the application, and the parties
can agree on directions, I will initial a consent
order signed by the legal
representatives of the parties. Failing that, an application for directions
will have to be made in the
ordinary way. Subject to that, I adjourn the
application to a date to be fixed. I reserve the costs of the application as
the applicants and the respondents other than Wonderley & Hall,
subject to the proviso that if the application is not proceeded
with beyond its
present point, the applicants pay those respondents' costs of and incidental to
the application to be taxed. With
respect to the costs as between the
applicants and Wonderley & Hall, I make no order as to costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (22.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter