URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2003/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LCG, Re [2003] QGAAT 15 (9 October 2003)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL,
LCG, Re [2003] QGAAT15
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
The Appointment of a Guardian and Administrator for Mr LCG
Leave for Mr JG to withdraw as an Attorney
In the Matter of Mr LCG
MATTER NUMBER:
2003/2257, 2003/2258, 2003/3430
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, Brisbane
DATE OF HEARING:
11 September 2003
DATE OF ORDER:
9 October 2003
DATE OF REASONS:
9 October 2003
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
A Lyons, President
L Laikind, Member
J Ford, Member
CATCHWORDS:
GIFTS-CAPACITY-VALIDITY OF ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY AND GIFT-DECLARATION
OF INCAPACITY-LEAVE TO WITHDRAW AS ATTORNEY-GUARDIANS-ADMINISTRATORS-91year
man with dementia resident in a nursing home-gift of $170,000 to care worker at
nursing home-previous EPA to nephew-revocation
of EPA -execution of new EPA to
care worker-declaration of incapacity-need for guardian and
administrator.
Ranclaud-v-Caban
(1988) NSW ConvR
Caldwell-v-McClelland
(Qld Supreme Court 1999
unreported)
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
DECLARATION OF INCAPACITY
In accordance with
Section 146
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
the Tribunal declares that Mr
LCG did not have capacity to make a gift of $170,000 to Ms AM on or about 8
January 2003.
ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
In accordance with Section 113 of the
Power of Attorney Act 1998
the Tribunal declares that the Enduring Power
of Attorney dated 11 March 2003 is invalid as Mr LCG did not have capacity to
this document. In accordance with section 114 of the
Attorney Act 1998
this Enduring Power of Attorney is
The Tribunal declares that Mr LCG did not
have capacity to revoke the Enduring Power of Attorney to Mr JG dated 19 June
1998, on 11
March 2003.
LEAVE TO WITHDRAW AS
The Tribunal accepts the resignation of
the attorney Mr JG under the Enduring Power of Attorney dated 19 June
ADMINISTRATION
That the Public Trustee of Queensland is
appointed administrator for Mr LCG for all financial
That the administrator will provide a
financial management plan to the Tribunal within three (3)
The Tribunal directs the administrator to
provide accounts to the Tribunal as requested.
Unless the Tribunal orders otherwise,
this order remains current for five (5) years.
GUARDIANSHIP
The Tribunal appoints the Adult Guardian
as guardian to make decisions in relation to contact with Mr
Unless the Tribunal orders otherwise,
this order remains current for one (1)
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE APPLICATION
Mr LCG is a 91 year old man who
has resided at the RSL Care home since 26 April 2000. He is a widower and has no
children. On 19 June
1998 Mr LCG appointed his nephew, Mr JG, as his attorney
under an enduring power of attorney.
On 31 December 2002 Mr LCG
withdrew $170,000 in the form of a bank cheque from the Westpac Strathpine
Branch, made payable to Ms AM.
Ms AM had been employed as a
personal care worker at the RSL Care home from 5 February 2002, having worked
there in the past before
travelling overseas and returning to Australia. Ms AM
had informed her employers on 13 December 2002 of her intention to resign
from 8 January 2003 to undertake university
On 8 January 2003 the bank cheque
for $170,000 made out to Ms AM was deposited into her bank account.
On 11 March 2003 Mr LCG executed
an enduring power of attorney appointing Ms AM as his attorney for financial and
personal/health
matters. He also executed a Will with Ms AM as the executor and
a beneficiary.
On 13 May 2003 the Adult Guardian
received a referral raising concerns that Mr LCG had been influenced to gift Ms
AM the $170,000.
Further concerns were raised about the circumstances
surrounding the execution of the new EPA and the Will and the Adult Guardian
conducted an investigation.
On 22 May 2003, pursuant to
section 195(1)
Guardianship and Administration Act
, the Adult
Guardian suspended the authority of the attorney Ms AM for financial matters.
The suspension was made on the grounds that
the attorney had contravened
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
On 18 June 2003 the Adult
Guardian also suspended the authority of the attorney for personal/health matter
due to concerns raised
visits by Ms AM.
On the 14 July 2003, the Adult
Guardian applied to the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal for the
appointment of the Adult Guardian
as guardian and the Public Trustee of
Queensland as administrator.
On the 18 August 2003, the
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal made an interim order appointing the
Public Trustee of Queensland
for all financial matters as the suspension of the
attorney for financial matters was to expire on the 21 August
THE PARTIES
The active parties at the
hearing were Ms AM (the suspended attorney) via phone link up, Mr GG (nephew),
Mr JG (nephew), Mr Mark Franco
representing the Public Trustee of Queensland,
and Mr Mark Phillips representing the Adult Guardian.
Present as an interested person
was Ms Lisa Lethlean of the Office of the Adult Guardian. Dr Kelly Shaw (General
Practitioner) and
Mr Michael Reddy (solicitor) both gave evidence during the
course of the hearing.
THE ISSUES AND THE
LEGISLATION
The application before the
Tribunal is an application by the Adult Guardian for the appointment of the
Public Trustee of Queensland
an administrator for Mr LCG and the Adult Guardian
as guardian. As there is currently an appointed attorney for Mr LCG the Tribunal
must determine whether the Enduring Power of Attorney executed on 11 March 2003
is a valid document.
The essential issues for the
Tribunal are:
whether Mr LCG had capacity to make the
gift of $170,000 to Ms AM on 8 January
whether Mr LCG had capacity to
execute the enduring Power of Attorney on 11 March 2003 and if not;
whether Mr LCG currently has impaired
capacity and if so;
whether there is the
need for the appointment of a guardian and administrator for Mr
the Tribunal has also been asked to
consider whether Mr LCG had capacity to make the gift of $170,000 to Ms AM on 8
January 2003.
The relevant sections of the Act
that the Tribunal has to consider are
sections 113
of Attorney Act
sections 12
Guardianship and
Administration Act
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE
The Tribunal relied upon the
following documents:
The application for guardianship and
administration from the Adult Guardian dated 11 July
Assorted financial documents
forwarded by the Adult Guardian received 14 July
The Health Professional report by Dr
Peter Buchanan dated 27 May 2003;
from Westpac Bank, including statements, dated 21 May
An Enduring Power of Attorney
appointing Ms AM, dated 11 March 2003;
letter from Welldon Zande & Reddy addressed to Mr LCG, dated 18 March
The Adult Guardian interview report
by Mr Mark Phillips, dated 21 May 2003;
Care progress notes forwarded by the Adult Guardian, received 14 July
The Adult Guardian Notice of
Suspension for Personal/Health Matters dated 18 June
The Adult Guardian Notice of
Suspension for Financial Matters dated 22 May
A letter from Ms Lisa Lethlean from
the Adult Guardian, dated 11 July 2003;
Inquiry Feedback Form completed by Ms BP, dated 24 July
The Inquiry Feedback Form completed
by Mr GG, dated 28 July 2003;
The Inquiry
The Interim Administration Order of
18 August 2003;
A Statutory Declaration
made by Ms TG, dated 5 September 2003;
letter from Mr GG, dated 5 September
A letter from Ms AM, dated 9
September 2003;
The Adult Guardian
Investigation Report, dated 9 September
A letter from Dr Buchanan, dated 29
August 2003;
A letter from Dr Buchanan,
dated 30 July 2003;
Personnel Record Change
and Listing from RSL Care, dated 13 December
Medication records from RSL Care,
dated 4 September 2003;
A letter from
Welldon, Zande & Reddy enclosing copy of the will, dated 12 February
A letter from Mr DC, dated 29 August
A letter from Ms Gail McDougall,
dated 3 September 2003;
A statement from
Ms TG, undated;
A bank statement from
Westpac, dated 31 December 2002;
Guardian Interview Report, dated 29 May
During the hearing the Tribunal
sought oral evidence from the parties concerning Mr LCG’s financial
matters prior to 2003, the
circumstances leading to the withdrawal of the
$170,000 on 31/12/2002, the circumstances leading to the execution of the EPA on
and views about Mr LCG’s present
Regarding Mr LCG’s present
ability to attend the hearing and capacity for financial matters, Dr Buchanan in
a letter dated 29
August 2003 stated that Mr LCG had deteriorated and from both
a physical and psychological point of view attendance at the hearing
distressing for him. Mr GG stated that his daughters visited Mr LCG at the home
and felt that his condition had deteriorated.
Ms AM however stated that Mr LCG
had wanted to attend the hearing. The Tribunal accepted that Mr LCG was unable
to attend the hearing
and that given his current condition the hearing would be
distressing to him.
Ms AM stated that Mr LCG trusted
her and considered her as a “granddaughter” and she did not think
that he had a trusting
relationship with his family.
Regarding circumstances leading
to the change of the EPA and the will on 11/3/2003, Ms AM stated that Mr LCG had
wanted a different
solicitor closer to the nursing home and she drove him to Mr
Michael Reddy in January 2003 probably about 13 January 2003. Both she
LCG spoke to Mr Reddy and she had expressed concerns about Mr LCG’s
problems with his family. Mr LCG did not speak alone
with the solicitor and Mr
Reddy asked Mr LCG what he wanted regarding the EPA and the
Ms AM stated that she had told
Mr Reddy that Mr LCG had given her $170,000 and he had advised Mr LCG to make
sure to put the gift
in writing. She advised that Mr LCG had wanted to give
everything to her and when she objected to that course of action, Mr Reddy
stated Mr LCG could do what he wanted.
Ms AM stated that whilst she was
present at this meeting where Mr LCG gave Mr Reddy instructions she was not
present at the execution
of the Will and new EPA on 11/3/2003. Ms AM stated that
she did not have concerns about Mr LCG’s capacity and that she had
suggested his nephew Mr A be the new attorney rather than herself, however Mr
LCG had stated A was not well enough to do the job.
Ms AM stated that if Mr LCG
were vulnerable to influence by her then he would have accepted her view that Mr
A should be the new
attorney and not her.
Ms AM considered that Mr LCG
gets depressed in having to live at the home and was always happy to see her
when she visited.
Regarding the circumstances
leading to the gifting of the $170,000, Ms AM stated that on 31 December 2003
she went shopping with Mr
LCG, meeting him at the Strathpine shopping centre. He
took a taxi going to the bank first as he was not allowed to travel in her
as she was still a staff member of the nursing home. After lunch at the centre
Mr LCG had told her he thought he had ‘made
a mistake at the bank’,
but she did not question him about his concern. They continued to shop, but Mr
LCG stated that he needed
to return to the bank and Ms AM stated she did not
discuss with him why. Mr LCG returned to the bank in a taxi and she waited for
him back at the home.
Upon questioning about a further
$200 which the bank records indicated had been taken from his account via an ATM
on the same day,
Ms AM conceded that she had helped Mr LCG undertake that
transaction, having stated earlier that she had never assisted Mr LCG’s
with his money. She thought that his nephew gave him money when he needed
Ms AM stated that at no time did
she know that the cheque for $170,000 was written out to her and she received it
at the end of her
last shift on the 8/1/2003 from Mr LCG. Mr LCG knew he was
going to die and that is why he wanted to give the money to her. Mr LCG
crying on the morning she finished work and had told her she was the only person
Regarding the expenditure of the
$170,000, Ms AM stated that Mr LCG did not ask her what she would do with the
money. She had pre-planned
a trip to Africa and she stated she had funds to pay
for the trip before receiving the cheque. On questioning by the Tribunal however
Ms AM confirmed that her bank balance the day before depositing the $170,000
recorded less than $2.00. She conceded that things would
have been tight for her
financially without the cheque and she would have relied heavily on friends in
Africa and her last pay to
cover her expenses.
Ms AM stated that when she
returned from her trip in March 2003 she had informed Mr LCG that she had spent
the $170,000 and he told
her it was O.K. as it was her money. Ms AM stated that
money was not an issue for her and that she liked to give money away, having
receipts for where the money had gone.
Ms AM stated that Mr LCG thought
he was in trouble (concerning the gifting) and she had had to reassure him on a
number of occasions
that he was not. She stated that he blames another staff
person for the situation they are in.
Mr JG (nephew and
previous attorney)
Mr JG spoke of his involvement
with Mr LCG’s finances and his attorneyship. He stated that Mr LCG would
ask for money then give
it back as he would state he had plenty. He disconnected
his phone saying he could not afford it but then denied he wanted it
disconnected.
Mr JG had organised Mr Colwell,
solicitor, to assist Mr LCG with the sale of his home (20/3/2002) as Mr Colwell
would be impartial.
At the time, Mr Colwell had expressed concerns about Mr
LCG’s ability to grasp fully the requirements for the house sale. The
process had gone on for months and Mr LCG had told him to do ‘whatever I
think’ needed doing. The house sold for $200,000
but his uncle could not
decide what to do with the proceeds of sale. Westpac drew up an investment plan
but his uncle could not turn
his mind to the issue and the cheque remained at
the nursing home for a long period before it was banked. The proceeds of sale
ultimately placed into a term deposit at 4.7% interest. All his uncle was
concerned about was whether he had enough to pay the nursing
bond which was $80,000. At the time of the sale his uncle did not seem to
understand how much money had been realised
on the sale.
Mr JG endorsed the concerns
Gail McDougall and Mr Colwell.
Mr JG stated that Mr LCG asked for an ATM card in
October 2002 but he couldn’t cope with using it and there were
difficulties
with remembering the PIN. If the present EPA was found to be
invalid Mr JG stated that he did not wish to continue any attorneyship
to a number of issues that now existed between he and Mr LCG due to the concerns
he had raised re the gift and he therefore
sought the appointment of the Public
Trustee of Queensland.
Mr GG (nephew)
Mr JG stated that historically
Mrs LCG and Mr LCG were frugal in their money management and that his wife
controlled the money. They
were renowned for their frugal ways and would only
shop for specials and would never buy presents at Christmas. Mr LCG had also
that the bank ‘had taken all his money’ which had led to
questions being asked by other members of the family not living
in Queensland,
after the house sale in 2002. Mr LCG had also alleged in the past that he was
paying for chemist bills for other residents.
An example of his frugality was
that he would not buy himself a small fridge for his room so Mr GG had given him
his own bar fridge.
At the time Mr LCG was
indicating to his doctors and Ms AM that he had been abandoned by his family and
that his family had sold his
house and gone through all his possessions his
family were visiting and the house was not sold until March 2002.
The Adult Guardian
The Adult Guardian’s
representative, Mr Mark Phillips affirmed the view detailed in his report that
Mr LCG has not had capacity
since at least December 2002 as Mr LCG was
susceptible to influence and this view was increased when combined with other
depression, confusion, and the views expressed by treating doctors
outlined in
their report to the Tribunal dated 9 September 2003.
Mr Phillips further commented
that there existed discrepancies in the stories between Mr LCG, Ms AM and Mr
Reddy regarding the circumstances
surrounding the $170,000 gift and the
disclosure about it to the solicitor Mr Reddy.
Dr Kelly Shaw indicated to the
Tribunal that she was Mr LCG’s medical practitioner from at least May 2001
until she relocated
to Tasmania earlier this year. Dr Shaw stated that she had
first assessed him as lonely and upset that his family “sold all
possessions or given it away”. Once his nephew had started visiting he has
settled down.
Dr Shaw indicated that she was
the medical practitioner who assessed Mr LCG as having the capacity to execute
the Enduring Power of
Attorney and the Will on 11 March 2003. She thought Mr LCG
was changing his EPA and his Will due to a “falling out” with
nephew and that a new family member was now visiting him “a niece”.
Dr Shaw stated that Mr LCG had got to a position
of wanting to change his Will
in order to give money to someone who would visit him.
Dr Shaw advised that she was
fully aware that these new documents were to be executed and she assessed him in
relation to his capacity
specifically in relation to these documents. In
particular she conducted an MMSE (Mini Mental State Examination) as well as
for the evidence of depression or a psychiatric illness. The score on the
MMSE was 23/30 which whilst within the normal range does
constitute some
evidence of cognitive impairment. Dr Shaw stated that whilst she thought Mr LCG
had sufficient cognitive ability
to make the decision she did recognise that at
the time he was making an emotional decision.
Dr Shaw stated that she thought
Mr LCG was lonely, tired and confused and that the first time she met him at the
nursing home she
felt he was lonely and upset that his family had put him in a
nursing home. Dr Shaw stated that Mr LCG led her to believe that his
not visit and that he was upset about this.
Dr Shaw also indicated to the
Tribunal that in November 2002 Mr LCG had seemed to forget that he had cancer
even though she had fully
explained this to him when it was first diagnosed. Dr
Shaw also indicated that she believed that the new attorney was a family member
and she was not aware that Mr LCG has just gifted $170,000 to a non family
member. If she had known these two factors she would have
been concerned given
Mr LCG’s emotional state at the time of the execution of the
Mr Michael Reddy
Mr Michael Reddy who was the
solicitor who drew up the EPA and the Will also gave evidence to the Tribunal on
the day of the hearing.
Mr Reddy advised the Tribunal that he was careful in
relation to taking instructions from Mr LCG as he was aware that it was a
“potentially
unusual situation”. By this he meant that Mr LCG was
making a young woman who was not a relative his attorney and was leaving
provided for in his Will. He made sure he received Mr LCG’s instructions
separately and that he had a doctor assess capacity
prior to the execution of
the documents. Mr Reddy also advised that he asked Mr LCG questions in relation
to his understanding of
the documents at the time of the execution and his
personal assessment was that Mr LCG understood the nature and effect of the
and had capacity to execute these documents. He did note however that
Mr LCG was frail and had sometimes required questions to be
Mr Reddy stated that he
considered that Mr LCG was his client and that whilst Ms AM brought him to the
appointment he did not take
any instructions from her. In particular Ms AM was
not present when the documents were subsequently executed at the nursing home
March. Mr Reddy advised that he took Mr LCG’s instructions prior to Ms AM
going overseas but that he was waiting for Ms
AM to return prior to going to the
Nursing Home to see Mr LCG and to have the documents
Mr Reddy advised the Tribunal
that a gift of $170,000 was not mentioned at any stage and he certainly did not
give Ms AM any advice
in this regard.
Mr Reddy stated that he had
visited Mr LCG a few times at the home, the most recent being one and a half
months ago when Mr LCG was
upset and had difficulty conversing or reading. Mr
LCG had informed him that Ms AM was the only person he could
DISCUSSION OF EVIDENCE
The essential legal issues for
the Tribunal are whether Mr LCG had capacity firstly to make the gift of
$170,000 on 8 January 2003
and secondly to execute the Enduring Power of
Attorney on 11 March 2003. The factual issues that the Tribunal has to look at
to determine
these legal conclusions are whether Mr LCG understood the nature
and effect of the gift of $170,000 and whether he understood the
effect of the execution of the EPA. Furthermore the Tribunal has to determine
whether Mr LCG freely and voluntarily entered
transactions.
The Tribunal notes Dr
Shaw’s specific conclusion on the evidence that she had before her that Mr
LCG had capacity at the time
he executed the new documents on 11 March 2003. The
Tribunal also notes Mr Reddy’s own conclusion that Mr LCG had capacity
also notes the extent to which Mr Reddy went, to ensure that he was satisfied
that Mr LCG did have capacity at the time of the
execution of the
The Tribunal has however the
benefit of looking at all the circumstances surrounding the making of the gift
on 8 January 2003 and
the execution of the documents on 11 March 2003. The
Tribunal notes in particular the comments of Justice Young in
(1988) NSW ConvR 57 at 548
A person only
seeing a little bit of the picture and seeing the plaintiff for a short time in
view of her strong feelings on the matter,
may well form the view that it is
safe to allow the plaintiff to proceed. It is only when one gets the complete
view of the evidence
that one can see just how incapable the plaintiff really
In particular the
Tribunal has looked at the Progress Notes from the Nursing Home for the period
May 2001 to 19 June 2003 as well
as the medical information provided by Dr
Buchanan and Dr Shaw and reviewed the evidence of some key witnesses to the
transactions
on 31 December 2002 and 11 march 2003.
The Tribunal notes that both Dr
Buchanan and Dr Shaw have indicated that Mr LCG was lonely and vulnerable and in
particular Dr Buchanan
in a Report dated 30 July 2003 indicated that
Mr LCG is a very pleasant man who is eager to please. I feel he is
quite susceptible to influence and in his frail condition, I believe
fairly naïve.”
Dr Buchanan in a Report dated 27 May 2003
indicated that Mr LCG at that time had mild to moderate cognitive impairment due
to dementia
Mr LCG has such a pleasant naive nature that can
make him vulnerable to persuasion.”
Dr Buchanan
also indicated
in this report that at the time of the execution of the documents he would have
considered Mr LCG borderline in terms
of capacity.
Dr Shaw has also stated that Mr
LCG was clearly making an emotional decision when he executed the documents on
11 March 2003. The
Tribunal notes in particular the entry in the progress notes
on 4 March 2003 which states that whilst Mr LCG had an MMSE of 28/30
testamentary capacity it was specifically noted
“this doesn’t
mean he cannot be misled”.
The Tribunal also notes that the MMSE one
week later had dropped some five points from 28 to 23. The Tribunal also notes
Progress Notes from the Nursing Home indicate that Mr LCG had suffered
from depression at various stages during 2001 and 2002.
The Progress Notes for November
and December 2002 are very revealing in that they indicate that Mr LCG was
unsteady on his feet and
confused on 23 November 2002 and on 26 November 2002 he
had forgotten he had cancer and had to be reminded. In December Mr LCG
very unhappy due to pain but that the notes reveal Ms AM spent a considerable
period of time with him trying to cheer him up.
On 16 December 2002 Mr LCG was
awake at 2.10 am asking if it was time to have a shower and on 21 December 2002
Mr LCG was again very
unhappy complaining about pain. On the same date Mr LCG
indicated that he wanted to leave the home as “
no-one cares about
The Tribunal also notes that Ms
AM was on duty at the nursing home for four overnights leading up to 31 December
2002 and took Mr
LCG on the outing within hours of finishing her shift on this
day. The bank cheque was drawn within hours of Ms AM finishing her
shift on 31
The Progress Notes for 31
December also clearly indicate that Ms AM who had ceased duty for the day took
Mr LCG out for lunch and
that he returned “
”. On 2 January 2003 the notes indicate Mr LCG was upset due
to the death of a friend and that the Progress Reports for 3 January
January continue to note that he was upset and that on 8 February 2003 his
depression had increased. The Tribunal also notes
that Ms AM worked three
straight overnights prior to her ceasing work at the Nursing Home on 8 January
2003 and that she was given
the cheque within a short period of time from the
end of her last shift. The Tribunal also notes the close contact Ms AM would
had with Mr LCG during these shifts including showering him. The Tribunal
accepts the Adult Guardians submission that during the
course of being a paid
carer Ms AM gained a degree of trust from her client Mr
The Tribunal relies on the
evidence of the bank manager Ms Monica Adams outlined in the Report of the Adult
Guardian dated 9 September
2003. Ms Adams indicates that on 31 December 2002 Mr
LCG arrived at the bank with a taxi driver and that he had a piece of paper
specific instructions to get a bank cheque. The name and the amount of the
cheque were also written on the piece of paper. Ms
Adams stated that Mr LCG was
difficult to understand and it looked as though the amount written down was
$1,700 and a bank cheque
for this amount was drawn in favour of Ms AM. Ms Adams
further stated that later in the day Mr LCG reappeared with the taxi driver
indicated that the amount should have been for $170,000 and made out to Ms AM.
Ms Adams questioned Mr LCG as to the amount and
why it was to be made out to an
individual and Mr LCG indicated that the cheque was needed to buy a unit at the
complex and that
it had to be made out to Ms AM as “
that was how he was
told to do it.”
Ms Adams stated that
“Mr LCG was very calm and frail and that she was concerned that he
understood exactly what he was doing during the transactions,
both took about 30
minutes but I was left with the impression that he was purchasing a unit from Ms
AM at the retirement village
where he lived and that it was a private
settlement”.
The Tribunal also notes the
evidence of the solicitor who handled three legal matters for Mr LCG from 1998
to 2002. Whilst Mr Colwell
had no concerns in relation to the execution of an
EPA and will in 1998 when it came to the settlement of the house property in
Mr Colwell believed
“ that Mr LCG was very willing to accommodate
and appeared very impressionable”.
The Tribunal was not able to
speak to Mr LCG as he was not well enough to come to the hearing but relies on
the interview conducted
by a staff member of the Adult Guardians office on 21
May 2003 with Mr LCG when he stated in considerable detail that he was told
Ms AM to get the cheque.
On the basis of the evidence the
Tribunal is satisfied that Mr LCG was very vulnerable and open to suggestion and
that he did not
freely and voluntarily make the gift to Ms AM on 8 January but
was vulnerable to her influence on both 31 December 2002 when he obtained
cheque and 8 January 2003 when he gave her the cheque. These were both periods
when he had been cared for by Ms AM for several
days prior to the transactions.
In relation to whether Mr LCG
fully understood the nature and effect of the gift to Ms AM the Tribunal relies
on the letter of solicitor
Ms Gail McDougall dated 2 September 2003. Ms
McDougall had some involvement with Mr LCG in September 2002 as a result of a
for a family member who was concerned that Mr LCG believed he had no money
and did not know where the proceeds of the sale of his
house had been placed. Ms
McDougall made inquiries and was subsequently satisfied that Mr LCG had money,
had in fact received the
proceeds of sale and that the money was invested with
Westpac and that Mr LCG had been given written advice of this. Ms McDougall
stated in her letter to the Adult Guardian that as a result of these inquiries
I had some doubts that Mr LCG had full capacity”.
The Tribunal also accepts the
evidence of Mr JG that Mr LCG was confused in relation to the amount of money he
had received as a result
of the sale, that he had no real idea of the value of
the amount he received and had no ability to make a decision as to how he wanted
the money to be invested. The Tribunal accepts that the cheque for the proceeds
of sale had remained at the Nursing Home unbanked
due to Mr LCG’s
inability to make a decision or discuss the issue with his attorney. It is also
clear from the evidence of
Ms McDougall that Mr LCG had in fact forgotten the
details of the sale and the investment which the Tribunal accepts had been
The Tribunal also accepts that the house was not sold
until at least a year after Mr LCG’s entry into the nursing home even
though Mr LCG believed it was earlier. The Tribunal also accepts on the evidence
that the family were visiting Mr LCG but he clearly
forgot these
The Tribunal also notes Mr
LCG’s confusion during the interview with Mr Phillips in May 2003and his
belief that he had sold
the house for $3,000 and that he believed Anne was
” but was unable to remember her
The Tribunal notes the letter
from Ms AM’s solicitor Michael Hefford dated 24 June 2003 setting out Ms
AM’s recollection
as to how the funds were spent and a copy of her ANZ
bank statements for the period 2 December 2002 to 3 March 2003 and credit card
statements for the period 13 January 2003 to 14 April 2003. These documents show
that Ms AM had less than $2 in her account on 7
January 2003 and received her
salary in the amount of $1,224 and a cheque for $170,000 into this account on 8
January 2003. At 3
March 2003 Ms AM had $500.55c in her account with total
withdrawals for this period of $173,072.
Of the total sum expended on Ms
AM’s evidence she paid $38,402 for a car, $117,000 to the Australian
College of Applied Psychology,
$22,000 to missionaries, $31,000 to TC, $10,000
to Mr AM, $7,000 to ER, $4,000 to GM, $4,104.20 to MC, $6,101 HECS debt, $8,619
CA, $6,035 for travellers cheques and Africa expenses of
Ms AM gave evidence to the
Tribunal on the day of the hearing and the Tribunal has difficulty in accepting
several aspects of her
evidence and did not accept Ms AM as a completely
truthful witness. In particular the Tribunal notes that initially Ms AM told the
Tribunal that she had never assisted Mr LCG to access money from a teller
machine. On further questioning from the Tribunal however
Ms AM admitted that
she had helped Mr LCG get money from the teller machine on 31 December
Ms AM denies any knowledge of Mr
LCG receiving a bank cheque for $170,000 on 31 December 2002 even though she was
the one who signed
him out of the Nursing Home, met up with him after his first
trip to the bank and was with him when he decided to return to the bank
the amount of the bank cheque. The Tribunal does not accept that Ms AM had no
knowledge of Mr LCG receiving a bank cheque
for $170,000 on 31 December 2002
made out to her and accepts Mr LCG’s evidence that he went to the bank
because that it what
he was told to do so by Ms AM. The Tribunal also accepts
the evidence of the bank manager Ms Adams that Mr LCG came to the bank with
written instructions on a piece of paper and initially received a cheque for the
wrong amount which he did not appreciate was the
wrong amount when he received
Ms AM also told the Tribunal
that she had no knowledge of the gift and was surprised by it on her last day at
work. Ms AM told the
Tribunal that she had pre-planned a trip to Africa even
though she had negligible savings because she would be able to rely on her
pay and the generosity of friends whilst overseas. The Tribunal does not accept
this evidence and notes that on Ms AM’s
own evidence she spent in excess
of $10,000 in Africa and only received $1,224 as her last pay.
Furthermore on the evidence
before it the Tribunal is not satisfied that Ms AM disclosed the amount of the
gift of $170,000 to Mr
Reddy when she took Mr LCG to see the solicitor on 13
January 2003.
Consequently it is clear from
the evidence of Mr JG and Ms McDougall that Mr LCG did not really appreciate how
much he had received
form the sale of his house and was uncertain whether
$200,000 was sufficient to pay his bond of $80,000 and the ongoing charges at
the home when the evidence is that he clearly had sufficient money. In order to
make a valid gift Mr LCG must have an accurate understanding
of the extent of
his assets and the Tribunal is not satisfied that Mr LCG had this understanding.
In order to fully appreciate the
nature and effect of the gift Mr LCG should
also have appreciated that the gift would still continue to be counted as an
pension purposes as it would be considered a “deprived
In the circumstances therefore
the Tribunal is satisfied that on the facts before it Mr Mr LCG did not fully
understand the nature
and effect of the gift of $170,000 to Ms AM on 8 January
Turning now to the issue of
whether Mr LCG understood the nature and effect of the execution of the EPA on
11 March 2003 and whether
he freely and voluntarily executed these documents the
Tribunal notes that it was Ms AM who took him to the new solicitor, Mr Reddy,
rather than to the solicitor who had undertaken the previous three legal
transactions for him. The Tribunal also notes that this
trip to the solicitor
which was organised by Ms AM was within days of her completing her final shift
at the nursing home. Given the
emotional state that Mr LCG was, in as previously
outlined in these reasons, the Tribunal accepts that Mr LCG was susceptible to
influence and very willing to please and accommodate Ms
The Tribunal notes the fact that
Ms AM was absent in Africa for almost a month and that the documents were not
executed until 11 March
2003 and that Ms AM was not physically present during
the execution. The question arises therefore whether this lack of contact could
have resulted in Mr LCG being freed of Ms AM’s influence. The Tribunal has
specifically considered this aspect and the Tribunal
is satisfied that given Mr
LCG’s confusion, his loneliness, his vulnerability and emotional state of
mind he was still subject
to Ms AM’s influence particularly as she had
returned to the scene shortly before the execution of the documents on 11 March
The Tribunal is also satisfied
that on the basis of Mr LCG’s confusion as to his assets and his asset
value he did not have
the requisite understanding of all of the essential
elements required to truly understand the nature and effect of executing an
Power of Attorney. It is also clear that Mr LCG had no true
understanding of the nature and extent of the assets that he was asking
manage under the EPA. He had no accurate knowledge of the amount of money he had
and the evidence shows he was highly confused
in relation to the value of money
and even as to numbers.
The Act also states that one of
the essential components necessary to have the requisite understanding to
execute an EPA specifically
includes Mr LCG understanding that he could limit Ms
AM’s power and instruct her about the exercise of the power. On the
the Tribunal is not satisfied that Mr LCG had a true appreciation of
this but rather he was simply agreeing to whatever Ms AM had
suggested to him.
The Tribunal notes that a new
Will was also executed on 11 March 2003. The issues as to whether Mr LCG had the
capacity necessary
to make this Will and whether he was influenced to change his
Will by Ms AM are clearly beyond the jurisdiction of this Tribunal
matters fro the Supreme Court. Accordingly the Tribunal will make no comments in
relation to these issues.
The Tribunal notes from the
evidence the distress which Mr LCG experienced when the issue of the gift and
the execution of the new
documents on 11 March were raised. The Tribunal in
particular notes Mr LCG’s belief that he was some how in trouble and notes
that the Progress Notes for March, April and May 2003 indicate increasing
confusion, depression and agitation. The Tribunal notes
that on 18 June 2003 the
Adult Guardian suspended Ms AM’s authority as attorney for health and
personal matters on the basis
of concerns that were held as information which Ms
AM was giving Mr LCG that were distressing him and leading him to believe that
they were both in trouble and that they would be going to
FINDINGS OF FACT
Mr LCG is currently 92 years of
age and resides at an RSL Nursing Home. Mr LCG has dementia with mild to
moderate cognitive impairment
which fluctuates. Mr LCG is lonely, confused,
emotional and susceptible to influence.
Ms AM worked at the nursing home
as a personal care worker from 5 February 2002 to 8 January
On 31 December 2002 Mr LCG
instructed his bank manager at Westpac Strathpine to draw a bank cheque in the
amount of $170,000 made
out to Ms AM. On the completion of Ms AM’s last
shift at the nursing home on 8 January 2003 Mr LCG gave Ms AM the cheque for
At the time of the gift Mr LCG
did not fully understand the nature and effect of the gift and did not freely
and voluntarily make
this gift as he was unduly influenced by Ms AM to make this
gift to her.
Ms AM spent $173, 072 in the
period 8 January 2003 to 3 March 2003.
Mr LCG executed an Enduring
Power of Attorney appointing Ms AM as his attorney for financial and
health/personal matters on 11 March
2003. Mr LCG also executed a new Will on 11
March 2003.
At the time of the execution of
the EPA dated 11 March 2003 Mr LCG did not fully understand the nature and
effect of this document
and did not execute this document freely and voluntarily
as he was unduly influenced by Ms AM to execute this
Mr LCG has financial matters
which need to be attended to including the investment of his remaining funds and
dealings with the Department
of Veterans Affairs in relation to his correct
pension entitlement given his current assets.
Ms AM continues to visit Mr LCG
and some of her visits have caused a level of distress to Mr LCG.
APPLICATION OF THE LAW
Section 146
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
provides that the Tribunal may
make a declaration about the capacity of an adult, guardian, administrator or
attorney for a matter.
Capacity is defined in schedule
4 as follows.
”, for a person for a matter, means the
person is capable of—
(a) understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
(c) communicating the decisions in some way.
Guardianship and Administration
an adult is presumed to have
capacity. This presumption however can be rebutted by evidence to the contrary
as discussed by Mackenzie
Caldwell v Mc
Court Qld 1999). On the evidence the Tribunal is satisfied that Mr LCG did not
fully understand the nature and effect of
the gift of $170,000 and does not
consider that he freely and voluntarily entered into this transaction. As the
definition of capacity
requires the presence of both these elements in the
decision making process the Tribunal is satisfied that Mr LCG did not have
to make the gift on or about 8 January 2003.
Section 113
Attorney Act
provides that the court may decide the validity of an
enduring power of attorney. The section further provides that the court may
declare an enduring document invalid if the principal did not have capacity to
make the enduring document.
113 Declaration about validity
The court may decide the validity of a power of
attorney, enduring
power of attorney or advance health directive.
The court may declare a document mentioned in subsection
invalid if the court is satisfied—
(a) the principal did not have the capacity necessary to make it;
(b) it does not comply with the other requirements of this Act;81
(c) it is invalid for another reason, for example, the principal
induced to make it by dishonesty or undue influence.
If the court declares the document invalid, the court
may, at the same
time, appoint 1 or more attorneys 82 for the principal.
Section 109
of Attorney Act
then provides that the Tribunal has the same powers of the
Supreme Court in relation to enduring documents. Accordingly the Tribunal
enter into the enduring document.
Section 41 of the
Attorney Act
provides that a person may only make an enduring power of
attorney if they understand the nature and effect of the enduring power
attorney. Section 41(2) then sets out that understanding the nature and effect
of the EPA includes an understanding of the following
41 Principal’s capacity to make an enduring power of
Understanding the nature and effect of the enduring
power of attorney includes understanding the following matters 42
(a) the principal may, in the power of attorney, specify or limit the
power to be given to an attorney and instruct an attorney about
the exercise of
(b) when the power begins;
(c) once the power for a matter begins, the attorney has power to make,
and will have full control over, the matter subject to terms
or information
(d) the principal may revoke the enduring power of attorney at any time
the principal is capable of making an enduring power of attorney
giving the same
(e) the power the principal has given continues even if the principal
becomes a person who has impaired capacity;
(f) at any time the principal is not capable of revoking the enduring
power of attorney, the principal is unable to effectively oversee
the use of the
On the basis of the evidence the
Tribunal is satisfied that Mr LCG did not fully understand the nature and effect
of the EPA and in
particular is not satisfied that Mr LCG actually understood
all of the elements as outlined in section 41 given the extent of his
on the statement of Young J in
Ranclaud v Caban
57,541. where he stated that in relation to testamentary capacity it was
important that a testator understood the extent
of the property of which he is
disposing. Similarly the Tribunal considers that one of the important elements
in relation to executing
an EPA is an understanding by the adult of the extent
of the assets to which the EPA relates. Mr LCG did not have such an
understanding.
The Tribunal is also satisfied
that Mr LCG was not able to freely and voluntarily enter in to this transaction.
Once again therefore
given the absence of these elements the Tribunal is
satisfied that Mr LCG did not have the requisite capacity to execute the EPA
dated 11 March 2003.
Section 114
Attorney Act
then provides that if a document is declared invalid under
section 113
the document is void from the start. The EPA dated 11 March 2003
appointing Ms AM as Mr LCG’s attorney for financial and health/personal
matters is void.
The Tribunal is also satisfied
that given Mr LCG’s state of mind at the time and his confusion in
particular Mr LCG did not
have the capacity to revoke the previous EPA dated 19
June 1998 appointing his nephew Mr JG as his attorney. The Tribunal notes
Mr JG’s comments that he does not consider that it is appropriate
that he continue in this position due to the discord which
has arisen since Mr
LCG made his gift to Ms AM and executed the new documents and he considers it
appropriate that eh resign as attorney.
Mr JG has suggested that the Public
Trustee should be appointed as administrator in these
circumstances.
Accordingly in accordance with
Powers of Attorney Act
the Tribunal accepts Mr
LCG’s resignation as attorney for financial and health/personal matters
The Tribunal is satisfied that
Mr LCG currently has impaired capacity for financial and personal /health
matters and in accordance
Guardianship and
Administration Act
is also satisfied that Mr LCG needs to have an
administrator appointed to manage his financial affairs. In the circumstances
the Tribunal
appoints the Public Trustee of Queensland as his administrator for
all financial matters for a period of 5 years.
The Tribunal is satisfied that
there is not currently a need for a guardian to be appointed for anything other
than to arrange suitable
LCG is genuinely fond of Ms AM and would wish to maintain contact with however
given the issues of undue influence which have occurred in the past the Tribunal
is satisfied that the Adult Guardian needs to be
appointed as the decision maker
in relation to contact arrangements with Mr LCG.
This appointment will be
initially for a period of 1 year and will be reviewed at the end of this period
to ascertain if the appointment
needs to be continued. Otherwise there are no
outstanding personal matters for which a guardian needs to be appointed. Mr
family remain as his statutory health attorneys and if they are
unavailable or inappropriate to act then the Adult Guardian can make
decisions as statutory health attorney.
The Tribunal has made this document available to you because you have a
sufficient interest in the proceedings to receive it. The
Guardianship and
Administration Act
contains provisions to protect the privacy of people involved
in the Tribunal’s proceedings. You are requested to respect this
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (309 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter