URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/147.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Featherstone & Ors [2025] QDC 147 (17 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
R v Featherstone & Ors
[2025] QDC 147
(Respondent)
MICHAEL JOHN FEATHERSTONE
(First Applicant)
ZACH MICHAEL FEATHERSTONE
(Second Applicant)
TRAVIS CHARLES BURCH
(Third Applicant)
ROBERT JOHN DOUEIHI
(Fourth Applicant)
KIRSTY MARIA LESTER
(Fifth Applicant)
NATCHAMON SRISUNANRAT
(Sixth Applicant)
DC No 1561 of 2023, 2232 of 2022, 2227 of 2022
PROCEEDING:
Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
17 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
23 September 2025
Loury KC DCJ
respect of Z Featherstone, T Burch, R Doueihi, and K Lester, indictment 1561/23
is permanently stayed.
respect of M Featherstone, indictments 1561/23, 2232/22 and 2227/22 are
permanently stayed.
applications by T Burch, Z Featherstone and N Srisunanrat for a permanent stay
of indictment 2232/22 are refused.
particulars provided in respect of indictment 2232/22 are struck out.
applications by R Doueihi and T Burch for a permanent stay of indictment 2227/22
are refused.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW -- ADJOURNMENT, STAY OR PROCEEDINGS -- application for
permanent stay where particulars are deficient; where there has
significant delay; where prosecution has declined to say whether it will satisfy
order -- where the prosecution is not confident it has
reasonable prospects of success -- whether the conduct of the prosecution
unjustifiably oppressive -- whether the conduct of the prosecution amounts to an
abuse of process and has the effect of bringing
the administration of justice
into disrepute
LEGISLATION:
Criminal Code 1899
(Qld) ss 7(1)(a)-(c), 7(4), 567(3), 568(3), 624,
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions v Citigroup Global Markets
Australia Pty Ltd (No 5 – Indictment)
[2021] FCA 1345
(2010) 241 CLR 237
[2010] HCA 20
Jago v District Court
(1989) 168 CLR 23
[1989] HCA 46
KBT v The Queen
[1997] HCA 54
KRM v The Queen
(2001) 206 CLR 221
Moti v The Queen
(2011) 245 CLR 456
O’Dea v Western Australia
(2022) 273 CLR 315
PPP v The Queen
(2010) 27 VR 68
[2010] VSCA 110
Featherstone, Featherstone & Burch
[2024] QDC 1
R v Featherstone
[2025] QDCPR 15
R v Featherstone; Ex parte Director of Public
Prosecutions
[2024] QCA 197
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
R v Jayaweera
[2022] QCA 103
ex parte Attorney-General
[1991] 1 Qd R 48
R v Quagliata
Rogers v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 251
Strickland v Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth)
(2018) 266 CLR
[2018] HCA 53
Walsh v Tattersall
(1996) 188 CLR 77
Walton v Gardiner
(1993) 177 CLR 378;
[1993] HCA 77
(1992) 174 CLR 509
[1992] HCA 34
T Bicanic for the first applicant
D P Jones KC, with A Cappellano, for the second applicant
A M Hoare KC for the third applicant
G M Elmore for the fourth applicant
J Robson for the fifth applicant
K Hillard for the sixth applicant
C N Marco, with S J Muir, for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Hannay Lawyers for the first applicant
Guest Lawyers for the second
Legal Aid Queensland for the third and fifth applicant
Ashkan Tai Lawyers for the fourth applicant
Beavon Lawyers for the sixth applicant
Director of Public Prosecutions (Queensland) for the respondent
[1] R Doueihi, T
Burch, Z Featherstone and K Lester are each charged with one or more counts of
fraud on indictment 1561/23. They
each apply for a permanent stay of this
indictment on the basis of the extraordinary delay in the matter proceeding and
the continuing
inability of the prosecution to properly particularise its
[2] T Burch, Z
Featherstone and N Srisunanrat are charged with fraud on indictment 2232/22.
They each make an application for a permanent
stay of this indictment on the
basis of the extraordinary delay in the matter proceeding and the continuing
inability of the prosecution
to properly particularise its case.
[3] R Doueihi
and T Burch are each charged with fraud on indictment 2227/22. They each apply
for a permanent stay of this indictment
on the basis of the delay and failure of
the prosecution to particularise its case.
Featherstone is charged on each of indictments 1561/23, 2232/22 and 2227/22 with
fraud. Indictment 1561/23 is the subject of
a temporary stay pending the payment
by the prosecution of costs thrown
M Featherstone applies for a permanent stay of each of the indictments on the
basis of the extraordinary delay in any of the matters
proceeding to date; the
unknown further delay caused by the decision of the prosecution to not indicate
whether it intends to satisfy
order and to not proceed against
M Featherstone on any indictment despite not discontinuing proceedings against
him on any indictment.
permanently stay an indictment is an extraordinary step to take. Indictment
1561/23 involves a large number of complainants
said to have been defrauded of
large sums of money. I have reached the conclusion that the eight iterations of
the particulars in
respect of indictment 1561/23 remain confusing and are wholly
deficient. The prosecution has, after a number of years, now moved
to prosecute
indictment 2232/22 in order to assess its prospects of success on indictment
1561/23 before determining whether it will
satisfy the
order. This
suggests the prosecution no longer considers that it has reasonable prospects of
success in respect of indictment 1561/23.
In my view, the conduct of the
prosecution in respect of M Featherstone has reached the point of being
unjustifiably oppressive and
as having the effect of bringing the administration
of justice into disrepute. For those reasons I consider that the prosecution
M Featherstone in respect of each indictment should be permanently stayed. My
reasons for reaching that view infect the prosecution
of R Doueihi, Z
Featherstone and T Burch on indictment 1561/23. I consider the prosecution of
each of those persons on indictment
1561/23 ought to be permanently stayed. In
respect of indictment 2232/22 and 2227/22 I have reached a different view. I
the particulars in respect of indictment 2232/22 be struck out. I
refuse the application for a permanent stay in respect of each
of T Burch, Z
Featherstone and N Srisunanrat in respect of indictment 2232/22.
application for a permanent stay of indictment 2227/22 is also refused in
respect of R Doueihi and T Burch.
Particulars
[7] The common
law rule against duplicity requires that one count should not charge an accused
with having committed two or more
Section 567(3) of the
Criminal Code 1899
reflects that common law rule. The rule against
duplicity and s 567(3) reflect the fundamental principle that a person charged
an offence is entitled to know the precise charge being preferred so that
he/she may know what evidence is admissible and what evidence
can be properly
objected to on the grounds of irrelevance.
[8] Section
568(3) explicitly permits a number of specific frauds to be proceeded against on
the one charge even if separate acts
of fraud can be identified. Section 568(3)
(3) In an indictment against a person for fraud the person
may be charged and proceeded against on 1 charge even though—
(a) any number of specific frauds of the same type has been committed,
whether or not each specific act of fraud can be identified;
(b) the frauds have extended over any space of time; or
(c) property applied belongs to different persons, and has come into the
possession or control of the accused person at different
times and subject to
different trusts, directions, conditions, or duties to account; or
(d) the property, benefit, detriment or inducement belongs to or is caused to
different persons.
[9] Section
568(3) provides for the charging and proceeding against a person on one charge
even if any number of specific frauds of
the same type have been committed and
whether or not each specific act of fraud can be identified. This provision does
a continuing offence. The actus reus of the offence is not a course
of conduct. The actus reus of the offence is the act of doing
a specific fraud,
whether one or more of the same type. If that is the actus reus of the offence
then a person cannot be convicted
unless the jury is agreed as to the commission
of each of the specific frauds relied upon to prove the offence. That the
provides for an offence of fraud to be charged and proceeded against
on one charge does not detract from the need to prove the actual
commission of
the acts which constitute a fraud.
That requires those acts to be identified.
existence of s 568(3) does not change the fundamental principle that an accused
is entitled to know the precise charge being
preferred. For an offence charged
pursuant to s 568(3) the provision of particulars provides that information.
Without identification
of each specific fraud relied upon, a person is not able
to avail himself/herself of a plea of autrefois acquit or autrefois convict.
Redlich JA described
the importance of proper particulars. He said that the provision of
particulars:
the accused to exercise the right to object to evidence on the ground of
the accused to know how the charge might be answered;
the accused with the opportunity to test the credibility of the complainant by
reference to the surrounding circumstances
disclosed as a result of the
particularisation of the count;
the trial judge to instruct the jury properly as to the law to be applied;
that there is a unanimity of view by the jury as to a specific act by the
the event of conviction, enables the court to know the offence for which the
accused is to be punished;
that the record discloses of what offence a person has been acquitted or
convicted in order for that person to avail himself
or herself, if the need
should arise, of a plea of autrefois acquit or autrefois convict.
[12] Each count
of fraud on each of the indictments, charged pursuant to s 568(3) involves
multiple acts, each of which would independently
amount to an offence of fraud.
As one of the purposes for the provision of particulars is to apprise the
accused of knowledge of
the act/s constituting the offence so as to give
sufficient indication of the case he/she must meet, there must be clarity as to
the acts that amount to the offence. Further, it appears that alternative bases
of criminal liability are advanced against the perpetrators
of the principal
offence of fraud. In
Bond J said of a case
in which alternative bases of criminal liability were
“If, as is trite, the purpose of particulars is to
give an accused sufficient indication of the nature of the case he or she
called to meet, then there must be clarity as to how each of the alternative
cases is advanced. An important reason why that is
significant is that evidence
admissible on one alternative case might not be admissible on another, and the
accused is entitled to
have the cases sufficiently clarified so that appropriate
objection can be taken, appropriate directions given and appropriate forensic
decisions made.” (citations omitted)
[13] If another
of the purposes of the provision of particulars is to assist in properly
directing the jury as to the law, again there
must be clarity as to each of the
acts that the prosecution relies upon as constituting the offence. That the
legislation allows
for multiple of acts of fraud to be charged as one offence,
does not mean that there is no requirement on the prosecution to identify
of the acts relied upon to constitute the offence. If a further purpose to the
provision of particulars is to ensure unanimity
of view by the jury the specific
acts relied upon to constitute the fraud must be clearly articulated.
McHugh J remarked of
the provision creating the offence with which the appellant had been charged
“... operates in the context of an adversarial system
of criminal justice where an accused person is entitled to be given as
degree of particularity concerning a criminal charge as the subject matter will
bear. An accused person ‘is entitled
to be apprised not only of the legal
nature of the offence with which he is charged but also of the particular act,
matter or thing
alleged as the foundation of the charge’. These
particulars are needed to ensure that the accused person has a fair opportunity
to defend the charge.” (citations omitted)
[15] With those
observations and requirements in mind, I have considered in detail the
particulars as provided in respect of count
1 on indictment 1561/23. The parties
agree that a consideration of these particulars will determine the outcome with
respect to the
sufficiency of the particulars on each count on each
indictment.
Indictment 1561/23 - Zach Featherstone and Travis
prosecution’s case on count 1 is that each of Z Featherstone and T Burch
are criminally responsible for an offence
of fraud committed on “divers
dates between 3 June 2011 and 30 April 2014” as a result of the
application of ss 7(1)(b)
and (c) of the
Criminal Code
. To prove that a
person is liable as a party pursuant to these provisions the prosecution is
required to prove beyond reasonable
doubt firstly, an identified or unidentified
person (the perpetrator) committed the offence of fraud; secondly that the
accused assisted the perpetrator to commit the offence of fraud or
enabled the commission of the offence by the perpetrator; thirdly,
accused assisted the perpetrator he did so intending to help the perpetrator to
commit the offence of fraud and fourthly
that the accused had actual knowledge
of the essential facts of the principal offence including the state of mind of
the perpetrator.
[17] In the
context of the offence of the fraud which is count 1 this means that the
prosecution is required to establish:
the perpetrator dishonestly caused a detriment to the complainant;
of Z Featherstone and T Burch assisted the perpetrator to commit the offence of
each of Z Featherstone and T Burch assisted the perpetrator he did so intending
to help the perpetrator commit the offence of
of Z Featherstone and T Burch had actual knowledge of the essential facts of the
fraud including the dishonest state of mind
of the perpetrator.
[18] Sections
7(1)(b) and (c) require that the act or omission of another constitute the
conduct element of the offence. In
Western Australia
the majority
held that if a person is not criminally responsible because his/her acts were
lawful then a person could not be convicted
of aiding in the commission of an
offence that had not been committed. To convict either Z Featherstone or T Burch
pursuant to ss
7(1)(b) or (c) the conduct of the perpetrator, whether he/she can
be identified or not, must be unlawful. This means the perpetrator
offence of fraud must do the act/s or omit to the act/s which constitutes the
conduct element of the offence and must have
the dishonest state of mind
necessary in order to have committed the offence of fraud.
[19] For count 1
on indictment 1561/23 under the heading “The offence” the
particulars state:
“Salespeople
sold managed packages, licences, and memberships under the name of the company
UK Home Based Business Pty Ltd ("UKHBB”)
to [620 complainants] that
purported to apply software to make selections on horses. The [620 complainants]
invested money into trading
accounts held by Vince McDonald to place bets using
the software and to yield profits.
software did not exist, or if it did exist, was not applied to place bets, or it
did not work to yield profits.
money deposited by the [620 complainants] to purchase the managed packages,
licenses, and memberships, and to trade, into the
trading account, was not
returned to the [620 complainants].
combined loss to the [620 complainants] was to the value of more than $30,000
and up to $9,314,289.05.
salespeople were employed by Phil Cropper, Patrik Goransson, and Charlie
Goransson. Not all of the individuals employed in this
role were able to be
identified, but Patrik Goransson and Charlie Goransson completed sales to [620
complainants].
Cropper, Patrik Goransson and Charlie Goransson knew that the software did not
exist, or if it did exist, it was not applied
to place bets, or it did not work
to yield profits, and that is dishonest by the standards of ordinary honest
is unknown what level of knowledge the remaining salespeople had of the
Cropper, Patrik Goransson and Charlie Goransson knew that the money deposited by
the [620 complainants] to purchase the managed
packages, licenses, and
memberships, and to trade, into the trading account, was not returned to the
[620 complainants], and that
is dishonest by the standards of ordinary honest
Cropper, Patrik Goransson and Charlie Goransson knew that the company UKHBB was
used to enable the dishonest conduct.”
[20] Beyond
those statements, the particulars provide in a general way for the knowledge
that Z Featherstone and T Burch are said
to have had, which included knowledge
that P Cropper, P Goransson and C Goransson sold the product through salespeople
complainants; knowledge that the software did not exist or work;
knowledge that the money was not returned to the 620 complainants;
knowledge that UKHBB was used to enable the dishonest conduct.
particulars then provide in a general way for the conduct engaged in by each of
Z Featherstone and T Burch which is said
to aid or enable the commission of the
offence of fraud by the perpetrator.
particulars do not properly articulate whose acts are said to give rise to the
commission of the principal offence. It is
entirely unclear whether it is the
acts of the salespeople, the acts of P Cropper, the acts of P Goransson or the
acts of C Goransson.
It remains unclear whether it is the act of procuring
salespeople that is relied upon or whether it is the act of selling the product.
The deficiencies in the particulars continue to arise because insufficient
attention has been given to the doing of an act which
gives rise to the conduct
element of the offence of fraud. Indeed, the particulars do not state that any
person did any act other
than “salespeople” who sold the product.
During oral argument the prosecutor confirmed that the act that is said to
the offence is the act of a salesperson selling the software to a
complainant in circumstances where it, in effect, did not exist.
The particulars
do not make clear who is the perpetrator of those, what must be, 620 acts.
[23] Assuming,
for the sake of argument, that the perpetrator of those acts is P Cropper or P
Goransson or C Goransson, the particulars
do not provide any clarity as to the
particular transactions that each of P Cropper, P Goransson or C Goransson are
said to have
engaged in whether by reference to a salesperson or a complainant.
They do not provide clarity as regards which transactions each
of P Cropper, P
Goransson or C Goransson were the actual salesperson as opposed to having
employed an innocent agent to sell the
product. The particulars do not detail
how Z Featherstone and T Burch or any others aided or enabled any specific
transaction or
even how they are said to have aided each of P Cropper, P
Goransson or C Goransson when making actual sales as opposed to employing
to make the sales.
paragraphs [1] through [9] the manner in which the particulars are drafted
attributes all acts of P Cropper, P Goransson and
C Goransson, whether as
employers or in their role as salespersons, to each of P Cropper, P Goransson
and C Goransson. That is contrary
O’Dea v Western
In argument however,
the prosecutor accepted that her case was in fact that it was either P Cropper
P Goransson
C Goransson who employed the salesperson who
made the sale.
[25] In respect
of count 1 there are 620 individual transactions which are said to be dishonest
and which would amount to the offence
of fraud. No attempt beyond naming the
complainants has been made to identify the transactions. No attempt has been
made to identify
which of P Cropper, P Goransson or C Goransson are said to have
employed the salesperson who sold a product to any of the 620 complainants
no attempt has been made to identify with precision the acts of each of Z
Featherstone and T Burch which are said to aid one
or other of those
transactions.
[26] There is no
identified basis under the heading “The offence” on which each of P
Cropper, P Goransson and C Goransson
are said to be criminally liable. There is
no description of any one of them having done any act.
O’Dea v Western
makes clear that s
7(1)(a) cannot be used to attribute the acts of one person to another. The
prosecution, to establish criminal
responsibility on the part of each of P
Cropper, P Goransson and C Goransson under s 7(1)(a) must necessarily prove an
act/s causing
a detriment coupled with the dishonest knowledge. No attempt to
identify the precise acts of any these people even by reference to
a complainant
has been undertaken.
[27] In respect
of count 1 the prosecution has further attempted to particularise the basis of
liability of each of P Goransson and
C Goransson. At paragraph [28] it is said
that P Goransson is liable under s 7(1)(a) for completing himself sales to the
complainants
of managed packages, licences and memberships that purported to
apply software to make selections on horses with the knowledge that
the software
either did not exist or did not work to yield profits and that the money
deposited by the complainants was not returned
particulars then state that P Goransson is liable under s 7(4) for
“employing salespeople” to sell to the 620
complainants the managed
packages, licences and memberships. Section 7(4) relevantly provides that any
person who procures another
to do or omit to do any act of such a nature that,
if the person had done the act or made the omission, the act or omission would
have constituted an offence on the person’s part is guilty of doing the
act. There is no identification of who he procured
and what act he procured that
person to do whether by reference to a salesperson or a complainant.
[29] P Goransson
is also said to be liable under ss 7(1)(b) or (c) for aiding or enabling P
Cropper and C Goransson to employ salespeople
to sell managed packages, licenses
and memberships to 620 complainants with the knowledge that it did not exist or
did not work to
yield profits. The particulars then go on to identify the acts
that P Goransson engaged in which constitute the aiding or encouraging.
[30] Again there
has been no attempt made to identify which of the transactions P Goransson is
liable for pursuant to ss 7(1)(a),
or 7(1)(b) or (c), or 7(4).
[31] On the
basis of these particulars each of Z Featherstone and T Burch aided P Goransson
when he sold software to a complainant;
when he procured another to sell the
software and when P Goransson was himself aiding or enabling P Cropper or C
Goransson. There
is no such basis of criminal liability that arises under the
Criminal Code
, aiding an aider or enabler of a criminal offence who is
themselves aiding or enabling a principal offence. That the acts of P Cropper,
Goransson or C Goransson have not been identified in the particulars with
precision does not allow Z Featherstone or T Burch to
know the case they have to
prosecutor, in oral argument, submitted that the particulars, as drafted, are
not intended to allege for example, Z Featherstone
aided or enabled P Goransson
when P Goransson’s liability is as an aider or enabler of the perpetrator.
The submission made
is that the particulars convey that Z Featherstone aided
whoever it was that did the act that constitutes the offence whether P Cropper,
P Goransson, C Goransson or a salesperson. The difficulty with that submission
is that the salesperson is not said to have the dishonest
knowledge that must
accompany the act of selling the software in order for the prosecution to prove
an offence of fraud was committed.
The particulars, as drafted are confusing and
do not properly allow for Z Featherstone or T Burch to understand the case that
have to meet.
[33] The same
difficulty arises with respect to C Goransson. He is also said to be liable
pursuant to ss 7(1)(a), (b), (c) and 7(4)
with no identification of the
transactions relied upon in proof of any of those bases of criminal
further instructive to consider how a jury could be directed based upon the
particulars provided.
[35] Firstly, it
is necessary as indicated above for the prosecution to firstly prove that the
offence of fraud has been committed.
That requires a jury to be directed that a
perpetrator, whether known or unknown, did the act or omission relied on to
the offence. No attention has been given to identifying the
perpetrator and what his acts are. If it is the act of P Cropper or P
or C Goransson the particulars should properly identify what that act/s is. If
it is employing another person to sell a
product to a particular complainant the
particulars need to identify that. They do not. If the act includes the making
of a representation
to a complainant himself or through another the particulars
should identify that representation.
[36] Secondly,
the jury has to be directed that they must be satisfied that it is the act of
(assuming for the sake of argument) P
Cropper, P Goransson or C Goransson that
causes the pecuniary detriment. That means that it must be the act of P Cropper
or P Goransson
or C Goransson in himself selling the software to a particular
complainant or employing a particular person who sold the software
particular complainant which was a substantial or significant cause of the
pecuniary detriment to that complainant.
[37] Thirdly,
the jury would need to be directed that to prove that P Cropper, P Goransson or
C Goransson caused the pecuniary detriment
dishonestly, they would need to be
satisfied that P Cropper, P Goransson or C Goransson knew, at the time he sold
the product or
employed the salesperson to sell the product to a particular
complainant, that it did not work or did not exist.
[38] In respect
of the matters in which it is said that P Cropper, P Goransson or C Goransson
sold the products directly to particular
complainants, in order to prove that
the act of P Cropper, P Goransson or C Goransson caused the pecuniary detriment
the prosecution
must prove that at the time of selling the products P Cropper, P
Goransson or C Goransson knew that the software did not work or
did not exist
and acting in that way was dishonest by the standards of ordinary decent people.
The directions that must be given
to the jury must identify the knowledge,
intention or belief said to be dishonest at the time of
act that is
a particular of each count.
[39] In order to
direct the jury as to proof of the commission of the offence of fraud by P
Cropper, P Goransson or C Goransson it
is critical that the prosecution state
clearly what its case is in that respect. As has been said by the Court of
Appeal the Crown
must articulate clearly the relevant aspect of the
perpetrator’s knowledge, belief, or intent which renders the
perpetrator’s
particulars as drafted refer to P Cropper, P Goransson
C Goransson as
if they are a single entity and that the acts or knowledge of any one of them is
attributable to the others. The particulars
otherwise allege a basis of criminal
liability that is unknown to the law, aiding an aider or enabler who is
themselves aiding or
enabling the perpetrator.
prosecution’s outline further demonstrates the confusion in the
particulars. At paragraph [25] it seems the prosecution’s
case is in fact
that it is either P Cropper
P Goransson
C Goransson who
employed a salesperson to sell the product. So much was admitted during the
course of the oral submissions.
[42] The outline
further states that in respect of Z Featherstone and T Burch that the
prosecution must prove that a salesperson committed
the offence. That would then
require identification of the knowledge, belief or intent that the salesperson,
if they are the perpetrator
of the offence, had at the time that he/she sold the
product to the particular complainant. However, at paragraph [7] of the
particulars
it is stated that it is “unknown what level of knowledge the
remaining salespeople had of the software”. The reference
to the offence
in ss 7(1)(b) and (c) is used to denote the element of conduct which if engaged
in with a prescribed state of mind,
renders a person engaging in the conduct
liable to punishment.
[43] To prove
the offence of fraud, the conduct of selling the software must be engaged in by
a person, whether known or unknown,
with a dishonest state of mind. If the state
of mind of the salespeople is unknown the prosecution’s case must be that
P Cropper, P Goransson or C Goransson who has committed the act/s which
gives rise to the offence.
[44] It is only
once the acts of the perpetrator of the principal offence of fraud are
identified, can the jury then be directed in
respect of the accessorial
liability of Z Featherstone and T Burch. Difficulties arise with respect to the
particulars in that regard
in terms of directing the jury. For example, in
respect of Z Featherstone it is said that he aided or enabled the commission of
offence of fraud by “drafting ‘deeds of settlement’ to
settle complaints made by complainants”. There is
no identification of
what deed of settlement such conduct refers to. It is difficult to understand
how drafting a deed of settlement
assumedly after the commission of the offence
of fraud by the perpetrator in respect of a particular complainant, could amount
aiding or enabling the commission of the offence of fraud in respect of that
complainant. The particulars do not identify in any
meaningful way what the acts
of Z Featherstone are that have aided or enabled the perpetrator to commit the
offence of fraud.
particulars in respect of count 1 are confusing and wholly deficient.
[46] Count 2 is
drafted in a similar way to count 1 although with different persons said to
employ the salespeople. Those people are
“Phil Cropper, Robert Doueihi and
Daniel Webb”. The same issues arise. They appear to be treated as a single
entity with
the act/s of one attributed to another.
Featherstone and T Burch are said to be liable pursuant to ss 7(1)(b) and (c). R
Doueihi is said to be liable pursuant to ss
7(4) and 7(1)(b) and (c). No
identification of the transactions which were said to have been procured by R
Doueihi as opposed to
those he is said to have aided or enabled has been
undertaken. For count 2 there are 558 complainants, inferentially there are at
least 558 transactions. There is again no identification of the act/s of R
Doueihi or any other person that is said to amount to
the conduct element of the
[48] D Webb is
said to be liable under ss 7(1)(a),(b) and (c) again with no identification of
those transactions in which he is said
to have actually done the act which
constitutes the offence and those which he is said to be liable because he aided
or enabled.
Z Featherstone and T Burch cannot be criminally liable for aiding an
[49] Count 5
appears to allege P Cropper as the principal offender who employed salespeople
to sell the same product to four complainants.
Despite the ease with which the
acts of P Cropper could here be identified they have not been. Z Featherstone
and T Burch are each
said to have aided or enabled those acts. The particulars
are deficient.
[50] Count 6
suffers the same problems as counts 1 and 2. Salespeople are said to have sold
the product. There are no acts of P Cropper,
R Doueihi or D Webb identified. If
it is the act of employing a salesperson to sell a product that is the act of
one or other of
those three men the acts of each of them are attributed to the
others. R Doueihi is said to be liable under ss 7(4) and 7(1)(b) and
aiding P Cropper and D Webb. D Webb is said to have done the act and aided or
enabled P Cropper and R Doueihi. Z Featherstone
and T Burch are said to have
aided or enabled the commission of the acts of P Cropper, D Webb and R
particulars do not identify in a meaningful way how Z Featherstone or T Burch
are said to have aided the perpetrator of the
offence of fraud. The particulars
do not allow Z Featherstone or T Burch to know the case they have to meet.
particulars provided in respect of Z Featherstone and T Burch are confusing and
wholly deficient.
Indictment 1561/23 – Kirsty Lester
[53] In respect
of K Lester, she is charged with count 5 which alleges that between 20 October
2012 and 31 July 2014 she dishonestly
caused a pecuniary detriment to 17
complainants. She is also charged on count 6 with an offence of fraud committed
between 15 January
2013 and 18 December 2014 and on count 7 with an offence of
fraud committed between 10 October 2013 and 2 November 2014.
[54] K Lester
was employed on a part-time basis for 10 weeks from around 17 January 2014 as an
office assistant to M Featherstone.
She ceased her employment soon after a
2016. She continues
to await her trial nine years later. The particulars do not
identify which of the transactions said to constitute the conduct element
offences of fraud she is said to have aided or enabled in circumstances where
she was only employed for 10 weeks of a more
than 2-year period. The brief of
evidence is voluminous. She has no ability to identify what evidence is properly
admissible against
her and what evidence she should take objection to.
particulars in respect of K Lester are confusing and wholly deficient for the
same reasons as with respect to Z Featherstone
and T Burch.
Indictment 1561/23 - Robert Doueihi
[56] The same
issues arise with respect to R Doueihi in relation to indictment 1561/23. The
particulars fail to identify a perpetrator
of the offence of fraud or the acts
of R Doueihi if he is the perpetrator. He is charged with count 2 on the basis
that he procured
others to sell the product knowing that it did not exist or
work. He is also said to be liable on the basis that he aided or enabled
P Cropper and D Webb. D Webb’s liability appears to be that either he did
the act which is the conduct relied upon
or alternatively he aided or enabled P
[57] Similar
issues arise with respect to count 6. There is no identification of the
perpetrator of the offence. There is no identification
of the transactions that
R Doueihi procured others to engage in, as opposed to having aided or enabled P
Cropper or having aided
or enabled D Webb. The particulars suggest R Doueihi
aided or enabled D Webb who himself is said to have aided or enabled P Cropper,
a basis of liability unknown to the law.
[58] R Doueihi
further contends that there are enumerable paths to conviction given the way in
which the particulars have been drafted.
The prosecutor relies upon a statement
of facts to assist R Doueihi to understand the acts he is said to have engaged
in. The difficulty
with that submission is that a jury will not be provided a
statement of facts. The prosecutor further submits that a special verdict
be taken in order to determine what acts were found by the jury unanimously.
Section 624 of the
Criminal Code
which provides for the taking of a
special verdict states “in any case in which it appears to the court that
the question whether
an accused person ought or ought not to be convicted of an
offence may depend upon some specific fact, or that the proper punishment
awarded upon conviction may depend upon some specific fact, the court may
require the jury to find that fact specially.”
Unless the precise acts are
properly identified there is no possibility of the taking of a special
particulars in respect of R Doueihi are confusing and wholly
Permanent Stay - Indictment 1561/23
granting of a permanent stay of an indictment is a rare and exceptional
There are no definitive
category of cases in which a permanent stay of proceedings can be ordered. The
question to be considered
is not so much whether the case can be characterised
as extreme but rather whether an apprehended defect in the trial is “of
such a nature that nothing that a trial judge can do in the conduct of the trial
can relieve against its unfair
consequences”.
French CJ, Gummow,
Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ adopted a statement of McHugh J in
Rogers v The
“...although
the categories of abuse of process are not closed, many such cases can be
identified as falling into one of three
categories; (1) the court’s
procedures are invoked for an illegitimate purpose; (2) the use of the
court’s procedures
is unjustifiably oppressive to one of the parties; or
(3) the use of the court’s procedures would bring the administration
justice into disrepute.”
[62] It is the
second and third categories which found the applications in this case. One
aspect to the contention that the use of
the court’s procedures is
unjustifiably oppressive is the delay that has been occasioned as a result of
the conduct of the
prosecution. For indictment 1561/23 this is the eighth
iteration of the particulars that the prosecution has provided.
relevantly on 9 October 2023 an application was brought by M Featherstone, Z
Featherstone and T Burch concerning the adequacy
of the particulars. The
particulars were struck out with my ruling that they failed to identify the
act/s or omission/s which constituted
the offences and failed to identify the
person, persons or entity who did the act/s or made the omission/s.
November 2023 the prosecution advised all accused on the three indictments that
it would proceed with counts 1-3 and 5-8
on indictment 1561/23 first in time
against M Featherstone, Z Featherstone, T Burch and N Forbes only.
December 2023 M Featherstone, Z Featherstone and T Burch brought an application
for a permanent stay of indictment 1561/23
on the basis of the continued
deficiencies in the particulars. I refused that application for a permanent stay
of the indictment
on 15 January 2024 however ordered that the particulars be
struck out.
The basis of the
application was the delay in the prosecution combined with the continued
material deficiencies in the particulars
which, it was contended, amounted to an
affront to the administration of justice.
January 2024 the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld) filed a notice referring
five questions to the Court of Appeal pursuant
to s 668A of the
. Each question was said to be a question of law arising out of my
ruling of 15 January 2024.
[67] The hearing
before the Court of Appeal occurred on 31 May 2024 with judgement being
delivered on 25 October 2024.
The ruling of the Court of Appeal was that it was unnecessary to answer any of
the five questions as none of them raised a point
of law within the meaning of s
668A. It was made clear as early as 31 May 2024 at the hearing, that the
particulars would need to
be redrafted as they were indeed deficient. Despite
those clear indications at the hearing and in the judgement, the prosecution
not move to provide further particulars until 16 May 2025 (16 months after they
were struck out).
[68] On 14 March
2025 I delivered judgement on an application by M Featherstone in which I
temporarily stayed the prosecution of him
on indictment 1561/23 until such time
as the prosecution had paid the costs thrown away in an amount of
$238,489.99.
[69] On 16 April
2025 the prosecutor informed all accused that she intended to move to prosecute
indictment 2232/22 which charges
M Featherstone, T Burch, Z Featherstone, D
Traynor and N Srisunanrat with one count of fraud. However, the prosecutor
advised that
she did not intend to prosecute M Featherstone on this indictment.
There is no current impediment to the prosecution proceeding against
accused on indictment 2232/22. The prosecution, however, have determined not to
proceed against M Featherstone on that indictment
but equally do not intend to
discontinue proceedings against him. The prosecutor has confirmed that she
intends to prosecute indictment
2232/22 in order to assess her prospects of
success on indictment 1561/23 before making a decision as to whether to satisfy
order in favour of M Featherstone made on 14 March 2025.
[70] It was not
until 17 April 2025 when I directed the prosecution to provide particulars in
respect of indictment 1561/23 that the
prosecution has moved to do so. On 16 May
2025 the particulars referred to in this judgment with respect to indictment
1561/23 and
2232/22 were delivered, absent any reference to M Featherstone,
including his liability for the offence contained in indictment 2232/22.
indicated, the particulars in respect of indictment 1561/23 are deficient.
[72] In respect
of the prosecution of indictment 1561/23 there has been an extraordinary delay,
some of which has been caused by the
conduct of the prosecution. In particular,
the filing of an unmeritorious reference to the Court of Appeal and the failure
particulars for 16 months after they were struck out. Even now those
particulars remain deficient. Given the extensive delay and
the multiple
attempts the prosecution has had to particularise its case, and despite comments
directing the prosecutor to the deficiencies
in the particulars by the judges in
the Court of Appeal, the prosecution is still unable to properly articulate its
case. As Wigney
Commonwealth Director
of Public Prosecutions v Citigroup Global Markets Australia Pty Ltd (No 5
– Indictment)
“...limits are and must be placed upon the ability of a prosecutor to
change the pleading or particularisation of an indictment,
particularly if the
proceedings are well advanced”. After more than nine years the prosecution
remains unable to particularise
its case on indictment 1561/23.
decision now taken by the prosecution to move to prosecute indictment 2232/22
first in time means that there will be a further,
very significant delay before
the prosecution even determines whether it has sufficient prospects of success
that it will continue
to prosecute any accused on indictment 1561/23.
[74] In respect
of Z Featherstone and T Burch this is the third application that has been made
with respect to the adequacy of the
prosecution’s particulars on
indictment 1561/23.
[75] I am not
satisfied that there is any other means available to remedy the
prosecution’s inability to particularise its case
after so many failed
attempts. The delay is extraordinary. The continued inability to properly
particularise the case and the now
moving to prosecute a different indictment in
order to assess prospects of success on indictment 1561/23 is unjustifiably
to each of the accused on indictment 1561/23. Further, that the
prosecution does not, after nine years, consider that it has reasonable
prospects of securing convictions on indictment 1561/23 such that it wishes to
delay prosecuting it for an indeterminate period of
time has the effect of
bringing the administration of justice into disrepute. As said by Kiefel CJ,
Bell and Nettle JJ in
Strickland v DPP
“Certainly,
as this Court has stated repeatedly, a permanent stay of a criminal prosecution
is an extraordinary step which will
very rarely be justified. There is a
powerful social imperative for those who are charged with criminal offences to
be brought to
trial and, for that reason, it has been said that a permanent stay
of prosecution should only ever be granted where there is such
a fundamental
defect in the process leading to trial that nothing by way of reconstitution of
the prosecutorial team or trial directions
or other such arrangements can
sufficiently relieve against the consequences of the defence as to afford those
charged with a fair
trial. But, as this court has also stated there is, too, a
fundamental social concern to ensure that the
of a criminal
prosecution does not justify the adoption of any and every
securing as conviction and, therefore, a recognition that in rare and
exceptional cases where a defect in process is so profound
as to offend the
integrity and function off the court as such, it is necessary that proceedings
be stayed in order to prevent the
administration of justice falling into
disrepute.” (citations omitted)
satisfied that there remains no other order that can be made which alleviates
the unjustifiable oppression involved to Z
Featherstone, T Burch, K Lester or R
Doueihi. I am further satisfied that the continued prosecution of indictment
1561/23 against
these four accused in circumstances where the eighth iteration
of the particulars are confusing and wholly deficient; the prosecution
satisfied that it has reasonable prospects of success such that it wishes to
delay the prosecution on this indictment whilst
using another as a “litmus
test” to assess its prospects; and the further indeterminate delay that
will be occasioned
as a consequence of this decision by the prosecution, is a
defect in process so profound as to “offend the integrity and function
and brings the
administration of justice into disrepute.
[77] I order
that indictment 1561/23 in respect of Z Featherstone, T Burch, K Lester and R
Douihi be permanently stayed.
Featherstone and T Burch further contend that the absence of any reference to M
Featherstone in the particulars delivered in
respect of indictment 1561/23 and
the conduct of the prosecution in moving to prosecute indictment 2232/22 other
than M Featherstone
is an attempt to circumvent the
March 2025. It is contended that everything that Z Featherstone is alleged to
have done in order to aid the commission
of the offence of fraud on indictment
1561/23 was done at the direction of M Featherstone. The absence of M
Featherstone at a trial
on indictment 1561/23 as a result of the
prosecution’s decision to not satisfy the
order creates a
further level of unfairness and would amount to an abuse of process. It is
unnecessary to make any determination
as to this aspect of the application for a
permanent stay as I am satisfied that indictment 1561/23 in respect of Z
Featherstone
and T Burch should be permanently stayed on the bases identified in
this judgement.
Indictments 1561/23, 2232/22 and 2227/22 - Michael Featherstone
applicant M Featherstone applies for a permanent stay of all indictments on the
basis the prosecution has no intention of
meeting the
with respect to indictment 1561/23 and that its conduct in now determining to
prosecute indictment 2232/22 absent of M
Featherstone is an abuse of
[80] On 14 March
2025 I ordered the prosecution of M Featherstone be temporarily stayed until
such time as the prosecution paid to
M Featherstone his costs thrown away in an
amount of $238,489.99. No appeal against that ruling has been instituted.
prosecutor argues that I have no jurisdiction to order a permanent stay of
indictment 1561/23 because I have ordered a temporary
stay which can only be
lifted, in effect, at the discretion of the Director of Public Prosecutions on
payment of the money. No authority
has been cited for that proposition.
District Court possesses all the necessary power to prevent abuse of its own
process and to ensure a fair trial. In
Jago v The District Court
Mason CJ adopted the
following statement:
“The justification for staying a
prosecution is that the court is obliged to take the extreme step in order to
protect its own
processes from abuse...it may intervene in this way if it
concludes from the conduct of the prosecutor ...that the court processes
being employed for ulterior purposes or in such a way...as to cause improper
vexation and oppression.”
[83] Deane J
a court is seised of criminal proceedings, it has control of them. In the
absence of applicable express statutory provision,
that control includes the
power – either inherent or implied – to ensure that the
court’s process is not abused
by the proceedings being made an instrument
of unfair oppression.
The grant of such a stay in those circumstances does not mean that the judge
is either stepping into the arena or assuming what is
properly to be seen as a
function of the executive government. It involves no more than the discharge of
the responsibility and duty
of the court to see that the process of law is not
abused in proceedings before it.” (citations omitted)
Featherstone contends that the prosecution’s conduct amounts to an abuse
of the court’s processes. The prosecution
has now indicated that rather
than proceeding with any prosecution on indictment 1561/23 it will move to
prosecute indictment 2232/22.
The prosecutor has stated that she does not intend
to prosecute M Featherstone upon this indictment however does not intend to
a nolle prosequi. I query how, when M Featherstone has been joined with
two others on that indictment, the prosecution could simply
say we will not
proceed but nor will we discontinue. If the prosecution does not wish to proceed
upon this indictment against M Featherstone
then it ought properly enter a nolle
prosequi. The entering of a nolle prosequi brings proceedings to an end but does
not provide
any bar against the proceedings being recommenced. It does not
dictate that any determination has taken place with respect to the
said by Thomas J in
R v Jell, ex parte
Attorney-General
short it is neither a bar to a fresh indictment nor a discharge of the original
offence. It is often described as a stay
but this does not imply that it is a
stay granted by the court; it is a stay effected by executive action.”
[85] If the
prosecution chooses not to enter a nolle prosequi in respect of indictment
2232/22 the real question is whether a permanent
stay of all indictments is the
appropriate remedy for M Featherstone. He contends that for two reasons all of
the indictments ought
to be the subject of a permanent stay, firstly because the
continuation of the proceedings would be so unfairly and unjustifiably
oppressive given the unknown but lengthy delay that will occur as a result of
multiple trials having to take place in respect of
numerous other individuals as
to constitute an abuse of process. Further it is contended that the
prosecution’s decision not
to prosecute M Featherstone on indictment
2232/22 and not to provide particulars in respect of that indictment for the
reasons given
by the prosecution brings the administration of criminal justice
into disrepute.
indictment 1561/23 the continuation of proceedings is temporarily stayed. That
is the order that I made on 14 March 2025 because
I was satisfied that there was
fault on the part of the prosecution which had resulted in such unfairness to M
Featherstone that
a temporary stay until such time as the costs thrown away was
paid by the Director of Public Prosecutions was the appropriate order.
Featherstone’s representatives have over time sought a response to two
queries (1) whether the prosecution intends to
pay the costs as ordered; and (2)
confirmation that should the costs not be paid that the other two indictments
charging M Featherstone
will be the subject of a nolle prosequi. On 16 April
2025 the prosecutor advised that the intention of the prosecution was to proceed
with indictment 2232/22 in respect of all accused other than M Featherstone,
after which the prosecution would assess its prospects
of prosecuting
indictments 1561/23 and 2227/22. The prosecutor confirmed that she did not
intend to enter a nolle prosequi in respect
of the two indictments charging M
Featherstone.
contended that such conduct borders on being scandalous.
prosecutor has not responded to the query as to whether the prosecution intends
to satisfy the order for the payment of costs
other than saying, after
prosecuting other people charged on indictment 2232/22 it will consider its
prospects and then make a decision
as to whether to pay the costs. The clear
inference to be drawn from that statement is that the prosecutor is not now
convinced that
she has reasonable prospects of conviction against M Featherstone
on indictments 1561/23 or 2232/22.
prosecutor’s submission is that it would be an appropriate exercise of the
prosecutorial function to allow the temporary
stay to remain in place for an
indeterminate period that could extend to 10 years or more without providing any
indication as to
whether the costs order would be met. In my view, continuing a
prosecution in those circumstances in which the Director of Public
Prosecutions
is not confident has prospects of success is not a proper exercise of the
prosecutorial function. It is oppressive for
M Featherstone to be left
effectively in limbo for an indeterminate number of years awaiting a decision of
the prosecution.
[91] There is a
substantial public interest in prosecuting those who are reasonably suspected of
having committed an offence and against
whom there is a prima facie case with
reasonable prospects of
conviction.
I infer by the
statements made by the prosecutor before me that she does not have confidence
that there are reasonable prospects
of success against M Featherstone.
[92] The conduct
of the prosecution in choosing not to prosecute M Featherstone on indictment
2232/22, to not provide particulars
of his criminal liability on indictment
2232/22, and to make no decision as to whether it will meet the costs order to
temporary stay to be lifted is unjustifiably oppressive.
[93] Accepting
that a permanent stay is an extraordinary step that is rarely justified,
nonetheless as referred to above the end of
a criminal prosecution does not
justify the adoption of any and every means for securing a conviction.
v The Queen
the majority
said that there were two fundamental policy considerations that are material to
a consideration of whether a prosecution
of criminal proceedings is an abuse of
“First, ‘the public interest in the
administration of justice requires that the court protect its ability to
as a court of law by ensuring that its processes are used fairly by
State and citizen alike. Secondly, ‘unless the court protects
its ability
so to function in that way, its failure will lead to an erosion of public
confidence by reason of concern that the court’s
process may lend
themselves to oppression and injustice.’” (citations omitted)
policy considerations in my view support a finding that the continuation of
criminal proceedings in which the prosecution
does not have confidence of its
prospects of success in circumstances where it intends to delay those very
proceedings for an indeterminate
period of time is an abuse of process and lends
itself to oppression.
[96] I order
that indictments 1561/23; 2232/22 and 2272/22 in respect of M Featherstone be
permanently stayed.
Permanent Stay - Indictment 2232/23
[97] T Burch, Z
Featherstone and N Srisunanrat all apply for a permanent stay of this indictment
on the same basis of the extraordinary
delay and the inability of the
prosecution to particularise its case. This is the first such application that
has been made with
respect to indictment 2232/23. The particulars, it seems,
suggest that D Traynor is the principal offender who has engaged in the
which is causative of the pecuniary detriment. Again there are no properly
identified acts of any perpetrator of the offence
of fraud set out under the
heading “The offence” and the reader is left to assume what those
acts are and whose acts
they are. D Traynor is said to have employed innocent
agents to sell a product he knew did not exist or did not work. There are,
it seems, 61 fraudulent acts. The particulars set out in a general way that for
each of those fraudulent transactions D Traynor
held the dishonest
particulars for each of T Burch, Z Featherstone and N Srisunanrat state that
they are each liable pursuant to ss 7(1)(b)
or (c) and set out the acts that
each is alleged to have done together with the knowledge of the dishonesty that
it is alleged. The
real difficulty with the particulars is in respect of the
principal offence. The particulars do not attribute any acts to D Traynor.
particulars set out in a very general way that there are 61 acts of fraud. They
do not identify in a specific way what the acts
of D Traynor are that amount to
the conduct element of the offence. The particulars are confusing in that they
appear to be saying
that salespeople committed the offence when no dishonest
knowledge is attributed to any salespeople. In order for each of T Burch,
Featherstone and N Srisunanrat to understand the case that they have to meet the
particulars need to identify for each of the transactions
that amount to a fraud
what D Traynor is said to have done, what his knowledge was, what
representations he made, to whom he made
those representations and what each of
T Burch, Z Featherstone and N Srisunanrat are said to have done in order to aid
him as the perpetrator of the offence, if that is the
prosecution’s case.
[99] It is not
sufficient for the purposes of the accused knowing the case they have to meet or
for the purposes of properly directing
the jury for the prosecution to provide
general particulars of 61 transactions that might each amount to an offence of
fraud, without
identifying the perpetrator of each of those acts of fraud,
whether known or unknown and the acts or representations of the perpetrator
respect of each of the transactions. The particulars further need to properly
identify the basis of accessorial liability in respect
of each of those
acts/omission that amounts to the conduct element of the offence.
[100] As this is
the first application in respect of indictment 2232/22 and given that it appears
that there is only one perpetrator,
the particulars may not suffer from the
difficulties of attributing the conduct of one person to another. It is not
appropriate to
order a permanent stay of the indictment. I will strike the
particulars out and give the prosecution another opportunity to particularise
their case with respect to indictment 2232/22.
[101] Particulars
are yet to be provided with respect to indictment 2227/22. I refuse the
application for a permanent stay of this
indictment until such time as
particulars have been ordered to be provided.
[102] My orders
respect of Z Featherstone, T Burch, R Doueihi, and K Lester, indictment 1561/23
is permanently stayed.
respect of M Featherstone, indictments 1561/23, 2232/22 and 2227/22 are
permanently stayed.
applications for a permanent stay of indictment 2232/22 are refused.
particulars in respect of indictment 2232/22 are struck out.
applications for a permanent stay of indictment 2227/22 are refused.
R v Featherstone (No 2)
[2025] QDCPR 15.
(1996) 188 CLR 77
[1996] HCA 26
KBT v The Queen
(1997) 191 CLR 417
[1997] HCA 54.
(2010) 27 VR 68
[2010] VSCA
at 80 - 81.
[2019] QCA 45
(2001) 206 CLR 221
[2001] HCA 11
at 226 - 227
(2022) 273 CLR 315
(2022) 273 CLR 315
(2022) 273 CLR 315
[2022] HCA 24.
R v Jayaweera
[2022] QCA 103
R v Jayaweera
Jago v District Court (NSW)
at 31, 34, 60,
R v Glennon
(1992) 173 CLR 592
Dupas v The Queen
[2010] HCA 20
245 CLR 456
[2011] HCA 50
(1994) 181 CLR 251
[1994] HCA 42
R v Featherstone,
Featherstone & Burch
[2024] QDC 1.
R v Featherstone; Ex parte Director of Public
Prosecutions
R v Featherston (No
[2021] FCA 1345
266 CLR 325
Strickland v DPP (Cth)
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
Jago v The District
Court (NSW)
[1991] 1 Qd R 48
Williams v Spautz
(1992) 174 CLR 509
Walton v Gardiner
CLR 378; [1993] HCA at 396;
Strickland v DPP (Cth)
(2011) 245 CLR 456
[2011] HCA 50
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (353 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter