URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLPT/2009/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:45:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Petschler [2009] QLPT 24 (30 October 2009)
Legal Services Commissioner v Petschler [2009] QLPT 24 (30 October 2009)
LEGAL PRACTICE TRIBUNAL
Legal Services Commissioner v Petschler
[2009] LPT 024
LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER
(applicant)
JAMES PETSCHLER
(respondent)
BS 5081 of 2009
PROCEEDING:
Discipline Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Legal Practice Tribunal
DELIVERED ON:
30 October 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
27 October 2008
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
PRACTITIONER PANEL MEMBER:
Mr P J Mullins
LAY PANEL MEMBER:
Dr J Lamont
respondent is publicly reprimanded.
respondent is to pay a penalty in the amount of $2,000 within six
respondent is ordered to accept mentoring from Mr Cameron Turnbull and Mr
Don Armit or any other senior solicitor nominated by
the Manager, Professional
Standards of the Queensland Law Society and to confer regularly with that mentor
in relation to his legal
practice for a period of 12 months.
respondent is to report to the nominated mentor/s any correspondence from the
Legal Services Commissioner or the Queensland Law
Society in relation to a
complaint about the respondent’s practice within five (5) working days of
receipt and thereafter confer
with the mentor in respect of the
respondent is to refund the amount of $1,820.60 to the complainant, Mr William
Johns, care of the Townsville Community Legal Service,
respondent is to pay the Commissioner’s costs of the application fixed in
the amount of $2,500 within six months.
CATCHWORDS:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS – QUEENSLAND –
PROCEEDINGS IN
TRIBUNALS – where the respondent practitioner is charged with failure to
respond/cooperate with the Legal Services
Commission investigation and failure
to comply with a written notice – whether the practitioner is guilty of
unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – NEGLECT AND DELAY
– where the
respondent practitioner acted for a client in an application for family
provision – where after the initial
filing of the application in 1999 the
practitioner neglected to advance the matter – where a complaint was made
against the
practitioner in 2008 – where the practitioner is charged with
neglect and undue delay in the conduct of the matter –
whether the
practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – TRUST MONEY –
where the respondent
practitioner on two occasions withdrew monies from a trust account and paid the
monies into his general account
without first obtaining the consent of his
client or other authorisation – where the practitioner is charged with two
Trust Accounts Act
(Qld) – whether the
practitioner is guilty of unprofessional conduct pursuant to the
Law Society Act
Legal Profession Act
Legal Profession Act
Queensland Law Society
(Qld), s 3B
Trust Accounts Act
Adamson v Queensland Law Society Incorporated
[1990] 1 Qd R
Legal Services Commissioner v Baker
Legal Services Commissioner v Bussa
Legal Services Commissioner v Madden (No 2)
Legal Services Commissioner v McClelland
Legal Services Commissioner v Podmore
Legal Services Commissioner v Twohill
Queensland Law Society Incorporated v Carberry
B I McMillan for the applicant
L R Middleton for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Services Commission for the applicant
Bill Petschler Lawyer for the respondent
[1] The applicant (“the Commissioner”) filed a discipline
application against
the respondent solicitor (“the
practitioner”) pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2007
(Qld) on 15 May 2009, charging him with failure to respond/cooperate with
the Legal Services Commission (“the Commission”)
investigation
between 31 October 2008 and 30 January 2009. He was also charged with a
Legal Profession Act
, namely, a failure to
comply with a written notice issued on 17 February 2009.
[2] After the
Commission had received the practitioner’s file, three further charges
were added by leave of the Tribunal. Notice
was given of them by the
Commissioner to the practitioner on 22 October 2009 and the practitioner agreed
that they could be heard
and determined together with the original charges.
Those further charges concern want of diligence and competence when acting for
client and two charges of breach of
Trust Accounts Act 1973
(Qld). In total there are five charges before the Tribunal. The practitioner
admits the allegations of fact in respect of all charges
and has cooperated in
settling a statement of facts.
[3] On 14 April 1999 the
practitioner received instructions from William Bowden Johns, a man in his late
seventies who had recently
been widowed. His wife of nine years had left a
will leaving her estate to her grandson and appointing her son as executor of
estate. She made no provision for Mr Johns. He instructed the
practitioner to make an application for family provision from her
also instructed the practitioner to assist in recovering some personal items
from the home that he had shared with his
late wife and from which he had been
excluded by the executor.
[4] At the request of the practitioner, Mr Johns
paid $800 on 22 April 1999 and $5,000 on 15 July 1999 on account of fees and
The practitioner paid those monies into his trust account. On 16 July
1999 the practitioner withdrew $500 from that account and
paid it into his
general account before obtaining the consent of Mr Johns. It was not otherwise
authorised. On 2 August 1999 the
practitioner withdrew $300 from the trust
account and paid it into his general account, again without obtaining the
consent of his
client or being otherwise authorised to do so. Those withdrawals
constitute charges 4 and 5.
[5] On 1 November 1999 the practitioner wrote to
Mr Johns enclosing an assessment of his costs to date in the amount of
Enclosed with the assessment was an account indicating that that
amount had been withdrawn from the funds held in trust on account
of those fees
and outlays. This figure took into account and included the amounts taken on 16
July and 2 August 1999.
[6] After receiving instructions from Mr Johns, the
practitioner promptly wrote to the solicitor for the executor advising of his
client’s intention to make a claim against the estate. The following day
he sought counsel’s advice with respect to
the claim. Acting on Mr
Johns’ instructions, a draft affidavit and application pursuant to the
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) were prepared on 29 June 1999. The proceedings were
filed in the District Court in Townsville on 21 December 1999 and
the following day. On 15 March 2000 the solicitor for the executor filed
a notice of address for service. On 7 June 2000 the practitioner
discussed with
counsel his difficulties in advancing the matter. Between 21 December 1999 and
24 January 2003 the practitioner failed
to take any material step to progress
the matter. On the latter date the practitioner wrote to the solicitor for the
executor suggesting
a mediation which was promptly rejected.
[7] Thereafter
between 24 January 2003 and March 2008 the practitioner failed to take any
material step to progress Mr Johns’
[8] In March 2008 Mr Johns
consulted the Townsville Community Legal Service which immediately contacted the
practitioner. The practitioner
did not reply. On 12 May 2008 the Townsville
Community Legal Service again wrote to the practitioner noting that it had
no response and requested the respondent’s file. It was not
until 19 August 2008 that the practitioner transferred his file.
On 22 October
2008 the Townsville Community Legal Service made a complaint to the Legal
Services Commission on behalf of Mr Johns
conduct of his file.
[9] On 31 October 2008 the Legal Services Commission
wrote to the practitioner pursuant to
Legal Profession Act
requesting his response to the complaint by no later than 21 November 2008. The
practitioner did not provide a response before that
[10] By an email
dated 1 December 2008 an officer of the Legal Services Commission requested the
practitioner to advise when he would
provide a response to the complaint but the
practitioner did not provide any response to that email.
[11] On 6 January
2009 the Commissioner wrote to the practitioner pursuant to
s 443(1)(a)(i)
Legal Profession Act
requiring him to provide a full written explanation
of his conduct which was the subject of the complaint and to provide his
client file by no later than 30 January 2009. The practitioner did not
provide any explanation or provide his client file as required.
By letter dated
2 February 2009 the Commissioner required the practitioner, pursuant
s 443(1)(a)(i)
Legal Profession Act
, to provide a written
explanation of the matters being investigated by 16 February 2009. Once again
the practitioner did not provide
an explanation within the time specified.
[12] By letter dated 17 February 2009 the Commissioner notified the
practitioner pursuant to
Legal Profession Act
that if his
failure to comply continued for a further 14 days he may be dealt with for
professional misconduct. He failed to comply
for at least a further 14 days
after the notice, that is, beyond 3 March 2009.
[13] On 15 May
2009 the Commissioner commenced this discipline application against the
practitioner in respect of his failure to respond
to the investigation.
[14] It was not until a letter dated 17 August 2009 that the practitioner
provided an explanation for his conduct to the Commissioner.
The Commissioner
sought further information from the practitioner on several occasions and
thereafter those requests were complied
[15] The practitioner’s
explanation for his failure to respond to the requests from the Legal Services
Commission and the Commissioner
was that he was “sticking [his] head in
the sand”. In his affidavit filed in response to the first two charges
to the failure to respond, the practitioner said his shortcomings were
due to his isolation, lack of a senior practitioner in Charters
Towers where he
practises, lack of a “bring-up” system, difficulties in finding
suitable staff and having “too
much on [his] plate”. The
practitioner is a man of some 58 years. He was not admitted to practice until
1995 and was offered
a position with the firm of Hill & Wadley in
Charters Towers in February 1996. In September 1996 he became a
partner with John
Hill and the firm became Hill & Petschler. That
partnership was short-lived and ended in December 1997 when Mr Hill moved
Townsville. The practitioner commenced sole practice in February 1998.
There was then only himself, the firm of the solicitor for
the executor and a
visiting solicitor offering legal services in Charters Towers.
practitioner’s explanation for his appalling dilatoriness in managing
Mr Johns’ affairs is that after the rebuff
the executor’s solicitor he felt some intimidation from that solicitor.
He did not seek any guidance
either from fellow practitioners or from counsel
who had given advice about Mr Johns’ claim and with whom he had
earlier discussed
his difficulties. It seems that counsel had by then
[17] The practitioner explains that the breaches of the
Accounts Act
were due to ignorance of what he was entitled to do. There was no
element of dishonesty involved. He thought he was entitled to
transfer monies
under the terms of the costs agreement and the general authority signed by Mr
Johns. He is now better informed.
As at 23 September 2009, when the
practitioner wrote to the Commissioner, he still had the balance of $1,820.60 in
his trust account.
[18] The practitioner was unaware of the availability of
assistance from experienced colleagues within the wider legal community or
the auspices of the Queensland Law Society. He has now instituted a file
management system and brought all of his current
matters into that system.
The legislative scheme
[19] The legal profession in Queensland is
regulated by the
Legal Profession Act 2007
which came into force on 1 July 2007.
The previous legislation, the Legal Profession Act 2004 (Qld) was thereby
repealed. It had
come into force on 1 July 2004. Prior to the
enactment of that Act the Queensland Law Society Act 1952 (Qld) regulated the
disciplinary
regime for Queensland solicitors. The conduct which is the subject
of charges 1 and 2 occurred between 31 October 2008 and 3 March
2009 and is thus
governed by the 2007 Act. Charge 3 concerns the failure to maintain reasonable
standards of competence or diligence
in relation to the conduct of Mr
Johns’ matter and occurred between April 1999 and August 2009 but
predominantly prior to 2004.
Charges 4 and 5, the breaches of
Trust Accounts Act
, occurred in 1999.
[20] The practitioner’s conduct
in respect to charges 3, 4 and 5 is to be assessed by reference to the concept
of professional
misconduct and unprofessional conduct or practice as understood
in the Queensland Law Society Act.
[21] There is no definition of
“professional misconduct” in the Queensland Law Society Act. In
Adamson v Queensland Law
Society Incorporated
Thomas J expressed the proper approach to an allegation of professional
misconduct against a solicitor in the following
“The test to be applied is whether the conduct violates or falls short
of, to a substantial degree, the standard of professional
conduct observed or
approved by members of the profession of good repute and competency.”
That test has been applied to conduct occurring before the 2004 Act came into
operation by the Tribunal established under the 2004
[22] The expression
“unprofessional conduct or practice” was defined in s 3B of the
Queensland Law Society Act in the
following way:
“(1) A practitioner commits
unprofessional conduct or practice
if the practitioner, in
relation to the practitioner’s practice, is guilty of –
(a) serious neglect or undue delay; or
(b) the charging of excessive fees or
(c) failure to maintain reasonable standards of competence or
diligence; or
(d) conduct described, under another Act, as unprofessional
conduct or practice.
(2) Subsection (1) does not, by implication, limit the
[23] The provisions of the 2007 Act which are to be applied to the conduct
described in charges 1 and 2 provide:
418 Meaning
unsatisfactory professional conduct
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner happening in connection with the practice of law
that falls short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal
practitioner.
professional misconduct
Professional
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner, if the conduct involves a substantial or
consistent failure
to reach or keep a reasonable standard of competence and
diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, whether happening in
connection with the practice of law or happening otherwise than
in connection
with the practice of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice.
(2) For finding that an Australian legal practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice as mentioned in
subsection (1), regard may be
had to the suitability matters that would be considered if the practitioner were
an applicant for admission
to the legal profession under this Act or for the
grant or renewal of a local practising
certificate.”
[24] In failing to respond to the enquiries or cooperate with an
investigation under the
Legal Profession Act
, the practitioner has been guilty
of unsatisfactory professional conduct. That conclusion is not
Section 443(4)
provides relevantly:
notice under subsection
is given and the
failure continues for the 14 day period –
(a) the Australian legal practitioner is taken to have committed professional
misconduct, unless the practitioner has a reasonable
excuse for not complying
with the requirement within that period;...”
The practitioner does not contend that he had any reasonable excuse for not
complying and does not, therefore, resist the legislative
conclusion that he is
guilty of professional misconduct.
[26] Charge three charges the
practitioner with neglect and delay. The neglect of Mr Johns’
application after the initial filing
of the application was egregious and
constitutes serious neglect of his duty. That conduct falls short, to use the
language of Adamson,
to a substantial degree of the standard of professional
conduct observed by members of the profession of good repute and competency.
Just what happened to the
Succession Act
application is unexplained, but the
estate has been distributed and an elderly man is forced, if he wishes to seek
compensation,
to bring a civil suit for negligence against the practitioner with
all the difficulties entailed in litigating the loss of a chance.
brings the profession into serious disrepute. Many privileges are accorded to
members of the legal profession. They
have correlative duties which this
practitioner has singularly failed to discharge so far as his former client, Mr
Johns, is concerned.
[27] In the handling of Mr Johns’ matter the
conduct was such as to be characterised as professional misconduct.
[28] Charges four and five, the breaches of the
Trust Accounts Act
examples of unprofessional conduct by the practitioner. In so fundamental a
matter as the proper management of his trust account
the practitioner
demonstrated a failure to maintain a reasonable standard of
competence.
[29] As is well
known, the jurisdiction of a disciplinary body such as this Tribunal is to
protect members of the public.
[30] In the practitioner’s favour are that he has not
previously been dealt with by a disciplinary body; since the commencement
filing of the discipline application he has cooperated with the Commissioner and
facilitated the efficient resolution of the
substantive matters of complaint; he
has agreed to the late joinder of the three charges relating to Mr Johns’
file while holding
the hearing date for the original charges; he has accepted
the allegations; he has cooperated in an agreed statement of facts; and
not oppose the orders sought. The practitioner has proposed a scheme for future
mentoring and has made some arrangements
with senior solicitors who attend at
Charters Towers to assist him.
[31] The Commissioner has proposed that the
practitioner be publicly reprimanded. The practitioner does not oppose that
Mr Middleton, who appeared on behalf of the practitioner, emphasised
that for a sole practitioner who occupies a number of community
positions in a
relatively small country town that will have a very adverse reputational effect
on him, both personally and professionally.
Although the trust account charges
have no element of dishonesty in them, nonetheless members of the community may
be inclined to
think that something of that kind is involved.
[32] As part of
his community contribution the practitioner is the only Duty Solicitor in
Charters Towers. He is a preferred Legal
Aid provider. He therefore makes a
significant contribution to community life in Charters Towers. As a consequence
he has access
to the not inconsiderable resources of the Legal Aid office and
should avail himself of its online facilities and databases if he
already do so.
[33] The proposal that the practitioner accept mentoring from
two senior practitioners who visit Charters Towers regularly will formalise
understanding that he may seek assistance when he has any concerns about aspects
of his practice. If there is any conflict with
files then the Queensland Law
Society can nominate some other senior solicitor.
[34] It is also agreed that
the practitioner should refund the amount of $1,820.60 to Mr Johns. That
is the amount remaining in the
trust account which Mr Johns had paid on account
of fees for acting in his matter. The Tribunal and members had proposed to the
parties that interest should be added to that amount. Although the practitioner
obtains no interest from having the money in his
trust account, nonetheless over
nearly 10 years Mr Johns has not been given the services for which the money was
held. On reflection,
however, interest would be characterised as compensation
and as there has been no application for compensation it is not proposed
include an amount for interest on that sum in the order.
[35] The costs
have been fixed and agreed in the amount of $2,500.
[36] The penalty to which
the practitioner has submitted is in the amount of $2,000 to be paid within six
months. This figure is
not to underestimate the seriousness of the conduct. It
is essential that practitioners understand that they must cooperate in
investigations
carried out under the
Legal Profession Act
. However, this
practitioner is of modest financial means. He engages in a great deal of Legal
Aid work in Charters Towers and the
purpose of the penalty is not to ruin him
financially.
[37] The ambit of these orders is not dissimilar from those
imposed in Legal Services Commissioner v Bussa
in respect of similar conduct where the Chief Justice constituted the Tribunal,
although the monetary penalty is less.
[38] The orders of the Tribunal
1. The respondent is publicly reprimanded.
2. The respondent is to pay a
penalty in the amount of $2,000 within six months.
3. The respondent is
ordered to accept mentoring from Mr Cameron Turnbull and Mr Don Armit or
any other senior solicitor nominated
by the Manager, Professional Standards of
the Queensland Law Society and to confer regularly with that mentor in relation
legal practice for a period of 12 months.
4. The respondent is to
report to the nominated mentor/s any correspondence from the Legal Services
Commissioner or the Queensland
Law Society in relation to a complaint about the
respondent’s practice within five (5) working days of receipt and
confer with the mentor in respect of the complaint.
respondent is to refund the amount of $1,820.60 to the complainant,
Mr William Johns, care of the Townsville Community Legal
Service, within
6. The respondent is to pay the Commissioner’s costs of
the application fixed in the amount of $2,500 within six months.
[1990] 1 Qd R 498.
[1990] 1 Qd R
Legal Services Commissioner v Baker
[2005] LPT 002 at [17];
Services Commissioner v Podmore
[2006] LPT 005 at [7];
Legal Services
Commissioner v Twohill
[2005] LPT 001;
Legal Services Commissioner v
[2006] LPT 013 at [20].
comply with the requirement to give a full explanation of the subject of the
investigation.
Section 3B(1)(c) of
Queensland Law Society Act
1952 (Qld).
Queensland Law Society Incorporated v Carberry
[2000] QCA 450
Legal Services Commissioner v Madden (No 2)
[2008] QCA 301.
[2005] LPT 005.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (97 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter