URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIC/2009/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Q-COMP v Glen Rowe [2009] QIC 17; 191 QGIG 67 (12 May 2009)
[Extract from Queensland Government Industrial
dated 22 May, 2009, Vol. 191, No. 3, pages
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Workers' Compensation
and Rehabilitation Act 2003
s. 561(1) - appeal against decision of
industrial commission
Q-COMP v Glen Rowe (C/2009/6)
PRESIDENT HALL
12 May 2009
Mr Glen Rowe was employed by an automotive dealership in Townsville for a
period of 22 years. For the later 15 years of his employment,
he was employed
as the Sales Manager of a Hyundai franchise conducted by the dealership. His
employment came to an end on 22 April
2008. Mr Rowe resigned following an
incident at work on that day. In June of 2008 Mr Rowe made an application for
benefits under
Workers' Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Act) in respect of a psychological/psychiatric injury. The information sheet
completed by Mr Rowe attributed the psychological/psychiatric
(i) events of 22 April 2008;
(ii) replacement of older staff
with less experienced staff; and
(iii) pressures of working with unsuitable staff and failure by management
to support him over the difficulties he was encountering.
accepted that Mr Rowe had suffered a "personal injury" within the meaning of s.
32(1) of the Act and that his employment
had been a significant contributing
factor to that "personal injury". However, WorkCover rejected his claim on the
ground that the
psychological/psychiatric injury was excluded from the statutory
definition of "injury" by the operation of s. 32(5) of the Act.
Mr Rowe sought
a Statutory Review. By a decision dated 11 August 2008, Q-COMP confirmed the
decision of WorkCover to reject the
application for benefits. In short form,
Q-COMP determined that the events of 22 April 2008 constituted management action
but that the management action was not reasonable. The decision of
WorkCover was confirmed because the "stressors" raised under
the headings at
(ii) and (iii) were found to involve reasonable management action taken in a
reasonable way and because the psychological/psychiatric
injury was found to
have arisen out of or in the course of that reasonable management action. Mr
Rowe appealed against that Review
decision to the Queensland Industrial
Relations Commission. By a decision of 6 February 2009 (now reported at
[2009] QIRComm 9
, the Commission allowed the appeal, set aside Q-COMP's decision and
determined that Mr Rowe's claim was one for acceptance. From
that decision
Q-COMP now appeals to this Court.
As the Commissioner correctly recorded,
the essence of Mr Rowe's case at first instance was founded on the opinion of a
psychiatrist
(Professor Basil James) that, as a result of the events of 22 April
2008, Mr Rowe had suffered "an acute aggravation of a major depressive
which was properly to be described as an aggravation of a personal injury within
s. 32(3)(b) of the Act. I hasten to add
that in advancing that submission
Senior Counsel for Mr Rowe did not impliedly concede that a "personal injury"
within the meaning
of s. 32(1) had arisen out of or in consequence of the
"stressors" gathered together at headings (ii) and (iii). On the contrary,
was the submission of Junior Counsel for Mr Rowe that the "stressors" gathered
together at (ii) and (iii) were but "irritants"
which did not impede Mr Rowe's
capacity to function in the workplace. The reference to "aggravation" and to s.
32(3)(b) of the Act
arose because before any of the "stressors" identified at
headings (i), (ii) and (iii) developed in the workplace, Mr Rowe had been
diagnosed as suffering from a depressive disorder. On the evidence of his
treating general practitioner (Dr Dignam) who gave evidence
at first instance Mr
Rowe had been taking prozac for two years prior to the general practitioner's
first consultation with him on
26 February 2002. The general practitioner had
continued to prescribe that medication for Mr Rowe in the period between
2002 and April 2008. It was that existing medical condition which was
said to have been "aggravated" by the events of 22 April 2008.
developed by Q-COMP at first instance was that the events of 22 April 2008 and
their sequela could not be separated out and
treated as discrete from the impact
of the "stressors" identified at (ii) and (iii). The primary submission appears
to have been
that the "aggravation" which flowed from the events of 22 April
2008 occurred only because the stressors at (ii) and (iii) had undermined
Rowe's psychological condition to the point at which he could not cope with the
events that occurred on 22 April 2008. At least
on the Appeal to the Court
there was a secondary submission that the "stressors" at headings (ii) and (iii)
were inextricably linked
with the consequences of the events of 22 April 2008
because the "aggravation" of Mr Rowe's medical condition was not contributed
by what happened but was contributed by Mr Rowe's flawed perception of what
happened. The perception was said to be attributable
to the "stressors"
gathered together at headings at (ii) and (iii).
In the event, the
Commissioner accepted the first of the arguments advanced by Q-COMP.
Materially, the Commissioner said:
"I have concluded that based on an assessment of the entirety of the evidence
that multiple stressors were present and those were
the ones identified in his
application as supplemented by his oral evidence. Professor James' opinion that
Mr Rowe had employed
coping mechanisms to deal with the stressors identified
under headings (ii) and (iii) above is consistent with the evidence given
Rowe and also by Mr Pickering who referred to the sales achievements of Mr
Rowe's team over the relevant period. For reasons
explained above, I accept
that these stressors arose out of, or in the course of, reasonable management
action taken in a reasonable
way. When the events of 22 April 2008 occurred Mr
Rowe's coping mechanisms had been exhausted and his final decompensation
These events were profound and significant in their impact on Mr Rowe
and did not arise out of, or in the course of, reasonable
management action
taken in a reasonable way.".
[2009] QIRComm 9
[190 QGIG 93
In my view, the
Commissioner's conclusion was plainly open to Her Honour. Indeed, any other
conclusion would have been difficult
to reconcile with the medical
A convenient starting point is Dr James Report of 13 November
2008. (There was an earlier draft report of 6 November 2008). Having
to the events of 22 April 2008 as triggering "depressive symptomology" and an
"overt depressive illness", Dr James concluded:
"It is my further opinion that had Mr Rowe not experienced the work
'stressors'* he describes, he would not have had his more recent
illness.". [*I interpolate that the "stressors" were the "stressors" at
headings (ii) and (iii).]
In the course of examination-in-chief, Dr
James takes the matter further asserting that the "stressors" at headings (ii)
had exhausted Mr Rowe's capacity to cope with stress. Materially Dr
James said:
"... but I think just one other thing that may be worth saying in this
regard, and this is very fundamental to the whole field of
stress research, that
stress has its effect partly through its intensity the magnitude of an event,
but it also has an effect through
its duration and that people can cope as is
called the so called stage of resistance, they can cope often for quite a long
of time with stressors, but they reach a point where those coping
strategies and mechanisms are exhausted and that's been called
the stage of
exhaustion and at that point illness can supervene. How one becomes ill is to
some extent a matter of past experience,
to some extent a matter of genetics.
Some people may get a peptic ulcer, some people get a psychiatric disorder such
as depression.
I think it's important to say about depression in this regard
that the kind of depression that people might get who are predisposed,
simply a psychological experience of being dejected and sad but it's a
fundamental, biological change that can happen quite
dramatically and has a very
clear profile of symptoms that is well defined in the DSM4.".
thereafter, and following a discussion of psychological baggage acquired by Mr
Rowe in his childhood, there was the following
"Now, can a person take those qualities and live a normal life, even in the
face of quite strong stressors? -- Yes, they can.
That is what I referred to
a little while ago, as the stage of resistance, the adaptational processes that
we all have. A particular
quite long periods of time. But either under more intense stress or if it goes
on just too long that a person may succumb into some form of
In re-examination Dr James stressed that he was not asserting
that the "stressors" at headings (i), (ii) and (iii) were cumulative,
Mr Rowe broke down over time. The nexus between the "stressors" at headings
(ii) and (iii) and the "sudden break-down"
appears from the following
"So the final psychological decompensation, what does that mean? -- It
means the point at which Mr Rowe's coping mechanisms that
I referred to earlier
as the stage of resistance, could no longer cope and have been exhausted and
illness supervened.
And as I understand it, he's coping mechanisms, they break down over a
period of time, do they because of all his stressors that
he's nominated? -- I
don't think they break down over time. I mean this seemed to me, and it often
is, quite an abrupt breakdown.
The graph which is the exempla of the stress
research shows a parallel line which is the stage of resistance and then a
decompensation.
But he's spoken about this intensifying, bullying and management style so it
would all be building up and coming to a head, wouldn't
it? -- Yes, they would
all be making demands on his coping systems, yes.".
The evidence of Mr
Rowe's treating general practitioner (Dr Dignam) was that although on his six
monthly visits over the period of
exposure to the "stressors" at headings (ii)
and (iii) she had made enquiries about symptoms of depression, he had
consistently indicated:
"... that his depression seemed to be under better control than it had been
previously and his activities were normal and there didn't
seem to be any
recurrence of any major depression; that seemed to be under control.".
However, at a consultation on 24 April 2008, i.e. two days after the
events of 22 April 2008, Mr Rowe revisited history and showing
not a little
prescience ventured a self-diagnosis not unlike that developed by Dr James. The
relevant passage is:
"Now, there's an entry there on the 24th of April
2008? -- Yes.
Now, can you explain to the Commission the matters that were discussed at
the attendance? -- Yes. At that consultation, he'd -
he had lost a little bit
of weight. His blood pressure had reduced but he told me that he had - things
had come at work to a bit
of a head and just on one particular day which he said
was 22nd of April, two days prior to this visit, that he's just lost the plot
and had suddenly realised he didn't want to take it any more, that he'd had
enough, and when he was talking about that he said that
in retrospect with the
symptoms once he'd had that outburst he looked back at what had been happening
and realised that he probably
hadn't been recognising symptoms where he was
maybe getting a bit more anxious at times or maybe not feeling as well as he
do, but each time he thought, oh, it'll be all right and he sort of put it
to the back of his mind, and, instead of acting on some
of those things, he just
carried on and things had built up. His frustrations had built up to the point
where he just lot [sic]
the plot and felt he couldn't continuing working any
Did he mention what those frustrations were? -- Yes. He mentioned that
there had been a change in management at work and he was
put in a position where
he was required to pull some other co-workers or subordinates into line but he
felt that, really, that was
a difficult job to do because he agreed with what
their grievances were and what their problems were and he felt that the way that
he was asked to do this was not what he would normally have done himself; that
he might've had a bit more leniency or a bit more
of an arbitration-type of
approach or a conciliatory-type of approach rather than to just say, 'Pull up
your socks, you can't do
that any more', type approach, and it didn't sit
comfortably with him to do that when he felt like these people were colleagues
he just felt it was all a bit too much; that he didn't have the recognition
that he'd had with the previous bosses where he'd been
sometimes consulted about
policy and direction of the company, and the new people taking over didn't use
him in that way or didn't
relate to him in that way.
Yes? -- And he felt it was just being difficult and he wasn't getting any
appreciation for that.
Yes. And did he say anything about whether he understood or - understood
that the employees needed to be disciplined? -- Yes,
he understood that there
was a necessary - that something happen about this, that action be taken, but he
wasn't a hundred per cent
in favour of the action that he was asked to take. He
might've gone about it a different way.
Yes. And when he - you have a note there about aggressive - sorry - 'was
having problems with people who were aggressive and disruptive'?
Did he mention who those people were? -- I understood - I didn't ask him
specifically there, but I assumed it to be the people
that were the staff that
he was - because he hadn't been able to choose his own team, that some of the
people that were on the team
weren't going along with team policy or weren't
doing things the way they were expected to do or perhaps were putting in their
opinions when that wasn't welcome or wasn't necessary or was inappropriate,
and that they were doing that in an aggressive manner
and in a manner that was
contributing to the team not functioning properly or the workplace not
functioning properly. But I didn't
ask him specifically any more about
In circumstances in which the history given to each of Dr James and Dr
Dignam by Mr Rowe largely accords with his evidence to the
Commission it is not
surprising that the Commission chose to adopt a view consistent with the medical
evidence. (The other health
professional who gave evidence, a psychologist
Dr Promnitz, does not contribute to the debate of the relative
Understandably, the Commission did not deal with Q-COMP's second
that the effect of the "stressors" at headings (ii) and
(iii) had been to flaw Mr Rowe's perception of events of 22 April 2008.
the matter has been traversed on the Appeal, it is appropriate to make some
brief remarks about it. The first comment is,
the argument seems to me not to
be consistent with the medical evidence. Each of the health professionals who
gave evidence,
Dr James, Dr Dignam and Dr Promnitz, attributed Mr
Rowe's perception of the "stressors" at the headings at (ii) and (iii) to the
moral values which he had developed as a result of childhood experience and
experience in the army and to Mr Rowe's relatively rigid
personality.
Doubtless, those values and what Dr Dignam described as his "stereotype" way of
looking at life influenced the impact
upon him of the events of 22 April 2008.
Indeed, in cross-examination Dr James seems to have explicitly taken that point.
that is a very different thing from an assertion that the "stressors"
at headings (ii) and (iii) had effected his perceptions and
that proposition
seems not to have been explicitly developed with any of the health
professionals. The second comment is that, but
for s. 32(5) of the Act, at
least at a conceptual level, a psychological injury arising out of interaction
between a worker's personality
and the work environment would be compensable,
Flinders Power Operating Services Pty Ltd (formerly NRG Flinders
Operating Services Pty Ltd) v Amato
[2007] SAWCT 33
at paras 125 and 126.
The third comment is that there is an unresolved question whether flawed
perception is excluded only in the
case of "action being taken against the
worker" (s. 32(5)(b)) or whether s. 32(5)(a) and s. 32(5)(b) of the Act are
parallel bars
to inclusion within the statutory definition of industry, neither
one of which truncates or limits the operation of the other. It
is preferable
to leave that matter for full argument in a case in which the point matters.
The reason that the interrelationship between s. 32(5)(a) and s.
32(5)(b) does not matter in this case is that by the passage previously
extracted, the Commissioner actually decided the matter in favour of Q-COMP for
reasons unrelated to notions of flawed perception.
I reproduce the passage
again (emphasis added):
"I have concluded that based on an assessment of the entirety of the evidence
that multiple stressors were present and those were
the ones identified in his
application as supplemented by his oral evidence. Professor James' opinion that
Mr Rowe had employed
coping mechanisms to deal with the stressors identified
under headings (ii) and (iii) above is consistent with the evidence given
Rowe and also by Mr Pickering who referred to the sales achievements of Mr
Rowe's team over the relevant period. For reasons
explained above,
that these stressors arose out of, or in the course of, reasonable management
action taken in a reasonable way
. When the events of 22 April 2008 occurred
Mr Rowe's coping mechanisms had been exhausted
and his final
decompensation occurred. These events were profound and significant in their
impact on Mr Rowe and did not arise out
of, or in the course of, reasonable
management action taken in a reasonable way.".
[2009] QIRComm 9
(190 QGIG 93
there be doubt about what was being found in an earlier passage (again at
[2009] QIRComm 9
at 95) the Commissioner concluded:
"Despite the valiant attempt made by Mr Fleming, QC the evidence from Mr Rowe
and Professor James is that
multiple stressors were present in the
aggravation of this injury
. It is true that Professor James' opinion is
that Mr Rowe was coping with the stressors falling under the headings (ii) and
but that does not mean that the stressors were not present or were not
causing Mr Rowe some distress. Firstly, the submission that
the mere fact that
Mr Rowe was coping with the multiple stressors shows the presence of more than
one stressor and further, Professor
James said in evidence that
all three of
the main factors specified by Mr Rowe in his workers' compensation application
contributed
to his 'load of stress'. Further, that two of the stressors
have been shown to arise from perceptions does not diminish their
existence.".
On those findings Mr Rowe, who bore the onus had not barred
the operation of s. 32(5)(a) of the Act. The very reason of this Appeal
course, that Mr Rowe succeeded at first instance. How it was that the
Commissioner accepted Q-COMP's submission but allowed
Mr Rowe's appeal.
"In recent times much debate has been had over when an injury is removed from
the operation of s. 32(1) of the Act where multiple
stressors are present, one
or more of which have been touched by reasonable management action taken in a
reasonable way. It has
been the consistent view of Q-COMP in reliance of the
decisions of President Hall in
Q-COMP v Education Queensland
[2005] QIC 46
Prizeman v Q-COMP
[2005] QIC 53
(2005) 180 QGIG 481
one stressor is caught by reasonable management action that will be sufficient
to remove the psychiatric/psychological disorder
from the definition of injury
in s. 32(1) of the Act. This view was repeated in the review decision against
which this appeal is
filed and submitted as part of this appeal hearing.
Q-COMP v Hohn
[2008] QIC 56
2008) 187 QGIG 139
) the President
refers to writings by Watson, the author of
Industrial Laws Queensland
in discussing reasonable management action and in particular the circumstances
in which an injury is withdrawn because of the reasonable
management action
exclusion in s. 32(5) of the Act. Given the President's endorsement of certain
of the views expressed by Watson,
it is useful to refer to his views in light of
the decision in
. After traversing the various decisions which have
been central to this debate the following is written:
'So it can now be definitely said that if there are multiple events or
stressors and only one or some of them arise out of or occur
in the course of
reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way then the claimant may
succeed in the claim based on any that
do not so arise or occur in the course of
reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way.'. at [71,015].".
In fairness to Q-COMP I should say that I cannot recollect an occasion on
which (in this Court), Q-COMP has submitted that "... even
if one stressor is
caught by reasonable management action that will be sufficient to remove the
psychiatric/psychological disorder
from the definition of injury in s. 32(1) of
the Act.". Neither have I any recollection of accepting such a proposition.
such a proposition is not consistent with the decision in
[2005] QIC 11
(2005) 178 QGIG 197.
Delaney v Q-COMP, ibid,
the claimant
succeeded though the sixth stressor (not as was contended for Q-COMP in this
Appeal the first stressor) was found to
be but blemished management action.
With respect to the Commissioner the decision in
Prizeman v Q-COMP
[2005] QIC 53
180 QGIG 481
, dealt with the converse proposition,
that if after
eliminating all stressors which arose out of or in the course of reasonable
management action reasonably taken, a stressor
or stressors remained, the
claimant was entitled to succeed. The earlier decision in
Q-COMP v Education
[2005] QIC 46
(2005) 179 QGIG 491
established the critical proposition that s.
32(5) of the Act is concerned with withdrawing injuries from s. 34(1) of the Act
is not concerned with nominating the "stressors" which may be taken into
account. The passage from the Industrial Laws of Queensland,
is by way of
commentary upon the decision of this Court in
Q-COMP v Hohn
[2008] QIC 56
It is made by way of comment upon the rejection of the view that so
long as a psychological/psychiatric injury is "touched" by reasonable
action reasonably taken, it will be withdrawn from the statutory definition of
"injury" by the operation of s. 32(5)(a)
of the Act. The passage is plainly
correct. It is the effect of the decision in
Q-COMP v Hohn, ibid
claimant may succeed though some of the operative events or stressors arise out
of or occur in the course of reasonable management
action taken in a reasonable
way. However, "may" cannot be read as "must": nor may the passage be read as
asserting that an Appeal
Body is at liberty to allow a claimant to succeed where
at least one stressor does not "... arise or occur in the course of reasonable
management action taken in a reasonable way". In all such cases, the Appeal
Tribunal will be required to embark upon the enquiry
whether the
psychological/psychiatric injury arose out of or in the course of reasonable
management action taken in a reasonable
way. Here, that very enquiry was
undertaken. The outcome was adverse to Mr Rowe. It follows that Mr Rowe does
not have a recognisable
I allow the Appeal. I set aside the
decision of the Industrial Commission. In lieu thereof, I order that the Review
decision of
Q-COMP be confirmed.
Dated 12 May 2009.
D.R. HALL, President
Released: 12 May 2009
Appearances:
Mr G. Long SC and with him Mr S. Gray, directly
instructed by the Appellant.
Mr K. Fleming QC and with him Ms L. Willson
instructed by Dempseys Lawyers, for the Respondent.
Government Printer, Queensland
The State of
Queensland 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (109 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter