URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCATA/2025/92.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Weranga Property and Livestock Enterprises Pty Ltd t/as Ray White Rural Tara v Metis Rex Pty Ltd t/as Metis Machinery [2025] QCATA 92 (14 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Weranga Property and Livestock Enterprises Pty Ltd t/as Ray White Rural
Tara v Metis Rex Pty Ltd t/as Metis Machinery
[2025] QCATA 92
WERANGA PROPERTY AND LIVESTOCK ENTERPRISES PTY LTD T/AS RAY WHITE RURAL
(applicant)
METIS REX PTY LTD T/AS METIS MACHINERY
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
ORIGINATING APPLICATION/S
MATTER TYPE:
DELIVERED ON:
14 October 2025
HEARING DATE:
On the papers
DECISION OF:
Member Lumb
to appeal is granted.
appeal is allowed.
default decision made on 2 April 2025 is set aside.
matter is returned to the Tribunal for reconsideration.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES – leave to appeal – minor
civil dispute – where applicant on appeal application
was a respondent to
an application for minor civil dispute (minor debt) – respondent to appeal
application claimed fixed sum
of money by way of a refund – where
applicant did not file a response to the application below – where a
decision by
default was made by the Tribunal against the applicant –
where applicant did not file an application to set aside the decision
– where applicant sought leave to appeal the decision by default –
whether applicant had established any grounds
justifying the grant of leave to
appeal – whether the requirements for the making of a decision by default
had been satisfied
– whether request for default decision filed prior to
the expiry of time to file a response – whether default decision
irregularly entered
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Corporations Act 2001
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2009
(Qld), r 39,
Berry v Treasure & Anor
[2021] QCATA 61
(also known as Hyung Seok Choi) v Kwangsu Choi as Trustee for the Choi Family
[2021] QCATA 16
CB Richard Ellis (C) Pty Ltd v Wingate
Properties Pty Ltd
[2005] QDC 399
Cooper v O’Connor
Hi Dow Australia Pty Ltd v Shivlosh Australia Pty Ltd
NDISP Pty Ltd v Bowieberghs Pty Ltd
[2024] QCATA 99
Saxer v Hume
[2022] QCATA 25
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
This matter was heard and determined on the papers pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
an Application for leave to appeal or appeal filed on 8 April 2025 (‘the
Appeal Application’), the Applicant to
the Appeal Application
(‘Weranga Property’) seeks leave to appeal, and to appeal, a default
decision of the Tribunal
made on 2 April 2025 (‘the Decision’). The
Decision was made in a proceeding commenced by the Respondent to the Appeal
Application (‘Metis Machinery’) against Weranga Property, by an
Application for minor civil dispute – minor debt
filed on 24 February 2025
(‘the MCD Application’).
[2] By the MCD
Application, Weranga Property claimed the sum of $12,375.00 by way of a refund.
The claim related to a ‘CAT scraper’
which Metis Machinery
successfully bid for at an online auction. The material filed in support of the
MCD Application alleged that
when Mr Tweddell on behalf of Metis Machinery went
to collect the scraper, it was not ‘operational’ and Mr Tweddell
to take possession of the scraper.
[3] On 26 March
2025, Metis Machinery filed a Request for decision by default – minor
civil dispute – minor debt. Weranga
Property had not filed a Form 7
– Response to minor civil dispute – minor debt by that time.
Machinery sought the following amounts in the Request: the amount claimed of
$12,375.00, together with interest of $1,048.78
and the filing fee of $379.50.
By the default decision, Weranga Property was ordered to pay the total of those
amounts ($13,803.28)
to Metis Machinery.
Grounds of appeal
the Appeal Application, the Grounds of Appeal stated as follows:
Initially apologies for not replying within 28 days of the initial QCAT Minor
Civil Dispute. I did not read in full the instructions
advising of the need to
reply within 28 days.
The grounds of appeal are that Weranga Property and Livestock Enterprises Pty
is only a rebate agent and is not the business owner of the auction
platform in which the item is sold that we have been instructed
to refund. The
collection and distribution of monies is not conducted by our business. The
terms & conditions and platform the
auction is conducted is owned by Nasco
Ag & Industrial and not ours, and while we attempted numerous times to aid
in the negotiations
for the matter, are not the responsible business that is
able to refund or not.
Additionally, when Metis Machinery went to collect the item is [sic] was
operational and not as stated in the Minor Civil Dispute
application ‘not
operational’.
Leave to appeal is required
appeal against a decision by the Tribunal in a proceeding for a minor civil
dispute may be made only if the party has obtained
the Appeal Tribunal’s
leave to appeal.
[7] As to the
Tribunal’s approach to an application for such leave, I respectfully adopt
the following observations of Judicial
Member DJ McGill SC in
... As a general proposition, when leave to appeal to the Appeal Tribunal is
required, it will be granted only where there is a reasonable
argument that the
decision was attended by error and an appeal is necessary to correct a
substantial injustice caused by that error,
or where the appeal raises a
question of general importance upon which further argument and a decision of the
Appeal Tribunal would
be to the public advantage. In deciding whether grounds
for leave to appeal have been shown, it is relevant to consider that the
proceeding was a minor civil dispute, and the obligation on the Tribunal was to
make orders it considered to be fair and equitable
to the parties to the
proceeding in order to resolve the dispute: the QCAT Act s 13(1). The
Tribunal was also required to comply
with the QCAT Act s 28 and s 29.
(citations omitted)
[8] Further, as
was said by Justice Daubney, President, in
Berry v Treasure &
There is no automatic right of appeal against minor civil dispute decisions. I
respectfully adopt and endorse the following observations
by the former
President, Justice Alan Wilson, in
Durrand v Karaolis
The Queensland Parliament has made it clear, in the QCAT Act, that so far as
possible minor civil disputes of this kind are to be
resolved by a simple
procedure which is speedy, inexpensive and final. That conclusion is reinforced
by the fact that before a party
can appeal a decision in this jurisdiction it
must obtain leave from the Appeal Tribunal ... In other words, there is not an
right to appeal these decisions; rather, an applicant must first
establish that it has a right to a grant of leave.
(citation omitted)
Consideration of the grounds of appeal
decision by default is taken to be a final decision of the Tribunal in the
proceeding.
[10] A decision
by default is not one of the decisions which a party to a Tribunal proceeding
cannot appeal to the Appeal
[11] In my view,
the default decision is a decision in respect of which leave to appeal (and an
appeal if leave is granted) may be
made to the Appeal Tribunal.
[12] However,
for the reasons set out below, the grounds upon which Weranga Property can seek
to set aside the default decision are
limited in scope, and, in my view, the
merits of any defence available to Weranga Property are not relevant to the
Appeal Application.
Setting aside a default decision
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(‘QCAT Act’) provides:
The tribunal, on application by the respondent, may set aside or amend a
decision by default on terms, including terms about costs
and the giving of
security, the tribunal considers appropriate.
principles to be applied in an application under s 51 were addressed in
Pty Ltd v Bowieberghs Pty Ltd
The relevant factors under s 51 include whether Weranga Property had a
defence on the merits.
[15] Weranga
Property’s submissions on the Appeal Application raise matters that would
ordinarily be addressed in relation to
an application to set aside a decision by
default under s 51.
[16] However,
Weranga Property did not bring an application under s 51 but chose to seek leave
to appeal the default decision under
Chapter 2, Part 8, Division 1 of the QCAT
Act. In my view, the consequence of this is that Weranga Property may succeed on
Application only if the Appeal Tribunal concludes that entry of the
default decision was attended by error, specifically whether
the requirements
for the making of the default decision were satisfied. In my view, this does not
entail any consideration of the
merits of Weranga Property’s defence. It
does raise the question of whether the default decision was regularly
[17] In the
present case, the question is whether
the requirements for the default
decision were satisfied.
The requirements for entering the default decision
[18] Section
50 of the QCAT Act provides:
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a person has applied to the tribunal to recover a debt or liquidated demand
of money from a person (the respondent); and
(b) an enabling Act that is an Act or the rules state that the respondent must
respond to the application within a stated period;
(c) the respondent has not responded to the application within the stated
(2) The applicant may, in the way stated in the rules, apply to the tribunal
for a decision by default for an amount limited to—
(a) the amount claimed in the application starting the proceeding; and
(b) interest on the amount claimed at the rate the tribunal considers
appropriate; and
(c) either—
(i) for an application for a minor civil dispute—costs stated in the
rules as costs that may be awarded for minor civil disputes
under section 102;
(ii) for an application other than for a minor civil dispute—
(A) the fee paid for the application; and
(B) legal costs based on a scale stated in the rules.
(3) If the applicant applies for a decision by default under this section the
principal registrar may make the decision.
(4) A decision by default given under subsection (3) is taken to be a final
decision of the tribunal in the proceeding.
(5) The applicant must prove the respondent has been given a copy of the
application before a decision by default may be made under
this section.
[19] In my view,
upon the proper construction of s 50, there are three requirements that must be
satisfied in order for an applicant
in an application for minor civil dispute
(minor debt) to file a request for a decision by default:
(a) the application must be one to recover a ‘debt or liquidated demand of
money’ from the respondent;
(b) an enabling Act or the
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules
(Qld) (‘the Rules’) states that the respondent must respond
to the application within a stated period; and
(c) the respondent has not responded to the application within the stated
The first requirement
the MCD Application one to recover a ‘debt or liquidated demand of
Dow Australia Pty Ltd v Shivlosh Australia Pty
the Appeal Tribunal
[23] The QCAT Act does not define “debt or liquidated demand of
[24] Generally a claim is liquidated when the monetary sum representing the
claim is ascertained, or capable of being ascertained
by calculation of a
formula, rather than being ascertainable only by an assessment which involves
the exercise of a discretion and/or
(citation omitted)
[22] In the
present case, Metis Machinery claimed a fixed sum comprising the full amount
paid for the scraper which was sought to
be recovered on the basis that the
machine was inoperable and was rejected by Metis Machinery. In my view, at least
on the face of
the material before the Registrar, the claim of Metis Machinery
was one to recover a liquidated demand of money within the meaning
of s 50(1)(a)
of the QCAT Act.
The second requirement
[23] Rule 45 of
the Rules applies if a respondent to an application for a minor debt claim
wishes to respond to the application. Subrule
45(2) provides that:
The response must—
(a) be made—
(i) within 28 days after the respondent is given a copy of the application; and
(ii) in the approved form; and
(b) have attached to it a statement—
(i) answering the applicant’s assertions in the application; and
(ii) stating any amount the respondent claims to owe the applicant, how any
amount owing is worked out, and why the respondent claims
to owe that amount;
(c) comply with any requirements about the response stated in a practice
direction; and
(d) be filed.
(emphasis added)
[24] For the
purposes of s 50(1)(b), the stated period is ‘within 28 days after the
respondent is given a copy of the application’.
requirement
[25] In my view,
there is a question of whether Metis Machinery satisfied the requirement in s
50(1)(c) of the QCAT Act.
[26] The Appeal
Tribunal directed that the parties file any written submissions addressing
whether Metis Machinery filed the Request
prior to the elapse of the time for
Weranga Property to file a Response to the application for minor debt claim and,
if so, whether
the default decision was irregularly made and should be set
[27] Only Metis
Machinery filed submissions in response to the direction (‘Metis
Machinery’s further submissions’).
[28] On 5 March
2025, Metis Machinery filed an affidavit of service of the MCD Application. Mr
Tweddell affirmed that the MCD Application
was served on Weranga Property on
26 February 2025
. I consider that Metis Machinery’s further
submissions raise a question in relation to the timing and validity of the
of the MCD Application. This is addressed below. Subject to that, for
the purpose of analysing the third requirement, I will assume
that service was
effected on 26 February 2025.
[29] The Request
was filed on
26 March 2025
[30] In my view,
the initial question for determination is whether the 28 day period prescribed
by r 45(2)(a) of the Rules had elapsed
prior to the filing of the Request on 26
March 2025.
Machinery submits that:
The time between 26 February 2025 (being the date of service) on 26 March 2025
(being the date the Application for Decision by Default
was filed) was 28 days.
The time between 26 February 2025 (being the date of service) and 2 April 2025
(being the date the Tribunal
processed the Application for Decision by Default)
was 35 days.
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(Qld) (‘the AIA’)
If a period beginning on a given day, act or event is provided or allowed for a
purpose by an Act, the period is to be calculated
by excluding the day, or
the day of the act or event, and
(a) if the period is expressed to be a specified number of clear days or at
least a specified number of days—by excluding
the day on which the purpose
is to be fulfilled; and
in any other case—by including the day on which the purpose is to
be fulfilled
(emphasis added)
[33] The 28 day
period prescribed by
rule 45(2)(a)
of the Rules began on the date on which the
MCD application was given (served) on Weranga Property, namely, 26 February
my view, by operation of
of the AIA, the date of service (26
February 2025) was excluded from the calculation, and the 28
for filing the Response was included. The consequence of this is that the first
day for calculating the 28 day period commenced
on 27 February 2025. By my
calculation, the 28 day period ended on 26 March 2025. In my view, the Request
was filed prematurely because
the 28 day period for the filing of the Response
had not elapsed
the filing of the Request. The Request should
have been filed no earlier than 27 March 2025.
Richard Ellis (C) Pty Ltd v Wingate Properties Pty Ltd
... It is of course well recognised that if the judgment was entered irregularly
the defendant is entitled to have it set aside
ex debito justitiae
has been said that where a plaintiff proceeds by default every step must comply
strictly with the rules, so that it is a matter
strictissimi juris
, the Court was concerned with circumstances in which both the request
for default judgement and the giving of the default judgement
occurred prior to
the expiry of the time allowed under the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
(Qld). As I read the reasons of McGill DCJ, each of those matters was
treated as an irregularity (and I respectfully agree with that
conclusion).
[36] His Honour
The time required under
extended to and included 23 September 2005. It
was not possible to say that the defendant had not filed a notice of intention
defend within that time until after its expiration, so the division did not
apply until after 23 September.
Accordingly, as at 23 September
rule 283(2)
which permits the plaintiff to file a request for judgment did not apply, and
the plaintiff was not entitled to file the request
for default judgment on that
day. In addition,
rule 283(3)
which permits the registrar to give judgment did
not apply, and the registrar was not entitled to give judgment, as he did, on 23
September 2005. On the face of the documents filed on 23 September 2005, they
had been filed too early, and the deputy registrar
ought not to have signed
judgment in reliance on them
. Unfortunately, this must have been overlooked
by the deputy registrar who did sign the judgment.
(emphasis added)
[37] His Honour
further said:
The problem with this argument, in my opinion, is that it does not get over the
proposition that the judgment which was given by
the court was one which ought
not to have been given.
Further, the request for default judgment upon which
it was given was one which ought not to have been filed. At the time that
was filed, the plaintiff’s solicitors knew nothing of the posting
log register and its contents, and had no evidence as to
the actual delivery of
the documents on 24 August. They were at that time relying on the presumption in
the Act, but by mistake had
sought to rely on it prematurely. I suppose this is
the risk you run when trying to sign judgment at the earliest possible
opportunity,
the risk of having miscalculated the period and applying too
. It is better to be safe than sorry.
(emphasis added)
[38] His Honour
concluded that the rules had not been complied with, and it followed that the
judgement was irregular.
Honour set aside the
[39] In my view,
even if the date of service was 26 February 2025, Metis Machinery was not
entitled to file the Request under s 50
of the QCAT Act and, as a result, Metis
Machinery was not entitled to a decision by default. It follows that the default
was irregularly entered.
Machinery further submitted:
Appellant has admitted receipt of the Application. The fact that the Appellant
intentionally and knowingly did nothing thereafter
until after a Decision by
Default was made is a matter for the Appellant, and should not be interfered
with by the Tribunal.
Appellant had 35 days from the date of receipt of the Respondent’s
initiating Application to file any Response before the
Tribunal granted Judgment
in favour of the Respondent in Default of Appellant having filed a Response.
Indeed, had the Appellant
filed any Response in the preceding 35 days on or
before 2 April 2025 (being the date the Tribunal processed and granted Judgement
by Default), Judgment would not have been entered. The Appellant had time. It
simply chose to not act during that time.
Respondent submits that it would be an abuse of process to essentially ignore
the Tribunal’s Rules as though they did not
exist or have any force or
effect just because the Appellant now wants to provide a Response (despite
having had 35 days to do so
before Judgment was entered against it), which would
significantly prejudice the Respondent by requiring the Respondent to start
over again, further delaying the recovery of the monies due and owing to it
since the initiating Application was filed back in
February for (what is likely
to be) several months.
[41] In my view,
none of the matters raised overcomes the fundamental issue that the default
decision was entered irregularly.
satisfied that there is a reasonable argument that the default decision was
attended by error and an appeal is necessary
to correct a substantial injustice
caused by that error. I grant leave to appeal. For the same reasons, I consider
that the appeal
should be allowed, the default decision set aside, and the
matter returned to the Tribunal for reconsideration.
[43] In any
event, I consider that service was effected after 26 February 2025 for the
following reason.
Timing and validity of service
noted, the affidavit of service filed below for that service had been affected
on 26 February 2025.
[45] In Metis
Machinery’s further submissions it is
Tweddell, on behalf of the Respondent, swore an Affidavit of Service on 5 March
2025 that on 26 February 2025 at 10.18am he:
a) Posted a copy of the Application to 37 Day Street, Tara; and
b) Emailed a copy of the Application to
craig.davison@raywhite.com
respect to the service by posting, the date of posting was
of service.
rule-making power in the QCAT Act is found in s 224. The subject matter for the
rules is set out in Schedule 2 to the QCAT
Act. The subject matter includes the
way a notice or document must or may be given, including substituted service
(see s 7 of Schedule
[48] Rule 39 of
the Rules provides for the ways in which a document may be given to the entity.
One of the ways is by sending it by
post to the relevant address (r
[49] Subsection
39A(1) of the AIA provides:
If an Act requires or permits a document
to be served by post, service—
(a) may be effected by properly addressing, prepaying and posting the document
as a letter; and
(b) is taken to have been effected at the time at which the letter would be
delivered in the ordinary course of post, unless the
contrary is proved.
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) provides that a document may be
served on a company by, relevantly, leaving it at, or posting it to, the
company’s registered
Acts Interpretation Act
(Cth) provides:
(1) Where an Act authorises or
requires any document to be served by post, whether the expression
“serve” or the expression
“give” or “send”
or any other expression is used, then the service shall be deemed to be effected
by properly
addressing, prepaying and posting the document as a letter and,
unless the contrary is proved, to have been effected at the time
at which the
letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.
(2) This section does not affect the operation of
section 160
Evidence Act 1995
[51] It follows
that, insofar as service of the MCD Application was effected by posting, it was
taken to have been effected at the
time at which the letter would have been
delivered in the ordinary course of post. There is no evidence, in the material,
applicable period of ordinary course of post but, plainly, the letter
containing the MCD Application would not have been delivered
in the ordinary
course of post on the same day as it was posted. It follows that service of the
MCD Application, by post, was not
effected on 26 February 2025. Consequently,
even on Metis Machinery’s calculation of time, the Request was filed
prematurely.
respect to the purported service by email, the email was sent to the email
address identified in paragraph [45] above. At
affidavit of service, the box that was ticked states: ‘I emailed the copy
to the email address that was included in
the entity’s address for
[53] Subrule
39(1)(d) of the Rules provides for service by email in the following terms:
‘if the entity has an address for service
that includes an email
address—by sending it to the entity at that address’. The
circumstances in which an originating
application may be served by email was
addressed in
Brian Choi (also known as Hyung Seok Choi) v Kwangsu Choi as
Trustee for the Choi Family
I adopt those
observations here. In short, I consider that the email address the MCD
Application was sent to was
Metis Machinery’s ‘address
for service’ within the meaning of r 39(1)(d) of the Rules and the sending
of the email
did not constitute effective service of the MCD Application.
[54] Consequently,
the only effective service was by post and that was effected on a date after 26
February 2025 (and the particular
date of service is dependent upon evidence of
the ordinary course of post applicable in the present case).
the reasons set out above, I make the following orders:
to appeal is granted.
appeal is allowed.
default decision made on 2 April 2025 is set aside.
matter is returned to the Tribunal for
reconsideration.
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld) (‘QCAT Act’) s
142(3)(a)(i).
[2022] QCATA 25
[2021] QCATA 61
QCAT Act s 50(4).
See QCAT Act s 142(2).
[2024] QCATA 99
(Judicial Member DJ McGill SC).
[2015] QCATA 155.
Ibid [23]–[24] (Senior
Member Stilgoe OAM (as the President of the Land Court then was) and Member
Traves (as Senior Member
Traves then was)).
Metis Machinery’s
further submissions, [8].
[2005] QDC 399.
Ibid [2]. See also
Cooper v O’Connor
[2016] QCATA 180
Brian Choi (also known
as Hyung Seok Choi) v Kwangsu Choi as Trustee for the Choi Family Trust
[2021] QCATA 16
Metis Machinery’s
further submissions, [9]–[11].
[2021] QCATA 16
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (251 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter