URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTBCCM/2009/36.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Seed v Body Corporate for Renaissance Golden Beach CTS 31880 [2009] QCCTBCCM 36 (2 September 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
SEED V BODY CORPORATE FOR RENAISSANCE GOLDEN BEACH CTS 31880 (No. 2)
[2009] CCT KC008-09
SEED Frank and Jane
BODY CORPORATE FOR RENAISSANCE GOLDEN BEACH CTS 31880
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
2 September 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
26 August 2009
DECISION OF:
Mr K D Dorney QC
CATCHWORDS:
Interlocutory application – whether originating application should be
dismissed summarily –
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act 2003
sections 58
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
section 149B
REPRESENTATION:
APPLICANTS:
Mrs Jane Seed, self-represented
RESPONDENT:
Ms Nicky Ross, Chairman of the body corporate
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
26 August 2009, there was a hearing of an interlocutory application in this
proceeding which was begun by application seeking relief
relating to 3 distinct
claims (filed 15 April 2009). The application was brought by the applicants who
were the caretaking service
contractors under a Caretaking/Letting Agreement
concerning the community titles scheme “Renaissance Golden Beach”
Titles Scheme 31880 (“CTS”).
interlocutory application in the proceeding was brought by the respondent, which
was the Body Corporate for the CTS. The respondent’s
application sought
both an order for legal representation and an order for the proceeding to be
summarily dismissed. This application
was filed 14 July 2009.
respondent’s defence was filed on 28 May 2009 and it sought, by
counter-claim, that the application be dismissed as well
as several declarations
concerning the Caretaking/Letting Agreement.
Tribunal dismissed the application for legal representation (for reasons which
will be developed later).
for summary dismissal, the Tribunal obtained the agreement of both parties that
it would be appropriate to determine the issue
of summary dismissal on the
material already filed by the parties, with particular attention to the relief
sought by the applicants
[being designated as “orders sought” (a) to
(o) inclusive].
concluding a consideration of the issue of summary dismissal, the Tribunal
determines that the application filed 15 April 2009
should be dismissed.
Legal representation
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act 2003
Act”) deals with the issue of representation. By section 76(1)(b), in a
proceeding an individual appearing before
the Tribunal must represent himself or
herself (or themselves), unless an order for representation is made.
to the application made by the respondent here, section 76(2) states that a
party may be represented by a lawyer, relevantly,
(d) all parties
to the proceeding agree; or
Tribunal directs that representation by the lawyer is appropriate having regard
to all the circumstances including, for example
(i) the cost of representation and whether each
party can afford to be represented;
(ii) the complexity of the legal and factual issues involved;
(iii) the potential for lengthening the proceeding if a party is not
represented;
(iv) the ability of the lawyer or other person to help the Tribunal and the
represented; and
(v) the ability of the party to represent himself or herself.
the applicants had ceased to rely upon the “review of the
remuneration” aspects of the application, the parties were
left simply
with the essential factual dispute of whether what the applicants sought by way
of orders could be sustained on the factual
material they filed to support the
seeking of those orders.
the various aspects of section 76(2)(e) – in circumstances where the
applicants opposed the application for representation
and thereby ruled out
reliance upon section 76(2)(d) – the Tribunal decided that there were not
sufficient reasons arising
from the relevant factors whereby the Tribunal should
direct that representation by a lawyer was appropriate, particularly where
parties were able to represent themselves on the reduced areas of dispute.
Consequently,
an order was made on 26 August 2009 that the application for legal
representation be refused.
Legislation
the applicants had before the hearing on 26 August 2009 abandoned any claim
concerning the review of the remuneration paid
under the Caretaking/Letting
Agreement (on the basis that they had not realised the significance of choosing
the boxes to tick on
the standard form of application), the issues for the CCT
Act involve both, or either, section 58 and section 126, since they deal
summary decisions. Section 58 states, if, in the Tribunal’s opinion, a
proceeding has been brought vexatiously or oppressively,
the Tribunal may
(a) summarily
dismiss the proceeding; and
(b) order costs
against the party by whom the proceeding was brought to compensate the party
against whom it was brought for loss,
inconvenience and embarrassment of
starting the proceeding.
126 of the CCT Act is wider in that, by section 126(1), the respondent against
whom a proceeding is started by application
in the Tribunal may at any time
apply to the Tribunal under Division 5 of Part 7 for a decision in favour of the
respondent (known
as a “summary decision”). By section 126(2), the
Tribunal may give the summary decision or make any other decision the
considers appropriate if satisfied –
reasonable cause of action is disclosed against the respondent;
proceedings is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process of the Tribunal;
respondent has a defence to the proceeding.
applicants have already made, and have had determined in their general favour,
an application pursuant to section 149B of the
BCCM Act. That was in
Body Corporate for Renaissance Golden Beach CTS No. 31880
KC004-07. As can be seen from the details of this new application, new
difficulties have arisen between the applicants
and the respondent (as the
relevant Body Corporate).
present application, insofar as it concerns the real issues that remain in
dispute, concerns allegations of ongoing contractual
respondent did not put in issue that, if there were to be identified from the
material filed in support of the applicants’
application factual matters
which gave rise to a relevant dispute within section 149B of the BCCM Act,
Rather, the respondent’s attack was on the
basis that, taken at its best, the material upon which the applicants relied
a defence to any potential dispute that might fall within
a result, the Tribunal, having canvassed all of the relevant factual material,
determines that the only relevant provision under
the CCT Act is section
126(2)(c) (namely, whether the Tribunal is satisfied that the respondent has a
defence to the proceeding).
There is just insufficient evidence to show that,
despite the deficiencies in the application, there is any vexation or oppression
or any “frivolous, vexatious or abuse of process” aspect to the
proceeding. Additionally, there is really not an issue
of the absence of any
reasonable cause of action disclosed, but rather whether the facts relied upon
are sufficient for the applicants
to succeed under section 149B of the BCCM
Consideration
ease of dealing with the issue of whether the respondent has a defence, the
Tribunal will work through the “orders sought”
which are designated
(a) to (o) (inclusive), dealing with those various orders sought in order.
is unnecessary to deal with (k) and (l), since both of those are part and parcel
of the abandoned claim for review.
what the applicants seek in the introduction to the orders sought is
unnecessary, because it is not in dispute that the applicants
have the right to
continue to operate under the terms and conditions of the Caretaking/Letting
seeks an order declaring that the Chairman is not authorised to
“appoint” an “Owner Representative for Lawn
Regeneration” to give instructions to the applicants. The response, by
the respondent, is that the facts show that no one
has even purported to
“give instruction”.
applicants have relied upon Appendix 21. An examination of that Appendix shows
that the respondent’s contention is made
out. The only reference to
“instructions” is to the contractor. Whether or not the contractor
had been engaged by the
applicants, it is clear from the material presented by
the applicants that the contractor had expressed his willingness to
participate.
in all, for the moment at least, the respondent does have a defence,
particularly since the whole context shows that the representatives
of the Body
Corporate recognise that the applicants are the ones who contract the mowing and
that no specific “authorisation”
can be given directly by the Body
Corporate to the applicants.
else the last email, dated 16 March 2009, shows, it is simply a request.
this the applicants seek that it be declared that the Agreement does not empower
the Chairman of the Committee, or any other nominated
“task” the applicants or their contractors on a day-to-day
respondent contends that, particularly in the absence of any supporting
evidence, there has not been shown that any breach of
Clause 10.2.1 has
occurred. That particular provision states that the applicants “will
confer fully and freely” with
the representative of the Body Corporate
“if requested in relation to the performance of the duties of the
Caretaker”.
the evidence, the Tribunal determines that the respondent has a defence to that
applicants seek a declaration that the Agreement does not oblige the applicants
to respond in writing to the Chairman’s
“endless requests and
instructions”.
respondent relies again on Clause 10.2.1.
is nothing of substance in the 26 original Appendices, or in the additional
Appendices, which shows that there is anything which
would justify the Tribunal
making such a declaration, even if there is evidence that the representative of
the Body Corporate is
fond of written communication. The Tribunal is not here
to resolve each and every minor disagreement, and the giving of relief by
declaration requires some serious dispute to exist concerning contractual rights
or obligations.
Necessarily,
should this matter escalate and should it become the matter of an alleged
failure or neglect pursuant to Clause 6.1.3,
then a different outcome might
applicants seek a declaration concerning the absence of an obligation to
“isolate” individual electrical fittings
upon request by the
response is that the request was that certain lights be isolated in order to
avoid electrocution from water that had leaked into
them, and that if a simple
flicking of a switch on a circuit board did not provide the requisite answer,
then a person with the necessary
skills, knowledge and qualification could be
called by the applicants.
the insignificance of this disagreement is not such as to call into
consideration the declaratory rights that are made available
under the BCCM
applicants claim it is inappropriate for the Committee “to suggest”
that the applicants “seek advice from qualified
horticulturists”.
response is that what was done was to make a reasonable suggestion and that, if
that could not be adequately carried out within
the existing duties, the
applicants should seek advice from a qualified person.
applicants rely upon Appendix 18, page 2. A consideration of that Appendix
supports the respondent’s contentions.
applicants seek by this a declaration that they are not obliged to take any
investigative action in a fire alarm situation. The
response is that the
factual basis relied upon is not established because there was no direction
given to the applicants.
parties rely upon Appendix 17 and the applicants rely, in addition, upon
Appendix 19.
Appendix shows that the disagreement has moved to the stage of the applicants
being “obliged” to take investigative
action in any fire alarm
“situation”. Hence, the Tribunal will not make any determination of
this matter at this stage.
A defence exists to the present order sought.
order seeks a declaration that the Agreement does not oblige the applicants to
provide unskilled manual labour to contractors
coming on site to complete tasks
for the respondent.
response is that there has never been any direction that the applicants provide
their labour to contractors.
parties refer to Appendix 20. A review of that Appendix does not show the
existence of any obligation and does not show that
the Committee expressed any
intention of informing contractors that a “gopher” or “spare
pair of hands” was
to be available to such contractors.
seeks a declaration about “Remedial Action Notices”.
response contends that any dispute about the validity of such Notices is not a
complex dispute and must, pursuant to section 229(3)(a)
of the BCCM Act, be
determined by a relevant process other than before the Tribunal.
is no doubt that section 229(3)(a) states that the “only remedy” for
a dispute that is not a complex dispute is
by a resolution that does not involve
the Tribunal, apart from an application to it “on appeal”.
section 149B of the BCCM Act shows, disputes about the contents of such Notices
can come within “contractual matters”,
but a determination of how
such Notices should be issued is not for determination by the Tribunal in this
particular complex dispute.
Therefore, a proper defence has been shown.
seeks declarations about the systematic testing, adjustment and repair of the
underground automatic irrigation system.
response is that there is absolutely no evidence that shows that the Body
Corporate has stated that the repair of the irrigation
system is the
“obligation” of the applicants.
parties refer to Appendix 20.
references have been made to Appendix 20 as well. Yet again, there is nothing
in Appendix 20 which would support the need
for a declaration.
seeks that the Tribunal give “some guidance”. The particular aspect
of guidance is identified as involving the mowing
and edging of lawns.
considering the specific aspects of the respondent’s response, it is clear
that it is not appropriate for the Tribunal
to give “guidance”.
Furthermore, there is nothing on the material given to the Tribunal which shows
that any disagreement
Tribunal to determine whether or not the applicants continue to have a duty
maintain common property lawns.
Consequently,
there is a proper defence raised with respect to this order sought.
reason of the orders made in the earlier Application on 26 August 2008, it has
already been determined between the parties that
the cleaning of external glass
is the responsibility of the respondent.
right that the applicants might, or might not, have to sue for a
for undertaking the cleaning of such glass prior to 26 August 2008 is
not a matter that comes within section 149B. Of course, any
similar claim on
the part of the respondent for (say, gardening) work undertaken on its behalf
which it might contend ought to have
been done by the applicants would fall
within the same ambit of determination. Whatever width the definition of
“contractual
matter” has in Schedule 6, it does not appear to be a
substitute for ordinary causes of action which can be brought in courts
circumstances where the Tribunal might be convinced
to make a declaration about
rights and obligations. But such is not the case here.
order seeks that the Tribunal be involved in determining that the task of
cleaning the insect screen covering the intake vent
supplying air to the carpark
“become part of the window-cleaning contract” involving
“external glass”.
response takes issue with the widest aspects of what the applicants seek.
Nevertheless,
it is not necessary to extend the inquiry that far. It is sufficient for the
Tribunal to determine that there is nothing
on the evidence which would show
that any cleaning of the relevant screen, identified in Appendix 25, cannot be
appropriately carried
out within the obligations presently placed on the
applicants under the Caretaking/Letting Agreement. That is, the respondent does
have a defence to that order sought, particularly where any long handled
cleaning instrument could easily be used to undertaken the
seeks a declaration that the cleaning of the external walls of the building,
apart from some matters concerning the lower walls,
is outside the obligations
placed on the applicants under the Agreement. It also seeks a declaration
concerning a specific Remedial
Action Notice.
respondent’s contention is that this is clearly a matter that comes within
the previous determination by the Tribunal on
26 August 2008.
Remedial Action Notice is in Appendix 23. It is dated 6 April 2009 and refers
to an alleged failure to clean the dirt and marks
from the external wall of the
gymnasium building “below the basement air intake”. It is not at
all clear to the Tribunal
that the respondent is requiring anything other than
proper compliance with the contractual obligations under the Agreement. Even
that were not so, it is quite inappropriate for the Tribunal to make a
declaration in such general terms without there being specific
evidence led as
to why, for instance, the only excepted things should be “mud
splashes” or “bird droppings”.
It is just inappropriate for
the Tribunal to make declarations of that kind. Nevertheless, should the
respondent later rely upon
non-compliance with such a Notice as a basis for
terminating the Agreement, then the Tribunal might well have jurisdiction to
that the specified alleged breach was, or was not, a contractual
breach of the relevant kind.
Conclusions
summation of the determinations reached by the Tribunal with respect to the many
orders sought by the applicants demonstrates that
the respondent does have a
defence to all the issues that have been raised.
must be added that there is nothing in the additional statement provided by the
applicants and received by the Tribunal on 24 June
2009 which would negative
that outcome.
the respondent has established that it is appropriate pursuant to section
126(2)(c) of the CCT Act to be satisfied that the
respondent has a defence to
the proceeding to the extent to which the applicants have persisted with the
orders which they seek.
consequence, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to give a summary decision in
the proceeding to the effect that the application
filed by the applicants on 15
April 2009 be dismissed summarily.
neither party is legally represented and since the factual disputation is not
complex, in the absence of there being any legal
complexity in the proceeding
which might otherwise have justified some order for legal representation, the
Tribunal determines that
it is not appropriate to make any order as to costs,
respecting the main purpose of the Division concerning costs (which states that
it is to have the parties pay their own costs unless the interests of justice
require otherwise).
______________________________
MR K D DORNEY QC
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (813 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter