URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2005/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CEJ, Re [2005] QGAAT 30 (7 June 2005)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL,
[2005] QGAAT30
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Declaration about Capacity
In the Matter of CEJ
MATTER NUMBER:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, Brisbane
DATE OF HEARING:
29 April 2005
DATE OF ORDER:
29 April 2005
DATE OF REASONS:
7 June 2005
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
R Joachim Deputy President
J Cockerill Member
M Howard Member
CATCHWORDS:
IMPAIRED CAPACITY-ENDURING POWERS OF ATTORNEY-CAPACITY-adult with impaired
capacity executed multiple and differing Enduring Powers
of Attorney in favour
of his daughters-whether adult had capacity
CASES QUOTED:
Ranclaud v Cabban
(1988) NSW ConvR 55-385
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
DECLARATION ABOUT CAPACITY
That Mr CEJ did not have capacity to
revoke or make an Enduring Power of Attorney in July 2004 and since that
The Tribunal directs that the attorneys
provide to the Tribunal by 31 May 2005 written advice on their intended dealings
purported gifts to them of $50,000 each.
That any monies held in an account styled
“Trustee account” be restored into the name of the principal.
DECLARATION
That the Enduring Power of Attorney of 2
March 2002 appointing Mrs E, Mrs P, Mrs S and Mrs R as attorneys for personal
and financial
matters is valid and the power has
REASONS FOR DECISION
The Tribunal received an application
from Mrs E, Mrs P, Mrs S and Mrs R, all daughters of Mr CEJ, on 11 April 2005.
This application
sought a declaration in relation to the capacity of Mr CEJ (the
adult) to execute Enduring Powers of Attorney.
The application arose as a result of the
adult executing multiple and differing Enduring Powers of Attorney in favour of
his daughters.
The daughters were unsure of their legal position as they felt
their father did not have capacity to properly execute enduring documents
The adult had executed four (4)
Enduring Powers of Attorney. The first of these was executed 10 September 1999
in which it was purported
he had appointed three (3) of his daughters for
financial and personal matters to take effect immediately with the attorneys to
severally. In fact, no one was appointed.
The second Enduring Power of Attorney
was executed 2 March 2002 appointing all four (4) daughters for financial and
personal matters
to commence immediately and with the attorneys to act
The third Enduring Power of Attorney
was executed 12 August 2004 appointing all four (4) daughters for financial and
personal matters
to commence immediately with the attorneys to act jointly.
The final Enduring Power of Attorney
was executed 27 October 2004 and appointed all four (4) daughters for both
financial and personal
matters to act jointly on the occasion when he becomes
incapable of understanding the nature and foreseeing the effects of the decision
and of communicating that decision.
The application was heard in Brisbane
on 29 April 2005. The application is made under
section 146
Guardianship and Administration
2000 Act”).
146 Declaration about capacity
The tribunal may make a declaration about the capacity
of an adult, guardian, administrator or attorney for a matter.
The tribunal may do this on its own initiative or on the
application of the individual or another interested person.
In deciding whether an individual is capable of
communicating decisions in some way, the tribunal must investigate the use of
reasonable ways of facilitating communication, including, for example,
symbol boards or signing.
In this section—
(a) an attorney under a power of attorney; or
(b) an attorney under an advance health directive; or
(c) a statutory health attorney.
power of attorney
(a) a general power of attorney made under the
Powers of Attorney Act
(b) an enduring power of attorney; or
(c) a power of attorney made otherwise than under the
Powers of Attorney
, whether before or after its commencement.
Section 110
Attorney Act
are also relevant:
110 Application and participation
An application may be made to the court for a
declaration, order, direction, recommendation or advice about something in, or
to, this Act.
The application may be by the principal concerned or
another interested person unless this Act states otherwise.
Each of the following persons may apply to the court for
it to do something under this chapter about a power of attorney, enduring
of attorney or advance health directive, or the exercise of an attorney’s
(a) the principal;
(b) a member of the principal’s family;
(c) an attorney;
(d) the adult guardian or public trustee;
(e) if the document is an advance health directive or the application
involves power for a health matter—the adult guardian
or a health provider
of the principal;
(f) an interested person.
A person joined as a party to a proceeding under this
Act or a person the court considers an interested person may participate in
proceeding.
In this section—
, of a principal, consists of the following
(a) the principal’s spouse;
(b) each of the principal’s children who is 18 years or more
(including a stepchild, an adopted child, and a person for whom
the principal
was foster-parent or guardian when the person was a child);
(c) each of the principal’s parents (including a step-parent,
adoptive parent, foster-parent and guardian);
(d) if there is no person mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or
(c) who is reasonably available—each of the principal’s
siblings who is 18 years or more (including a step-sibling, adopted
sibling, and
foster-sibling).
111 Determination of
The court may make a declaration about a person’s
In relation to Enduring Powers of
Attorney, the Tribunal derives its jurisdiction from section 84 of the
Guardianship and Administration
84 Jurisdiction
section 245
, the tribunal has exclusive
impaired capacity for
The tribunal has concurrent jurisdiction with the court
for enduring documents and attorneys under enduring documents.
The tribunal has the other jurisdiction given under this
Present at the hearing were the four
(4) applicants, the adult and by telephone, Ms F, Manager at the facility where
the adult currently
lives and Mr B, solicitor from B and B who had witnessed the
last two (2) Enduring Powers of Attorney.
As well as the application and copies
of the Enduring Powers of Attorney, the Tribunal had access to the following
a covering letter from the applicants
accompanying the application;
a statement
from the adult’s general practitioner, Dr Tom Murphy dated 1 March
a letter from Ms W, registered nurse
at the Hostel to Mrs S undated but received at the Tribunal 11 March
a report from Dr P Mulholland,
psychiatrist prepared for by B & B solicitors dated 6 August
a family response to Dr
Mulholland’s report received by the Tribunal 11 March
a letter from the four applicants to
the Public Trust Office in Nambour dated 22 February
a letter from Mr B, solicitor, to
the adult dated 13 August 2004 regarding his Enduring Power of Attorney dated 12
August 2004;
a Health Professional Report
from Dr Murphy dated 23 March 2005;
Care Assessment Team assessment dated 19 May
a Health Professional Report from Ms
W dated 18 April 2005;
a Residential Care
Fee assessment form;
a Suncorp Metway form
regarding term deposit maturity
instructions;
a copy of a phone bill
covering the period 26 December 2004 – 16 January
a statement from adult dated 5 August
2004 authorising a gift to each of the applicants of $100,000 subsequently
revoked at 9.00pm
that evening;
a statement
of 6 August 2004 authorising a gift of $50,000 to each of the
applicants;
a revocation of the Enduring
Power of Attorney of 2 March 2002 dated 10 August
a revocation of the Enduring Power of
Attorney of 12 August 2004 dated 27 October
unsigned revocation of an Enduring
Power of Attorney dated 27 October 2004.
The essential issues for the Tribunal
are whether Mr CEJ had capacity to execute and revoke Enduring Powers of
Attorney during 2004
and whether he had capacity to make gifts of up to $50,000
to his daughters.
Mr B advised the Tribunal that he
took instructions from the adult on 21 July 2004 in relation to a new Enduring
Power of Attorney.
The adult had expressed concerns that his daughters acting as
attorneys had confiscated the proceeds of the sale of his property.
Mr B advised
the Tribunal that he asked the adult some questions in relation to finances to
form his own view and thought that he
was probably competent. To be sure he
arranged an appointment with Dr Peter Mulholland in relation to issue of
competency. The adult
had stated to him that he wanted to have control of his
Prior to the execution of the
enduring document on 12 August 2004, Mr B advised that he had received a report
from Dr Mulholland and
on 12 August 2004 Mr CEJ revoked the 2002 Enduring Power
of Attorney. He advised that two (2) days later Mr CEJ had wanted to set
daughters again as attorneys. He advised the Tribunal that on 26 October 2004 he
saw the adult again and he had wanted to
revoke his August 2004 Enduring Power
of Attorney. On 27 October 2004 he signed a revocation of the August 2004 EPA
and signed a
new EPA. On this occasion Mr B did not discuss with the adult his
understanding of an Enduring Power of Attorney as he was not concerned
adult’s capacity. He saw the adult again on 5 January 2005 to prepare a
revocation for the October 2004 Enduring
Power of Attorney. This document
remained unsigned.
The Tribunal was advised by the
applicants that none of them signed an acceptance of the Enduring Power of
Attorney of 27 October
2004 because they did not believe that their father was
capable of executing the document, although they had signed the acceptance
the 12 August 2004 EPA.
The report of Dr Mulholland contrasts
sharply with the reports of Ms W, registered nurse and the adult’s general
practitioner,
Dr Murphy. Dr Mulholland in his report notes that Mr CEJ was
referred for psychiatric advice regarding his ability to manage his
own affairs
in respect of a planned revocation of a power of attorney. In the conclusion of
his report he stated “
this man does not have a diagnosable psychiatric
condition, he does not have dementia. He does have features of what I would
as normal age related memory impairment, but the quality and quantity of
same is not sufficient to warrant any formal psychiatric
He went on to say “
he appeared to understand the issues in respect of
power of attorney and revocation of power of attorney satisfactorily. The
is that there does not appear to be any psychiatric contraindication
in respect of his proceeding to revocation of power of attorney
if that is what
he wishes to do
The four (4) applicants provided a
document to the Tribunal which severely criticised Dr Mulholland’s report
in that Dr Mulholland
appears to have taken at face value the information that
the adult had given to him. The daughters explain in great detail in their
submission that there are significant errors in the information provided to Dr
Mulholland. Dr Mulholland described briefly the examination
he gave Mr CEJ, but
unfortunately he doesn’t provide any commentary on Mr CEJ’s
understanding of the requirements outlined
Powers of Attorney Act
for a principal to execute or revoke an Enduring Power of Attorney. These
are laid out in
Powers of Attorney Act
41 Principal’s capacity to make an enduring power of
A principal may make an enduring power of attorney only
if the principal understands the nature and effect of the enduring power
Understanding the nature and effect of the enduring
power of attorney includes understanding the following matters—
(a) the principal may, in the power of attorney, specify or limit the
power to be given to an attorney and instruct an attorney about
the exercise of
(b) when the power begins;
(c) once the power for a matter begins, the attorney has power to make,
and will have full control over, the matter subject to terms
or information
(d) the principal may revoke the enduring power of attorney at any time
the principal is capable of making an enduring power of attorney
giving the same
(e) the power the principal has given continues even if the principal
becomes a person who has impaired capacity;
(f) at any time the principal is not capable of revoking the enduring
power of attorney, the principal is unable to effectively oversee
the use of the
47 Principal’s capacity for written revocation of power of
A principal may revoke an enduring power of attorney in
writing only if the principal has the capacity necessary to make an enduring
power of attorney giving the same power.
However, a principal may revoke an enduring power of
attorney in writing, to the extent it gives power for a health matter, if the
principal has the capacity necessary to make an enduring power of attorney
giving the same power for the health matter.
Dr Murphy advised the Tribunal by a
statement dated 1 March 2005 that he had been Mr CEJ’s doctor for eight
(8) years. During
that time he stated there had been a steady deterioration in
his health with particular emphasis on his mental ability. He stated
this has reached the stage that over the last three to four years it
had been very difficult for him to manage his own finances and
comprehend complex business and legal dealings. His major problem is some
disorientation as to time and place and definite
short term memory
” This is further supported by a more detailed report from Dr
Murphy which was completed for the Tribunal on 23 March 2005.
In this report he
states that Mr CEJ feels that he is quite capable of making his own decisions
and states that “
although there has been some improvement in recent
months, it has been my opinion that in complex financial matters CEJ would have
problems with decision making.”
In his report he stated that the adult
could make simple financial decisions but not complex ones.
Further support for this is provided
by a registered nurse, Ms W who has known the adult eighteen (18) months since
he has been living
at the Hostel. She also advised in her report that Mr CEJ
does not feel that he suffers from dementia at all, but acknowledges that
memory is not as good as it used to be. She stated that in relation to mini
mental state examination that his recall was poor
and that he is unable to make
complex decisions. An Aged Care Assessment Team of May 2003 noted that the adult
memory lapses caused
problems with his ability to cope at home alone and that he
did have insight into his memory loss.
The applicants gave evidence that the
adult was unable to tell the family why he had revoked the Enduring Power of
Attorney executed
in August 2004. They advised that he had wanted to give each
of them $100,000 and the daughters did not want to take it. He subsequently
changed his mind and wanted to tear up the agreement. Shortly thereafter however
he provided all his daughters with a gift of $50,000.
The applicants advised
that the adult was often confused regarding the sale of his property and he
thought that he had gone to the
Public Trustee of Queensland because he
didn’t think his daughters were doing anything in relation to his money.
At the hearing, the adult expressed
concern that he did not have access to funds whereas the daughters as attorneys
had set up an
account for him to access several thousand dollars at a time. The
daughters advised that they had signed the contract for the sale
of the house
under the Enduring Power of Attorney as the adult had been ill and was going to
sell his house cheaply. They advised
that around December 2003, the adult was
writing cheques in pounds, shilling and pence and paying the same bill on
repeated occasions.
The applicants advised that the adult’s house settled
in July 2004 and the adult had thought the money for the house had been
The applicants further advised the Tribunal that the adult had trouble with
memory for many years.
The Tribunal preferred the evidence
of Dr Murphy, the adult’s daughters and Ms W to Dr Mulholland. This was
because their evidence
was based on regular, lengthy contact and because the
evidence of each was consistent with the others.
The adult advised the Tribunal that
whereas he wants to control his finances he wanted a backup position and he is
happy for his daughters
to be that backup. It is clear from the evidence given
to the Tribunal that by July 2004 the adult was becoming confused about
arrangements
for the sale of his real property. It was also clear that around
early August 2004 the adult was changing his mind in relation to
the granting of
the gift and was confused about financial matters.
The Tribunal notes a judgment in
Ranclaud v Cabban
in the Supreme Court of NSW delivered on 09/02/88. In
this case six Powers of Attorney had been given by an elderly woman of 79 years
of age, alternatively in favour of two different persons over a 8 ½ month
period. The Court was concerned about the fact that
the plaintiff had executed
so many Powers of Attorney in such a short time that she did not appear to have
the ability to weigh up
alternatives, make decisions and give instructions which
were likely to remain constant from one day to the next. Mr CEJ’s
executing of his last two (2) EPA’s with so little variation and revoking
the previous one is material to his capacity.
The Tribunal made the following
findings of fact:
Mr CEJ has a significant short term
memory loss of some duration;
The adult has
executed 4 different Enduring Powers of Attorney in favour of his
The attorneys settled the sale
of the adult’s property in July
The adult was very confused about the
sale of his property and the subsequent depositing of his
The adult offered a gift to each of
his four (4) daughters of $100,000 and changed his mind within twenty-four (24)
hours changing
the gift to $50,000
The adult was confused about the
gifts he gave to his daughters;
was confused about his access to
Information provided to Dr
Mulholland (by the adult) was inaccurate.
The Tribunal is therefore satisfied
that Mr CEJ did not have the capacity to make or revoke Enduring Powers of
Attorney from July
2004 and since that time. The Tribunal was concerned that the
attorneys had accepted a gift of $50,000 each from the adult at a time
was confused about the nature of his wealth and at a time when they were
attorneys. The Tribunal therefore made a Direction
to the attorneys in relation
to how they intended to deal with the purported gifts to them. As a consequence
of the Tribunal’s
finding, the Enduring Powers of Attorney and revocations
executed in August and October 2004 were declared invalid.
As a result, the Enduring Power of
Attorney of 2 March 2002 appointing the four (4) daughters as attorneys for
personal and financial
matters comes into effect and because of the
adult’s current incapacity the Tribunal decided to make a Declaration that
power granted to the attorneys in this document has
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (125 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter