URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QChCM/2015/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department of Communities, Child Safety and Disability Services v LW [2015] QChCM 1 (23 March 2015)
MAGISTRATES COURTS OF QUEENSLAND
Department of Communities, Child Safety and Disability Services v LW
[2015] QChCM 1
Department of Communities, Child Safety and Disability
L. W. (mother)
Childrens Court
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Pine Rivers
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
Pine Rivers
HEARING DATE:
MAGISTRATE:
Application is dismissed
CATCHWORDS:
Best interest of child paramount consideration
For Dept: Mr Scott, of counsel, I/by Crown Law
For Office of Public Guardian: Ms C Burchill, Solicitor,
Burchill & Horsey
No appearance of Respondent Father or Respondent Mother
For Respondent Child: Ms Quinn, of counsel, I/by Damien Carter
[1] This is an application brought by the Department whereby the Applicant is
seeking to vary a Child Protection Order granting
long term guardianship of A K
J W, born 27 April 2007 and A W, born 4 February 2009 (hereafter referred to as
[2] The fathers of both A and A are unknown.
[3] On 28 October 2009 the Childrens Court made Protection Orders in relation to
both A and A granting long term guardianship of
both children to the Chief
Executive until they each turned 18 years of age. The application before me
seeks to vary those orders
made on 28 October 2009 and make an order granting
long term guardianship of each of the children to their carers, Mr C G and Mrs
G until each child reaches the age of 18 years of age.
[4] Pursuant to
section 65(4)
Child Protection Act 1999
referred to as the Act) such an application is to be treated as if it were an
application for a Child Protection Order.
[5] The children had the benefit of a separate representative who has appeared
in the hearing of this matter with the mother (who
is the subject of an order
appointing the Public Guardian to conduct her affairs) represented by a
solicitor on instructions from
the Public Guardian.
[6] The mother did not participate in the proceedings.
[7] An order was also sought that there be non-disclosure of the long term
guardians’ address.
[8] The Applicant relied upon affidavits sworn by Emma Lowe together with
Affidavits filed by CJG, one of the foster carers. Whilst
a Social Assessment
Report had been filed previously by the children’s separate
representative, the separate representative
did not seek to rely upon that
report, however the Applicant chose to do so and the contents of the Social
Assessment Report have
been taken into account.
[9] The Department together with the Solicitor representing the Mother have
submitted written submissions in relation to this matter
and both the Applicant,
Ms Emma Lowe and Mr C G were subjected to cross-examination.
[10] This is a finally balanced application.
[11] I note the application is neither supported by the Public Guardian nor is
the application supported by the children’s
representative.
[12] There is little doubt that the children are well settled in their current
placement and are regarded by Mr and Mrs G as being
part of their
[13] The children appear to be doing very well in this placement and there is
nothing to suggest that Mr and Mrs G would not be able
to adequately meet the
needs of both children going into the future.
[14] Further, it is not the case that Ms W realistically will be in a position
to bring any application in the future seeking to
set aside the long term
guardianship order which was previously made.
[15] The submissions filed, and the oral submissions of all parties, have been
delivered written
reasons for my decision so that all parties can be appraised of the
consideration that I have given to this matter
and the matters that I have taken
into account.
Child Protection Act 1999
defines the
circumstances in which a
Child protection order can be made:
– Making of child protection order
(1) The Children’s Court may make a child protection order only if it
is satisfied –
(a) The child is a child in need of protection and the order is appropriate
and desirable for the child’s protection; and
(b) There is a case plan for the child –
(i) That has been developed and revised under
(ii) that is appropriate for meeting the child’s assessed protection
and care needs; and
(c) If the making of the order has been contested, a conference between the
parties has been held or reasonable attempts to hold a
conference have been
(d) The child’s wishes or views, if able to be ascertained, have been
made known to the court; and
(e) The protection sought to be achieved by the order is unlikely to be
achieved by an order under this part on less intrusive terms.
(6) In addition, before making a child protection order granting long-term
guardianship of a child, the court must be satisfied -
(a) There is no parent able and willing to protect the child within the
foreseeable future; or
(b) The child’s need for emotional security would be best met in the
long term by making the order
(8) Before the court extends or makes a further child protection order
granting custody or short-term guardianship of the child, the
court must have
regard to the child’s need for emotional security and
stability.”
[17] A child in need of protection is defined as follows:
child in need of protection
child in need of protection
is a child who—
(a) Has suffered significant harm, is suffering significant harm, or is at
unacceptable risk of suffering significant harm; and
(b) Does not have a parent able and willing to protect the child from the
, to a child, is any detrimental effect of a
significant nature on the child’s physical, psychological or emotional
(2) It is immaterial how the harm is caused.
(3) Harm can be caused by—
(a) Physical, psychological or emotional abuse or neglect;
(b) Sexual abuse or exploitation.”
[18] Child protection orders can be made for up to one year if custody or
guardianship of the child is not granted, up to two years
if custody or
short-term guardianship is
granted, and until the child turns 18 if long-term guardianship is
Paramount Principle
[19] The main principle for
administering this Act is that the safety, wellbeing and best interests of a
child are paramount.
Other General Principles
following are general principles for ensuring the safety, wellbeing and best
interests of a child –
(a) A child has a right to be protected from harm or risk or harm;
(i) If a child was removed from the child’s family, the child should be
placed with the child’s siblings, to the extent
that is possible;
child should only be placed in the care of a parent or other person who has the
capacity and is willing to care for the child
(including a parent or other
person with capacity to care for the child with assistance or support);
child should have stable living arrangements, including arrangements that
(i) for a stable connection with the child’s family and community, to the
extent that it is in the child’s best interest;
(ii) for the
child’s developmental, educational, emotional, health, intellectual and
physical needs to be met;
(l) A child should be able to maintain relationships with the child’s
parents and kin, if it is appropriate for the child;
(m) A child should be
able to know, explore and maintain the child’s identity and values,
including their cultural, ethnic and
religious identity and
[21] There is very little in the evidence of this case which seems to be in
contention.
[22] Essentially, none of the parties submit that a Child
Protection Order should not be made but simply whether the existing order
be varied to allow Mr and Mrs G to become the guardians of the
[23] The mother has been diagnosed with a psychiatric condition
being schizophrenia. She has an extensive history of mental illness
times been the subject of involuntary treatment orders under the Mental Health
[24] Ms W was charged with attempted abduction of a child and assault
occasioning bodily harm on 18 January 2004.
[25] Those matters were referred
to the Mental Health Court and she was found to be of unsound mind and placed on
a forensic order.
[26] She is currently on a forensic order.
Applicant’s assertion that the mother’s health and related symptoms
have been long standing over a period of
15 years does indicate the
improbability of change.
[28] There is little doubt that both A and A are
children who are at an unacceptable risk of suffering harm and do not have a
able and willing to protect them from harm.
[29] I am satisfied that
the relevant pre-requisites as set out in section 59 have been met, that is that
the children are children
in need of protection and an order is appropriate and
desirable for the protection of both children, there is a case plan that has
been developed and revised, that a conference has been held by the parties and
that the views or wishes of the children have been
able to be ascertained. I
will return shortly to the issue of the children’s views or
[30] I am satisfied that a Child Protection Order granting long term
guardianship is the least intrusive order with the only issue
being whether that
long term guardianship order be in favour of the Chief Executive or Mr and Mrs
Views and Wishes of Children
[31] I note the report writer Dr Joy
interviewed both A and A and at paragraph 6 of her report set out the
“They both indicated that they wished to continue having
(A). This was in reference to monthly contact. A particularly, seemed keen to
be allowed to call mum and dad, mum and
dad. I know L is my tummy mummy but mum
and dad are really my mum and dad. A commented on how their mother Ms W at
times says things
that aren’t really true but we know to just agree with
her. We know that she can say things that are a bit strange. That’s
okay. Both children reported at times feeling a bit worried about L, like that
she might take us, but not really, not all the time
but sometimes (A). A matter
of factly reported that she considers her family to be with Mr and Mrs G and
that’s just how it
is and we like it that way.”
[32] Mr C G gave
evidence in these proceedings by way of two Affidavits and was the subject of
cross-examination.
[33] It is difficult to anticipate there being any more
appropriate carers for these children than Mr and Mrs G.
[34] Particularly in
light of the fact that Mr G has professional experience and qualifications,
having worked with mental health
patients and being equipped with a high degree
of insight as to the characteristics that such illness presents which may
a threat to the children.
[35] Both carers appear to be extremely
committed to both children and to ensuring that the children be an ongoing part
of their family.
[36] In the Applicant’s submissions, the following
extract from the Social Assessment Report was set out:
“...R and J
stated their commitment to A and A is a lifelong one that is not dependent on
what sort of order they may be subject
to or what sort of needs may arise but is
defined by their love for the children as their own. They asserted that a
role in terms of emotional support and encouragement ‘never
[37] Nothing on the evidence would cause me to doubt
those particular sentiments expressed by both carers.
[38] Mr G’s
Affidavit filed on 4 April 2014 under the heading “Our application for
guardianship” he sets out the
reasons why they wish an order to be made
that they be granted long term guardianship of both children. Set out below are
30 to 34 of that Affidavit:
“Our application for
Guardianship
30. We want guardianship of the girls in order to formalise the
reality of their day to day life.
31. To be recognised as a whole and
permanent family is important to us from an emotional and psychological point of
32. Our relationship with the Department of Child Safety has been
without issue or concern, but the girls notice that the Department
is involved
in their lives, and not the lives of the other children. This could create a
perception of them not being a permanent
part of the family, as they get
33. We recognise that by having guardianship we forego some financial
and support related benefits which are currently offered by
the Department. But
we believe the benefits to the girls far outweigh the cost to
34. Additionally, there are some life goals which we have as carers can
only fulfil as guardians, for example, we would like to include
the girls in our
estate planning without concern that our wishes would be contested by our
natural children or their future spouses.”
[39] I note that in part the
G’s wish to be recognised as a whole and permanent family which to them is
important from an emotional
and psychological point of view.
[40] Whilst it
is important to provide the carers with some form of comfort and as much
assistance as can be given to assist them
in adequately caring for the children,
the focus in these proceedings is on the best interests of the children and what
is best for
the emotional and psychological development of the
[41] In relation to their assertion that they wish the order so as
to formalise the reality of the children’s day to day life,
allowing the current order to continue will not in any real sense affect that
[42] Further it is accepted that their relationship with the
Department has been without issue
[43] Whilst it could be the case that the
children perceive themselves as not being a permanent part of the family, there
is no evidence
to suggest that the children’s current placement will in
any way be disrupted and as the G’s have said for their commitment
and A is a lifelong one that is not dependant on what sort of order they be
subject to.
[44] Further I note that Mr G did also mention during
cross-examination, his concerns about estate planning saying that he is a
planner and deals with people’s estate planning issues every day
of the week.
[45] He said in his evidence:
“We would like to make
provision for A and A in our estate planning with a certainty that my natural
children will not contest
our decisions.” (Page 45 transcript).
asked him the following:
“Well, how are you going to achieve that? I
read that in your Affidavit...and I was somewhat perplexed by it. What –
on what basis would they have any greater certainty if an order was
[47] Mr G conceded that he was not a qualified estate planning
lawyer and it was simply his understanding of the law given his experience
a period of nine years of having been involved in the Australian financial
services industry.
[48] Whilst the court can inform itself in a way that it
sees fit and is not strictly bound by the rules of evidence in these
proceedings,
there is no evidence for me to make a finding that such an order
would give any greater certainty in this regard.
[49] Further, it is
difficult to see how any future spouse of the natural children of Mr and Mrs G
would have any claim on their estate
or how Mr and Mrs G could be affected at
all in any proceedings under the Family Law Act. Further, a family provision
application
under the Succession Act would still be able to be made by the
natural children irrespective of any guardianship order in relation
to A and A.
[50] Even in the event that such an order would give greater protection in
relation to estate planning matters, that needs to be balanced
against other
considerations that I must consider, namely that the children continue to have a
stable connection with their mother
(subject to their best interests) and to be
able to maintain that relationship with their mother and to know and explore
their identities.
[51] Mr G also raised a practical measure which
such an order could assist in, that is when travelling as a family the children
unable to be included under any family travel insurance policy because they
are not under the guardianship of Mr and Mrs G.
[52] Whilst this is a
consideration that could be taken into account when making an order, on the
basis that it ordinarily would be
in the best interests of the children to be
able to enjoy holidays and travel with Mr and Mrs G and the other children in
their care,
this consideration is secondary to the considerations that must be
considered particularly when considering the principles set out
in sections 5A
and 5B of the Act.
Conclusions
[53] In submissions made on behalf of the
Applicant reliance was placed on section 59(7)(b), that is that the court must
long term guardianship of a child to the Chief Executive if the court
can properly grant guardianship to another person.
[54] To this extent, I am
satisfied that both Mr C G and Mrs R G are suitable persons as defined in
Child Protection Regulation 2011
. In his oral submissions Mr
Scott appearing for the Applicant said in part:
in essence, my submission is if Your Honour is satisfied they are suitable
persons, then in essence,
the court’s almost obliged to grant a less
intrusive order or make a less intrusive order, and that is granting
guardianship
to those carers...(page 48 transcript)
[55] It is not the case
that simply because Mr and Mrs G may be deemed to be suitable persons, then it
is necessarily the case that
an order not granting custody to them is not an
order made on less intrusive terms to achieve the protection sought in relation
the children. Mr Scott in his submissions himself said:
submission, it’s not the suitability of the carers that appear to be an
issue from any of the parties at the
Bar Table today. It’s their ability
to be able to manage contact and ongoing contact between the mother and the
children in
the foreseeable future.” (Page 50 transcript).
issue of ongoing contact in the context of this current matter, was succinctly
expressed by Ms Burchill being the solicitor
acting for the First Respondent
that is the mother on instructions from the Public Guardian at paragraph 28 of
her submissions where
“The children are 7 years and 8 months
and 5 years and 11 months old and therefore it is an extensive period of time
current application will be in place before the children turn 18. At
some stage during this period, it is likely that Ms W will
present as extremely
unwell and [it] is the Public Guardian’s view that the Chief Executive
would be better equipped to deal
with this situation and to ensure the safety of
the children and the mother and to make appropriate arrangements for contact in
positive and safe environment. It is noted that at present contact between
the mother and the children is arranged in places throughout
the community such
as libraries and parks. If Ms W presented as extremely unwell then this is
potentially an unsafe environment
for the children and also the
[57] I have concerns that if long term guardianship was made
in favour of the current carers, and in circumstances where they found
with the mother was either difficult or even intolerable, then any ongoing
[58] This is especially a danger
when the children grow a little older and may express an unwillingness to
exercise any contact with
their mother.
[59] Ms Burchill also raises the
point that due to privacy considerations the mother’s treating doctors
would not be able to
pass on information to the carers in relation to the
mother’s current health status and that it was the view of the Office
the Public Guardian that the Department would be in a better position to make
safe arrangements and decisions in the best interests
of the children regarding
Guardian and also any mental health
service to ensure that contact ensured a
positive and safe relationship remained. (Page 26 written
submissions).
[60] At paragraph 37 of her written submissions Ms Burchill
“37. We do not believe that it has been established that it
would be in the best interests of the children for guardianship
to be with the
carers as opposed to the Department. Given the complex nature of the
mother’s mental health and future possible
periods of Ms W being unwell
and alternative arrangements for contact being made, it is submitted that it
would be in the best interests
of the children for the Department to retain
guardianship.”
[61] I note Ms Burchill further made a submission that
when considering the context of a “suitable person” for the purpose
Child Protection Regulation 2011
that the only suitable
person could be the Chief Executive given the need to obtain information to
properly assess any safety risk
to the children. I do not necessarily agree
with that submission however as I have expressed previously the fact that Mr and
Graham may ordinarily come under the definition as being “suitable
persons” as defined in the
Child Protection Regulation 2011
, it is not on
that basis alone that I am obliged to grant the application before
[62] Ms Quinn, the barrister instructed by the separate representative
adopted the submissions made by Ms Burchill.
[63] She correctly submitted
that the issue of the foster carers’ capacity is not in question and that
to date they had facilitated
59 transcript).
[64] She raised the issue however, as to:
happens if that relationship becomes toxic?” (Page 60
transcript).
[65] She also submitted that if guardianship was transferred to
the current carers, then responsibility fundamentally laid with them
evidence about the mother including her psychiatric history and she went on to
“Who knows what’s going to happen in terms of the
carers’ perception of and relationship with the mother.
How will the
– we can hope that the carers will be able to balance the need for them to
have an ongoing relationship with the
mother. They have to balance that,
though, against the need to protect the children. It would be my submission,
Your Honour, that
the best people to do that given these unusual circumstances
is the Department.” (Page 62 transcript).
[66] Having considered all
the relevant matters present in this case, having reviewed relevant parts of the
Affidavits relied upon
by the Applicant, having regard to the Social Assessment
Report, having regard to and having refreshed myself of the matter by way
perusing a transcript of the hearing, and taking into account the submissions
made in this matter, both written and oral, I am
satisfied that these are
children at risk of significant harm and in need of protection and that there is
no parent willing or able
to meet their protective needs.
[67] Considering
those matters in
Child Protection Act
, I am satisfied that a
Protection Order should be made and that such an order is the least intrusive
[68] As to whether or not an order in favour of the carers as
guardians would be the least intrusive order and consistent with the
interests of the children, I am not minded to grant an order in those
[69] The matters raised in favour of such an order being made, mainly
those as set out in the Affidavit of Mr G and in his oral evidence,
are outweighed by the need to ensure that these children have an ongoing
connection with their mother.
[70] The effect upon children having been
denied a sense of identity (or in this case at risk of losing their sense of
identity) has
been well documented both in an examination of past adoption
practices and in respect to the effect upon indigenous children who
were part of
the stolen generation.
[71] The paramount principle in the Act as outlined at
section 5A and the other general principles as set out in section 5B and to
lesser extent where applicable 5C, 5D and 5E lead me to find that the wellbeing
and best interests of A and A are served by making
a Protection Order granting
long term guardianship of the children to the Chief Executive. I am of the view
that this order will
best achieve the children being able to maintain a
relationship with their mother (if that ongoing relationship is appropriate) and
will enable them to retain their sense of identity.
[72] I am of the view
based on the evidence that Mr and Mrs G will continue to care for and nurture
these children despite a long
term guardianship order not being made in their
[73] There is little to suggest from the evidence in this matter that
the Department will intervene to change the placement of the
children and I am
not of the view that there is any significant risk of the children’s
ongoing care arrangements being interrupted.
[74] The inconvenience of
ongoing contact with the Department has been managed to date by the carers and
in this respect I note that
there are other foster children currently in their
care which does necessitate ongoing contact with the Department.
these reasons the application is dismissed in relation to the
[76] Given my findings and the Order I have in this matter, it is
not necessary for me to make an Order that the carers be relieved
requirement to give their current address to the mother for the duration of the
[77] I note that section 80 of the Act only applies if a Child
Protection Order for a child is made where a member of the child’s
or another suitable person is granted custody or guardianship of the
[78] Therefore, it is not necessary for me to deal with that
application.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (171 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter