URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBCCMCmr/2025/397.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
4 Princess [2025] QBCCMCmr 397 (7 November 2025)
ADJUDICATOR’S ORDER
Office of the
Commissioner
for Body Corporate and Community
[2025] QBCCMCmr 397
Murray Laurence Wills and Tracey-Skye Wills (
Colin Rayner (
Body Corporate for 4 Princess (
Occupiers of lot 1 (
affected persons
4 Princess CTS 51515
Body Corporate and Community Management Act
sections 227(1)
Body Corporate and Community Management (Specified Two-Lot Scheme Module
Module) Regulation 2020
APPLICATION NO:
DECISION DATE:
7 November 2025
DECISION OF:
D. Sutherland, Adjudicator
CATCHWORDS:
SPECIFIED TWO-LOT SCHEME – LOT OWNER AGREEMENT – REASONABLENESS
– The scheme comprises two lots. Under the Specified
Two-Lot Scheme
Module, body corporate decisions must be made by a lot owner agreement.
The applicants, as owner of one lot, require the agreement of the other lot
owner to install a shed on their exclusive use area, which
has been declined.
The Act provides that an order may be made giving effect to the LOA if agreement
was unreasonably withheld.
The questions are (a) whether the other lot owner, acting reasonably, may
act with self-interest or must also consider the interests
of the proposing or
owner, and in light of that test (b) whether the refusal to agree to the
proposal was unreasonable.
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
(1); Sched 5, item 17; Sched 5, item 26
Body Corporate and Community Management (Specified Two-Lot Scheme Module
Module) Regulation 2020
: ss 45; 111E; 111H
The application is dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Princess CTS 51515 is a scheme comprising 2 lots and common property.
[2] Each lot is
surrounded by an area of common property over which each has exclusive use
rights. The applicants, the owners of lot
2, wish to install a 70 m
shed on their exclusive use area. The application is made because they have been
unable to secure the necessary agreement of the
other owner.
[3] The scheme
is governed by the Act
identified in its community management statement (
Corporate and Community Management (Specified Two-Lot Scheme Module Module)
Regulation 2020
STLS Module
[4] In schemes
regulated under the other regulation modules, decisions about a body
corporate’s affairs are made either by its
committee or by owners voting
in a general meeting. However, due perhaps to their small size, schemes
regulated by the STLS Module
do not have committees and general meetings, but
instead must make lot owner agreements (
) to make those
[5] Because the
scheme’s exclusive use by-law does not specifically allow an owner to make
an improvement to their exclusive
use area, the STLS Module requires them to
make a LOA about any such proposal with the other owner.
[6] The owner of
lot 1, Colin Raynor, does not agree to the applicants installing the proposed
shed, in essence because he considers
its size and location would diminish the
enjoyment of his lot. The applicants say Mr Raynor’s opposition is
unreasonable.
applicants therefore seek an order giving them approval to install the
[8] In summary,
I have decided not to make an order to that effect because I am not satisfied
Mr Raynor, or alternatively the body
corporate, acted unreasonably in
declining to give approval.
Applicable law
Lot owner agreements and exclusive use areas
mechanisms for authorising an improvement to common property which is part of an
exclusive use area in a STLS are found in
section 45 of the STLS Module
It provides that if the exclusive use by-law does not authorise an owner to
make ‘stated improvements’, the owner must
get body corporate
authority through a LOA. The terms of section 45 make it clear that the proposed
improvement must be specifically
provided for. In this case, there is no dispute
that the applicants’ proposal requires a LOA.
[10] Section
111E of the Act
explains the meaning and effect of a
111E Meaning and effect of lot owner agreement
(1) A lot owner agreement for a specified two-lot scheme is an agreement
between the owners of the lots included in the scheme about
(a) related to the carrying out of the functions given to the body corporate
under this Act and the community management statement;
(b) for which the body corporate is required or permitted to make a decision
under this Act or the community management statement.
(2) A lot owner agreement for a specified two-lot scheme is a
decision of the body corporate
[emphasis added]
[11] Section
111H of the Act
explains the mechanics of proposing and making a
111H Request to enter into lot owner agreement
(1) The owner of a lot included in a specified two-lot scheme may ask the
owner of the other lot included in the scheme to enter into
a lot owner
agreement about a proposed decision.
(2) A request under subsection (1) must—
(a) be made in the way prescribed under the specified two-lot schemes module;
(b) state a reasonable period for the owner of the lot to whom the request is
made to enter into a lot owner agreement about the proposed
(3) If the owner of the lot to whom the request is made does not enter into a
lot owner agreement about the proposed decision within
the period stated,
body corporate
is taken to have decided against making the proposed decision
contained in the request.
(4) Subsection (3) applies despite section 111G (2) .
(5) In this section—
"proposed decision" means a proposed decision—
(a) about a matter related to the carrying out of the functions given to the
body corporate under this Act and the community management
statement; and
(b) that the body corporate is required or permitted to make under this Act
or the community management statement.
[emphasis added]
[12] I will note
here, as it becomes relevant later in my reasons, that sections 111E(2) and
111H(3) of the Act explicitly provide
that a decision to enter or to decline to
enter a LOA is taken at law to be a
body corporate
proposed LOA
(set out in more detail below) encompasses a number of
different improvements, but the applicants presently seek only an outcome
respect of the shed. Elsewhere in their submission the applicants say they also
wish to get approval for the other potential future
improvements. Given those
matters are not addressed in the outcomes section of the application form and
are not addressed at all
in the submissions, I will not consider them at this
Orders to resolve the dispute
requested outcome is an order giving the applicants approval to construct the
proposed shed. An adjudicator does not have
power to give that approval, as
such. However, the Act empowers an adjudicator to make an order giving effect to
the applicants’
proposed LOA, or a variation of it.
[15] I will
start by setting out the relevant legislation, and then deal with a High Court
decision which is relevant to the interpretation
of those provisions.
[16] I firstly
section 276(1) of the Act
empowers an adjudicator to make an
order to resolve body corporate-related disputes. It relevantly
276 Orders of adjudicators
(1) An adjudicator to whom the application is referred may make an order that
is just and equitable in the circumstances (including
a declaratory order) to
resolve a dispute, in the context of a community titles scheme, about—
(a) a claimed or anticipated contravention of this Act or the community
management statement; or
(b) the exercise of rights or powers, or the
performance of duties, under this Act or the community management statement;
(3) Without limiting subsections (1) and (2) , the adjudicator may make an
order mentioned in schedule 5.
[17] Section
276(1) thereby empowers an adjudicator to make orders in 2 types of
circumstances—about a contravention of the
legislation or by-laws, or
[18] Sched 5 to
the Act details a number of specific orders in addition to the general
order-making power in section 276(1), without
limiting that power. The Sched 5
items explicitly relevant for LOAs are:
declaring that a decision purportedly made by a lot owner agreement was at all
times void.
An order declaring that a decision purportedly made by a lot owner
agreement is a valid decision of the body corporate.
satisfied that a decision made by a lot owner agreement was
unreasonable—an order—
(a) declaring that the decision was at all times void; or
(b) giving effect to a variation of the lot owner agreement.
satisfied that an
of a lot included in a specified two-lot scheme
was unreasonable
in not entering into a lot owner agreement following a
request from the owner of the other lot—an order—
giving effect to the decision proposed by the owner of the other lot; or
(b) giving effect to a variation of the decision proposed by the owner of the
[emphasis added]
[19] Of those,
only item 26 fits the factual circumstances of this case.
[20] Although
not specific to LOA’s, Sched 5 item 17 is also potentially relevant,
because it applies to proposals for improvements
on or changes to common
property, and an exclusive use area remains part of the common property. It
satisfied the body corporate’s decision about a proposal by the owner of a
lot to make improvements on or changes to common
property is an unreasonable
decision—an order requiring the body
(a) to reject the proposal; or
(b) to agree to the proposal; or
(c) to ratify the proposal on stated terms.
[21] While item
17 refers to a body corporate decision, it is potentially relevant to a LOA
refusal because section 111H(3) deems
the other owner’s refusal to be a
body corporate decision. Further, while item 17 refers to decisions about common
an exclusive use area is also common property.
The reasonableness requirement
applicants say that Mr Raynor is being unreasonable in refusing to make the
proposed LOA. They do not point to any particular
provisions in support of their
application, but Sched 5, items 17 and 26 above are clearly potentially
relevant, because they apply
respectively to a lot owner’s proposal to
improve or change common property and to a lot owner not entering into a
applicants’ stated grounds also invoke
of the Act. It is
a key provision of the legislation, imposing various functions on a body
corporate and, particularly relevant in
this case, requiring a body corporate to
act reasonably in fulfilling them. It provides:
corporate’s general functions
(1) The body corporate for a community titles scheme must—
(a) administer the common property and body corporate assets for the benefit
of the owners of the lots included in the scheme; and
(b) enforce the community management statement (including enforcing any
by-laws for the scheme in the way provided under this Act);
(c) carry out the other functions given to the body corporate under this Act
and the community management statement.
The body corporate must act reasonably
in anything it does under
subsection (1) including
making, or not making, a decision
subsection.
Examples for subsection (2) of a body corporate making a
• passing a motion by resolution at a general meeting or a committee
• not passing a motion after a vote at a general meeting or a committee
• owners of lots included in a specified two-lot scheme entering into a
lot owner agreement for the scheme (see section 111E
• owners of lots included in a specified two-lot scheme failing to
enter into a lot owner agreement following a request made
by one of the owners
(see section 111H (3))
[my emphasis]
[24] Section
94(2) sits neatly with item 17 insofar as both deal with the reasonableness of a
body corporate
decision. With respect to item 26, however, section 94(2)
does not, at least directly, prescribe or proscribe anything in regard
decisions made by
individual owners
. However, the examples provided in
section 94 about its application include the circumstance of lot owners in a
specified two-lot
) failing to enter into a LOA. That thereby
unambiguously indicates that the section 94(2) obligation imposed upon bodies
to act reasonably was intended by the legislature to apply to owners
considering a LOA in a STLS. Further, it draws attention specifically
item 26, which deals with an owner unreasonably failing to enter into a
LOA. The examples also draw attention to section 111H(3)
which, as I noted
above, describes such a decision as a body corporate decision.
[25] Thus, it
might seem obvious that this application could be resolved by an item 17 order
or by an item 26 order, in each case
empowered by subsection 276(1)(a) of the
Act, on the basis that the body corporate had acted unreasonably in
contravention of section
94(2) (if I found in fact that was the case).
[26] However,
resolving the problem is not as straightforward as it may seem because, in a
two-lot scheme, the defeat of the proposal
turns on only one owner’s vote
and the words of item 26 focus attention on the reasonableness of a
decision, whereas section 94(2) refers to
decisions. At least in other contexts, that distinction raises a
questions as to the way in which the test for unreasonableness is
applied. The
answer to that question must be found in the leading authority on reasonableness
in this jurisdiction, being the decision
to which Mr Raynor’s submission
refers, namely the High Court in
Ainsworth v Albrecht
). I will therefore proceed firstly by discussing
that decision in some detail.
Ainsworth decision on reasonableness
High Court in
heard an appeal of an adjudicator’s
failed motion to grant them exclusive use over certain common property and
approve proposed changes to
the area, by joining the airspace between the
lot’s two separate balconies. The applicant’s motion had failed to
the required resolution without dissent in a general meeting, ie without
disagreement by any voter. The adjudicator deemed the motion
to have passed on
the basis it was defeated unreasonably. The appeal had first proceeded through
(where the adjudication
decision was overturned) and then the Queensland Court of
(where the adjudication
decision was reaffirmed). The original applicants in BCCM thereby became the
appellants in the High Court.
[28] Adjudicator
Rosemann at first instance applied section 94(2) of the Act, finding that
the body corporate had acted unreasonably
in defeating the motion because (among
other things) that decision did not represent a reasonable balance of the
competing interests
of the owner who proposed the motion and the other owners
(or at least those other owners who opposed the proposal). The adjudicator
went on to make an order
deemed the motion to be passed.
[29] In that
process, Adjudicator Rosemann noted that
item 10 of Sched 5 to the Act
referred specifically to motions requiring, but failing to get, a resolution
without dissent. I note at this point that items 26
and 10 are very similar in
that they both focus attention on the reasonableness of the
, rather than on the reasonableness of the
body corporate
[30] Item 10
If satisfied a motion ... considered by a general meeting
of the body corporate and requiring a resolution without dissent was not
opposition that in the circumstances is unreasonable
order giving effect to the motion as proposed, or a variation of the motion as
[my emphasis]
adjudicator considered (and the High Court agreed) that the
‘opposition’ referred to in item 10 is the opposition
dissenting voter, acting
individually.
Attempting to resolve
the apparent inconsistency between section 94(2)’s focus on the body
corporate’s decision and item
10’s focus on the individual
voter’s decision, Adjudicator Rosemann said:
In my view, the
relevant legal obligation is whether the Body Corporate acted reasonably
(pursuant to
section 94(2)
) in deciding not to approve the proposal.
Schedule 5, items 10, 11, 17, 22, 24 and 25 (and potentially other example
orders) all
contemplate different circumstances where a body corporate decision
may not have been reasonable. There is not, in my opinion, a
different legal
obligation depending on which Schedule 5 order has been contemplated by an
[32] It was on
this point that the High Court centred its analysis, finding that the
adjudicator erred in applying section 94(2) and
therefore irrelevantly
considering whether
the body corporate’s
decision evidenced a
proper balancing of the competing owners’ interests. As Mr Raynor
specifically raises this point, I will
address the High Court’s reasons in
in further detail.
[33] Regarding
the interrelationship between item 10 and sections 94(2) and 276(1) of the Act,
the Court said:
Item 10, which
is the basis on which rights of lot owners may be altered by the adjudicator in
the face of an otherwise lawful decision
not to pass a motion requiring a
resolution without dissent, concerns the exercise of a right or power by an
The adjudicator
incorrectly viewed section 276(1)(a) of the Act as the source of power to make
the order to resolve the dispute, ie
an order about a contravention of the Act,
when the better view was that it was instead within the power conferred by
section 276(1)(b),
ie an order about the exercise of a right or
276(1)(b) of the Act operates to the exclusion of section 276(1)(a) (to whatever
extent the latter might apply), according
to the maxim
expressum facit
cessare tacitum
(ie, where a provision expressly deals with something, it
prevails to the exclusion of a provision which impliedly provides for it
different way).
Section 94(2) of
the Act did not govern the resolution of the matter. The machinery in Sched 5
for the enforcement of section 94(2)
is item 24, not item 10. The language
of item 10, which focusses on the reasonableness of a lot owner’s
opposition, stands
in contrast to the language of item 24, which empowers an
adjudicator to deem a motion passed if it is unreasonably defeated and
focusses on a decision of a body corporate in general
[34] Regarding
the focus of the reasonableness test, the Court said:
The issue for
the adjudicator was, as raised by item 10, whether the opposition of each
dissenting voter was unreasonable, not whether
the decision of the Body
Corporate was unreasonable.
reasonableness of the dissenter’s opposition to the proposal can only be
determined by considering the circumstances of
the proposal and its likely
effect on their property interests; but that is not to say that their opposition
to the proposal is unreasonable
if it is not informed by altruism or sympathy
for the interests of the proponent, at the expense of the opponent's reasonable
of their own
A reasonable
decision must have a rational
The standard of
reasonableness is objective, and it is to be applied in this case at the time of
rejection of the defeated motion
taking into account all relevant factors
including factors which were extant but which the parties may not have
identified or appreciated
The reliance by
the adjudicator on the judgment in
Waters v Public Transport Corporation
which concerned the duty of a decision-making body to reach a reasonable
decision taking into account competing considerations,
was misplaced, because a
lot owner registering their opposition to a motion is not a decision-maker of
This was not an
instance in which the adjudicator was required to strike a balance between
competing positions and weigh all the relevant
factors in determining whether
the dissenters’ opposition was unreasonable. It is not unreasonable for
dissenters not to have
taken account of factors favouring the
[35] Regarding
the application of the reasonableness test to the facts in that case, the Court
It is no light
thing to conclude that opposition by a lot owner to a resolution is unreasonable
where adoption of the resolution will
have the effect of:
− appropriating
part of the common property to the exclusive use of the owner of another lot,
for no return to the body corporate
or the other lot owners
the features of the common property which it exhibited at the time an objecting
lot owner acquired his or her lot,
− potentially
creating a risk of interference with the tranquillity or privacy of an objecting
intended to operate in respect of a broad range of resolutions which are
required to be passed without dissent. It must,
therefore, be understood that it
is neither necessary nor desirable to attempt an exhaustive statement of the
circumstances in which
such an order may be made. That said, opposition to a
proposal that could not, on any rational view, adversely affect the material
enjoyment of an opponent's property rights may be seen to be
unreasonable.
The fact that a
lot owner might have an interest in improving his or her lot is not a prima
facie affirmative proposition, the pursuit
of which can be assumed to be
appropriate or supported by other lot
Item 10 is not
to be read as if it contained the words ‘in the opinion of the
adjudicator’, nor as if it otherwise threw
the determination of what is
unreasonable upon the subjective and unexaminable opinion of an adjudicator.
Evidently, the BCCM Act
so values the interests of lot owners in common property
that, subject only to proven unreasonableness, it conditions the disposition
common property upon
Reconciling Ainsworth, item 17, item 26, and ss 276(1) and
have noted that both items 17 and 26 are relevant in these circumstances. I note
also that they approach the issue from different
paths: the former is relevant
here because it applies specifically to decisions about proposed changes to
common property and generally
to all types of schemes; whereas the latter is
also relevant here because it applies generally to all LOA decisions regardless
the subject matter but specifically to
[37] My decision
as to which item to apply is further complicated by the fact that item 17
focusses on a body corporate’s decision
but item 26 focusses on the lot
owner’s decision. As the High Court in
cautions, they are
not to be treated as involving the same adjudication reasoning process.
[38] In many
instances where 2 statutory provisions might apply, that often can be resolved
by adopting the well-accepted approach
to statutory interpretation that a more
general provision does not detract from, or should be interpreted consistently
with, a more
specific provision.
But that approach is unhelpful where it is not clear which of items 17 and 26 is
the more specific provision—the provisions
intersect, rather than sit as
under and overlay. I therefore think the answer lies in the following passage
from another High Court
decision, to the effect that I must find a way to
accommodate
enduring of the canons of construction that have been applied throughout the
history of this Court is that which enjoins
the decision-maker, faced with
apparent statutory intersection, to endeavour, to the fullest extent permitted
by the language, to
read the two statutes so that each, within its own sphere,
can continue to operate, such that no part of either is taken to be repealed
inoperative, for Parliament has not said so.
[citations omitted]
[39] I will
focus primarily on resolving the dispute through an item 26 order, if only
because it seems to be the more winding path,
for reasons which will become
apparent below. Along the way, I will also deal with item 17.
[40] Having read
reason in this case as follows:
opposing owner in a STLS is like a single voter in another type of scheme
dissenting on a motion in general meeting
item 26 is like
item 10, in that both focus on the reasonableness of the owner/voter
item 26 deals
expressly with the fact-scenario of this case, and so applies to the exclusion
of item 24 (which deals with the reasonableness
of body corporate decisions),
item 26 concerns
the exercise of rights or powers, or the performance of duties, under this Act,
therefore the correct approach is as found in
, adjusting for these circumstances, ie:
consider whether
to make an item 26 order, via section 276(1)(b) of the Act, and
do not apply
section 94(2) of the Act to make an order via section 276(1)(a) of the Act.
[41] However,
that last step poses a problem because, as I have noted above, the examples
given in section 94(2) indicate it applies
to a failure to enter into a
LOA. I must therefore apply item 26 compatibly with sections 94(2) and
276(1)(a). I consider the following
points are the path to getting there.
item 26 must be employed in this case (compatibly also with item 17), because it
explicitly applies to the circumstances. In
, the High Court
could have affirmed the adjudicator’s application of section 94(2)
simply by finding that item 10 may be ignored,
noting that subsection 276(3)
provides that the specific orders in Sched 5 do not limit the application of the
more general subsection
276(1), or finding that item 24 (which easily dovetails
with section 94(2)) could be applied instead. However, their Honours considered
it preferable to apply item 10, because it was explicitly tailored to the
circumstances of the case. I cannot see any justification
for diverging from
that approach, here.
[43] Second
while a decision about a LOA is deemed by section 111E(2) of the Act to be a
body corporate decision, item 26 focuses unequivocally
on the reasonableness of
the individual owner’s decision, not the body corporate’s. The
decision makes it clear that the distinction has implications
for the way in which the decision-maker may and must act, if acting
reasonably.
for the purposes of item 26, and again following
requirement to act reasonably permits an owner in a STLS to act solely with
self-interest in considering a proposed LOA. I will
deal with this in more
detail, below.
[45] Fourth
section 94(2) explicitly applies to a LOA. Again, in light of their
Honour’s insistence in
that explicitly relevant
provisions must be applied, I cannot see any justification for ignoring section
94(2) in deciding this application,
section 94(2) orders may only be made with reference to the power in subsection
276(1)(a), and not subsection 276(1)(b). Central
decision was the concern that the adjudicator did not have due regard to which
of those two limbs was engaged when finding power
for making the order. It
follows that section 276(1)(a) also must be engaged.
item 26, although apparently concerning an exercise of a right, power or duty,
can be reconciled with section 276(1)(a), concerning
contraventions of the
[48] Seventh
item 26, while permitting self-interested decision making, can be reconciled
with section 94(2) insofar as it ordinarily requires
a balancing of competing
interests. I will also deal with this and my sixth point in more detail,
[49] I will now
third point
, above, in more detail.
section 111E(2) of the Act expressly provides that a LOA for a STLS is a
decision of the body corporate, if item 26 called
for an assessment of the body
corporate’s reasonableness and not the owner’s, it would have been
drafted in such terms.
That distinction must be given due regard.
[51] I will
therefore start by following, for item 26 purposes, the view firmly expressed by
the High Court in
in respect of an individual owner deciding
how to vote on a motion: a lot owner acting reasonably in considering a LOA
proposal need
not take account of the proponent’s interests in considering
their own position. Apart from the obvious need for me to make
consistently with the considered views of the High Court, I respectfully
consider that to be the logical approach for a
lot owner in a STLS deciding
whether to enter a LOA, too.
[52] I will deal
briefly with the contention that, otherwise, to the extent section 94(2) of the
Act applies, the reasonableness of
a body corporate’s decision is to be
assessed including as to whether the decision represents a proper balancing of
interests. The High Court in
does not explicitly say
as much; rather, both the joint reasons and Nettle J say that a balancing
exercise is not required in the
circumstance of that case, where section 94(2)
does not apply at all and the focus is instead on the decision of the individual
voter. However, I understand those reasons to indicate that their
Honours did otherwise consider the balancing requirement would
example, to a body corporate decision not to pass a motion requiring an ordinary
resolution, which is subject to section
94(2). I take that view because it seems
to me that it would have been simple for their Honours to say there was no
balancing exercise
required for
body corporate decision, whether or
not section 94(2) applied, if they considered that to be so, rather than to
reason at some length
that it did not apply in the special case of a motion
requiring a resolution without dissent. The view that section 94(2) ordinarily
requires a balancing exercise was subsequently taken by QCAT Senior Member
Stilgoe OAM and Member Collins in
Body Corporate for the Reserve CTS 31561 v
Trojan Resorts Pty Ltd
Justice Carmody in QCAT, in
Body Corporate for Beaches Surfers Paradise v
[53] It bears
emphasising that a LOA involves only two lot’s owners. If the opposing lot
owner were obliged to take into account
the proponent’s interests, in
considering the LOA, then surely the proponent, in proposing the LOA, must also
be required to
take into account the opponent’s interests. Otherwise, the
burdens put on the two owners would be asymmetrical and would strongly
the proponent. But the legislation does not require the proponent to be mindful
of the other owner’s interests. If one
owner can act entirely with
self-interest in
then surely the other owner
can act entirely with self-interest in
[54] However,
there is some nuance to that position. An owner in a STLS considering a proposed
LOA is, at least to some extent, engaging
in a body corporate decision-making
process differently from an owner in other types of schemes considering a motion
(whether or
not it requires a resolution without dissent). Significantly, they
are able to engage in discussion with the proponent and perhaps
renegotiate the
terms of a LOA. That observation might prompt a conclusion that the proponent
and opponent in a two-lot scheme are
like a committee considering a proposal
from an owner or occupier. That then might raise the question whether, like a
committee making
a decision, they are obliged to engage in a negotiating and
interests-balancing exercise, as discussed by Carmody J in
Body Corporate for Beaches Surfers
[55] In my view,
requiring an opposing owner in a STLS to act as if they are a committee member
casts too heavy a burden on them.
They are not, like a committee member,
negotiating at arm’s length from the
Rather, they take part
as the sole guardian of their own interests as a lot owner. As I concluded
above, to require an opposing lot
owner to have taken into account the interests
of the proponent and possibly compromise their own position would ironically
a greater burden on them than is placed on the proponent owner. Further,
while an owner in a STLS considering a lot owners agreement
may look like some
hybrid of the single voter in
and the committee in
, I cannot conceive of a practicable middle ground between
self-interested decision-making and interests-balancing decision-making.
either does or does not consider the interests of others; for practical
purposes, the choice in that regard is binary.
[56] Of course,
an adjudicator can still make an item 26 order to deem the LOA to have been
made if the opponent is being unreasonable
in purporting to protect their own
interests. There must be a reasonable basis for their objection—as
variously expressed in
, it cannot be irrational or based on
irrelevant factors or feelings of spite, ill-will or attention-seeking. To that,
I would add
that it is arguably unreasonable for a lot owner to refuse to engage
with a proposed LOA, thereby defeating it by
[57] That is not
to say that acting entirely selfishly, with no regard to the owners’
interests, is reasonable in every case. This case, and cases like
, involve proposals for which the proposer has no inherent right
(other than the right to ask). I would contrast that with a hypothetical
a lot owner in a STLS refusing to contribute funds for necessary common property
maintenance because they would instead like
to spend the money on
themself—in that case, an adjudicator might find that their opposition was
unreasonable insofar as it
was inconsistent with their obligation as a body
corporate member to maintain common property, even when they have a competing
to spend their money as they wish. That is simply to say that whether a
self-interested decision is reasonable will depend on circumstances
the subject matter of the proposal and the consequences of opposing it. Their
entitlement to act with self-interest is
therefore not unfettered.
[58] I will deal
sixth and seventh points
, above, together, and I will start by
considering whether there is technical compatibility between item 26 and section
[59] I will
pause here to note that item 17 is clearly compatible with section 94(2),
because both explicitly deal with a body corporate’s
reasonableness, and
it also follows that item 17 is compatible with an order pursuant to section
276(1)(a) for a contravention of
section 94(2).
, the High Court found error in the adjudicator’s
contention that item 10 represented a circumstance which could be prosecuted
through section 94(2). Firstly, that was because item 10 and section 94(2) are
referrable, by their nature, to different limbs of
section 276(1): section
94(2) operates through subsection 276(1)(a) because they both deal with
contraventions of the Act; whereas
item 10 operates through subsection 276(1)(b)
because they both deal with the exercise of rights etc. However, while item 26
face also deals with the exercise of rights etc, section 94(2) and
111H(3) drag it into the realm of contraventions. While that may
forcing a square peg into a round hole, that is what deeming provisions can
do—create legal coherence out of discordance.
The High Court in
had no equivalents of sections 111E(2) and 111H(3) to similarly
knock the metaphorical corners off item 10.
[61] Further,
the High Court noted there was different machinery in Sched 5 for enforcing
section 94(2), namely item 24. But in this
case, regardless of item 24,
item 26 clearly is machinery for enforcing section 94(2), because the
circumstance described in item
26 is explicitly repeated in the examples for
section 94(2). That is also consistent with 111H(3) of the Act deeming a
decision not
to enter a LOA to be a decision of the body corporate.
therefore satisfied that, in a technical sense, section 276(1)(a) is a power for
enforcing section 94(2) through an item
to the next step, I also consider that section 94(2) and item 26 are not
incompatible in a practical sense, for the following
difficulty here, on its face, is that item 26 focusses on the reasonableness of
the individual (where acting with self-interest
is considered reasonable),
whereas section 94(2) is said ordinarily to require consideration of the
interests of all affected parties,
ie a balancing exercise. However, for the
following reasons, I do not consider it necessary to apply section 94(2) of
a decision about a LOA in the same way one might apply it to other
body corporate decisions, and thereby inconsistently with item
[65] In reality,
body corporate decisions are made in different ways in different contexts. The
practical mechanics of a decision
made by an owner voting in a general meeting,
and one made by a committee, and one made in a STLS, are different, yet all of
decisions are subject to section
Common to all decisions
on reasonableness is the view that it must be assessed in all of the
circumstances,
circumstances include the nature of the decision-making process—section
94(2) requires a body corporate to ‘
reasonably’ in making
a decision. That is not to say that reasonableness has different meanings
depending on the context—objectivity,
relevance, rationality and the like
are touchstones in all contexts—but rather, a decision is not made in a
vacuum, and understanding
and acknowledging the circumstances in which the
decision is made provides the framework for assessing the reasonableness of the
conduct in the particular case.
[66] Looking at
it another way, section 111E(2) deeming a LOA to be a body corporate decision to
which section 94(2) therefore applies
does not mean that, in reality, a LOA
shares all the characteristics of a body corporate decision made in a general
meeting or a
committee meeting. One might say it does no more than acknowledge
that, because there are no committee or general meeting resolutions
STLS Module, there must be some way of giving a LOA decision the formal status
of a body corporate action. It also serves
the purpose of distinguishing formal
agreements between the two owners about body corporate affairs from informal
agreements between
neighbouring owners which do not relate to the body
corporate’s affairs (for example, one agreeing to feed the other’s
pet while they are away), or formal agreements between those owners for matters
unrelated to the body corporate (for example, when
one sells personal property
to the other).
[67] If one
accepts that section 94(2) may apply differently in different decision-making
contexts, then it is a short next step to
say that its interests-balancing
requirement can be satisfied in different ways. In this case, the context is a
decision by one owner
in the face of a proposal by the other owner, and in my
view that in itself can satisfy the balancing requirement—the body
corporate’s decision has two steps, in which the interests of the
proponent are accounted for in their formulating and putting
up the proposal,
and the interests of the other owner are accounted for in their consideration of
it. As I suggest above, requiring
an opposing owner to go further and consider
the other owner’s interests in the LOA would ignore the terms of item 26,
clear, considered, unanimous view of the High Court about a strongly
analogous provision (item 10), and the reality that the proposer
need not have
the other owner’s interests in mind.
[68] In light of
that, in my view, while section 94(2) of the Act applies to owners in a STLS
failing to enter into a LOA, the section
is not contravened for a lack of
consideration by the opponent of the proponent’s interests. To put it
another way, for the
purposes of an item 26 order, if the adjudicator is not
satisfied that an owner in a STLS was unreasonable as to their own interests
not entering into a LOA, they cannot be satisfied that the body corporate acted
unreasonably in making its decision, in contravention
of section 94(2) of
the Act. I also consider that item 17 may be applied consistently with this
application of item 26 and section
94. That is, in this context, the body
corporate’s reasonableness is adjudicated with reference to the
reasonableness of the
opposing owner’s decision, and without requiring an
interests-balancing exercise.
Submissions
now turn to the parties’ submissions.
attempts have been made to resolve the matter directly with Mr Raynor since June
2023. Despite these efforts, Mr Raynor has
consistently refused to engage
in direct discussions and has instead referred us to his lawyer.
Lot 1 is already
substantially developed and we are seeking to do likewise on the exclusive area
for our lot.
The objections
we have encountered primarily concern the size and location of our proposed
shed. Key considerations include:
proposed 10 x 7 metre shed is significantly smaller than the existing shed on
Lot 1, which measures 14 x 9 metres and
is 7.5 metres high.
proposed shed is a reasonable and proportionate structure for a semi-rural area
and is intended for storage purposes.
plans, approvals, certifications and quotes.
As to the issues
of the elevation of the shed and its impact on the lot 1’s views:
situated at a lower elevation (approximately 35 m Australian Height Datum)
compared to Lot 1 (approximately 40 m
Australian Height Datum), making the
shed’s height and placement on Lot 2 less
shed’s maximum height is 3.68 metres, which is below the slab level of Lot
primary views from Lot 1 are to the northeast and southwest, while Lot 2 is
oriented east-west. Therefore, the shed’s
proposed location will not block
or negatively affect the views from Lot 1.
also planted trees along the shared boundary to further screen the shed from
view, ensuring minimal visual impact.
As to traffic
and usage impact:
is intended solely for the storage and retrieval of items. This limited use will
not increase traffic or noise levels
to the property.
current concern from tenants at Lot 1 regarding increased traffic is
unwarranted.
presently paying $400 per month (and have been doing so since moving into the
property in June 2023) for storage of
furniture and belongings that we wish to
store on site in a shed constructed for this purpose.
storage facility will reduce the need for us to make trips to a commercial
storage facility, thus decreasing traffic on
the common driveway.
As to unsuitable
locations for the shed:
northern end of Lot 2 is not suitable for the shed due to its use as the only
access point to the rear of the property.
− Additionally,
there is insufficient space to place the shed in this location, in compliance
with council regulations.
of the property cannot accommodate the shed due to the location of the effluent
disposal system. Any modification
to this system would constitute a development
offence, as stipulated in the Decision Notice for the property.
Given these
factors, we believe the proposed shed is a reasonable improvement to the
property and does not negatively affect the interests
or rights of the owner of
Raynor, the second respondent
My daughter
Lauren Raynor is an occupier of Lot 1. She informed me of a conversation she had
in about July 2023 with Murray Wills’
father, Geoff, who informed her that
they had plans to convert the existing garage of Lot 2 into a granny flat.
initially told the ultimate purpose of the shed was to allow the existing
garages to be repurposed into additional dwelling
rooms, facilitated by the shed
effectively becoming a garage. Since then, we have been told the shed is needed
for storage of belongings.
I understand the belongings the applicants have in
storage are in a facility no bigger than a single car garage that typically
2.9 m by 5.8 m equating to approximately 16.8 square meters. I can only
assume that it is for the purpose of parking cars as well
as storge, in order to
facilitate a later conversion of the existing garages to dwelling rooms.
A number of
conversations ensued over the course of time about the proposal, including
concerns about the size and location of the
proposed shed. Geoff informed Lauren
that an alternative size and location for the shed were not being considered,
due to the fact
they had already purchased the 10m by 7m shed.
The proposal for
the construction of a shed would have it situated near the boundary of the
exclusive use areas and therefore it would
likely interfere with the
tranquillity and privacy of the Lot 2’s occupiers.
The shed is
proposed to be 70 m² in size. No explanation is given as to why the
proposed location is necessary or why the proposed
size is necessary. In fact,
the applicants’ material suggests that they need nothing more than a
regular sized storage shed
for the storage of goods.
Where there is
an appropriate alternative location for a more appropriately size shed, and
where the location and size of the shed
proposed by the applicants will
interfere with the tranquillity and privacy of the occupiers of lot 1, the
application should be
That decision to
oppose the proposed location and the size of the shed should also be considered
in light of circumstances where the
applicants have said the shed would be
utilised for the parking of cars, which would have a direct impact on the
tranquillity and
It should not be
lost that the respondents have already indicated agreement to a shed in an
alternate location and size such that
body corporate approval will be obtained
without the need for an application.
subdivided the property into two lots, I ensured the dwelling was appropriate in
the sense that it had a three car garage that
was sufficient to meet the needs
of new owners.
The applicants
purchased Lot 2 of the Scheme with their eyes wide open, knowing the property
they were purchasing formed part of a
Community Titles Scheme. They knew or
should have known the approvals they would require to make changes to the
The shed on Lot
1 does not impact on the amenity of Lot 2 as if it did, the applicants would not
have proceeded with the purchase
of Lot 2. The presence of an existing shed on
Lot 1 does not grant the applicants automatic permission to build a shed of any
or in any location, especially one that impacts the amenity of Lot 1, when
viable alternative spaces are available.
In the decision
Ainsworth v Albrecht
[2016] HCA 40
the High Court held that the task of
an adjudicator was not balancing competing considerations, but determining
whether the opposition
to the proposal was unreasonable, noting that it is no
light thing to conclude that opposition by a lot owner to a resolution is
unreasonable where adoption of the resolution will have the effect of
interference with the tranquillity or privacy of an objecting
lot owner. The
refusal by the respondents in all the circumstances is not unreasonable.
Prior to this
application, the respondents put forward the alternative location and size for
the shed, which the applicants had not
taken up, and did not provide a
reasonable explanation as to why that was not suitable for the needs. By
refusing to adopt the alternate
location and size, the applicants have
themselves acted unreasonably by failing to consider the effect of interference
with the tranquillity
and privacy of the respondents.
[72] Mr Raynor
also provides a signed statement from Lauren Rayner confirming the essential
matters in Mr Raynor’s submission,
including as to:
Wills’ alleged conversation with her about the applicants’ intention
to convert the existing garage into a granny
the anticipated
effects on lot 1’s occupiers if the proposed shed were installed, mainly
in regard to the increased number of
occupiers of lot 2 (presumably because the
existing garage would be converted to living area) and the resulting increased
on the common roadway, and the impact of the shed’s size and close
location to lot 1, visually and in regard to overland water
[73] Lauren Raynor’s contemporaneous text
message of 15 September 2023 generally confirms those concerns:
Hi Geoff, I have spoken to both my parents and they have advised that they
would like to know legally what the rules are regarding
this, and also what
approval is necessary. Both have concerns regarding the size of the shed and it
being so close to the boundary
fence, as well as any additional traffic that may
be associated with it. At this stage we can't say yes to this being built. My
has also expressed concerns that the building is due to take place tomorrow
according to Murray. This is not adequate time for any
decision to be made.
Thanks Lauren
submissions
, the applicants say:
The assertion
that the shed will be used for additional vehicle parking is incorrect—the
shed is solely intended for storage,
to replace costly off-site facilities.
information presented in relation to Geoff Wills’ conversations or
comments is irrelevant to this application. Geoff Wills
is neither an owner nor
a decision-maker for Lot 2 and his statements should not be considered in the
adjudication.
We recognise
that we entered the purchase of this property without a thorough understanding
of the legislation related to a two-lot
scheme. Unfortunately, we were misled by
both the real estate agent and our solicitor (at the time of purchase) into
believing that
the only area involved in this scheme was the common use
We only became
aware of the full implications of the two-lot scheme after consulting with a
private building certifier and asking
the respondent for their approval. At this
time we contacted a new lawyer and learnt the by-laws of the two lot scheme. We
have continually
followed all correct processes and abided by the By Laws.
location and size have been designed within council regulations and do not
significantly impact Lot 1. The proposed
location is the most practical for the
property layout and council compliance.
Mr Raynor has
declined to engage in constructive resolution discussions and instead
misrepresented facts to support their objections.
Determination
[75] Broadly
described, the scheme land is rectangular, with lot 1’s buildings on the
right half and lot 2’s buildings
on the left. Title for each lot is
confined to the depicted buildings, the rest of the scheme land being designated
as common property.
By-law 5 of the CMS grants exclusive use rights over common
property, by reference to Schedule E of the CMS. The exclusive use areas
comprise most of the remaining scheme land, save for the driveway servicing both
lots, and those areas are separated by a line running
the scheme, and about half way between the lots. Lot 1 is granted area
“A”, comprising about
the right half of the scheme, and Lot 2 is
granted the area “B”, comprising about the left half. The plan
describes area
“A” as 2513 m
“B” as 2386 m
[76] Through
by-law 5, exclusive use is granted “
for the purpose of garden, lawn and
any other purpose lawfully permitted and compliant with the use of the Scheme
land under the provisions
of the town planning scheme for the local
”. Schedule E is worded differently but is largely the same,
describing the permitted uses as “
driveway and/or general yard and
”. As I noted above, there is no dispute that the by-law
does not specifically allow for the proposed improvement and so the
legislation
requires the owners to make a LOA about it.
proposed LOA was put to Mr Raynor by letter dated 26 March 2024. The LOA in full
is expressed as follows:
The Body Corporate acknowledge and agree to
support an application by the owner of lot 2, to undertake all or any of the
1. Construct a shed 10 metres long and 7 metres wide not closer than 1.5
metres to the boundary of the exclusive use area of common
property allocated to
lot 2, as shown on the plan attached and to then have that area augmented to lot
2 on completion.
2. Constructed an inground or above ground pool on the common property
allocated to lot 2, as shown on the plan attached and to then
have that area
augmented to lot 2 on completion (if applicable); and
3. Create additional parking area on the common property allocated to lot 2,
as shown on the plan attached and to then have that area
augmented to lot 2 on
completion (if applicable).
The Owner of Lot 2 will bear all costs of:
(a) Building design and approval by certifier or Council
(b) construction of the Works,
(c) insurance of the works during construction,
(d) the surveyor for preparation of a new Survey Plan and revised Exclusive
(e) registration fees for the survey plan and New Community Management
Statement once the works are completed and the survey plan
(f) anything otherwise reasonably necessary to achieve the result of adding
the Works to the title of lot 2.
proposed LOA seeks agreement for three types of works: to construct the shed, to
construct a swimming pool, and to create
a (presumably unenclosed) additional
parking area for lot 2. The proposal, if accepted, would also have the areas
relative to those
works “augmented to lot 2 on completion (if
applicable)”. I cannot find any reference to the word
or “augmented” in this or the related
legislation. It seems to me that the plain meaning and effect would have those
areas of common property given up by the body corporate and incorporated into
lot 2, as indicated also by item (f) of the LOA. As
this is not addressed in the
submissions or specifically sought in the outcome expressed in the application
(which is limited to
getting approval to construct the shed) perhaps this part
of the proposal is no longer pressed by the applicants. In any event, I
that where an allowed improvement to common property will be enjoyed exclusively
and indefinitely by a lot owner, that approval
may amount to a gift of that
common property to the lot owner, in which case the body corporate should effect
that by clear and unambiguous
and consistently with
section 33 of the STLS Module.
[79] I have
concluded, above, that the proper approach is to apply the reasonableness test
proposed in
. That is, in considering the LOA, Mr Raynor, acting
reasonably, need not have balanced the competing interests by taking into
factors favouring the applicants (whether an item 17 or item 26 order is
contemplated).
also requires me to assess the decision’s
reasonableness according to the circumstances of the time Mr Raynor made it. It
difficult for an adjudicator to be reasonably satisfied that opposition was
unreasonable unless there was no rational and substantial
basis for it, or
unless it appears the opposition was driven by spite, ill-will, or
attention-seeking.
rests with the applicant to convince the adjudicator that the dissenting owner
acted unreasonably.
[80] I find that
Mr Raynor’s opposition to the LOA was driven primarily by his concern
shed being located close to his lot and the
potential for the shed to substantially change the uses of lot 2 to the
detriment of
the enjoyment of lot 1, especially by increasing vehicular traffic
near his lot. In my view, they are prima facie relevant and rational
considerations and they are not, as the applicants assert, merely
‘arbitrary preferences’.
[81] That the
concerns were genuinely held at the time is also not in doubt—the evidence
from Lauren Raynor and the contemporaneous
text message satisfies me that they
were always Mr Raynor’s and lot 1’s occupier’s concerns.
Further, as Mr Raynor
says, the status quo is evidence of his preference for the
appearance and use of lot 2 because he developed the scheme in that way.
applicants say they dealt with the concern about visual impact by proposing to
plant trees in the sightline, but that solution
appears not to be acceptable to
Mr Raynor, and that also does not seem to be a necessarily unreasonable
position for him to take.
There is no certainty the trees would fully soften the
visual or noise impact of the shed, and even if the trees achieved that effect
and were a suitable solution for Mr Raynor in the short term, there is no
obligation on the applicants to maintain the trees so that
they would continue
to have that effect in the long term.
applicant’s say that any evidence in relation to
Geoff Wills’ conversations or comments is
irrelevant because he is neither an owner nor a decision-maker for Lot 2.
Presumably,
they are referring to the alleged statement by Geoff Wills that the
applicants intend to convert the existing garage into a granny
flat. I also
presume that this point is intended to bolster their contention that the shed
would only be used to store household
items and not also vehicles (which would
be displaced from the garage if it were converted). Whether any information or
to a determination is a matter for the adjudicator,
depending on the findings to be made and the dispute to be resolved. If instead
the applicants mean that it is
inadmissible
, again I disagree. I am not
bound by the rules of evidence,
although I must still be satisfied the evidence is reliable. In that regard, I
note the evidence is given by a first-hand witness
to the conversation in her
signed statement. There is no indication that Lauren Rayner is not a reliable
witness, nor that her evidence
is inherently implausible. I note also that the
applicants do not specifically deny that the existing garage will be converted
a granny flat, although they do insist that the proposed shed is not intended
for vehicle storage and would only be used for household
items. Even if mere
storage for household items is the applicants’ present intention, the
proposed LOA makes no mention of
limiting the shed’s future uses. If its
use changed and became an annoyance to lot 1’s occupier’s, there is
reasonable prospect of the location being changed once installed, and Mr
Raynor’s only recourse would be an application to
this office in the
nature of a nuisance claim, with no certainty of success. I therefore find that
Mr Raynor had reasonably held
concerns about the shed’s potential
impacts at the time he made his decision.
[83] I cannot
see in the evidence and indication that Mr Raynor was motivated substantially by
spite, or ill-will, or irrational objections
finding would be inconsistent with Mr Raynor’s position that he would
consent to a proposal for a smaller shed, and
that he does not object in
principle to the construction of the proposed pool.
[84] In light of
that, I am not satisfied that the body corporate’s decision, or
alternatively Mr Raynor’s decision, not
to accept the LOA for the
applicants’ proposed shed was unreasonable.
completeness, I will also address the applicants’ contentions which may
have been relevant to an interests-balancing
approach to the reasonableness
requirement in this case.
applicants say they should be allowed to have a shed including because lot 1 has
one, but I do not see any force in that
argument. The inescapable fact is that
the applicants bought the lot knowing it was without a shed. I can accept they
were ignorant
of the restrictions on their rights to make improvements when they
purchased the lot, but I cannot accept that to be a factor in
their favour in
this application. The applicants cannot now have any more rights than they in
fact had at the time of purchase, due
simply to their ignorance of the true
position. Whether they were mistaken or misled, if any remedy or special
dispensation is due
to them, it should not come at Mr Raynor’s cost.
The true position is that the applicants could not have had any reasonable
expectation, given the terms of the CMS and the legislation concerning owner
decision-making in a STLS, that any improvements proposals
would be agreed to.
Nettle J squarely addressed that notion in
, saying: “The
fact that a lot owner might have had an interest in improving his or her lot was
not a prima facie affirmative
proposition, the pursuit of which can be assumed
to be appropriate or supported by other lot
[87] I am not
satisfied that an additional 70 m
of storage is necessary for the
reasonable enjoyment of lot 1, especially when it already has a 3-vehicle
garage. Further, the applicants’
assertion that the proposed location is
necessary or the only practicable solution is not borne out by the evidence. It
is, rather,
as much a matter of preference, indicated for instance by the
applicant’s email of 17 July 2024 to Mr Raynor, which says in
We purchased a 5 BR home on a half acre block for enough space
to have a home, a garage and a shed. Currently our belongings are in
Robina which is not ideal. It is very costly and inconvenient. All we are
proposing is the permission to build a shed
next to the house to move our
belongings to. Your daughter Lauren asked why we can't build this shed on the
other end of our house.
We park our vehicles there. If we put our shed there,
which there is not enough room for anyway, it would then force us to be parking
our cars at the other end of our home and we do not want to be driving across
the lawn to park cars.
applicants have no right to make the proposed improvement and Mr Raynor was
under no obligation to agree to it. The improvement
is not necessary for the
reasonable enjoyment of lot 2, and the applicants could not have had any
reasonable basis to expect it would
be approved. Mr Raynor’s grounds
for objection were relevant, rational and evidence based. Accordingly, he or
alternatively
the body corporate did not act unreasonably in declining to make
[89] It follows
that I will dismiss the
application.
Body Corporate and Community
Management Act 1997
See generally Ch 3, Part 1, Div 5 of the
Viridian Noosa
[2013] QBCCMCmr 351
Re Body Corporate for
Viridian; Kjerulf Ainsworth & Ors v Martin Albrecht & Anor
Ainsworth & Ors
By implication, pursuant to
section 276(1)(a), because it deals with contraventions of the
[47] per French CJ, Bell, Keane and Gordon JJ (
at [27] per joint reasons, [71] per Nettle
per joint reasons, [71] per Nettle
per Nettle J
at [47]-[50] per joint
[27] per joint reasons, [71] per Nettle
per joint reasons
at [56], [[63] per joint
101] per Nettle J
at [51] per joint reasons. The court’s reference to
Waters v Public Transport Corporation
relates to the finding in that case
that a decision maker, acting reasonably, is required to strike a reasonable
balance by weighing
all the relevant
at [45] per joint
[55] per joint reasons
at [63] per joint
[85] per Nettle J
at [101] per Nettle
Noting that a LOA is only
made in a STLS.
principle is sometimes expressed as the maxim ‘
generalia specialibus
non derogant
’. See for eg
Ferdinands v Commissioner for Public
[2006] HCA 5
Ferdinands v
Commissioner for Public Employment
[2006] HCA 5
[2017] QCATA 53
) at [24], following
at [48]-[51] per
joint reasons
[2016] QCATA
) per Carmody J at
Provided they
otherwise act lawfully.
[2016] QCATA
A committee member in
schemes regulated by other regulation modules must not vote on a motion about
which they have a direct or indirect
conflicting interest in it: see for eg s
Body Corporate and Community Management (Standard Module) Regulation
See section
111H(3) Act
creates an exception for a motion requiring a resolution without dissent.
Section 100(1)
of the Act deems a committee decision to be a body corporate
at [60], [63] per joint reasons; [71], [101] per Nettle J;
Body Corporate for the Reserve CTS 31561 v Trojan Resorts Pty Ltd
Katsikalis v
Body Corporate for “The Centre”
[2009] QCA 77
at [63] per joint reasons
for eg at [89], [97] per Nettle
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (467 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter