URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2002/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:48:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hughes, Shirley & Neil v National Asset Planning Corporation Pty Ltd & Sabato, Peter & Others [2002] QPAMDT 30 (26 June 2002)
PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR DEALERS TRIBUNAL
[2002] QPAMDT 30
26 JUNE 2002
APPLICATION NO:
HUGHES SHIRLEY DIANNE & NEIL
FIRST RESPONDENT:
NATIONAL ASSET PLANNING CORPORATION PTY LTD
SECOND RESPONDENT:
SABATO PETER
THIRD RESPONDENT:
CHAPMAN ANTHONY
FOURTH RESPONDENT:
BRIDGEFERN PTY LTD
FIFTH RESPONDENT:
BILBOROUGH CHRISTOPHER R
DATE OF HEARING:
15 APRIL 2002
[2002] QPAMDT 30
REASON FOR DECISION:
This is an application by Neil and
Shirley Hughes (“the Hughes”) under section 119 of the
Auctioneers and Agents Act
1971 ("the repealed Act") claiming against the
former fund on the basis of an alleged contravention of the repealed Act by
Asset Planning Corporation Pty Ltd (NAPC) and Anthony Chapman (Mr
The claim arises in relation to a unit at
202 Pacific Resort, Albert Avenue, Broadbeach, (the unit) which Mr and Mrs
Hughes purchased
after being shown it by NAPC and Mr Chapman. The Hughes
purchased the unit from Tremild Pty Ltd (“the vendor”) by a contract
signed by the Hughes on 20 May 1998 and the vendor on 26 May 1998. The purchase
price was $184,900. The Hughes’s claim that
the unit was sold to them by
NAPC and Mr Chapman at an overvalue and that they only purchased the unit due to
false and misleading
misrepresentations made by NAPC and its agents, including
Mr Chapman, upon whom they relied.
The Hughes, in the amended revised claim
filed by consent at the hearing, claim the sum of $34,900 as their loss based on
the difference
in value and further sums as set out in the report of Geoffrey
Gunn and Co, Chartered Accountant, making a total claim of $109,303
fund arising from the alleged breach of the repealed Act by NAPC and Mr Chapman.
The transfer of the claim to the
The claim continues as if it were a claim
against the claim fund under the
Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act
2000 (“the Act”) by virtue of section 604 of the Act which
Former fund
The rights and
liabilities of the former fund are taken to be the rights and liabilities of the
claim fund.
A claim that has been made against the former fund,
and not finished before the commencement, continues as if it were a claim
the claim fund.
The application was transferred to this
Tribunal, from the Auctioneers and Agents Committee by the Chief Executive under
section 476
of the Act. The claim had not been finished by 30 June 2001, when
the Committee ceased to exist. In this regard the Tribunal was
satisfied that
sections 474 and 475 of the Act had been satisfied.
Christopher R. Bilborough
(“Mr Bilborough”) who was the sole director of NAPC at the
relevant time is a party to the application by virtue of sub-section
Neither Mr Bilborough nor any of the
other respondents were parties before the claim was transferred to the Tribunal
and for that
reason the Tribunal forwarded them copies of all of the material
transferred to the Tribunal by the Chief Executive.
Some Preliminary Matters
While the Tribunal is to deal with this
application under the Act, it has to determine the claim based on section 119 of
the repealed
Act which relevantly provided as
Application of fund
A&A Act 119.(1)
Subject to this Act, the fund shall be held and applied for the purpose of
reimbursing persons who may suffer pecuniary loss because
contravention of any provision of section ... 69, 70, 72, 73 ... by a prescribed
“prescribed person”
licensee, the licensee’s partner, employee, agent or any person having the
apparent charge or control for the time being
of the office or business of the
licensee.(s.119)
A person may claim against the
fund by giving the registrar written notice of the substance of the claim.
The notice must be given within—
(a) 6 months after the
person becomes aware that the person has suffered pecuniary loss; or
years after the commission of the breach that caused the person’s
pecuniary loss;
whichever occurs sooner.
For the purposes of
this section and sections 120, 121 and 123 to 126
includes a person who carries on the business of an ... a real estate agent,
... and is not the holder of a licence.
A complaint was made by the Hughes in a
detailed letter dated 23 July 1999 to the then Office of Consumer Affairs and
was acknowledged
by that Office by letter dated 26 July 1999. As part of that
process a Claim Inquiry Report, dated 14 April 2000, was prepared under
repealed Act. This Report and its attachments were transferred to the Tribunal
after 1 July 2001.
At a Direction Hearing on 20 July 2001,
the Tribunal, in order to ensure that the Respondents were clear that they were
now Respondents
to these claims and, to clarify the exact claims being made
against them, ordered that the Hughes file with the Chief Executive a
Claim. It further ordered that:
In the Revised Claim, the Claimant will
comply with section 473 of the Property Agents and Motors Dealers Act 2000
With regard to all respondents
previously named, make submissions as to the section of the Auctioneers and
Agents Act 1971 which
it is alleged has been contravened by each respondent
which is relevant to section 119 of that
Where the Applicant considers that any
other respondents should be joined, make submissions as to the section of the
Auctioneers and
Agents Act 1971 which it is alleged has been contravened by each
proposed respondent which is relevant to section 119 of that
The revised claim was forwarded to the
Chief Executive who advised the Tribunal that the requirements of the Act had
been complied
with when the Chief Executive transferred it to the
NAPC’s liquidator, Mr M Sheehy,
had advised the Chief Executive by letter dated 27 September 2001 that NAPC
“was placed
in a member’s voluntary liquidation on 23 December 1999,
effectively with no assets and no liabilities”. Mr Sheehy referred
Chief Executive’s correspondence to Mr Bilborough who he was aware was
involved with this matter. Mr Sheehy subsequently
confirmed to the Tribunal, at
the directions hearing on 8 October 2001, that he did not intend to participate
in the litigation.
At the directions hearing on 8 October
the parties were required to file and serve the evidence in relation to this
matter and the
application was listed for a one day hearing commencing at 9:30
am on 15 April 2002.
By consent at the hearing, Peter Sabato,
the Second Respondent, was removed as a party. No evidence was presented by the
against Bridgefern Pty Ltd, the Fourth Respondents (Bridgefern) but
there was no application for its removal as a party. NAPC, Mr
Chapman and
Bridgefern took no part in the proceedings.
On the day of the hearing, Ms Skennar,
counsel for the Hughes, sought to file a revised amended claim with the
agreement of Mr Bradley,
counsel for Bilborough, the only respondent who took
part in the proceedings before the Tribunal. The Tribunal gave leave under
486 which provides as follows:
486 Amendment of
The tribunal may at any stage of the proceeding amend
the particulars of the claim in the way it considers appropriate—
on application, if the tribunal is satisfied the amendment is of a formal or
minor nature and no party is unfairly prejudiced
by the amendment; or
its own initiative, if all the parties agree.
The amended claim is
taken to be the claim.
The Tribunal was satisfied that the
amendment was appropriate because the Tribunal considered the beneficial
interest provisions which
the Hughes now wished to add to their claim had
relevance to the claim on the basis of the evidence before the Tribunal and
the amendment of the claim on the basis of the agreement.
Ms Skennar then sought leave to file
further statements by the Hughes with the consent of Mr Bradley. The Tribunal
accepted these
additional statements into evidence.
Mr Bradley, with the consent of Ms
Skennar, then sought leave to file a further statement by Mr Bilborough which he
said was in substitution
for the statement which Mr Bilborough had previously
filed. The Tribunal accepted this statement into evidence.
Counsel for the parties did not require
any witnesses for cross-examination and simply filed submissions with the
In bring this claim against the fund the
Hughes have to be able to rely upon a contravention of one of the defined
sections (i.e.
ss 69,70,72 or 73) in section 119 of the Repealed Act by a
“prescribed person”. The defined sections prohibit real estate
agents and employees of real estate agents from e.g. making or publishing any
statement or representation that is false or misleading.
However, because of the
definition of “prescribed persons” in section 119, the fund is made
available in the event of
a contravention of the defined sections by more that
just real estate agents and employees of real estate agents.
To interpret section 119 as firstly
requiring the identification of a contravention solely by a real estate agent or
an employee of
real estate agent and then a determination that the person is a
“prescribed person” would result in an illogical situation
made the later wider definition meaningless. If that was what section 119 was
meant to achieve, the concept of “prescribed
person” would have been
unnecessary as simply referring to a contravention of the defined sections would
have achieved that
The Hughes claim that NAPC has
contravened sections 69 and 70 of the Repealed Act.
The relevant sub-section of section 69
is subsection (2) which provided as follows:
Restriction
on agents purchasing or selling property
... a real estate agent, ... or an employee of any such person, who has for
sale any property that is owned by such person or in which
such person is
beneficially interested shall, before making any agreement in respect of the
sale of the property, notify the prospective
purchaser in the approved form of
the interest in the property and obtain
from the purchaser an acknowledgement
of receipt of the notice.
The relevant parts of section 70
provided as follows:
When agent prohibited from having
interest in option to purchase land
An ... real estate
agent shall not, in respect of land had by the ... real estate agent for sale,
obtain or be in any way concerned
in obtaining from the seller an option to
purchase in which that ... real estate agent is beneficially
interested.
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units.
estate agent shall not as such sell land at any time when, in respect of that
land, there is subsisting an option to purchase
in which that ... real estate
agent is beneficially interested.
Maximum penalty—100 penalty
For the purposes of this section—
(a) an option to
purchase includes any transaction granting or purporting to grant a right not
immediately exercisable to purchase
or to be given an option to purchase;
, in relation to ... a real estate agent acting as
such, means sell, agree to sell, attempt to sell, have for sale, negotiate for
sale, or be in any way concerned in selling.
Where an offence
against subsection (1) or (2) has been committed, the ... real estate agent
shall, upon conviction, and in addition
to any other penalty the court may
impose, be ordered by the court to pay over to the convicted person’s
principal such amount
in respect of profits resulting from the person obtaining
the option in respect of which the
offence was committed as is determined by
Where a court makes a determination under subsection
(4), it may order that the person convicted pay such costs of and incidental
the making of the determination as it thinks fit.
For the purposes
of making a determination and enforcing an order under subsection (4) or (5),
section 69(4), (5) and (8) to (10)
shall apply with all necessary
modifications.
Where a court makes or refuses to make an order
under subsection (4), an appeal shall lie in all respects and in the same manner
if the court had imposed a penalty or a punishment.
Section 71 provided a definition of
“beneficial interest” and provided as
Beneficial interest
For the purposes of—
(a) section 69—... a
real estate agent ... is taken to be beneficially interested in the purchase or
sale of property; and
(b) section 70—... real estate agent is taken to
be beneficially interested in an option to purchase land;
if the purchase or
sale is made or the option is obtained, as the case may be, on behalf
(d) if the ..., real estate agent ... is a
corporation—
(i) the corporation or an executive officer or a
prescribed relative of an executive officer of the corporation; or
the corporation has not more than 100 members, any member or a prescribed
relative of a member of that corporation; or
(iii) another corporation that
has at least 1 executive officer in common with the corporation; or
another corporation, having not more than 100 members, of which the corporation
is a member or having at least 1 member in common
with the corporation;
(e) if the ..., real estate agent ... carries on business as a member
of a firm or partnership—a person who is a member of the
partnership or a prescribed relative of a member; or
(f) a person carrying on
for profit or gain a business if the ..., real estate agent ..., or a prescribed
relative of the ..., real
estate agent ..., has, directly or indirectly, a right
to participate in the income or profits of the business of the
To allay any doubt it is declared that any
reference in—
(a) section 69 and this section to ..., real estate agent
(b) section 70 to ... real estate agent;
includes reference to a
corporation that acts as or carries on the business of
an ..., real estate
agent ..., as the case may be.
The Hughes also claim that NAPC has
contravened sections 72 and 73 of the Repealed Act.
Those sections provided as
False representations as to
No ... real estate agent, ... or employee of ...
a real estate agent, ...shall make to any purchaser or prospective purchaser or
publish or cause to be published any
statement or representation that is
false or misleading (whether to the person’s knowledge or not) concerning
any real or personal
property which the person, or as the case may be, the
person’s employer, has for sale ... as a real estate agent ....
penalty—100 penalty units.
Without limiting
the generality of subsection (1) or (2), a statement or representation shall,
for the purposes of that subsection,
be deemed to be false or misleading if it
is of such a nature that it would reasonably tend to lead to a belief in the
of a state of affairs that does not in fact exist, whether or not the
statement or representation indicates that that state of affairs
This section shall be read and construed as in aid
of and not in derogation from any other Act or law relating to false or
advertisements or other statements.
Representations as to
availability of finance
... a real estate agent who as such
or as a principal sells any land, whether improved or unimproved, shall give to
the purchaser
a statement in writing in compliance in every respect with the
requirements of this section.
A statement in writing under this
section shall—
(a) clearly identify the land to which the statement
relates; and
(b) state the names and addresses respectively of the seller and
purchaser; and
(c) state clearly whether or not the ... real estate agent has
(by the ... real estate agent or by an employee) made or offered to
purchaser any representation, promise or term with respect to the availability
of finance for defraying wholly or in part the
purchase price; and
such representation, promise, or term has been so made or offered, in addition
to stating clearly that fact, state clearly
the particulars of that
representation, promise or term; and
(e) state the date on which the
statement is given; and
(f) be signed by the ... real estate agent or by a
person authorised in writing (prior notice of which, accompanied by a copy of
authority, has been delivered to the registrar) by the ...real estate
and shall not contain any other written, typewritten, or printed
matter except the letterhead (if any) of the ... real estate agent.
A statement in writing under this section shall be given by the ... real
estate agent to the purchaser before the purchaser signs
any contract,
agreement, or document legally binding or intended to bind the purchaser legally
in respect of the sale.
If, in respect of the sale of any land,
whether improved or unimproved—
(b) by a real estate agent
whether as such or as a principal;
finance for defraying in whole or in part
the purchase price, or any amount or instalment of that finance, is not made
available to
the purchaser in compliance in every respect with any
representation, promise, or term made or offered to the purchaser by, or by
employee of, that ... real estate agent, then, if the purchaser has been
materially affected, the purchaser may at the purchaser’s
option avoid the
contract made by the
purchaser in respect of the sale by notice in writing
given either to the seller or to the auctioneer or real estate agent concerned
at any time before the time at which the purchaser is required by the contract
to pay all of the outstanding purchase price or immediately
Upon the avoidance (whether by the purchaser under this
section or by the seller for that the purchaser has failed to pay in terms
the contract the purchase price or any amount of the purchase price) of a
contract to which subsection (4) applies, the seller
and the ... real estate
agent concerned shall be liable at law, jointly and severally, for the repayment
to the purchaser of all
money paid by the purchaser under the contract
such money shall be recoverable, by action as for a debt, by the
purchaser accordingly.
Judgment recovered against either person
liable under subsection (5) in respect of money repayable under that subsection
be a bar to an action against the other person so liable, but if
separate actions are brought against those persons the sums recoverable
the judgments given in those actions shall not in the aggregate exceed the
amount of money repayable to the purchaser concerned
and in the one of those
actions in which judgment is secondly given the plaintiff shall not be entitled
unless the court is of opinion that there was reasonable ground for
bringing the action.
Where a representation, promise, or term to
which this section applies shall have been given, made or offered without the
connivance, or consent of the seller, the seller may recover from the
... real estate agent concerned any money paid under the contract
received by the seller which the seller has repaid to the purchaser, and
additionally any damage suffered by the seller consequent
on the voidance by
purchaser of the contract.
Any covenant, agreement, or
condition expressed or implied in any contract, agreement, or document legally
binding, or intended legally
to bind, the purchaser in respect of the sale to
the purchaser of any land, or in a separate document, under which it is agreed
the seller or the ... real estate agent concerned of the one part and
the purchaser of the other part that any representation, promise,
or term made
or offered to the purchaser for which the seller or the ... real estate agent is
legally liable under this section,
shall not be legally binding as against that
seller and auctioneer or real estate agent, or either of them, shall be
absolutely void
and of no legal effect.
An auctioneer or a real
estate agent who—
(a) being required by subsection (1) fails to give to
a purchaser of land a statement in writing in compliance in every respect with
the requirements of subsections (2) and (3); or
(b) being liable at law under
this section for repayment to a purchaser of land of any money paid by that
purchaser under the contract
entered into by the purchaser, fails to make such
repayment in full within 14 days after becoming so liable;
shall be guilty of
an offence against this Act
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units or 12
months imprisonment.
Liability to punishment under this section
shall be in addition to other liabilities at law imposed by this section, and
that ... a real estate agent has not been prosecuted or, if prosecuted,
has or has not been convicted for an offence against this
section shall not bar
or prejudice any proceedings for enforcing against the auctioneer or real
agent any such other liability.
Subject to subsection
(4), this section applies so as not to render illegal or void any contract or to
empower any party to void the
In any civil proceedings
arising out of or connected with a contract or agreement or document to which
this section relates the onus
of proving that the statement referred to in
subsection (2) was duly given shall lie upon the party so alleging.
In this section—
(a) a promise that a seller of land will transfer
the land to the purchaser conditionally upon the purchaser at the same time
a proper mortgage in favour of the seller to receive payment of all or
any part of the money payable or that would afterwards but
for the execution of
the mortgage become payable by the purchase under the contract of sale;
(b) a promise that the terms of the sale will be or will include a
provision that the purchase price or any part shall be or may be
installments;
shall not be taken to be a representation, promise or term as
respects the availability of finance for defraying wholly or in part
purchase price.
The process for deciding a claim against
the fund is set-out in section 488 of the Act which provides as
Deciding claims other than minor
The tribunal may allow the claim, wholly or partly,
or reject the claim.
However, the tribunal may allow the claim
only if satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that—
(a) an event
mentioned in section 470(1) happened; and
(b) the claimant suffered financial
loss because of the happening of the event.
If the tribunal allows
the claim, wholly or partly, the tribunal must—
(a) take into account
any amount the claimant might reasonably have received or recovered if not for
the claimant’s neglect
or default;
(b) decide the amount of the
claimant’s financial loss; and
(c) name the person who is liable for
the claimant’s financial loss.
However, because this is a claim against
the former fund, sub-section 119(1) of the repealed Act rather than sub-section
the Act applies. The relevant provisions of Section 119 are set-out
The orders the Tribunal may make on a
claim hearing are set-out in section 530 of the Act which provides as
Orders tribunal may make on claim
The tribunal may make the following orders in
relation to a claim against the fund—
(a) an order allowing the claim,
wholly or partly, or rejecting the claim;
(b) an order stating that a named
person is liable for a claimant’s financial loss and the amount of the
(c) an order about recovery of an amount payable in relation to a
(d) an order that no amount is recoverable in relation to a
Section 530 of the Act is a departure
from the procedures under the repealed Act, in that it provides for the Tribunal
order stating that a named person is liable for a claimant’s
financial loss and the amount of the loss and an order about recovery
amount payable in relation to a claim. Under the repealed Act an amount
payable from the former fund was recovered from the
licensee found to have been
guilty of a breach of the repealed Act, or from a director of the licensee, in
an independent recovery
proceeding which followed the decision about the claim
on the fund.
Section 125 of the Repealed Act will be
relevant to Mr Bilborough if NAPC is ordered to compensate the fund in respect
of any payment
the Tribunal may order to be made from the fund to the Hughes.
It provided as follows:
Directors to compensate
Where payment is made out of the fund in settlement
in whole or in part of any claim relating to the business of ... a real estate
agent, ...carried on by a corporation, the
directors of the corporation, at
the time when the act or omission (that gave rise to the claim) occurred, shall
be jointly and severally
liable to compensate the fund in respect of that
In this section—
(a) any person occupying or acting in the position of
director of the corporation, by whatever name called and whether or not validly
appointed to occupy or duly authorised to act in the position; and
person in accordance with whose directions or instructions the directors of the
corporation are accustomed to act.
The evidence
Both Mr and Mrs Hughes filed statements
dated 27 October 2001. They also filed a copy of a valuation of the unit by
Taylor Byrne,
a licensed valuer, dated 8 November 2001 and a report by Geoffrey
Gunn and Co, Chartered Accountant, dated 8 November 2001. At the
hearing, by
consent and leave of the Tribunal additional statements by both Mr and Mrs
Hughes filed statements dated 15 April 2002
were filed.
By consent and leave of the
Tribunal on the day of the hearing, the statement by Mr Bilborough dated 15
April 2002 was substituted
for his previous statement of 27 November
Mr Sabato had previously filed a
statement dated 30 November 2001, which under the circumstances, was not
considered by the Tribunal.
In addition, the Tribunal had before it
the material transferred to it by the Chief Executive referred to above.
It is not in dispute that in April 1998
the Hughes were contacted by a telemarketer employed by NAPC. As a result of
that call, the
Hughes attended a seminar on the benefits of negative gearing
with particular emphasis on the Gold Coast area. They were told during
seminar that the Gold Coast consistently averages capital growth at the rate of
8% per annum. Following the seminar they agreed
to have a NAPC representative
come to their home. The representative extolled the virtues of investment on the
Gold Coast, in particular,
and asserted that the capital growth rate was 11%.2
As a result of this visit, the Hughes agreed to travel to the Gold Coast to
properties.
On 19 May 1998 the Hughes travelled to
the Gold Coast from Mooroopna in Victoria. The Hughes were met at their motel
the next morning
by Mr Chapman who advised them that he worked for
The Hughes were taken by Mr Chapman to
meet Mark Rennie (Mr Rennie) of Markfair Pty Ltd, trading as Investlend (Aust)
(Investlend),
who provided them with a financial analysis involving a
consideration of their financial position and the preparation of a 'Property
Investment Analysis' spreadsheet' which indicated what the property would be
worth in one, two, three, five or ten years, what their
initial outlay would be
and the cost to them per week in relation to the purchase.
Mr Rennie advised the Hughes
a. They would be able to invest in a property, negatively
gear it and as a result have a sound investment which would provide for
later in their lives.
b. The investment would not require any financial
c. After 5 years there would be a build up of rent which would enable
them to replace the furniture.
d. The unit was well priced for its position
and furnishings.
e. The position of the unit alone was so good that this
alone would lead to an increase in value
Mr Chapman was present during the
financial analysis and it is the unchallenged evidence of the Hughes that during
this time Mr Chapman
would nod approvingly at comments made by Mr Rennie about
the viability of the Hughes purchasing the unit.
When Mr Hughes said it all sounded too
good to be true, Mr Rennie responded that it sounded good because it was good
and that they
had worked out the figures they were using on the lowest occupancy
rate and, even on the worst case scenario the unit would still
The Hughes were taken then by Mr Chapman
to inspect three properties including the unit which the Hughes eventually
agreed to purchase.
It is the unchallenged evidence of the
Hughes that during this process Mr Chapman advised the Hughes
a. They would have to be quick (in relation to the first
development shown to them) because it was selling fast (and while they were
the car Mr Chapman received a phone call and told them that it had already been
b. Now was the time to purchase as the Gold Coast was growing so
c. Properties on the Gold Coast were limited and the demand would
continue to push the values up.
d. They would be mad to miss this opportunity
e. The unit in Pacific Resort was well situated and needed no weekly
financial outlay from the Hughes.
I. The unit in Pacific Resort came with a
12 month rental guarantee.
g. The values on the Gold Coast were going up and
h. The purchase of the unit at Pacific Resort was a 'good
Mr Chapman then took the Hughes back to
Mr Rennie who produced a spreadsheet for Pacific Resort where the Hughes
subsequently contracted
to purchase the unit. Mr Chapman was again present
during this meeting with Mr Rennie, during which the Hughes agreed to purchase
The Hughes were taken then to see a
solicitor, Michael Yarwood, so that they could execute the
The Hughes signed a loan application
form, a contract and paid a deposit of $1,000 (which was apparently banked to
the trust account
of the solicitors for the vendor).
Subsequently, the Hughes signed a
mortgage with the Bank of Melbourne.
The contract settled on 30 June
According to the unchallenged evidence
of the Hughes, in August 1998, it became apparent that the investment was not
performing as
had been represented by Mr Chapman and Mr Rennie. Mrs Hughes
telephoned NAPC on a number of occasions to discuss the problem. Jason
of NAPC told Mrs Hughes that he would negotiate with the developer on their
behalf and in August 1998 the Hughes were advised
that the developer had agreed
to pay the rental guarantee every 2 months instead of at the end of 12 months.
Despite this change
in payment of the rental guarantee, the investment property
still required contributions by the Hughes.
In February 1999 the Hughes decided that
they would see what the unit would bring on the open market. On 15 February
1999, they received
a letter from LJ Hooker Broadbeach saying that it would sell
for $165,000 to $175,000. They decided to sell.
The Hughes put the unit to auction twice
and tried to sell it over the period between February 1999 and April 2001. They
sold the unit in April 2001 for $132,000. This was less than what it
was worth as at May 1998, according to the valuation report
On 23 July 1999, the Hughes made a
complaint to the Office of Fair Trading, which was acknowledged on 26 July 1999
and the Hughes
lodged their claim against the fund on 20 November
The Tribunal accepts the unchallenged
evidence of the Hughes as set-out above.
At May 1998, according to the company
sole shareholder
and company secretary of Coral Reef Group Pty Ltd ("Coral
Reef”). He was also a director and one of two shareholders of Investlend
and was the sole director, sole shareholder and company secretary of NAPC.
According to Mr Bilborough, NAPC
“arranged investment seminars about negative gearing of real estate
property, telemarketing
and in-home consultations with prospective purchasers of
real estate properties”.
NAPC was not licensed as a real estate
agent at the relevant time.
There was in evidence before the
Tribunal a joint venture agreement between Coral Reef, Dafute Pty Ltd and
Tremild in relation to
the marketing and sale of the Pacific Resort Broadbeach
property which included the unit which was purchased by the
At Clause 8 that joint venture agreement
8.1 The Developer hereby grants to the Marketer (Coral
Reef) for consideration in the sum of $1.00 (the receipt of which is hereby
acknowledged) an
option to purchase
each unit/lot in the development
either together in one line or separately during the term of this Deed for the
price allotted for
each lot in the said schedule. (Tribunal’s
underlining)
8.2 The option shall be for the term of this Deed and can be
exercised at any time by the Marketer delivering written notice of its
of option to the Developer at the address shown in this Deed.
8.3 The terms
of the sale will be based on the Standard REIQ Contract with the price as stated
in the schedule.
8.4 The said Standard REIQ Contract shall provide for
settlement to be effected within ninety (90) days form the date of execution
the Agreement and shall be subject to any financial arrangements that the
Marketer shall require.
8.5 The said Standard REIQ Contract of Sale shall
provide that a $1.00 deposit be paid by the marketer.
Clause 5.4 of the agreement also
5.4 The Developer acknowledges that this Deed shall
form part of my contract of sale entered into by the Developer during the
of the Deed.
Clause 3 of the joint venture agreement
The Joint Venturer (Coral Reef) at its expense is to
engage consultants with the authority of the developer for the sale of the
units in the Project during the term of this Deed and to specifically
carry out the following tasks:
3.1 Preparation and implementation of a
marketing campaign which may include seminars, promotions and
advertising.
3.2 On behalf of the Developer and as agent for the Developer to
appoint Coral Reef's agents and co-ordinate the selling and marketing
of all Coral Reef's agents and individuals involved in the selling of units in
the Project provided that the terms of
any such appointment are consistent with
the term hereof.
3.3 Liaise with purchasers, financiers and other relevant
parties to assist with the successful satisfaction of any conditions of
contracts so as to bring the contracts to an unconditional status.
upon execution by a purchaser completed conforming contracts to the Developer's
solicitors for checking and obtaining execution
by the vendor of such
3.5 To make payment to or arrange with the Developer for payment
from the proceeds of settlement the amounts due and payable to any
Coral Reef's
agent that has reached Deed with the Coral Reef in relation to the sale of units
in the Project.
3.6 Provide written reports to the Developer at regular
monthly intervals as to the status of sale for every unit.
Clause 4.1 of the joint venture deed
“The Developer hereby authorises Coral Reef and
exclusively appoints Coral Reef as its agent for the purpose of appointing Coral
Reef’s agents, including at their discretion the appointment of licensed
real estate agents, to act as agent for the Developer
provided always that the
terms of appointment of any Coral Reef 's agent are not inconsistent with the
terms hereof”
According to Mr Bilborough, as a result
of the marketing and sales assistance by Coral Reef, Coral Reef expected to
receive consultancy
fees for each of the units in the development
It is uncontested evidence that the sum
of $29,900 was paid from the purchase price to Coral Reef.
The Tribunal accepts the submissions of
Ms Skennar that the precise link between NAPC and Coral Reef is not immediately
apparent from
the material but that it is clear that despite NAPC apparently
undertaking all of the work, payment for the services rendered by
NAPC was made
to Coral Reef. The work carried out by NAPC is precisely the work to be carried
out by Coral Reef pursuant to the joint
venture agreement. Further, Coral Reef
did not receive any payment for any services until the contract was completed
which was brought
The Tribunal finds that the only logical
conclusion is that Coral Reef engaged NAPC to locate purchasers for the units,
the subject
of the joint venture agreement and that NAPC was acting as an agent
for Coral Reef, and therefore, for the developer which included
the vendor,
Applying the Law to the Facts
Section 2 of the
Auctioneers and
Agents Act 1971
defines “real estate agent” as
“real estate agent”
person who, as an agent for others, and
whether on commission or for or in
expectation of any fee, gain, or
reward, and either alone or in connection
with any other business, and
either generally or in respect of any 1
transaction, exercises or carries
on or advertises or notifies or states that
the person exercises or carries
on or that the person is willing to exercise
or carry on or in any way
holds the person out as ready to undertake the
business of buying,
selling, exchanging, or letting houses, land, or estates,
or negotiating
for such buying, selling, exchanging, or letting, or buying,
exchanging, or letting hotel businesses, residential
businesses,
boarding house businesses, storekeeping businesses,
manufacturing
businesses, or businesses of any kind, or any interest in any
businesses, or buying, selling, or exchanging livestock but, does
include a person who—
(a) undertakes any such function as a
representative of Her Majesty;
(b) is employed merely as a clerk or
servant; or
(c) is a registered life assurance company or friendly society,
financial institution or trustee company.
The Tribunal finds that a scheme was
adopted by NAPC and the other entities involved ensuring that the Hughes would
acquire a property
marketed by Coral Reef and/or NAPC in fulfilment of the joint
venture agreement with the vendor.
The Tribunal accepts the submissions of
Ms Skennar that NAPC and Investlend, acted in concert in persuading the Hughes
to purchase
the unit by each having representatives present during the financial
analysis, each approving of the comments made by the other.
Under these
circumstance the Tribunal finds that Mr Rennie was acting as an agent for NAPC.
Agency can occur irrespective of the
fact that it is disavowed by the parties involved. In
Garnac Grain Co Inc v
HMF Faure & Fairclough Ltd [
it was found that
“parties will be held to have consented to an agency relationship if
they have agreed to what amounts in law to such a relationship
even if they do
not recognise it themselves and even if they have professed to disclaim
A significant factor in determining
whether agency exists is the degree of control involved. In
South Sydney
Rugby League Football Club Ltd v News Limited
[2000] FCA 1541
Though there is no uniformly agreed definition of agency: see the discussion
, (2000), 8-11; the two whose authoritative
character has resulted in their wide citation are those of the
Restatement,
Second, Agency
, §1 and of
Bowstead and Reynolds
, above, 1-001
(the latter being based upon the
Restatement
provision). The
Restatement
's definition is that:
" §1 Agency is the fiduciary
relation which results from the manifestation of consent by one person to
another that the other
shall act on his behalf and subject to his control, and
consent by the other so to act."
I would note in passing that the definition proposed in the
Restatement,
Third, Agency
, Tentative Draft No 1, §1.01 proposes no material
departure from the above.
Bowstead and Reynolds
' definition is that:
"Agency is the fiduciary relationship which exists between two persons,
one of whom expressly or impliedly consents that the other
should act on his
behalf so as to affect his relations with third parties, and the other of whom
similarly consents so to act or
The necessary consents apart, the required characteristics of the relation
are that (a) one party acts on the other's behalf but (b)
subject to that
other's control or direction.
Clearly there was a 'scheme' adopted in
relation to the marketing of the units. Each company or individual involved in
ensuring the
sale of the unit knew exactly what the other company or individual
would do. As NAPC was the key to the entire process flowing smoothly,
accepted that NAPC had the ultimate control in marketing the unit to the Hughes.
Mr Chapman and Investlend acted on the NAPC's
behalf and subject to that NAPC's
control or direction. However, the Tribunal also finds that Coral Reef were
controlling NAPC behind
The Tribunal accepts the submission of
Ms Skennar that there was obviously no prospect that as part of this 'process'
Investlend would
not recommend a unit in the price bracket being marketed by
NAPC or that it would not provide positive projections about that unit
form of the spreadsheet.
On the basis of the evidence, the
Tribunal finds that NAPC was acting as a real estate agent, as defined above, in
relation to the
sale of the town house to the Hughes. (See
Kedcorp Pty Ltd v
Peter David Jenkins
[1999] QCA 452)
Sub-section 119(7) provides
For the purposes of section 119 and sections 120, 121
and 123 to 126
includes a person who carries
on the business of an ... a real estate agent, ... and is not the holder of a
The tribunal finds that NAPC was clearly
carrying on business and the business was that of acting as a real estate agent.
The tribunal also finds that, by virtue
of sub-section 119(7), NAPC was a “prescribed person” under
sub-sections 119(1)
and (2) of the Repealed Act. It
The Tribunal finds that Mr Chapman was a
director of Bridgefern on the basis of the Office of Fair Trading Claim Inquiry
Report. The
Applicants led no evidence in relation to the activities of
Bridgefern but it appears that Mr Chapman may have been employed by Bridgefern.
The Tribunal finds that Mr Chapman,
either directly or through Bridgefern, was acting as an agent of NAPC who was
carrying on business
of a real estate agent.
The Tribunal finds that Mr Chapman, an
agent of NAPC, was a “prescribed person” under sub-sections 119(1)
and (2) of the
Repealed Act as alleged by the Applicants.
The alleged false or misleading representations
(Section 72)
It is now necessary to examine the
alleged contraventions of the repealed Act relating to the alleged false or
misleading representations
concerning the unit for sale by NAPC and Mr
The Tribunal has already found that NAPC
was acting as a real estate agent and this was also true for the purposes of
section 72.
The alleged false or misleading
representations are:
a. The Hughes would be able to invest
in a property, negatively gear it and as a result have a sound investment which
would provide
for them later in their lives.
b. The investment would not
require any financial outlay by the Hughes.
c. After 5 years there would be
a build up of rent which would enable the Hughes to replace the
d. The unit was well priced for its position and
furnishings.
e. The position of the unit alone was so good that this alone
would lead to an increase in value.
f. 'It' (being the acquisition of the
unit in Pacific Resort) sounded good because it was good.
g. NAPC had worked
out the figures they were using on the lowest occupancy rate and even on the
worst case scenario, the unit would
still do well.
h. The Hughes would have
to be quick (in relation to the first development shown to them) because it was
selling fast.
i. "Now" was the time to purchase as the Gold Coast was
growing so quickly.
j Properties on the Gold Coast were limited and the
demand would continue to push the values up.
k. The Hughes would be mad to
miss this opportunity to buy.
l. The unit in Pacific Resort was well
situated and needed no weekly financial outlay from the Hughes.
m. The unit
in Pacific Resort came with a 12 month rental guarantee. (This not false on the
n. The values on the Gold Coast were going up and up.
It is also submitted by Ms Skennar that
the silence of Mr Chapman and NAPC amounted to false and misleading
representations contrary
Auctioneers and Agents Act.
The leading authority on questions of
this kind is the decision of the Full Court in
Demagogue Pty Lid v Ramensky
[1992] FCA 557
(1992) 39 FCR 31
, Black CJ said (at 32):
"Silence is
to be assessed as a circumstance like any other. To say this is certainly not
impose any general duty of disclosure; the question is simply
whether, having regard to all the relevant circumstances, there has
been conduct
that is misleading or deceptive or that is likely to mislead or deceive. To
speak of 'mere silence' or of a duty of
disclosure can divert attention from
that primary question. Although 'mere silence' is a convenient way of describing
some fact situations,
there is in truth no such thing as 'mere silence' because
the significance of silence always falls to be considered in the context
which it occurs. That context may or may not include facts giving
rise to a reasonable
expectation, in the circumstances of the case,
that particular matters exist they will be
disclosed." See also per
Gummow J at 38-41.
Relevantly section 72(3) of the
Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971,
a deeming provision
which provided-
statement or representation shall be
deemed to be false or misleading
of such a nature
that it would reasonably tend to lead to a belief in the existence
a state of affairs that does not in fact exist, whether or not the statement or
representation indicates that a state of affairs
does exist.
That Tribunal accepts that the
representations in relation to the unit being a 'sound investment', 'well
priced', 'sounding good
because it was good', and that it was a 'good deal'
would reasonably tend to a belief that the price to be paid was market value.
The representations made by Mr Rennie all implied that the purchase of the unit
was a good investment and the claimants were not
paying more than they should
Mr Chapman was present throughout the
financial analysis and did not qualify what was being said when it would have
been prudent to
do so. Indeed, to the contrary, he nodded approvingly. It is not
disputed that Mr Chapman was an agent of NAPC.
The passing on of the list price by NAPC
with such comments constituted a representation as to the market value of the
unit. In the
context of Mr Chapman and Mr Rennie’s comments, NAPC was
confirming that the list price was the market value of the
90. This matter was considered by the Full Court of the Federal Court
(Davies, Heerey and Whitlam JJ) in
John G. Glass Real Estate Pty Limited v.
Constructions Pty Limited; Bonefind Pty
Limited; Gymea Developments Pty Limited and Albert Edward John Davey
[1993] FCA 295
ATPR 41-265
(1993) ATPR 41-249
where after citing what was said by Mason ACJ,
Wilson, Deane and Dawson
Yorke v Lucas
[1985] HCA 65
(1985) 158 CLR 661
666 they said:
17. In our opinion an estate agent which holds itself out as, amongst
other things, "consultants to institutional investors and
to developers of major
properties" would not be regarded by potential purchasers of properties as
merely passing on information about
the property "for what it is worth and
without any belief in its truth or falsity".
18.... a purchaser like
would ordinarily expect ... that the agent had no reason to doubt
the completeness or accuracy of the information provided.
19. ...There was
certainly no express disclaimer of the appellant's belief in the truth of the
information in the brochure –
indeed there was an express assertion of
such belief. As part of its ordinary business the agent was providing
information in a
persuasive form with a view to achieving a sale of its
principal's property and of course earning commission. It was this conduct
which the learned trial judge, correctly in our opinion, held to be misleading
and deceptive. Once the falsity of the figure was
demonstrated, it seems to us
that no other conclusion could follow.
The Tribunal accepts that NAPC would not
be regarded by potential purchasers of properties, such as the Hughes, as merely
on the price information about the property "for what it is worth and
without any belief in its truth or falsity". Mr Rennies’s
comments were
representations confirming that the list price was the market value of the unit.
The Tribunal accepts that the list price
was not the market price on the basis of the valuations by Taylor Byrne . Mr
Bilborough’s
statement that Coral Reef expected to receive consultancy
fees of $20,000 to $30,000 from the purchase by the Hughes also tends to
that the true value of the unit was considerably less than the list price.
The Tribunal also accepts that the
structure of NAPC’s marketing program conducted with the Hughes was
designed to give the
Hughes the impression that NAPC, with whom they were
dealing, were professional real estate agents and were intending to sell them
investment property which would be beneficial to them. The Tribunal accepts
that representing the list price of this investment
property, which the Tribunal
accepts was overpriced to the extent of
as being a good
investment, was false and misleading because it was priced above the market
The Tribunal comes to this conclusion
after considering the evidence of the Hughes’s that NAPC showed them, as
part of the marketing
of the unit, “comparative properties” which
tended to suggest that the unit was a good buy in comparison. Whether or
the “comparative properties” were similarly overpriced is not clear
on the evidence and the Tribunal makes no findings
in this regard. However,
whatever the true situation NAPC should not have passed on the list price
without comment as to its relationship
to the market price.
Henderson v Amadio Pty Lid (1995)
Heerey J considered a scheme whereby investors
were targeted to provide funds for the acquisition of the Coles Myer Building in
The investors could not reasonably have been expected to have any
expertise in commercial property in Melbourne. The actual value
of the building
was lower than the proposed purchase price because one of the parties to the
transaction has been promised an "acquisition
fee", Some of the representations
a. There was a significant potential for rental
b. There was security of income;
c. The current market value of
the building was
million and this would increase. At the time of
the representation, the building was in fact worth only
million and
its value declined to
million by the date of trial in
His Honour found that the making of the
representations as to the value of the building and the potential for growth was
and deceptive conduct.
The Tribunal notes the submissions of Mr
Bradley, on behalf of Mr Bilborough, that on the basis of the evidence of the
Hughes it is
open to the Tribunal to find that Mr Chapman and NAPC breached
section 72(1) of the Repealed Act.
The Tribunal finds, on the basis of the
valuation of Taylor Byrne, that the capital growth rate for the unit has been a
negative which
differs from the representation of a growth rate of 11.2% during
the home visit and from the 8% suggested by the spreadsheets done
The Tribunal finds that these
representations by Mr Chapman and Mr Rennie, both of whom were agents of NAPC,
were misleading. The
Tribunal specifically finds that the representations by Mr
Chapman and Mr Rennie at paragraph 84 (a), (d), (e), (f) and (g) were
because of the evidence from Taylor Byrne of the true value of the unit at the
relevant time.
The Tribunal finds that
these representations were a contravention section 72(1) of the Repealed Act by
Mr Chapman and by NAPC, the
latter through Mr Chapman and Mr Rennie acting on
behalf of NAPC.
The alleged breach of section 73 of the
repealed Act
is submitted by Ms Skennar
that Mr Rennie represented that:
They (NAPC) had worked out the
figures they were using on the lowest occupancy rate and even on the worst case
scenario the unit would
After 5 years there would be a
build up of rent which would enable the claimants to replace the furniture;
The investment would not require
any financial outlay.
is then submitted by Ms
Skennar that these were representations about finance that should have been the
subject of a notice pursuant
to section 73 of the
Auctioneers and Agents Act
It is apparent from the further
statement of the Hughes that they were not given a notice in compliance with
section 73 of the Act.
is then submitted by Ms Skennar that by reason
of not having been given the notice, the Hughes were deprived of the opportunity
terminating the contract.
The Tribunal finds that as NAPC, acting
as a real estate agent, was selling land it was required to give the Hughes a
notice under
section 73 (1). Its failure to give the notice contravened that
Likewise Mr Chapman, who was a
prescribed person under section 119 was selling land he was required to give
the Hughes a notice under
section 73(1). His failure to give the notice
contravened that section.
The Tribunal notes the submissions of
Mr Bradley, on behalf of Mr Bilborough, that on the basis of the evidence of the
Hughes it is
open to the Tribunal to find that Mr Chapman and NAPC breached
section 73(1) of the Repealed Act.
The Alleged
Breaches of ss 69 and 70 (the Beneficial interest provisions)
According to Mr Bilborough’s
statement, Coral Reef as a result of the contribution by Coral Reef to this
joint venture expected
to receive fees from the purchase by the Hughes. Coral
Reef subsequently received these fees.
The Tribunal notes the submissions of
Mr Bradley that at all relevant times, NAPC and Coral Reef had a common director
Bilborough. Coral Reef is not a respondent to the
On the basis of the Hughes evidence the
Tribunal has found that Mr Rennie and Mr Chapman were both acting as an agent
for NAPC in
relation to the sale and/or marketing of the unit to the Hughes.
Therefore, NAPC, as a real estate
agent, who had for sale the unit in which NAPC was beneficially interested
through Coral Reef and
its joint venture agreement with the vendor, before
making any agreement in respect of the sale of the property, was required by
section 69 of the Repealed Act to notify the Hughes in the approved form of the
interest in the property and obtain from the Hughes
an acknowledgement of
receipt of the notice.
The Tribunal finds that no such
notification was given to the Hughes, and that, therefore, NAPC contavened
section 69 of the Repealed
The Tribunal notes the submissions of
Mr Bradley that as the option agreement was made before Mr Chapman and NAPC
introduced the Applicants
to the property and before the Claimants signed the
contract, it is open to the Tribunal to find that NAPC breached section 70(2)
the Repealed Act.
The Tribunal finds that the option
agreement through the shared director, Mr Bilborough, resulted in NAPC
contavening section 70(2)
of the Repealed Act
It is clear from the evidence that NAPC
and Coral Reef were part of an elaborate marketing network which included
Investlend and where
lucrative undisclosed commissions were being obtained by
the marketeers at the expense of people such as the Hughes.
There was no explanation in the
evidence as to why Coral Reef were paid $29,900 in connection with the
Hughes’s purchase when
on the evidence, including that of Mr Bilborough,
NAPC did all of the work with regard to marketing the unit.
Mr Bilborough, as a director of both
NAPC and Coral Reef, was part of this network and knew what was happening.
The Tribunal accepts that the Hughes
most probably would not have signed the contract if they had been made aware
that a fee in the
sum of $29,900 was to be paid to Coral Reef in the event that
they purchased the unit being marketed by NAPC. When the Hughes were
of the involvement of Coral Reef and saw no benefit from its involvement, why
would the Hughes have been prepared to have
paid it such a large amount relative
to the purchase price under these circumstances?
Likewise, the Tribunal accepts that the
Hughes most probably would not have signed the contract if they had been made
aware that the
price they were being asked to pay for the unit was $29,900 or
$34,900 above the market price.
Has a breach of the
repealed Act been committed?
The tribunal is satisfied on the
balance of probabilities, for the reasons set-out above, that the false and
misleading representations
happened and that, as a result, NAPC and Mr Chapman
have breached section 72 of the repealed Act. Likewise the Tribunal is satisfied
that sections 69, 70 and 73 have been contravened by NAPC and Mr
The repealed Act was set up to provide
compensation for loss arising from contraventions of the Act by prescribed
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
In summary the Tribunal has made the
following findings:
Mr Chapman’s contraventions of
sections 72 and 73 of the repealed Act led to the Applicants entering into a
contract to purchase
NAPC’s contraventions
of sections 69, 70, 72 and 73 of the repealed Act led to the Applicants entering
into a contract to purchase
The contraventions resulted
in a pecuniary loss to the
Applicants;
The fund shall be applied
for the purpose of reimbursing persons, such as to the Applicants, who may
suffer pecuniary loss because
contravention;
In the present case, Mr
Chapman and NAPC’s contraventions of the Repealed Act can be seen to have
caused the Applicants’
damage because the Applicants relied on Mr Chapman
and NAPC's false and misleading representations in deciding to proceed with the
purchase of the property.
The amount of the financial
The claim fund established under both
the Act and the Repealed Act provide compensation for loss arising from
contraventions by prescribed
persons. The measure of damages for deceit or
misleading and deceptive conduct, in the opinion of the Tribunal, is the
appropriate
measure to be applied to calculating loss under these Acts. (See
Gould v Vaggelas
(1984) 58 ALJR 560
Gibbs CJ at 561).
First, it is necessary to identify the
loss sustained by the Applicants.
Paraphasing what was said by Hayne J in
Henville v Walker
[2001] HCA 52
(6 September 2001) Several different
items must be taken into account in computing the amount expended and the amount
received, but
the loss is the single sum remaining after receipts are subtracted
from expenditures. Further, the whole of that loss was brought
decision to proceed with the purchase, a decision which was made in reliance
upon the wrong information supplied by
Mr Chapman and
The question presented by the
statute is what loss was suffered by the Hughes that was caused by the relevant
contravention?
It should be noted that
sub-section 119(5)(b) refers to “the commission of the breach that caused
the person’s pecuniary
The conclusion that the
Hughes suffered loss requires comparison between the position in which the
Hughes find themselves now, and
the position in which they would have been if,
instead of relying on what they were told by NAPC, they had not undertaken the
Secondly, seldom, if ever, will
contravening conduct be the
cause of a person suffering loss. Other
factors will always be capable of identification as a cause of the person
suffering loss.
In a case like the present, the Hughes’
Mr Chapman and NAPC’s estimate of likely profits can be seen to be a cause
of their loss.
Thirdly, it is necessary
to recognise that, on its face, sub-section 119(1) permits recovery of the whole
of the loss sustained by
a person who demonstrates that a contravention of the
provisions enumerated in section 119 was a cause of that loss. Neither the
of sub-section 119(1) nor anything in the intended scope and context of the
Repealed Act suggest some narrower conclusion.
The very simplicity of the language used
in sub-section 119(1) appears to confine attention to the limited question of
the historical
relevance of the contravening conduct to the loss or damage
The Hughes have claimed damages under
the following headings:
Reason for the Claim
Total Capital losses
Consequential Capital loss on sale
Total incidental costs
Total losses relating to income
Total disposal costs
Total Interest
Total Losses
The Hughes rely upon the High Court
decision in
Henville v Walker
[2001] HCA 52
[2001] CA 52
(2001) 182 ALR 37.
case, McHugh J held that the court should strive to construe s 82 of the TPA
(which is a similar provision to here) in a
manner that promotes competition and
fair trading and protects consumers. His Honour
“In this case, the most appropriate approach is
to identify what Mr Henville has suffered by way of prejudice or disadvantage
consequence of altering his position by reason of the breach of the
His Honour went on to say:
“Mr Henville's loss was not
confined to the difference between what was represented as the selling prices of
the units and their
sale prices. Mr Walker's contravention of the Act induced Mr
Henville to enter upon a course of conduct that resulted in a greater
that difference. To fail to compensate him for that loss does not accord with
the purposes of the Act.
Henville v Walker
Court determined that the measure of loss was the entire cost of the purchase of
the land, the acquisition costs, the development
costs, interest less the amount
achieved on the sale of the units.
Using this measure, the Tribunal finds
that the amount of that financial loss was $34,900 being the difference in value
between what
they paid ($184,900) and what they should have paid ($150,000).
The Hughes sold the unit in April 2001
for $132,500. This is a consequential capital loss of $17,500. The Tribunal
finds that this
amount is claimable.
The Hughes have also claimed the
incidental costs of purchasing the unit which the Tribunal finds they would not
have incurred except
for the contraventions of the Repealed Act. The costs
claimed and payable are as follows:
Reason for the Claim
Stamp duty on purchase
Mortgage brokerage fee
Napier & Blakely Schedule of property allowances
Total Incidental costs
The Hughes have claimed income losses
after taxation benefits as follows:
Reason for the claim
Adjusted expenses
Adjusted loss
Tax Benefit – N Hughes
Tax Benefit – S Hughes
Total loss after tax benefit
The Tribunal finds that the Hughes are
entitled to the sum of $41,968.
The Hughes have also claimed the costs
of disposal of the unit which they sold in April 2001. These costs which the
Tribunal finds
that the Hughes are entitled to claim are as
Real estate agent commission
Legal costs
Total costs of disposal
The Hughes have also claimed interest
on the income losses in the amount of $11,058. However, in her submissions Ms
Skennar conceded
that these costs were not claimable apparently on the basis of
the Tribunal’s decision in the Gordon v NAPC and Ors, PAMDT
FEBRUARY 2002 matter. The evidence to justify this claim and how the amount was
calculated was not clear to the Tribunal
and on that basis the claim must be
Therefore, for the above reasons, the
Tribunal has determined the amount payable to the Hughes as
Reason for the Claim
Total Capital losses
Consequential Capital loss on sale
Total incidental costs
Total losses relating to income
Total disposal costs
Total Interest
Total Losses
The Tribunal considers that the Hughes
are entitled to costs under section 537 of the Act. The Hughes costs have been
by certification of Ryan Cost Consultant Pty Ltd, a Qualified Costs
Assessor, as follows:
Legal costs
Miscellaneous
Total legal costs
First Order
On the basis of the evidence, the
Tribunal orders that the Chief Executive of the Department of Tourism, Racing
and Fair Trading pay
from the claim fund to the Hughes the sum of
$127,405.37.
Reimbursement of the
The Tribunal finds that Mr Chapman and
NAPC were the persons responsible for the Hughes’ financial loss.
Here the claim will be paid out of the
claim fund by virtue of section 604(2) but this amount can be recovered by
virtue of section
604(1) which states as follows:
The rights and liabilities of the former fund are taken to be the rights and
liabilities of the claim fund.
This allows the Chief Executive to recover
monies paid out of claim fund as a liability of the former fund under the
provisions of
The Tribunal must also consider the
liability of Mr Bilborough, if any, and in this regard it must consider section
125 of the repealed
Under section 125 of the Repealed Act,
the directors of the corporation, at the time when the act that gave rise to the
claim occurred,
shall be jointly and severally liable to compensate the fund in
respect of that payment. The Tribunal finds that this section applies
Bilborough.
The rights of the former fund to
recover from Mr Bilborough are taken to be the rights of the claim fund by
virtue of section 604(1)
of the Act. The fact that the former fund no longer
exists is irrelevant.
The monies are paid out of the claim
fund as if it were a claim against the claim fund and the claim fund, therefore,
can recover
this amount by virtue of that section acting under the provisions of
On the basis of the evidence, and
applying section125 of the repealed Act, the Tribunal finds that Mr Chapman,
NAPC and Mr Bilborough
are jointly and severally liable to compensate the claim
fund in the amount of $127,405.37
The Tribunal orders that Mr Chapman,
NAPC and Mr Bilborough reimburse the claim fund in the amount of $127,405.37
in accordance with sections 490 and 491 of the
Third Order
The Tribunal orders that all claims
against the Second and Fourth Respondents are dismissed for the reasons
......................................................
B A COTTERELL - CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents and Motor
Dealers Tribunal
Barry Cotterell John Gallagher Barry
Chairperson Member Member
mE:\Case Management Files\2001\W-
Claim\W003-01\Decision\W003-01D26-06-02.doc
i.e the purchase or list price
of $184,900 less the valuation of $150,000
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (598 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter