URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Horton v State of Queensland (Department of Justice and Attorney-General) [2025] ICQ 7 (23 May 2025)
COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Horton v State of Queensland (Department of
Justice and Attorney-General)
[2025] ICQ 007
(Appellant)
STATE OF QUEENSLAND (DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL)
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
General Application and Application in existing proceedings
DELIVERED ON:
23 May 2025
HEARING DATE:
23 May 2025
Appellant's General Application, filed on 14 May 2025 in
Matter No. C/2024/47, is dismissed.
Appellant's Application in existing proceedings, filed on 16 May 2025 in Matter
No. C/2024/47, is dismissed.
Appellant's oral application made today, to amend her application to appeal in
Matter No. C/2024/47, so as to appeal on a ground
other than error of law or
excess, or want, of jurisdiction, is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – QUEENSLAND – APPEAL – APPEAL TO
INDUSTRIAL COURT – OTHER MATTERS – Appellant is employed
Respondent as a Court Services Officer and was the subject of disciplinary
proceedings under the
Public Sector Act 2022
– the Respondent
made a disciplinary finding decision that five disciplinary allegations made
against the Appellant were substantiated
– the Appellant then, pursuant to
, div 2 of the
Public Sector Act 2022
against the disciplinary finding decision to the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission – the Commission decided
that four of the five disciplinary
allegations were substantiated because they were fair and reasonable and to that
extent, pursuant
s 562C(1)(c)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
confirmed the disciplinary finding decision – the Appellant then, pursuant
s 557(1)(a)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
against the decision of the Commission to the Industrial Court of Queensland
contending that the decision of the Commission
was affected by alleged errors of
law – after the appeal to the Court had been set down for hearing and the
parties had filed
and served written submissions, the Appellant, pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 2016
made an application
to the Court for the Court to hear additional evidence and made an application,
pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 2016
certain disclosure – consideration of the relevant principles for an
appellate court determining an appeal by way of re-hearing
on the record to hear
additional evidence – no basis for the Court to exercise its discretion to
allow the Appellant to lead
additional evidence because the evidence does not go
to determining whether the Commission's decision was affected by the errors
law as contended by the Appellant – not appropriate to hear additional
evidence to effectively dispose of the appeal –
Appellant's application
for the Court to hear additional evidence dismissed – as a consequence, no
utility for the Court to
grant the Appellant's discovery application –
Appellant's application to the Court for discovery dismissed
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES –
ADMISSION OF FURTHER EVIDENCE – IN GENERAL – consideration
discretion conferred on the Industrial Court of Queensland by
Industrial Relations Act 2016
the hear additional evidence –
whether the evidence is such that there was a high probability that there would
be a different
result – whether evidence could not have been obtained with
reasonable diligence for use at the hearing before the Queensland
Relations Commission – additional evidence is not such that there is a
high probability that there would be a different
result – Appellant could
have obtained the additional evidence with reasonable diligence prior to the
hearing before the Commission
LEGISLATION:
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
Industrial Relations Act 1999
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Public Sector Act 2022
Right to Information Act 2009
Barmuncol Pty Ltd v Maroochy Shire Council
[1983] 2 Qd R 639
Horton v State of Queensland (Department of Justice and
Attorney-General)
[2024] QIRC 278
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Kelsey v Logan City Council & Ors (No. 9)
[2022] QIRC 342
Kim v Workers' Compensation Regulator
[2019] ICQ 14
Local Government Association of Queensland Ltd v Queensland Services
Industrial Union of Employees and Ors
[2017] ICQ 002
McEnearney v Simon Blackwood (Workers’ Compensation Regulator)
[2019] ICQ 7
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
; (2018) CLR 541
State of Queensland (Queensland Health) v Hume (No. 3)
Turay v Workers' Compensation Regulator
[2023] ICQ 013
The Appellant appeared on her own behalf
Mr L. Grant of Counsel for the Respondent
SOLICITORS:
Ms A. Wells of Crown Law for the Respondent
Reasons for Decision
ex tempore,
revised from
Introduction
Jan Horton is employed by the State of Queensland, through the Department of
Justice and Attorney-General ('the Department'),
as a Court Services Officer and
Enforcement Officer in the Supreme, District and Land Court Service,
[2] In February
2023, the Department asked Ms Horton to show cause in relation to five
disciplinary allegations made against her.
Ms Horton responded and in September
2023 the relevant Departmental decision-maker determined the five disciplinary
allegations were
substantiated ('the disciplinary finding
decision').
[3] Pursuant to
, div 2 of the
Public Sector Act 2022
('the PS Act'), Ms
Horton appealed against the disciplinary finding decision to the Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission.
[4] By decision
dated 27 November 2024, the Industrial Commissioner, into whose hands
Ms Horton's appeal fell, ordered that, pursuant
s 562C(1)(c)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
('the IR Act'), the disciplinary
finding decision be set aside and another decision substituted, namely, that of
the five disciplinary
allegations, only the first four were substantiated ('the
Primary Decision').
application to appeal filed on 17 December 2024, Ms Horton appeals to this Court
against the Primary Decision. Ms Horton's
appeal is made pursuant to s 557(1)(a)
of the IR Act. That is, Ms Horton appeals against the Primary Decision on the
grounds of error
February 2025, I made Directions Orders for the hearing and determination of
Ms Horton's appeal to this Court. Given the
written submissions made by
Ms Horton, which were attached to her application to appeal, the Department
was content for those submissions
to be Ms Horton's principal written
submissions in the appeal. As a consequence, I made orders that by 6 March
2025, the Department
file and serve an Appeal Record Book, by
27 March 2025, the Department file and serve its written submissions;
and that by 10 April
2025, Ms Horton file and serve her written submissions
in reply. The parties have complied with those orders. The hearing of Ms
appeal to this Court is set down for today.
[7] By General
Application filed on 14 May 2025, Ms Horton made an application, pursuant to s
567(2) of the IR Act, for the Court
'... to adduce additional evidence' on the
basis of '...new documentary evidence' she had received pursuant to
Right to Information Act 2009
('Ms Horton's additional evidence
application'). An affidavit, purportedly affirmed by Ms Horton on 10 May 2025,
accompanied that
application ('Ms Horton's Court
affidavit').
[8] On 16 May
2025, Ms Horton, pursuant to s 536(f) of the IR Act, made an Application in
existing proceedings by which she seeks
an order for a direction that '...the
respondents' having regard to the matters to which she refers in that
application, provide
their ''preliminary' meetings documents and notes' ('Ms
Horton's discovery application'). Ms Horton, in respect of her discovery
application, also relies on the affidavit that accompanied her additional
evidence application.
during the course of argument, Ms Horton made an oral application to amend her
application to appeal so that she could
appeal on the ground or grounds other
than error of law or excess, or want of, jurisdiction, namely, to amend her
application to
also appeal on grounds of error of fact. I heard further argument
to appeal, in
addition to hearing Ms Horton's additional evidence application and her
discovery application.
The Primary Decision
following undisputed facts emerged from a consideration of the Primary
[11] By letter
dated 24 February 2023, the Department asked Ms Horton to show cause in relation
to five disciplinary allegations.
The five disciplinary allegations emerged from
an investigation report prepared by the Ethical Standards Unit of the Department
24 November 2022.
[12] The first
disciplinary allegation was that on 24 April 2021, in relation to a particular
matter, Ms Horton failed to comply with
the Police Action Plan completed by the
Registrar in response to a red alert being advised by the police and that she
(Ms Horton)
proceeded to attend the relevant house and speak with a male
[13] The second
disciplinary allegation was that between 13 April 2022 and 22 April 2022,
Ms Horton failed to comply with a lawful
direction issued by the Deputy
Principal Registrar and Sheriff of Queensland, not to perform any enforcement
officer or bailiff duties
on behalf of the Department whilst under alternative
work arrangements, by continuing to engage in arrangements for an eviction
for 23 April 2022.
[14] The third
disciplinary allegation was that on an unknown date in January 2022, without
authority, Ms Horton released a copy of
the Department's draft 'Mandatory
Vaccination Requirements' policy to Cloe Read, a reporter from the
[15] The fourth
disciplinary allegation was that on 5 November 2018, 21 October 2019,
4 August 2020, 10 March 2022 and 17 March 2022
Ms Horton sent
inappropriate emails to her colleagues.
[16] The fifth
disciplinary allegation was that on 7 April 2021 and on 27 October 2021,
Ms Horton sent inappropriate emails to a group
of colleagues in which she
made derogatory and offensive comments about the Department and its management
[17] Ms Horton
provided a response to the Department in respect of these allegations on
14 March 2023.
September 2023, Ms Horton was notified that the relevant decision-maker had
found that the five allegations were substantiated
and that, pursuant to various
grounds contained in s 91(1) of the PS Act, she was liable for disciplinary
action under the PS Act.
The disciplinary action proposed by the relevant
decision-maker was the termination of Ms Horton's employment. The decision-maker
provided Ms Horton with an opportunity to respond as to why her employment
should not be terminated. On 14 September 2023, Ms Horton
responded to the
proposed disciplinary action.
September 2023, pursuant to ch 3, pt 10, div 2 of the PS Act, Ms Horton appealed
to the Commission against the disciplinary
finding decision.
[20] The hearing
of that appeal was heard and decided by the Commission under ch 11 of the IR
Act. In that regard, s 562B of the IR
Act relevantly provides:
562B Public service appeal to commission is by way of review
(1) This section applies to a public service appeal made to the commission.
(2) The commission must decide the appeal by reviewing the decision appealed
(3) The purpose of the appeal is to decide whether the decision appealed
against was fair and reasonable.
[21] Ms Horton's
appeal was heard and determined by the Industrial Commissioner on the papers,
namely, by giving consideration to
the written submissions and material filed by
the parties.
[22] The powers
conferred on the Commission, in respect of such an appeal as the one made by Ms
Horton to it, are contained in s 562C
of the IR Act. That section relevantly
562C Public service appeals–decision on appeal
(1) In deciding a public service appeal, the commission may–
(a) confirm the decision appealed against; or
(c) for another appeal–set the decision aside, and substitute another
decision or return the matter to the decision maker
with a copy of the decision
on appeal and any directions considered appropriate.
considering the parties' written submissions, the Industrial Commissioner found
the disciplinary
findings made by the relevant decision-maker, in respect of the first four
disciplinary allegations, were decisions
that were fair and reasonable;
the disciplinary
finding made in respect of the fifth disciplinary allegation was a decision that
was not fair and reasonable.
[24] The order
made by the Industrial Commissioner was:
Pursuant to
s 562C(1)(c)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Allegations
1, 2, 3, and 4 are substantiated and disciplinary findings are
5 is not substantiated and the disciplinary finding relating to this allegation
is set aside.
Ms Horton's appeal to this Court against the Primary Decision
[25] Ms Horton
makes her application to appeal to this Court against the Primary Decision
pursuant to s 557(1)(a) of the IR Act. Section
557 of the IR Act relevantly
from commission
(1) The Minister or another person aggrieved by a decision of the commission
may appeal against the decision to the court on the
(a) error of law; or
(b) excess, or want, of jurisdiction.
[26] Having
regard to Ms Horton's application to appeal to this Court, and the accompanying
written submissions, Ms Horton identifies
four grounds of appeal by which she
contends the Primary Decision was affected by an error of law. They
Industrial Commissioner ignored relevant considerations, namely s 45 and
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
('the first ground of
there was no
evidence to support certain facts found by the Industrial Commissioner ('the
second ground of appeal');
the Industrial
Commissioner ignored relevant evidence submitted by her ('the third ground of
appeal'); and
the Industrial
Commissioner failed to provide her (Ms Horton) with procedural fairness in that
there was an apprehension of bias on
the part of the Industrial Commissioner
('the fourth ground of appeal').
[27] An appeal
to this Court is by way of re-hearing on the
which is a procedure for the
correction of error in that the existence of an error, whether of law or fact,
on the part of the Commission
in the first instance, is an indispensable
condition of a successful appeal.
Even where it can be demonstrated that there is an error of law or of fact in
the decision appealed against, it must be shown that
the error of law or fact
vitiates the decision before an appellate court would allow the
decision, the subject of a public service appeal, was determined by the
Commission to be, or not to be, fair and
reasonable,
and there is an appeal
to this Court against the decision of the Commission alleging it is affected by
an error of law, then the
deferential standard of appellate review is
In that regard, Dixon,
Evatt and McTiernan JJ in
House v The King
The manner in which an appeal against an exercise of discretion should be
determined is governed by established principles. It is
not enough that the
judges composing the appellate court consider that, if they had been in the
position of the primary judge, they
would have taken a different course. It must
appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. If the judge
upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to
guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does
not take into account
some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the
appellate court may exercise
its own discretion in substitution for his if it
has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how the primary judge has
the result embodied in his order, but, if upon the facts it is
unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that
in some way
there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which the law
reposes in the court of first instance. In
such a case, although the nature of
the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on
the ground that
a substantial wrong has in fact
Ms Horton's additional evidence application
[29] Ms Horton
seeks an order from the Court to hear additional evidence. Further, as I
understand it, the additional evidence is
the documents exhibited to her Court
[30] From Ms
Horton's additional evidence application, the following is a summary of the
grounds advanced in support of that application:
on 3 February
2025, pursuant to the
Right to Information Act 2009
she applied
for certain documentation from the Department which she received on 15 April
2025, being '... new documentary evidence'
which had not '...previously been
availble [sic] or produced throughout these proceedings before the
Tribunal/Court/Commission';
the new evidence
is relevant as it reveals '... the respondents breached' s 923(1) and (2) of the
IR Act and '...did knowingly provide
false and misleading information in
submissions to the Commission' in her appeal against the disciplinary finding
a particular
officer of the Ethical Standards Unit '...knowingly and willingly did mislead
the Commission' in the submissions filed
by the Department in respect of the
matters referred to by the Industrial Commissioner in paragraphs [27], [28],
[29], [99] and [100]
of the Primary Decision; and that, in particular, one named
officer '... commenced reprisal action against Ms Horton soon after she
maladministration and bullying within enforcement'; and
the Industrial
Commissioner was not informed that two named officers of the Department '...
acted corruptly and added the emails to
inflate the allegations against'
[31] It is fair
to say, having regard to the above grounds for Ms Horton's additional evidence
application, she contends that the
documents obtained by her, as a consequence
of her application pursuant to the
Right to Information Act 2009
evidence that the disciplinary findings made against her amounted to corrupt
reprisal action because she had raised allegations
of maladministration and
bullying within her work area.
[32] Ms Horton,
in her additional evidence application, correctly identifies s 567(2) of the
IR Act as being the source of discretionary
power for the Court to hear
additional evidence.
[33] Section
567(2) of the IR Act relevantly provides that the Court '...may hear evidence
afresh or additional evidence if the industrial
tribunal considers it
appropriate to effectively dispose of the appeal.' That identified consideration
by the Court constrains the
exercise of the discretion vested in the Court to
hear additional evidence. However, that is not to say that the considerations
the civil courts take into account, in the exercise of a discretion to
admit fresh evidence on an appeal by way of rehearing, are
irrelevant to the
exercise of the discretion vested in this
[34] It has been
held that a consideration that informs the exercise of the discretion of this
Court, namely, whether hearing the
additional evidence is appropriate to
effectively dispose of the appeal, is if the evidence could not have been
obtained with reasonable
diligence for use at the primary
relevant considerations may include that:
the evidence
must be such that there is a high probability that there would be a different
result; and
the evidence
must be credible.
[36] Ms Horton
submitted that it can be inferred from the documents she obtained pursuant to
Right to Information Act 2009
, that there has been misinformation and
lies told about her, that the Department lied to the Industrial Commissioner and
engaged in corrupt behaviour.
Department submitted that:
by reference to
the decision of Davis J, President in
Turay v Workers' Compensation
where an appeal
to this Court is made against a decision on the grounds of error of law, receipt
of additional evidence is for the
purposes of discerning error of law or
Ms Horton's
appeal against the Primary Decision is that it is affected by errors of law, not
errors of fact and, as such, the additional
evidence she applies to the Court to
hear cannot be relevant to her appeal on those grounds because it goes to
factual matters; and
consequence, the Court's discretion, pursuant to s 567(2) of the IR Act to hear
additional evidence is not enlivened and, even
if it was, because Ms Horton,
with reasonable diligence, could have led the evidence she obtained through the
Right to Information Act 2009
before the Industrial Commissioner, the
Court's discretion, even if it was enlivened, should not be exercised in her
favour for that
[38] There are
two issues with Ms Horton's additional evidence application that lead me to
consider that hearing the additional evidence
is not appropriate to effectively
dispose of the appeal.
[39] First, Ms
Horton has decided to pursue her appeal against the Primary Decision by alleging
that the Primary Decision is affected
by errors of law. That is an avenue of
appeal Ms Horton has as of right. Ms Horton in her filed application to appeal,
did not allege,
pursuant to s 557(2) of the IR Act, that there are errors of
fact in the Primary Decision in respect of which she must apply for,
and obtain,
the Court's leave to advance.
additional evidence sought to be heard could not result in a conclusion that
there is a high probability that there would
be a different result in this
Court. This is because the additional evidence could not have any bearing on
whether or not the errors
of law, said to be made by the Industrial Commissioner
in the Primary Decision, are made out.
[41] The first
ground of appeal is that the Industrial Commissioner ignored relevant
considerations, namely, certain provisions of
District Court of
Queensland Act 1967
Whether that ground of appeal is made out
depends upon whether the provisions in that Act, to which Ms Horton refers, had
any relevance
to the Industrial Commissioner's determination that the
disciplinary finding decisions made in respect of the first, second, third
fourth disciplinary allegations were fair and reasonable; and if they were,
whether they were not taken into account by the Industrial
Commissioner and that
failure had a material effect on the Industrial Commissioner's ultimate
decision. No additional evidence could
have any bearing on whether this ground
of appeal is made out.
[42] The second
ground of appeal is a no evidence ground. Ms Horton alleges that the Industrial
Commissioner made certain findings
of fact that were not supported by any
evidence before the Industrial Commissioner. Whether that ground of appeal is
made out depends
upon whether there was evidence before the Industrial
Commissioner which would support the impugned findings of fact made by the
Industrial Commissioner. No additional evidence could have any bearing on
whether this ground of appeal is made out.
[43] The third
ground of appeal is that the Industrial Commissioner ignored evidence submitted
by Ms Horton which she contends was
relevant. Assuming that this ground of
appeal gives rise to an alleged error of law, no additional evidence could have
any bearing
on whether this ground of appeal is made out.
[44] The fourth
ground of appeal is that the Industrial Commissioner denied Ms Horton procedural
fairness on the basis of apprehended
bias. The additional evidence of the kind
Ms Horton seeks the Court to hear could not have any bearing on whether that
appeal is made out.
[45] For all
these reasons, I am not persuaded that the additional evidence Ms Horton asked
the Court to admit, if admitted, would
result in a high probability that there
would be a different result than that reached by the Industrial Commissioner in
the Primary
[46] Secondly, I
am not persuaded that the additional evidence Ms Horton now wishes this Court to
hear, namely, the evidence exhibited
to her Court affidavit, could not have been
obtained with reasonable diligence for use in her appeal before the Commission
the disciplinary finding decision.
disciplinary finding decision was notified to Ms Horton on 1 September
2023. Ms Horton commenced her appeal before the Commission
September 2023 following which the Industrial Commissioner issued various
Directions Orders for the parties to file and serve
submissions which, having
regard to the Primary Decision and indeed to the Appeal Record Book, included
various attachments. The
Industrial Commissioner's decision was delivered on 27
November 2024.
[48] In her
additional evidence application, Ms Horton states that she did not, pursuant to
Right Information Act 2009
, apply for the documents she now seeks to
be considered as evidence by this Court until 3 February 2025. Having regard to
the additional
documentary evidence contained in Ms Horton's Court affidavit,
these are primarily emails, but also other documents, which were sent
in 2021, 2022 and 2023.
[49] Having
regard to the Primary Decision, Ms Horton expressly submitted to the Industrial
Commissioner that the disciplinary allegations
made against her by the
Department were in retaliation due to her allegations of maladministration made
by her to the Department
and to external agencies. Ms Horton claims that the
documents she has now retrieved pursuant to the
Right to Information Act
go to proving that same claim.
[50] However,
while Ms Horton has provided an explanation as to why she did not receive the
documents she sought from her application
pursuant to the
Information Act 2009
until April 2025 (due to various objections being
no explanation has been provided by Ms Horton as to why she
could not have made her application, pursuant to the
Right to Information Act 2009
documents she has now obtained (which were sent or created in 2021, 2022 and
2023), prior to 3 February
2025. That is, Ms Horton has provided no explanation
why she did not take the steps she took on 3 February 2025, to obtain the
now in her possession, at or about the time she made her submissions
to the Industrial Commissioner. Indeed, today Ms Horton frankly
conceded in her
submissions that she could have made her application pursuant to the
Information Act 2009
sometime well in the past.
[51] For these
reasons, I am not persuaded that the evidence, which Ms Horton now wishes to
admit, could not have been obtained with
reasonable diligence for use at the
hearing before the Industrial Commissioner.
[52] For these
two reasons, I do not consider it appropriate, for the effective disposition of
Ms Horton's appeal, to grant Ms Horton's
additional evidence
application.
Ms Horton's discovery application
[53] Ms Horton
applies, pursuant to s 536(f) of the IR Act, for the Department to discover
certain documents and notes.
[54] By way of
summary, Ms Horton provides the following as the grounds for her discovery
application:
upon receipt of
the documents under the
Right to Information Act 2009
15 April 2025, she '...discovered evidence of the respondents [sic]
corrupt conduct within the disciplinary process' currently
involving her;
documentary evidence supports her argument that the allegations made against her
'...are reprisals and retaliatory in nature';
two officers of
the Department, including the decision-maker, '...participated in unethical
unlawful behaviours';
one of those
officers '...admitted holding several 'preliminary meetings' with other
employees’ and '...It is expected that
these notes and documents from the
meetings will provide further evidence as to what this group was discussing
they came to the decisions they made';
officers '...misled' the Industrial Commissioner '...with misleading information
and disinformation'; and
the order sought
is '... for a direction that the respondents [sic] provide their 'preliminary'
meetings documents and notes.'
[55] Ms Horton,
in requesting the above order, applies to the Court to exercise its discretion
pursuant to s 536(f) of the IR Act.
Section 536 of the IR Act
Interlocutory
proceedings
For conducting proceedings under this Act or another Act, the court,
commission or registrar may make orders or give directions the
court, commission
or registrar considers just and necessary in relation to interlocutory matters
to be taken before the hearing of
the proceedings, including matters about the
(a) naming and joinder of parties;
(b) persons to be served with notice of proceedings;
(c) calling of persons to attend in proceedings;
(d) particulars of the claims of the parties;
(e) the issues to be referred to the court or commission;
(f) admissions, discovery, interrogatories or inspection of documents or
(g) examination of witnesses;
(h) costs of the interlocutory proceedings;
(i) place, time and mode of hearing of the cause.
[56] In essence,
Ms Horton today submitted that the disclosure application may reveal further
documents that support her contention
that the Respondent lied to the Industrial
Commissioner and to her and engaged in corrupt conduct.
Department submitted that if Ms Horton's additional evidence application was
incompetent on the basis it contended then,
similarly, Ms Horton's discovery
application was also incompetent.
[58] I will not
exercise my discretion to make the orders sought by Ms Horton.
obvious, having regard to the grounds of Ms Horton's discovery application, that
it is directly linked to her additional
evidence application.
[60] As stated
earlier in these reasons, in respect of Ms Horton's additional evidence
application, her contention is that the documents
she obtained through her
application made pursuant to the
Right to Information Act 2009
evidence of corrupt reprisal action against her because she had raised
allegations of maladministration and bullying within her
area of work.
[61] For the
reasons I have given above, having regard to Ms Horton's grounds of appeal,
namely, that the Primary Decision was affected
by the errors of law of which she
contends, it cannot be said that the additional evidence upon which she wishes
to rely is such
that there is a high probability there would be a different
result from the Primary Decision.
[62] Ms Horton's
discovery application is put on the basis that, having regard to the documents
that were provided to her by virtue
of her application pursuant to the
Right to Information Act 2009
, there may be other
documents, namely notes and documents associated with certain meetings, which
she contends may provide further
proof of the corrupt reprisal action she
alleges led to the disciplinary findings being made against her.
[63] I will not
exercise my discretion to make the orders Ms Horton seeks by her discovery
application. This is because there is no
utility in making the order for
discovery she seeks. Any such disclosure would have no bearing in respect of the
errors of law she
contends affects the Primary Decision. As a consequence, it is
not necessary for me to make the orders sought by Ms Horton to achieve
[64] For these
reasons, I am not persuaded that it is just and necessary for me to make the
orders sought by Ms Horton in her discovery
application.
Horton's oral application to amend her application to appeal
[65] During the
course of submissions this morning, when I was asking Ms Horton questions that
went to the competency of her additional
evidence application and particularly,
when I pointed out that Ms Horton's appeal to this Court against the Primary
Decision was
on the basis that the Primary Decision was affected by errors of
law and not errors of fact, Ms Horton made an oral application to
application to, as I understand it, also appeal against the Primary Decision on
the ground or grounds other than error
of law or excess, or want, of
[66] In the
course of making that application, Ms Horton did not give any reasons why she
was making such an application, namely,
to amend the basis of her application to
appeal against the Primary Decision at such a late stage, and did not articulate
any particular
alleged errors of fact in the Primary Decision.
[67] It seems to
me that Ms Horton made her oral application today on the basis of the
difficulties, pointed out to her today, that
confronted her in respect of her
additional evidence application. That is that her appeal to this Court, as it
currently stands,
is that the Primary Decision was affected by errors of
Department opposes the oral application made by Ms Horton to amend the basis of
her application to appeal to this Court against
the Primary Decision because the
application was made very late, namely, on the day the appeal is to be heard by
the Court. The Department
further submits that the appeal that it has come to
meet today is the appeal made by Ms Horton as of right, namely, that the Primary
Decision is affected by errors of law.
[69] Indeed, as
Mr Grant, Counsel for the Department submits, the Department's written outline
of submissions filed on 27 March 2025,
in respect of Ms Horton's application to
appeal against the Primary Decision on the grounds of error of law, point out
that Ms Horton
did not apply for leave to appeal against facts in the
Primary Decision.
[70] I have
discretionary power to allow Ms Horton to amend her application to appeal. That
is not disputed by the Department. However,
in the circumstances, I refuse to
allow Ms Horton to amend her application to appeal on the basis she seeks.
This is for a number
of reasons.
[71] First, the
application is made very late, namely, on the day the appeal is being heard by
[72] To allow Ms
Horton at this late stage to amend her application to appeal would require the
hearing of her appeal to be adjourned,
for directions to be made for her to file
and serve an amended application to appeal, and then for the parties to be heard
the question of whether or not it is in the public interest for Ms Horton
to be allowed to appeal against the Primary Decision on
alleged errors of fact
whatever those alleged errors may be. The appeal to this Court was made in
December 2024 and Directions Orders
issued on 13 February 2025. Having regard to
these facts, it is not in the public interest for the resources of the Court to
There are other litigants before the Court who could have had their
matter heard and determined today, but could not because Ms
Horton's appeal was
listed for today.
[73] Secondly,
there is no guarantee that Ms Horton could appeal against the Primary Decision
on the grounds of errors of fact. To
be able to appeal on such grounds, Ms
Horton would have to demonstrate that it is in the public interest that she can
appeal on such
grounds. It seems to me that the alleged errors of fact Ms Horton
may wish to agitate before the Court arise out of the documentation
she received
from the application she made pursuant to the
Right to Information Act
. As set out earlier in these reasons, Ms Horton did not make that
application until February this year and that she frankly admits
she could have
made it well before that time. This is a reason also against allowing Ms Horton,
at this late stage, to amend her
application to appeal. The documentation upon
which she wishes to agitate an appeal on errors of fact could have been obtained
her well before she made her application to appeal to this Court.
[74] Finally,
there is the prejudice to the Department. The appeal the Department has come to
meet today is Ms Horton's appeal against
the Primary Decision on alleged errors
of law. The Department would suffer prejudice in terms of time and cost if the
adjourned and Ms Horton was then allowed to argue whether it was in
the public interest that she could appeal on the grounds of errors
While I appreciate that, throughout this appeal, Ms Horton has represented
herself, that is a misfortune and not a privilege.
Ms Horton's past failure
to appreciate that she could have sought leave to appeal against the Primary
Decision on the grounds of
error of fact should not be visited upon the
Department.
[75] For all
these reasons, I refuse Ms Horton's oral application to amend her application to
appeal as she seeks.
[76] For the
reasons I have given:
I dismiss Ms
Horton's additional evidence application;
I dismiss Ms
Horton's discovery application; and
I dismiss Ms
Horton's oral application to amend her application to appeal on grounds other
than error of law or excess, or want, of
Court makes the following orders:
Appellant's General Application, filed on 14 May 2025 in
Matter No. C/2024/47, is dismissed.
Appellant's Application in existing proceedings, filed on 16 May 2025
in Matter No. C/2024/47, is dismissed.
Appellant's oral application made today, to amend her application to appeal in
Matter No. C/2024/47, so as to appeal on a ground
other than error of law or
excess, or want, of jurisdiction, is dismissed.
Industrial Relations Act
for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR
, [30] (Gageler J).
Barmuncol Pty Ltd v Maroochy Shire Council
[1983] 2 Qd R 639
(Shepherdson J, Kelly J at 640 agreeing) and
McEnearney v Simon Blackwood
(Workers’ Compensation Regulator)
[2019] ICQ 7
, [5] (Martin J,
President).
Within the meaning
Industrial Relations Act 2016
State of Queensland
(Queensland Health) v Hume (No. 3)
[2024] ICQ 003,
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
the cases referred to by Martin J, President in
Local Government Association
of Queensland Limited v Queensland Services Industrial Union of Employees and
[2017] ICQ 002 ('
'), [13],[14] and [15]. This decision was in
respect of the almost identical provision in the
Industrial Relations Act
(s 348(2)) to
Industrial Relations Act
Ibid [11]-[15].
(n 7), [11] and
Kim v Workers' Compensation Regulator
[2019] ICQ 14
, [16]-[20] (Martin J,
President) in respect of
Workers' Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act 2003
which is similar, but not identical to,
Industrial Relations Act
[2023] ICQ 013
Kelsey v Logan
City Council & Ors (No 9)
[2022] QIRC 342
, [39] (Vice President
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (349 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter