URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2025/285.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Byrnes-Reeves v QSuper [2025] QSC 285 (3 November 2025)
COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Byrnes-Reeves v QSuper
[2025] QSC 285
RILEY KYNAN BYRNES-REEVES
(plaintiff)
BOARD PTY LTD
A.C.N 657 707 009
AUSTRALIAN RETIREMENT TRUST PTY LTD
720 840 AS TRUSTEE OF THE AUSTRALIAN RETIREMENT TRUST, ART LIFE INSURANCE LTD
ACN 607 345 853
(Second Defendant)
INSURANCE LTD
ACN 607 345 853
(Third Defendant)
BS 15425/23
Trial Division
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
3 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
2-3 June 2025; 4-7 August 2025
claim is dismissed.
question of costs is adjourned to a date to be fixed.
CATCHWORDS:
SUPERANNUATION – BENEFITS – MATTERS AFFECTING ENTITLEMENT TO
AND PAYMENT OF BENEFITS – where the plaintiff brought
a claim against the
defendants for superannuation on the basis of a total and permanent disability
– where the plaintiff additionally
claims interest and costs –
whether the plaintiff’s injuries were pre-existing – whether any
injuries rendered
the plaintiff totally and permanently disabled
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994
Superannuation (State Public Sector) Deed 1990
(Qld) s 69(1)
Hannover Life Re of Australasia Ltd v Jones
[2017] NSWCA 233
MetLife Insurance Ltd v Hellessey
[2018] NSWCA 307
MetLife Insurance Ltd v MX
[2019] NSWCA 228
Panos v FSS Trustee Corporation
[2015] NSWSC 1217
Tal Life Ltd v Shuetrim
[2016] NSWCA 68
(2016) 91 NSWLR 439
Trident General Insurance Co Ltd v McNiece Bros Pty Ltd
[1988] HCA 44
The plaintiff appeared on his own behalf
M May for the defendants
SOLICITORS:
The plaintiff appeared on his own behalf
McInnes Wilson for the defendants
Introduction
December 2023, Mr Riley Byrnes-Reeves, the plaintiff, filed a claim in the
Supreme Court of Queensland, claiming:
(a) $200,000;
(b) $500,000 for interest; and
(c) $100,000 for costs of issuing the claim and this statement of claim.
[2] The first
defendant was the trustee of the fund, ‘QSuper’, until 28 February
2022. The second defendant is the current
trustee of the fund, and the third
defendant is the insurer.
[3] On 13 July
2017, the plaintiff commenced employment at Riviera
as a labourer. The
plaintiff’s employment at Riviera is the crux of his TPD claim, as this is
where the plaintiff claims that
he sustained injuries that prevented him from
future employment.
plaintiff’s case is that he is entitled to his claim because he has a
total and permanent disability due to mental health
and spinal issues.
[5] Although the
plaintiff is not a party to the insurance contract, the third defendant accepts
that, if a benefit is payable, then
the plaintiff can sue for it
defendants state that the claim should be dismissed as:
(a) on the material before the third defendant, its opinion was valid; and
(b) even if the third defendant’s opinion was not valid, then the evidence
before the Court does not support the plaintiff
being entitled to his TPD
[7] As for the
first and second defendants, the defendants submit that no benefit is payable to
the plaintiff as a member unless liability
under the insurance policy is
established and a benefit is paid by the insurer to the trustee. Since no such
benefit has been paid,
there is no amount payable by the first or second
defendants.
[8] This trial
was protracted. The hearing commenced on 2 June 2025, with evidence given by the
self-represented plaintiff and his
mother. The plaintiff sought to rely on a
number of medical reports but had not subpoenaed any doctors to give evidence on
the contents
of their reports.
[9] On 3 June
2025, the second day of trial, the matter was adjourned to allow the plaintiff
to subpoena doctors from whom he wished
to adduce evidence in support of his
[10] The hearing
recommenced on 5 August 2025 and the plaintiff called Dr Mahapatra – a
psychiatrist. The defendants called
Dr Siddle, a psychiatrist, and Dr Goode, an
occupational physician.
[11] The bulk of
the exhibits are medical records, mostly tendered by consent of the parties.
The insurance policy
plaintiff became a member of the QSuper fund on 26 October 2017. Upon becoming a
member of the fund, the plaintiff’s
insurance coverage commenced.
plaintiff’s coverage ceased on 30 September 2019 (when the plaintiff
submitted a hardship application to withdraw his
account balance from the fund,
which was accepted. On 1 October 2019, the defendant’s cover ended.
[14] Accordingly,
in relation to the insurance policy, the relevant dates to consider are between
26 October 2017 and 1 October 2019.
critical terms of the insurance policy are as follows:
– Definitions and interpretation
Date of Disablement
(b) for Total and Permanent Disablement, means:
(i) for an Insured Person who is Gainfully Employed – the date on which
the Insured Person has ceased all work and has been
certified in writing by a
Medical Practitioner as unable to work due to the Injury or Illness for which
the Insurance Benefit is
being claimed; or
means a sickness or disease
Individual Open Fund Member
means a Member of the Fund who
is not employed by a Queensland Government Employer who makes contributions to
the Fund in respect
of that Member or a Default Employer who makes contributions
to the Fund in respect of that Member, and is not a Retained Member
or a Spouse
means bodily injury resulting from an
Pre Existing Condition
means an Illness or Injury the signs
or symptoms of which existed prior to the date the cover or additional cover
Pre Existing Exclusion Period
means a period in which an
Insurance Benefit will not be payable if the Illness or Injury, of which the
claim is subject, is related
to a Pre Existing Condition;
Unless otherwise expressed in this policy, a Pre Existing Exclusion Period
in relation to an Insured Person commences on the date
the Insured Person became
covered for the relevant type of cover;
means the Superannuation Industry (Supervision)s
Regulations 1994 (Cth);
Total and Permanent Disablement
means that, in the opinion
of QInsure, the Insured Person:
(a) is under the care and following the advice of a Medical Practitioner; and
meets one of the following definitions in Parts A, B
or C as applicable; and
(b) meets the “Permanent Incapacity” definition contained in the
SIS Regs, as amended from time to time.
Where at the Date of Disablement, the Insured Person was:
(a) Gainfully Employed, or unemployed for less than 6 months Part A
PART A- STANDARD DEFINITION
Where at the Date of Disablement the Insured Person was Gainfully Employed
or unemployed for less than 6 months, Total and Permanent
Disablement means
solely because of an Illness or Injury, the Insured Person has been absent from
work and in the opinion of QInsure,
after obtaining the advice of not fewer than
two Medical Practitioners, which QInsure may require to be a specialist in the
or related conditions, the Insured Person is unlikely ever to be able
to work again in a job for which the Insured Person is reasonably
qualified by
education, training or experience that they have acquired or could reasonably be
expected to be able to acquire in the
future within a suitable
rehabilitation/retraining program; In determining what could be acquired in the
future, QInsure will consider
if the Injury or Illness prevents the Insured
Person from being able to undertake retraining or rehabilitation to acquire
training or experience;
Total and Permanent Disablement Benefit
means a benefit paid
in accordance with clause 27.3;
11. Exclusions
11.2 Default Cover
11.2.1 An Insured Person’s Default Cover will not be payable under
this policy in the following circumstances:
(a) in QInsure’s opinion, the Insured Person’s death, Terminal
Illness, Total and Permanent Disablement, Total and Temporary
Disablement or
Partial and Temporary Disablement is related to a Pre Existing Condition; and
(b) the Insured Person has not served the relevant Pre Existing Exclusion
Period outlined in the respective schedule or clause of
this policy.
[16] Under r
1.03C of the
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994
(“SIS Regulations”) permanent incapacity is defined as:
For subsection 10(1) of the Act, a member of a
superannuation fund or an approved deposit fund is taken to be suffering
incapacity if a trustee of the fund is reasonably satisfied that the
member’s ill‑health (whether physical or mental)
makes it unlikely
that the member will engage in gainful employment for which the member is
reasonably qualified by education, training
or experience.
[17] I note the
plaintiff states that an earlier version applied. However, this is of no
consequence as the earlier version defined
the critical terms “Total and
Permanent Disablement” and “Pre-Existing Condition” in the
same way as the
later version.
Two-step process
definition of TPD in the policy hinges upon the
of the insurer,
rather than on the underlying objective circumstances.
[19] For the
plaintiff to establish liability, he must satisfy both limbs of a two-step
(a) the first step involves establishing some defect in the insurer’s
formation of opinion; and
(b) if the insurer’s opinion is found to be defective, then the second
step involves the Court going on to determine whether
the plaintiff is entitled
to the TPD benefit.
necessary to set out a detailed chronology to provide context to the
plaintiff’s diagnoses in relation to the TPD
scheme and his employment
with Riviera.
[21] In 2009,
the plaintiff was diagnosed with Raynaud’s syndrome.
[22] Sometime in
2015, while he was in Grade 10 of high school, the plaintiff attended five
sessions with a psychologist at Headspace.
August 2016, the plaintiff saw a Dr Gundru, reporting low self-esteem. He told
Dr Gundru that he’d been on the antidepressant
Cymbalta in the previous
six months and asked if he could be referred to a psychologist because of
depression. The plaintiff saw
Dr Gundru once more during August 2016 for the
same reason.
September 2016, the plaintiff saw Dr Gundru and reported experiencing panic
attacks, poor sleep, low self-esteem, depressed
mood, anxiety, and irritability.
Dr Gundru diagnosed the plaintiff as having “depression/anxiety”.
[25] Less than
two weeks later, on 27 September 2016, the plaintiff saw Dr Gundru again and
told her that his symptoms had worsened
and that he felt “very
[26] On 29 March
2017 the plaintiff left Palm Beach Currumbin State High School.
[27] Almost 4
months later, on 13 July 2017, the plaintiff commenced employment at Riviera as
a labourer.
[28] On 27 July
2017, the plaintiff’s general practitioner at the time, Dr Wong, first
recorded the plaintiff having symptoms
of severe and debilitating anxiety,
agoraphobia, attention deficit disorder, and Asperger’s autistic spectrum
August 2017, the plaintiff then visited another doctor, Dr Abdul-Razack, on the
basis that he was stressed for work. Dr
Abdul-Razack certified that the
plaintiff had a medical condition and would be unfit for work that day.
September 2017, the plaintiff left work early at Riviera.
September 2017, an administrative manager at Riviera emailed the plaintiff at
Obviously you left without Notice on Monday, and haven’t heard from
Can you advise what is happening?”
plaintiff responded at 12.17pm that day:
“Sorry for no notice
Bryan I was feeling a little stressed out with the requirements of me on Monday,
I was having a mental
breakdown, I need a week of stress leave and can get a
medical certificate if that’s what’s needed but at the end of
day it’s your choice to keep me on or terminate me.”
administrative manager then replied at 1.49pm:
I don’t see the connection with work, however contact us once you are
better and we’ll go from there.”
[34] That same
day, the plaintiff ceased his employment at Riviera.
September 2017, the plaintiff went back to Dr Abdul-Razack, who recommended he
speak to a psychologist. The plaintiff declined
this suggestion.
[36] Less than
one month after the plaintiff ceased work at Riviera, he commenced new
employment as a pizza delivery driver at Maries
Pizza on 10 October 2017.
October 2017, the plaintiff visited Dr Abdul-Razack once again for depression,
anxiety, panic attacks, and a referral to
a psychologist. That day, Dr
Abdul-Razack referred the plaintiff to psychologist Dr Devineni “for
management of his long H/O
anxiety, depression, panic attacks”. The
information about the plaintiff’s “long history of anxiety,
depression,
and panic attacks” came from what the plaintiff told Dr
Abdul-Razack by this time.
October 2017, the plaintiff’s total and permanent disability cover
[39] On 8 May
2018, almost 7 months after commencing work again, the plaintiff ceased working
at Maries Pizza. Sometime after this
in 2018, the plaintiff worked towards a
diploma in mental health. He did coursework for about 12 months and a placement
[40] On 24 July
2018, another general practitioner, Dr Katz, wrote to a psychiatrist, Dr Jok
Teng, regarding the referral of the plaintiff
to him. He referred to the
plaintiff as having:
“a long history of anxiety and depression
extending back to his teens and multiple trials of antidepressants which have
had any benefit in altering his emotional and personal
functioning”.
[41] Dr Katz
also outlined that:
“detailed mental state examination
reveals that in all likelihood Riley has symptomatic disturbances on the
congenital autistic
spectrum lying in the AADD/ADHD range and associated
particularly with diminished concentration, attention span and registration
information, especially from low stimulus sources such as text as well as easy
distractability [sic]; difficulty staying to task,
poor time management,
habitual procrastination and busy, racing, scattered, poorly focused thoughts
together with comorbid features
of nervous hypersensitivity, social anxiety and
obsessional thinking patterns such as overanalysing and overthinking situations
reading too much into the same leading, in turn, to anticipatory anxiety and
periods of more generalised anxiety as well as chronic
indecisiveness”.
October 2018, Dr Patrick, a general practitioner, prepared a report and listed
the plaintiff’s “major physical,
psychiatric and intellectual
conditions” as “ADHD, dysphasia related to agoraphobia and
agoraphobia related to anxiety”.
He also identified “other relevant
conditions” of the plaintiff as Asthma, C6/C7 spinal injury and
Asperger’s syndrome
February 2019, Gold Coast Radiology MRI Services reported on a scan of the
plaintiff’s cervical thoracic spine, stating,
“At the C6/C7 level
there is a small right parasagittal disc bulge.” This means that the
report showed that a spinal
disc on the right side of the plaintiff’s
spine had slightly bulged outwards.
months later, Dr Bersin completed a document identifying the “main medical
conditions which significantly impact
on the [plaintiff’s] capacity to
work” as attention deficit disorder, agoraphobia, Asperger’s
syndrome, and autistic
spectrum syndrome.
[45] General
practitioner Dr Islam then prepared a GP Mental Health treatment plan for the
plaintiff, referring to “Ongoing
symptoms consistent with ADHD; Also
agoraphobia; Duration: since 07/2017”.
plaintiff’s total and permanent disability cover ended on 1 October 2019.
February 2020, Dr Wong wrote to Dr Mahapatra with a consult note, stating that
his reason for contact was “anxiety”
and referred to the
plaintiff’s past history of ADD, ADHD, Agoraphobia, Anxiety, Depression,
and Raynaud’s Disease.
[48] On 15 May
2020, the plaintiff signed a total and permanent disability claim form. Almost a
month later, on 10 June 2020, the
plaintiff’s solicitors at the time sent
the total and permanent disability claim to QSuper.
[49] On 30 June
2020, Dr Wong signs a certificate that states, in his opinion, the plaintiff:
“is unlikely to be able to return to his usual occupation as
because of injury / illness
severe debilitating anxiety, agoraphobia, panic attacks on the background of
ADHD from 8 May 2019.”
[50] On 3 July
2020, Dr Wong signed a Centrelink medical certificate for the plaintiff,
referring to diagnoses of “severe debilitating
anxiety, agoraphobia,
attention deficit disorder”. He also stated that “Riley is just not
ready for the workforce until
his mental conditions are stabilised. His care
team are working intensely to achieve stabilisation”. Dr Wong also
that he is unfit for “work / study” from 3 July 2020 to 25
September 2020.
[51] On 16 July
2020, Dr Wong wrote a letter and provided a corrected medical certificate to
Centrelink to address the period stated
on the medical certificate being
“slightly over the 13-week maximum”.
November 2020, QSuper wrote to Dr Mahapatra requesting a report. On 1 March
2021, Dr Mahapatra sent a report to QSuper,
referring to the plaintiff’s
issues with anxiety starting in grade 7 and becoming much worse while he was
working at Maries
Pizza for nearly 8 months in 2018. He also referred to the
plaintiff having developed severe social phobia in 2018 while working
Pizza. He referred to the plaintiff’s ADHD and ASD as having been in
existence since childhood.
[53] On 29 April
2021, Dr Wong sent a report to QSuper, referring to the plaintiff’s
“background of severe anxiety, panic
disorder, agoraphobia, social phobia,
autism spectrum disorder and ADHD” and also referred to the plaintiff
having to quit
his job as a pizza delivery driver “due to severe anxiety
which resulted in uncontrollable vomiting before and during work”.
terms of the plaintiff’s employment prospects, Dr Wong said the following:
“In terms of employment prospects currently, he is likely to
have severe anxiety and panic attacks despite being on his medications
therefore is unlikely to be suitable for regular employment.”
[54] He listed
the plaintiff’s medical history as including ASD, ADHD, agoraphobia,
anxiety, depression, Raynaud’s Disease.
[55] On 19 May
2021, QSuper sent the plaintiff a procedural fairness letter.
[56] On 23 June
2021, QInsure declined the claim and issued a statement of reasons and
communicated this to the plaintiff. On 10 August
2021, the plaintiff sought a
review of the decision, referring to:
“C6-C7 spinal issues
giving from work – having a bulging disc from lifting over 50kgs without
being shown correct form,
my first job Riviera I was not given a job description
and thrown into the labour force from being a highschool dropout at age 18
my diagnosis wasn’t until 2018.”
August 2021, QInsure responded to the plaintiff’s email confirming that
the claim was declined based on the pre-existing
exclusion period. The same day,
the plaintiff replied to QInsure requesting an internal review.
September 2021, QSuper wrote to the plaintiff with the outcome of the review and
the statement of reasons. The original
decision to decline the claim remained.
September 2021, the plaintiff further disputed the decline of the claim and
stated (among other things):
“What about my physical
capacities; right shoulderblade pain – nick [sic] pain days my neck will
not turn fully right
– back pain, upper, middle and lower! – C6-C7
has myriad of symptoms – tingling forearms, weak strength in the
and wrist ... How can I have a on going back problem pain after pain and
cervical achieved just after my first ever job”.
October 2021, QSuper again wrote to the plaintiff with the outcome of the review
and the statement of reasons. The decline
of the claim was maintained
December 2021, Dr Wong wrote a report, referring to the plaintiff’s
diagnoses of severe anxiety, panic disorder,
agoraphobia, social phobia, autism
spectrum disorder, ADHD, cervical spine (C6/C7) disc bulge abutting the anterior
aspect of the
spinal cord, hyperemesis secondary to those diagnoses (other than
ADHD). He then stated that the plaintiff’s “anxiety,
panic disorder,
agoraphobia and social phobia are severe enough to prohibit him from working in
likely any setting”.
February 2022, Beaudesert Family Practice records contained a record of the
plaintiff having a telephone consultation with
Dr Wong. The note contained a
“TPD claim draft response” addressed to
amongst other things:
“You state that you require a medical
practitioner to confirm that Riley’s current condition is not a
pre-existing condition
present throughout his childhood. A letter from 24/7/2018
provided by Riley from his psychiatrist, the late Dr Katz, states that
exhibited depression and anxiety following the separation of his parents when he
You request that I amend my answer to take into account a back injury that
occurred during his employment as a boat labourer and detail
whether the back
injury contributed to further decline in Riley’s mental health. I do not
recall Riley mentioning this back
problem. I have never treated him nor
documented this this [sic] back problem as a presenting complaint. This is the
first time I
have seen the CT report you provided. I cannot reasonably comment
[63] On 2 April
2022, the plaintiff suffered a violent assault outside of his home when, on his
account, he was attacked by three
men outside of his home. He was hospitalised
[64] On 5 April
2022, the plaintiff’s solicitor emailed QSuper a copy of Dr Wong’s
report of 16 December 2021 and the
radiology report dated 18 February 2019.
August 2022, Dr Siddle provided an opinion that the plaintiff’s
disablement was due to conditions of anxiety, ADHD,
and ASD. He noted that the
plaintiff had displayed signs and symptoms of these disorders since childhood.
Although the documentation
suggested that the plaintiff’s social phobia
had only been present since 2018, it was likely attributable to his underlying
conditions, as difficulties in social interactions are a common feature of ASD.
Dr Siddle would not consider the social phobia on
its own as likely to cause the
plaintiff to be permanently unable to return to work.
August 2022, Dr Goode provided an opinion that, in the apparent absence of any
significant accompanying upper limb radiculopathy,
a C6/C7 disc bugle on its own
would not deem the plaintiff unlikely ever to be able to work again in a job for
which he is reasonably
qualified by education, training, or experience. He noted
“Cervical spine disc budges [sic] are quite frequently
reported on CT and MRI imaging, and these types of disc bulges mostly
reflect minor constitutional degeneration, and very frequently are simply
incidental and clinically insignificant”.
August 2022, QSuper, on behalf of QInsure, sent a procedural fairness letter to
the plaintiff. On 31 August 2022, the plaintiff’s
solicitors responded to
the procedural fairness letter. This same day, QInsure wrote to Qsuper with a
response to the plaintiff’s
September 2022, Dr Deveney certified that the plaintiff has PTSD (albeit yet to
be confirmed by a specialist psychiatrist).
He stated that the plaintiff’s
PTSD symptoms were not documented until April 2022. Further, he noted that the
plaintiff also
has ADHD, ASD, a spinal injury, and agoraphobia.
November 2022, QSuper again wrote to the plaintiff with the outcome of the
review and statement of reasons. They again maintained
that the claim was
October 2024, Dr Wong wrote a letter addressed to the Court, stating the
plaintiff’s:
“medical history includes significant
mental health challenges, including diagnoses of Social Phobia, Autism Spectrum
ADHD, and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder” ... “Given the
chronic and severe nature of his mental health conditions, the
persistence of
symptoms despite treatment, and his inability to maintain employment, I support
Mr Byrnes-Reeve’s application
to access his superannuation
December 2024, Dr Dhupelia prepared a radiology report stating:
“minimal diffusive disc bulge is noted only at C6/C7. This is
non neurocompressive.”
He referred to the plaintiff as having “chronic cervical and thoracic
pain since 5 years. Old injury. Define.”
January 2025, a Dr Gupta wrote a letter to a Dr Sadasivan, stating that the
“has been complaining of upper back pain since
last 5 years. Pain is radiating to both upper limb and lower cervical spine.
Pain is gradually getting worse. Been investigated with MRI scan of thoracic
[73] Accordingly,
the lengthy chronology and multiple medical opinions demonstrate the long
history of health issues the plaintiff
has endured. However, the critical
question is whether the plaintiff has a
total and permanent
pursuant to the policy.
The total and permanent disability form
[74] On 15 May
2020, the plaintiff completed and signed a total and permanent disability claim.
In that form, the plaintiff details
his illnesses/injuries as “depression,
agoraphobia, autism, ADHD, Aspergers, and nervous
hypersensitivity”:
“What was the cause of your illness
When did you first see a doctor about your illness or injury?
(dd/mm/yyyy)
24/07/2018.
When did you first start to experience signs or symptoms? (dd/mm/yyyy)
27/07/2017.
When was your illness first diagnosed or when did your injury occur?
(dd/mm/yyyy)
When did you stop working because of your illness or injury? (dd/mm/yyyy)
08/05/2019.
Have you suffered from a similar illness or injury previously?
If yes, please provide details and dates.
Been experiencing symptoms of my illnesses since I was 10 but wasn’t
diagnosed until 24/07/2018.”
plaintiff responded to questions about his most recent
“Name of your most recent employer.
Maries Pizza Southport.
Your position / job title.
Pizza Maker – Delivery Person.
Please describe your job in detail, including all of your duties and
responsibilities, and attach a position description if possible.
If your role
involves manual handling duties (lifting, carrying, pushing, pulling) please
provide details of these specific duties.
Unpacking stock, strain on back from 20kg boxes of cheese to be properly
stored, driving/Delivering, making pizzas, serving customers,
taking orders over
the phones.”
“If no, did you terminate your employment due to any illness or
Please provide the exact date of termination? (dd/mm/yyyy)
08/05/2019.
Do you plan to return to work?
If no, please provide details.
Unable to work due to my illnesses.”
[76] Dr Wong,
the plaintiff’s treating doctor at the time, completed the section of the
form requiring a response from the treating
doctor as to diagnosis:
“Based on your objective clinical findings, please confirm
the patient’s diagnosis.
Severe debilitating anxiety, agoraphobia, attention deficit disorder,
Aspberger’s, autistic spectrum disorder.
Please describe your objective findings that support the diagnosis (e.g., if
the condition is a mental illness, provide criteria as
per DSM-V; if condition
is musculoskeletal provide ROM and strength test results).
Abrupt surge of intense fear that reaches a peak within minutes with severe
debilitating physical manifestations (see below). Daily
occurrence.
Please outline the patient’s symptoms relating to this condition.
Typical physical manifestatiosn [sic] include, but are not limited to
tremors, hyperventilation, hyperemesis, globus sensation.
When did the patient’s symptoms for this condition first occur?
(dd/mm/yyyy).
27/07/2017.
Has the patient ever experienced these symptoms, or similar symptoms,
previously?
respect to the circumstances of whether the injury or illness would prevent the
plaintiff from working, Dr Wong stated the
patient currently performing their usual work duties?
If the patient has ceased all work, have they been certified in writing by
you or another medical practitioner as unable to work due
to the injury or
If yes, what date was certification completed? (dd/mm/yyyy).
21/04/2020.
How do the symptoms affect the patient in their day to day activities?
Severe debilitating anxiety. Unable to work. Difficulties with activities of
activities of daily living when under stress and/or anxious.
How do the symptoms impact on the patient’s functional ability to
undertake work?
Some examples of debilitating anxiety at work are involuntary hyperemesis,
catatonia, tremors.
If the patient has ceased all work, do their symptoms present a barrier to
their return to work?
plaintiff’s previous lawyer sent Dr Wong various questions relating to the
plaintiff’s health issues and capacity
to work. Dr Wong responded on 16
December 2021 with the following:
“1. Severe anxiety,
Agoraphobia,
spectrum disorder,
spine (C6/C7) disc bulge abutting the anterior aspect of the spinal cord, and
Hyperemesis
secondary to [the aforementioned diagnoses]”.
[79] Dr Wong
noted that, while he first saw the plaintiff on 7 February 2020, diagnoses 1-6
came from 24 July 2018 from psychiatrist
Dr Katz and diagnosis 7 came from a
radiology report from a CT scan dated 18 February 2019.
[80] Dr Wong, in
that same letter, answered the following questions in this way:
“Do you believe our client is likely able to return to full
time work within his education, training and experience?
Do you believe our client’s condition interferes with his ability to
return, gain and maintain employment within his education,
training and
experience. Please detail.
Yes, his anxiety, panic disorder, agoraphobia, and social phobia are severe
enough to prohibit him from working in likely any setting.
His panic attacks
manifest as gagging, vomiting, palpitations, headaches, and globus pharyngeus,
symptoms that would preclude most
from working in any setting. Furthermore, he
has multiple triggers for his severe anxiety and panic attacks including social
situations,
sensory stimulus, and stressors that the average person would
consider normal for a typical work environment.”
respect to his mental and physical conditions, Dr Wong stated the following in
that letter:
“What is the prognosis regarding his mental
His condition is likely to be a long term and probably permanent for him. He
is stable on his current medication regime, however his
anxiety symptoms are
very easily triggered.”
What is the prognosis regarding his physical condition?
Riley’s hyperemesis is likely to persist because diagnoses 1-5 and 7
are likely to persist.”
The insurer’s decision
[82] On 23 June
2021, QInsure stated that, in their opinion, the plaintiff’s TPD claim is
not payable:
“After reviewing all the available information,
this decision has been made because:
The information
received indicates that Riley Byrnes-Reeves Insurance Policy is subject to a
Pre-Existing Exclusion Period Clause
The medical
information received indicates that the Total and Permanent Disablement was
related to an illness or injury, the signs
or symptoms of which existed prior to
the date the cover commenced.
However, the information received
supports Riley Byrnes-Reeves has a permanent incapacity as defined in the SIS
Regulations.”
[83] QInsure’s
final decision on 1 November 2022, was:
“On 23 June 2021,
QInsure advised Maurice Blackburn Lawyers that our assessment was finalised and
assessed Riley Byrnes-Reeves
as having a Total and Permanent Disablement Claim
with a Date of Disablement 8 May 2019.
Riley Byrnes Reeve’s disablements were assessed as relating to an
illness or injury the signs and symptoms of which existed
prior to the date the
cover commenced being 26 October 2017, there was no entitlement to a Total and
Permanent Disablement Benefit
On 23 June 2021, QInsure also assessed Riley Byrnes Reeves as having a
Permanent Incapacity; therefore he was entitled to access his
preserved benefits
that he held in his superannuation account.
Therefore, after consideration of all the medical evidence supplied by Riley
Byrnes-Reeves and obtained by QInsure and applying the
definitions and clauses
of the Insurance Policy, QInsure maintain the decision made on the Statement of
reasons dated 23 June 2021
that no benefit is payable.”
[84] QInsure set
out in the final decision the voluminous material that it relied on to assess
the plaintiff’s claim.
The plaintiff’s position
[85] Exhibited
to the plaintiff’s affidavit sworn on 21 November 2024 are reports,
including from Dr Deveney and Dr Gupta, neither
of whom were called by the
[86] Attached to
Dr Deveney’s report is a certificate of permanent incapacity. Dr Deveney
first saw the plaintiff on 7 April
2022 and notes:
Byrnes-Reeves has Posttraumatic Stress Disorder yet to be confirmed by a
Specialist Psychiatrist.
Riley also has ADHD, ASD, a spinal injury and Agoraphobia.
The latter four diagnoses were described and confirmed on 22/1/21, when Dr
Mahapatra interviewed Riley ...
The PTSD symptoms were not documented until April 2022.”
plaintiff also relies on the opinion of Dr Gupta, who referred the plaintiff to
another doctor, Dr Sadasivan. In that letter,
Dr Gupta writes:
“Thank you for seeing Riley Byrnes-Reeves for an opinion and
management. He has been complaining of upper back pain since last
5 years. Pain
is radiating to both upper limb & lower cervical spine. Pain is gradually
getting worse. Been investigated with
MRI scan of thoracic spine.”
exhibited to the plaintiff’s affidavit are the results of a computed
tomography scan of the plaintiff’s spine.
The reported results from Gold
Coast Radiology, dated 18 February 2019, are:
“CT CERVICAL
FINDINGS. Cervical spine shows normal alignment. Within the limitations of CT
imaging no gross abnormalities to
the contents of the spinal canal. Normal
appearance to the structures of the posteria fossa. Likewise no concerning
findings within
the prevertebral soft tissues. At the C6/C7 level there is a
small right parasagittal disc bulge. This abuts the anterior aspect
spinal cord. There is minor narrowing of the right exiting foramen. Left foramen
appears patent. Over all remaining levels
the disc heights are preserved with no
foraminal narrowing, spinal canal stenosis, disc bulges or face arthropathy.
COMMENT. At the C6/C7 level there appears to be a focal disc bulge on the
right side showing mass effect on the spinal cord. This
should be further
assessed with MRI.
CT THORACIC SPINE. Thoracic spine shows normal alignment and curvature. No
end-plate or wedging deformities. Normal appearance to
the costovertebral,
costotransverse and facet joints globally throughout. No evidence of
Scheuermann’s disease, scoliosis or
an spinal dysraphism.
COMMENT. Normal CT assessment of the thoracic spine.”
plaintiff relies on the opinion of one of his treating psychiatrists, Dr
Mahapatra, who provided opinions on the following
“1. Based on your clinical assessment is Riley unlikely ever
to be able to work again in a job for which they are reasonably
qualified by
education, training or experience?
In my opinion, Riley is unlikely to work again in the foreseeable future in a
job for which he is reasonably qualified by education,
training or experience.
2. Please advise if based on the [sic] Riley’s condition/s, if in the
future he could be reasonably expected to acquire additional
education, training
or experience within a suitable training/rehabilitation program to aid in return
to work? Please provide details.
He cannot be reasonably expected to acquire additional education, training or
experience within a suitable training/rehabilitation
program with an aim to
have not improved significantly
enough. He has been suffering from severe Social
Phobia on a background of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Autism
disorder. When he initially presented to me in in [sic] January 2020
after referral from his GP Dr Muhammad Ali Shah, Eaglesfield
Medical Centre, he
was suffering from severe anxiety and panic in social situations. He was
struggling with his focus and concentration.
He was not sleeping well. He was
feeling irritable and angry. He was not able to make phone calls and was scared
to go out. His mother
said that he was unable to leave his room without feeling
nauseous and gagging. He has been seeing his psychologist for six years
been trialled on Dexamphtamine [sic], a few antidepressants and antianxiety
medications. I put him back on Dexamphetamine
and have trialled many
antidepressants and anxiolytic medications since then. He has not been able to
tolerate many medications due
to side effects. In his most recent appointment on
22 January 2021, he continued to present with high anxiety which continued to
affect his interactions with people and day-to-day functioning.
3. Are there any other factors which you consider relevant in assessing their
capacity for future work?
His inability to cope with severe anxiety seems to be the main factor
affecting his capacity for future work. Though he said that
some issues with
anxiety started when he was in grade 7, it became much worse while he was
working at a pizza shop for nearly 8 months
in 2018 ... He said that he was
bullied in school and while working as a disability support worker.
4. Riley has previously worked in a pizza shop and as a labourer, what should
be their return to work goal, for example reduced hours,
less demanding duties,
alternate workplace, alternate employer, medical retirement, or other? Please
share feedback.
He does not have capacity to return to work for the foreseeable future due to
Social Phobia. His current medications i.e. antidepressant
Mirtazapine,
antianxiety Alprazolam and ADHD medication Dexamphetamine have provided some
relief in his symptoms but not enough for
him to be suitable for education or
training for work.
5. Riley’s insurance has Pre-Existing Condition clause associated to
his claimed conditions; therefore, it needs to be determined
if (a) in your
opinion, is the current disablement either physical of psychiatric related to
illness or injury the science of symptoms
of which existed prior to the
effective date of insurance of 26 October 2017?
He suffers from Attention Deficit Hyperactive Disorder and Autism Spectrum
Disorder which have been in existence since his childhood.
In spite of this he
was able to attend school and worked in various jobs. Though he reported having
issues with anxiety since grade
7, he developed severe Social Phobia in 2018
when he was working in a pizza shop.
6. If the Riley [sic] is permanently unable to return to work within his
education, training or experience from what date would you
confirm the
certificate and from?
I certify him to be permanently unable to return to work as per his
education, training or experience from 8 May 2019 as he was too
continue working at the pizza shop at that stage.”
Mahapatra was the only doctor that the plaintiff called to give evidence.
plaintiff’s position has remained consistent throughout the hearing of the
matter. His view is that he is unable to
work again because of a permanent
injury sustained at Riviera and, as such, is entitled to claim on his
superannuation.
plaintiff’s written submissions, in their entirety, are:
Introduction
May it please the Court. My name is Riley Byrnes-Reeves. I stand before you
today not as a seasoned advocate, but as a young man whose
life was derailed
before it even had a chance to begin. Every word I speak is a struggle-my spine
screams, my hands tremble, and
my breath is never truly free. But I am here
because silence would be surrender, and I refuse to be forgotten.
My Background and Employment
In October 2017, I entered the workforce at Riviera Marine. I was just 17
years old. A teenager. Vulnerable. Eager to prove myself.
I was thrown into an
adult world, placed on 10-hour shifts without training, without a safety
briefing, without care. I was a kid
expected to carry a man's weight in a brutal
environment. And I did it, every day-while my fingers turned purple from
Raynaud's phenomenon,
a condition I was diagnosed with in 2009. I am not blaming
QSuper or Riviera for this diagnosis, but the harsh conditions undeniably
worsened its effects. At the time, my spine was strained beyond repair, and my
mental health began to crumble in the shadows.
The Injury and Its Consequences
What I endured at Riviera was not work-it was exploitation. I was left
unsupervised in dangerous conditions, and I broke under the
pressure. I
sustained a spinal cord injury, and with it came a tidal wave of psychological
destruction. Since then, I have lived
with relentless pain, PTSD, and anxiety so
intense it cages me in my own mind. In 2022, after being brutally assaulted
My condition-both physical and mental-has spiralled further
into darkness. And
all the while, I was dismissed, left without the care or protection I begged
Mental Harm and Systemic Neglect
When my mother was rear-ended by a three-tonne truck in 2018, I became her
full-time carer-despite being broken myself. I had no support.
No guidance. No
lifeline. My mental health declined further, yet instead of compassion, I was
met with suspicion. QSuper and A.R.T.
turned their backs on me. They weaponised
assumptions, labelled me with conditions I never had, and used those labels to
justice. Their treatment was cold, calculated, and crushing.
Violence and Continued Trauma
On 22 April 2022, while still healing from surgery, I was attacked by three
men. Beaten. Left bleeding. Left alone. No ambulance came.
Police offered no
care. My mother-already injured-found me collapsed, dazed, and bloody. I still
see it when I close my eyes. I still
feel the blows, the fear, the isolation.
The trauma didn't end that night. It haunts me. My memory fades. My energy
drains. My sense
of safety is gone. I live in constant survival mode, trapped in
housing where I am stalked, harassed, and ignored.
What I Seek
I come to this Court not for pity, but for justice. I only ever wanted to
contribute, to care for my mother, to build a life. Instead,
I was chewed up by
a system that thrives on silence and indifference. That system left me broken,
untreated, and unheard. I ask this
Court to recognise the truth of my
suffering-not just in diagnosis or documents-but in the daily agony of my
existence. I seek full
compensation, recognition of my lifetime care needs, and
a ruling that says: what happened to me matters. That I matter.
Thank you, Your Honour.”
[93] It should
be noted that the plaintiff refers to a number of irrelevant matters and also
matters for which there is no evidence.
Further, the submissions are vague as to
what evidence QSuper chose to ignore.
particular, the plaintiff focuses on his mental health issues. On his evidence,
he is living with significant mental health
symptoms. The question is not
whether he suffers from a mental illness, but whether the mental illness was a
pre-existing condition
as defined by the policy.
[95] Gleaning
what I can from his submissions, the defendant makes a number of
complaints:
(a) that his C6-C7 spinal issues were not considered;
(b) the physical consequences of his mental health conditions (such as vomiting,
gagging sensation and dry throat) were not considered;
(c) his mental health conditions were not pre-existing; and
(d) due consideration was not given to the balance of the medical evidence to
make a true and genuine assessment of the evidence
The first step: validity of the insurer’s opinion
[96] In relation
to the first step, Meagher JA (with whom McColl JA and White JA agreed) in
MetLife Insurance Ltd v Hellessey
[2018] NSWCA 307
stated that:
“[7] The relevant principles are those stated by McLelland
J (as his Honour then was) in
Edwards v Hunter Valley Coop Dairy Co Ltd
(1992) 7 ANZ Ins Cas 61-113
, and approved by this Court ... MetLife’s
liability under the policy turned on its being satisfied as to the extent of the
Insured Member’s incapacity. Both in considering that question and in
determining whether it was so satisfied, MetLife was
required to act reasonably
and fairly. And breach of one or more of these overlapping implied obligations
would deprive the decision
of contractual effect.
[8] Thus, an insurer’s decision may be set aside if it is shown to
be unreasonable on the material before the insurer. It
will not answer that
description merely because the Court would or could have reached a different
opinion on that material, because
“reasonable persons may reasonably take
different views” ... In addition, however, a decision may be set aside if
process of consideration underlying it was not undertaken reasonably and
fairly, even if the outcome itself is not also shown to
have been unreasonable
on the material before the insurer. Again, more than one reasonable process of
consideration may be open in
the circumstances, but the process adopted by an
insurer would not cease to be unreasonable simply because another, and
reasonable,
process to the same conclusion happened to exist.
[9] For example, in
, the insurer’s breach of that
duty was in not considering a “body” of relevant medical and
psychiatric opinions:
at [154]. And, in
Hannover Life v Jones
failure to take into account the Insured Member’s psychological makeup was
a “failure to act reasonably and fairly
in undertaking the task of forming
the opinion as to [his] disablement”: at [134]. As will become apparent,
it is not necessary
in this appeal to attempt a comprehensive description of the
evidentiary material required to be considered by an insurer because
witness material considered below would meet any such description: see, in
another context,
Torbey Investments Corporated Pty Ltd v Ferrara
[2017] NSWCA
(Basten JA, McColl and Simpson JJA agreeing), identifying the
evidence required to be considered by an administrative decision-maker
reference to its apparent credibility, relevance and materiality to a
[97] In relation
to the first step, the relevant principles are:
(a) the insurer must act reasonably and fairly in forming the opinion;
(b) the insurer’s opinion is not unreasonable simply because the Court
would form a different view;
(c) the insurer’s opinion will be invalidated if the process was not
undertaken reasonably and fairly;
(d) an opinion that is reasonably open on the evidence can still be invalid if
the insurer did not engage with the relevant evidence;
(e) the insurer’s opinion will be invalid if it does not answer the
correct question or does not take into account relevant
(f) in deciding whether the insurer’s opinion is defective, the Court
should not take into account material that was not before
the insurer when
forming its opinion;
(g) where an insurer has reconsidered a claim multiple times, the focus is
usually on the last of the
[98] The process
by which the insurer’s opinion was formed is set out in an affidavit of
the Group Life Claims Leader of the
third defendant. In summary:
(a) the plaintiff’s claim was lodged on 10 June 2020;
(b) various information was provided to the insurer in support of the claim
between 10 June 2020 and 6 May 2021;
(c) on 19 May 2021, the insurer sent the plaintiff (via his solicitors) a
procedural fairness letter and invited the plaintiff to
respond to it;
(d) on 10 June 2021, the plaintiff (via his solicitors) responded to the first
procedural fairness letter;
(e) on 16 June 2021, the third defendant sent its claim decision to the trustee
of the fund, being a decision to decline the claim;
(f) there were then subsequently a series of complaints by the plaintiff and
responses by the insurer; and
(g) on 1 November 2022, the third defendant sent its final claim decision.
satisfied that the insurer did consider the plaintiff’s C6/C7 spinal
issues and his mental health.
[100] It is
noted that the plaintiff only raised the C6/C7 spinal issues after the first
decision declining the claim. The final decision,
which considers the spinal
(a) sets out the substance of the report from Dr Wong dated 16 December 2021;
(b) notes that the 18 February 2019 CT Cervical and Thoracic Spine scan was
considered; and
(c) refers to Dr Goode’s report addressing the claimed C6/C7 spinal issue
(and the 18 February 2019 CT scan).
[101] I note Dr
Goode’s report is dated 15 August 2022. On 16 August 2022, the insurer
sent a procedural fairness letter to
the plaintiff’s legal
representatives. On 31 August 2022, the plaintiff’s legal representatives
responded to the procedural
fairness letter.
[102] Accordingly,
in relation to the plaintiff’s spinal issues, I am satisfied
(a) the insurer engaged with the relevant evidence; and
(b) the insurer’s decision was reasonably open on the evidence before it.
relation to the various symptoms of the plaintiff’s claimed mental health
conditions, I am also satisfied that they
were considered in all decisions made
by the insurer, including the final
[104] The basis
for the insurer’s decision was not that the plaintiff did not have such
symptoms, rather that his claimed conditions
related to a “Pre-Existing
Condition” within the meaning of the policy. The policy defined such
conditions as:
“Pre Existing Condition
Illness or Injury the signs or symptoms of which existed prior to the date the
cover or additional cover commenced;
Pre Existing Exclusion Period
means a period in which an Insurance
Benefit will not be payable if the Illness or Injury, of which the claim is
subject, is related
to a Pre Existing Condition;
Unless otherwise expressed in this policy, a Pre Existing Exclusion Period in
relation to an Insured Person commences on the date
the Insured Person became
covered for the relevant type of cover.”
[105] It must be
borne in mind that the plaintiff became a member of the fund on 26 October
upon which his insurance
coverage commenced.
[106] Accordingly,
in relation to the plaintiff’s mental health issues, I am satisfied
(a) the insurer engaged with the relevant evidence; and
(b) the insurer’s decision was reasonably open on the evidence before it.
[107] I accept
that the insurer’s decision is reasonably open on the material it was
considering for the following reasons:
(a) in the claim form itself, the plaintiff identified that he first experienced
symptoms of his illness since from 27 July 2017;
(b) the information submitted in support of the claim included:
(i) a referral from Dr Abdul-Razack dated 18 October 2017, which referred to the
plaintiff’s “long H/O anxiety, depression,
panic attacks”;
(ii) Dr Katz’s letter dated 24 July 2018 which referred to the plaintiff
being a person who describes “a long history
of anxiety and depression
extending back to his teens”;
(iii) the plaintiff’s contemporaneous email to his Riviera manager on 13
September 2017 where the plaintiff claimed that he
was having a “mental
breakdown” and needed stress leave; and
(iv) Dr Siddle’s opinion that the plaintiff had suffered from signs and
symptoms of anxiety, ADHD and ASD since childhood,
and that whilst the
documentation suggested that social phobia had only been present since 2018, it
was likely to be due to his underlying
conditions (anxiety, ADHD and ASD) and
that therefore his current disablement was related to a medical condition the
signs or symptoms
of which existed prior to 26 October 2017; and
(c) the insurer also had regard to Dr Mahapatra’s report dated 1 March
2021 referring to the plaintiff reporting having issues
with anxiety since grade
plaintiff’s more general contention that the insurer did not give due
consideration to the balance of the material
is not made out. The plaintiff has
not identified any evidence which is said not to have been taken into account by
the insurer.
[109] I note
that the reasons for the decision set out in detail the various evidence
submitted in support of the claim to the information
used to assess the claim.
[110] Accordingly,
based on the material before me, I consider that, in relation to the spinal and
mental health issues, the insurer
engaged with the relevant evidence and acted
reasonably and fairly in doing so.
[111] Further, I
am satisfied that the process of consideration underlying the insurer’s
decision, in respect of both the spinal
and mental health issues, was also
undertaken reasonably and fairly. There was a process that was undertaken by the
insurer that
included the plaintiff being provided procedural fairness and the
insurer undertaking multiple reviews.
[112] Accordingly,
the plaintiff does not pass the first step required to establish his claim. That
is the end of the matter. The
plaintiff’s claim fails.
[113] However, I
will briefly deal with the next stage of the process, because, in my view, it
also has no merit.
The second step: reconsideration afresh
whether the plaintiff is entitled to a TPD benefit
concluded that the plaintiff passed the first step required to establish his
claim (which I have not), then the second
step requires me to reconsider on the
evidence before the Court, whether the plaintiff is entitled to a TPD benefit.
[115] That will
require consideration of whether the plaintiff has proven that:
(a) “solely because of an Illness or Injury, the Insured Person has been
absent from work and ... the Insured Person is unlikely
ever to be able to work
again in a job for which the Insured Person is reasonably qualified by
education, training or experience
that they have acquired or could reasonably be
expected to be able to acquire in the future within a suitable
rehabilitation/retraining
program” (before 1 October 2019 when the
plaintiff’s cover expired); and
(b) whether any such Illness or Injury is “related to” a Pre
Existing Condition, being “an Illness or Injury the
signs or symptoms of
which existed prior to” 26 October 2017.
[116] As to
Panos v FSS Trustee Corporation
[2015] NSWSC 1217
“[281] The court is required to make the
determination on the basis of the conventional adversarial approach. It is for
applicant to support his or her case by the necessary evidence. The Insurer
ceases to have any positive obligation to assist the
applicant in the
presentation of his or her case.
[282] Importantly, the court has no expertise that permits it to make expert
determinations of questions that cannot properly be decided
without appropriate
expert opinion evidence, without that evidence being provided. The entitlement
of the court to draw its own conclusions
based upon primary medical records is
likely to be significantly restricted. The court is likely to require the
assistance of appropriate
expert evidence to make findings about the
significance of primary medical facts and records.
[283] There is likely to be a real risk, when the question that requires
determination passes from whether the Insurer has made a
proper determination,
to whether the court itself should find that the criteria for the entitlement to
the TPD benefit have been
satisfied, that evidence provided by the applicant to
support a favourable determination of the claim by the Insurer may no longer
suffice, when the question must be determined by the court.”
considering this stage of the process, I have taken into account all of the
evidence that was before me, which included the
evidence from the plaintiff and
his mother.
[118] It is
clear that the plaintiff suffers from many debilitating conditions and has
endured many difficulties. The plaintiff, at
times, struggled during the
hearing, but persevered. He, at all times, was respectful and polite to the
[119] However,
as I have stated, the issue is not whether the plaintiff suffers from medical
conditions. The relevant issue is whether
these conditions satisfy the terms of
the insurance policy.
Mental health
[120] The only
witness with medical qualifications that the plaintiff called in support of his
case was Dr Mahapatra. The only illness
that Dr Mahapatra’s evidence
suggests precludes the plaintiff from working is Social Phobia.
[121] To the
extent that the plaintiff’s claim relies on other mental health conditions
or symptoms (such as depression, agoraphobia,
ADHD, ASD, “nervous
hypersensitivity” etc.), Dr Mahapatra’s evidence does not support
[122] However,
on the plaintiff’s own evidence, he was not absent from work “solely
because of” social phobia.
plaintiff’s evidence was that he stopped work at Maries Pizza in 2018
because his driver’s license was suspended
in connection with a drink
driving incident, and that he was going to leave his job at Maries Pizza anyway
because he was not being
given enough hours.
‑ where it says, “Please give reasons and/or further details,”
and it says, “Driver’s
licence suspended.” Can you explain why
was your driver’s licence suspended?‑‑‑Because after
you’ve been talking about, we’ve been going through all
my history of doctors and stuff like that, found out that there
was no-one to
rely on in this world. So, um, stupid, naïve me went out driving under the
influence of alcohol and, um, my mate
said, “Come down. Stay at my
place,” and he lived all the way down at, um, what was it, uh, um, Tugun.
He lived at Tugun
and I was at Runaway Bay. I was just sitting down at the water
in the car, and then, um, I told him, “I got to pull the car
once I got all the way down there. And I only had four beers in my system. And s
– when I got all the way down
there, um, we went for a cruise, and then I
got out and obviously drank a bit more, and then I got out of the car. So I
pulling us over. I got to get out. I feel sick,”
and, uh, that’s when the cops were just knocking off and thought,
an easy take,” and I was not even in the car. But, yeah,
that’s – so driver’s licence suspended under DUI.
Right. And did that happen, what, in May 2018? Is that when you had your
licence suspended?‑‑‑I think, yeah, would’ve
been around
that date. Yeah.
All right. And ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑I didn’t
– when they ticked, “Employee ceasing work,
voluntary,” it
wouldn’t have been voluntary if I kept my licence. I would’ve left
anyway, ‘cause they cut
me – as soon as I turned 19, they had to pay
me $1.50 more with no loadings or anything like that, so they cut me down to one
shift a week. I said to mum, “Mum, I’ll be earning more money on
Centrelink than I will be working here.”
Right. So even if you hadn’t had your licence suspended, you ‑
‑ ‑?‑‑‑Either way, the job
would’ve had to
You would’ve left because they weren’t giving you enough
hours?‑‑‑Yeah.
Okay?‑‑‑And – and – is this the pizza job one?
And the throat problem too. See, it all correlates to
the throat. This is when
it started, at the Maries Pizza. I don’t know what happens. I just get
dried up and, uh, just –
you – you can’t – you just
– you got to see it. But it’s in the mornings. It’s nervous
just projectile, and I can’t hold it back. I can’t
eat breakfast, because it will come up.
What you’ve just said then, though, is inconsistent with what you said
just before that, where you said, “If I didn’t
have my licence
suspended, I was going to leave anyway because I wasn’t getting enough
hours. I wanted more hours”?‑‑‑I
was basically –
see, tactics. What I said earlier. Um, no, but I was, uh, having these vomit
episodes and anxiety episodes
dealing with multiple customer’s complaints,
all that. Having to drive to parking and loading zones, nearly getting me car
towed because I had to run up storeys with pizza to deliver it to this bloke who
couldn’t come to meet me. Yeah, I’ve
had a tough life.”
[124] After he
left Maries Pizza, the plaintiff was then able to do coursework for a diploma in
mental health for some 12 months,
and commence a vocational placement for around
1 month, which he stopped because he was not able to obtain a prescription for
for his conditions.
evidence in this case supports that the plaintiff’s mental health
condition is, or is related to, a condition the
signs or symptoms of which
existed before 26 October 2017. Of relevance, the plaintiff noted in his TPD
claim form that he had been
experiencing symptoms of his
‘illnesses’
(identified in the form as “
Depression,
Agoraphobia, Autism, ADHD, Aspergers, nervous hypersensitivity
he was about 10 years old. As to what the plaintiff included on this form, that
plaintiff gave the following evidence
at the hearing:
see at the top right there, it says, “Name of your illness or
injury”?‑‑‑Yeah.
And what’s written there is, “Depression, agoraphobia, autism,
ADHD, Asperger’s, nervous
hypersensitivity”?‑‑‑Yeah.
That was Maurice Blackburn.
They didn’t put my back in.
Okay. Just pausing there, there’s no mention there of Reynaud’s
syndrome?‑‑‑Also their fault. That’s
probably why they
abandoned me after one year.
Well, there’s no mention of asthma?‑‑‑Yeah, I know.
There’s a lot missing. I can see that.
Well, I suggest to you that that’s intentional, because neither ‑
‑ ‑?‑‑‑Why would I intentionally
stuff my own
No, no. If you just listen to the question. You didn’t put down
Reynaud’s syndrome or asthma because those things weren’t
– even though they were conditions you had, you weren’t claiming
that they were the reason why you weren’t
able to work
anymore?‑‑‑Once again, it’s Maurice Blackburn’s
And I suggest you knew you could put down more than one illness or injury,
because you’ve listened several?‑‑‑I
don’t know. I
was, uh – how old was I? Look, it even comes under my mum’s email
and phone number. She was in charge
at the time, because I couldn’t deal
with the confrontation of publicity or calls.
And – sorry, didn’t mean to cut you off?‑‑‑No,
You’re finished?‑‑‑That’s all right.
And I suggest the reason why the C6, C7 spinal bulge isn’t written
there is because it wasn’t something that was stopping
working?‑‑‑I think that was probably because of the medicine
that I got put on once I found a psychiatrist.
It numbed the pain. But then
it’s come back everywhere. Now it’s all hitting the, uh, thoracic
part of the spine.
So you weren’t suffering from pain that was stopping you from working
‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑Yes, I was.
‑ ‑ ‑ from your back?‑‑‑I was, but I di
– obviously didn’t put it in there.
Okay. And you’ll see down the bottom there’s a little –
there’s writing in a box in 15 the bottom-right corner
“Been experiencing systems of my illnesses since I was, but wasn’t
diagnosed until 24/07/2018”?‑‑‑Yeah.
Renaud’s disease, 2009, when I was 10.
Well ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑But I forgot to put –
in – insert a comma. Just one little mistake.
HER HONOUR: So where do you say the comma should go – should have
gone?‑‑‑It should gone, um, “Been
experiencing”
– I don’t know why it says “systems”.
MR MAY: Do you agree that should be
“symptoms”?‑‑‑Yeah. I don’t know why it says
HER HONOUR: Yes?‑‑‑I was obviously under a lot of
Okay. Where do you say the comma should go?‑‑‑It should go
– “Experiencing symptoms and illnesses”
– would have
been after “10”.
So you say it should say, “Been experiencing symptoms of my illness
since I was 10,” comma ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑Yeah.
Okay?‑‑‑Yeah.
MR MAY: And can I suggest that it doesn’t make sense for that to be
referring to Reynaud’s syndrome for a couple of reasons.
The first one is
you don’t list Reynaud’s syndrome or condition in the list of
illness or injury?‑‑‑No.
I – I see that. I thought I
just put the worst ones down, but apparently, um – yeah. If I –
look, if I was 26 years
of age back then applying for the – doing this,
I’d be more on task with it.
Okay. The second reason is that the words in that box – you used the
word “illnesses”, plural, not just “illness”.
that’s suggesting ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑Um ‑
‑ ‑ ‑ that it’s talking about all the illnesses in
the box up – above it. Do you agree?‑‑‑Nah.
And then ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑Nah. I don’t
agree with that, sorry.
And then the third reason is that you weren’t diagnosed with
Raynaud’s Syndrome 5 on the 24th of July 2018?‑‑‑Yeah,
know. That was a – yeah, I – 24th of July two thousand – I
So ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑I – I mean, yeah. Look,
this is why it’s come to court, so I can –
can speak about – I
might – I was, uh – how old was I – I mean, I know I was
evicted at the time and we moved
out to – wait, this is 2018. Yeah.
Southport Library. That’s where it was done.
Isn’t ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑So I was 18.
Mmm-hmm. When did I fill this out?
Twenty – you signed it on the 15th of May
2020?‑‑‑Fifteenth of May 2020. Yeah. That’s when I
that’s when Maurice Blackburn, I got, uh, them, and then they
choofed off.
So what I suggest is when you say in the box down the bottom, “Been
experiencing symptoms of my illnesses since I was 10”
‑?‑‑‑You could tell I was under stress. It’s
– I mean, it’s completely
written wrong, and I – yeah, as you
said, I did not add in everything. I mean, the – the boxes were very
small. It doesn’t
even look like it’s my writing. I mean, why is
there one pen and then the rest is all typed? It looks fabricated.
Can I suggest that the reason you wrote – signed the document
containing what’s in the box at the bottom-right is because
you had been
experiencing symptoms of the illnesses mentioned in the top-right since you were
10?‑‑‑No, that’s
not right, because I didn’t know
I had them.
You knew you had the symptoms?‑‑‑No, I didn’t. I
didn’t until I saw Maxwell Katz. I nev – ‘cause
going through with Dr Gundru and all that, they – they weren’t
referring me to the right people.
And all that Dr Katz did, I suggest, was ‑ ‑
‑?‑‑‑He put me on the right path.
‑ ‑ ‑ put a label on the symptoms you’d already been
experiencing for many years?‑‑‑Well,
I had to show him, you
know, doctor’s reports and stuff like that. And they keep saying they want
me to go to psychology, and
then he just went, “Nah. Doesn’t work
and you’re not going to listen to it.” ‘Cause all they go on
don’t – I just couldn’t understand what
they were saying, so I
got angry with them and walked out on that too.”
[126] Prior to
commencing at Riviera, and by the end of 2016, the plaintiff had:
(i) seen a psychologist approximately 5 times;
(ii) been prescribed and was taking Cymbalta for depression (or depression and
(iii) visited a doctor on numerous occasions in 2016 for mental health concerns,
and reported symptoms of poor sleep, low self-esteem,
depressed mood, being
anxious, irritability and panic attacks; and
(iv) been diagnosed as having ‘depression/anxiety’.
medical records are littered with entries, diagnosing the plaintiff with
conditions that existed prior to starting work
at Riviera on or around 13 July
2017, let alone before the policy commenced on 27 October 2017.
example, Dr Gundru’s notes refer to a consultation with the plaintiff on
15 September 2016, where she noted the plaintiff
as being diagnosed as having
depression/ anxiety. In relation to this consultation, the plaintiff stated:
“So what I want to suggest is in a visit on the 15th of
September 2016 with Dr Gundru, you reported to her having some panic
attacks. Do
you see that halfway down the history there?‑‑‑Uh, hang on.
Sorry, page fourteen ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑Wait
‑ ‑ ‑ forty-five?‑‑‑Is it down the
Yeah. Bottom third of the page?‑‑‑Ah, yep. “Some
panic attacks”.
So ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑Yeah. I don’t know.
Once again, her notes, not mine.
Well, what I’m suggesting to you is that she’s writing that
because you told her in this consultation that you’d
been experiencing
some panic attacks?‑‑‑Yeah. I – I’d say so,
And you told her that, because you had been experiencing panic
attacks?‑‑‑Yeah.
That’s right?‑‑‑Yes.
And the panic attacks that you were experiencing, what they involved were
things like a gagging sensation?‑‑‑No.
Nausea?‑‑‑No.
Vomiting?‑‑‑No.
Globus – trouble swallowing?‑‑‑No. I never had to
carry a water bottle around until it was for work.
The reference to having “tried a psychologist x5 in the past”
‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑Didn’t
But that’s talking about the headspace psychologist; is that
right?‑‑‑Yeah, it’s that, yeah.
Okay?‑‑‑Yeah, because it says in the past – yeah, it
would be the headspace one.
And you’ll see it says there, “Patient keen to start medication
to ease symptoms.” Is that right? Did you tell her
you were keen to start
medication to ease symptoms?‑‑‑Yeah. Now realising it, she
should have, ah, referred me
to a psychiatrist, not psychologist. They
don’t work.
Okay. But so yes, you did?‑‑‑Yes. Yeah.
Yes?‑‑‑Yeah.
And then, if you go over the page, you’ll see there’s a list of
symptoms either present or not present, and the ones that
are present are poor
– the ones I want to draw to your attention are poor sleep, low
self-esteem, depressed mood, anxious,
irritability, and panic attacks. And they
were all symptoms that you reported to Dr Gundru in that
visit?‑‑‑Mmm.
And you reported them because you had those
symptoms?‑‑‑Yeah, I did. Over girlfriends and having no
friends. Who
would you talk to, if you had the same problem?
And you’ll see further down that page, it’s got,
“Diagnosis: depression/anxiety”?‑‑‑Yeah,
that’s what – yeah. I see that. I do.
And that’s what she diagnosed you as having?‑‑‑Yeah,
she diagnosed me as, yes.
Right. And so you knew that in September 2016?‑‑‑Yeah,
I’ve got a very good memory of that.”
[129] Twelve
days later, the plaintiff returned to Dr Gundra stating that he felt that his
symptoms were worsening. The plaintiff
gave this evidence about seeing Dr Gundru
at the hearing:
“And you’ll see there, under History it
says, “Feels that symptoms have worsened”?‑‑‑I see
And do you remember going to see Dr Gundru and telling her that your symptoms
had worsened?‑‑‑Yeah. I do remember
And that was true, your symptoms had worsened?‑‑‑No, that
was because of the Cymbalta, it didn’t work. That’s
why she wrote
Well, so you agreed a moment ago that you told her that your symptoms had
worsened, and what I’m suggesting is, you told her
that because your
symptoms had worsened?‑‑‑Yeah, after she prescribed me on
Right. And you see under that, she records you telling her you “feel
very teary”. You told her that?‑‑‑Yeah,
once again, high
school stress, I can’t hide that.
And when you say high school stress, this was significant enough ‑
‑ ‑?‑‑‑I was being bullied.
I understand. And the way that was making you feel was serious enough that
you went to the doctor a number of times about it?‑‑‑Yeah,
the doc- doctor gave me no help.
Yep. If you go down to page – well, sorry, further on page 1446, under
the heading Psychiatric, there are similar symptoms noted
there. So again she
notes poor sleep, low self-esteem, depressed mood, anxious, irritability, panic
attacks. I want to suggest they
were symptoms you told her you were
having?‑‑‑Ah, I know poor sleep was one, definitely. Low
self-esteem, definitely.
I never told her – I never said, oh, I’ve
got a depressed mood, Doctor. I never said that. But I do see that. Anxious,
well, that was probably about going back to high school to get bullied again.
Had panic attacks?‑‑‑I see that.
And again, I want to suggest, any time there’s a reference to panic
attacks here, it’s referring to those kinds of things
I was talking about
earlier, where you feel things like nausea, gagging ‑ ‑
‑?‑‑‑Yeah, that came
Right?‑‑‑After the Riviera job. I needed that and then
worked at Maries Pizza. And then dealing with all these –
communication
with all these people, I don’t know what happened. I had a breakdown.
I’ll come to that. But you described to Dr Gundru on a number of
occasion [sic] having experienced panic attacks, yes?‑‑‑Mmm.
And you described that in 2016, grade 11?‑‑‑Yes.
And you were experiencing panic attacks in grade 11?‑‑‑Not
that I remember.
Is there any reason you would have been telling Dr Gundru ‑ ‑
‑?‑‑‑Maybe it would have been about
don’t know. Um, being bullied. I don’t know, having to play footy
with the guys that bullied me. Ah, you
know, they stole my wallet one day
[indistinct] and all of that.
And all of that was making you feel really anxious about being at
school?‑‑‑This is high school we’re talking
November 2016, Dr Gundra’s notes record that the plaintiff needed a script
for Cymbalta and “Tolerating well
and nil major side effects” to
which the plaintiff states:
“‑‑‑Yeah. I
don’t know why, but obviously she kept throwing me on and off it. I kept
saying it didn’t
work, but she insisted on putting me back on it. Once
again, out of my hands.”
[131] Around
August or September 2017, the plaintiff saw Dr Abdul-Razack and reported being
stressed from work. Dr Abdul-Razack suggested
he speak to a psychologist.
[132] On 11
September 2017, the plaintiff left work at Riviera.
[133] On 13
September 2017, the plaintiff sent an email to Riviera explaining why he left
without notice on 11 September 2017 and
“Sorry for no notice Bryan I was feeling a little stressed out with the
requirements of me on Monday, I was having a mental
breakdown, I need a week of
for stress leave and can get a medical certificate if that's what's needed but
at the end of the day
it's your choice to keep me on or terminate me.”
[134] A letter
from Dr Abdul-Razack submitted in the course of the claim process, dated 18
October 2017, stated:
“Thankyou for seeing Mr Riley
Byrnes-Reeves, age 18 yrs, for favour of management of his long H/O anxiety,
depression, panic
attacks, please”.
Katz’s report, tendered by the plaintiff, states:
indicated that ... he was also the object of bullying at school because he was
detached and a loner due to difficulties
in relating socially and interacting
spontaneously with his peers” and “described a long history of
anxiety and depression
extending back to his teens and multiple trials of
antidepressants which have never had any benefit in altering his emotional and
personal functioning.”
[136] I note
that the plaintiff acknowledged at the trial that he was the source of the
information set out in Dr Katz’s report
and that what he told Dr Katz was
[137] As already
stated, the only witness called by the plaintiff was Dr Mahapatra.
Mahapatra does not say that the plaintiff did not have any relevant condition,
the signs or symptoms of which existed prior
to 26 October 2017. He was not
treating the plaintiff at that time, and so he can only express opinions based
on what he understands
to be the plaintiff’s circumstances prior to that
[139] I note
that what Dr Mahapatra claims to have been told is broadly consistent with much
of the other evidence in the proceeding.
For example, the plaintiff himself gave
evidence of having been to “about seven different schools” and
“not getting
along too well with high school mates”. He also stated
that difficulties with bullying not fitting in at school led to him
being put on
Mahapatra was asked at the hearing whether it was likely that, by 2016, the
plaintiff had some kind of anxiety disorder,
to which he responded:
“answering your question, there is a likelihood that he was
suffering from anxiety also, answering your question, but we don’t
any proof of that”.
[141] Notably,
the plaintiff did not call Dr Wong. Following the plaintiff’s request for
subpoena, Dr Wong responded to the
plaintiff on 26 June 2025 and this
correspondence was tendered. In what is entirely inconsistent with his previous
professional opinion
“I am mindful of my obligations to the Court, and in
particular, to provide honest evidence if I am validly subpoenaed. If you
to call me, I anticipate that I will be required to provide my views on whether
you meet the threshold for ‘total and
permanent disability’ and
whether you have capacity for work. Based on the clinical records, our
interactions, specialist input,
and examinations, my professional view is that
you do not have a ‘total and permanent disability’, and that you
a capacity for work. I say this not to be dismissive of your valid concerns
and the difficulties you have faced with your health,
but rather to allow you to
consider whether you wish to call me as a witness in the proceedings.”
[142] Accordingly,
it is difficult to place any weight on Dr Wong’s opinion (dated 29 April
2021) when:
(a) he was not called; and
(b) a further and later letter was tendered (dated 26 June 2025) which stated
that his medical opinion was that the plaintiff did
not have a total and
permanent disability.
defendants called Dr Siddle who relevantly stated:
consider the disablement is due to the conditions of anxiety, ADHD and ASD. The
member has suffered from signs and
symptoms of these disorders since childhood.
Whilst the documentation suggests the social phobia has only been present since
this is likely to be due to his underlying conditions as listed above. In
Dr Katz letter dated 24/07/18 he stated the member had
suffered from symptoms of
anxiety and depression since his teens. I would therefore consider that the
current disablement is related
to a medical condition the signs or symptoms of
which existed prior to the effective date of insurance of 26 October 2017.
Autism and Asperger' s have now been reclassified as both part of Autism
Spectrum Disorder (ASD), a developmental disorder present
since childhood. ADHD
is also a developmental disorder present since childhood. Depression and
anxiety, including social anxiety/
phobia are psychological symptoms/conditions
commonly occurring with the above developmental disorders. As mentioned above, I
consider that the social phobia is a type of anxiety the development of
which has likely been contributed to by the underlying developmental
I would not consider that social phobia on its own is likely to cause the
member to be permanently unable to return to work within
their education,
training or experience as a labourer or pizza delivery driver. Social phobia is
a treatable condition with established
psychological therapies. It is likely
that the underlying ADHD and ASD have contributed to the development of the
social phobia and
are complicating its treatment. I would consider that the
social phobia in conjunction with the ADHD and ASD are likely causing the
incapacity for work.”
[144] The main
challenge by the plaintiff to Dr Siddle’s evidence was in relation to her
report being a desktop review. However,
I note that the critical propositions
– that the diagnosed social phobia was likely to be due to the
plaintiff’s underlying
conditions, and that it was likely that the
plaintiff’s disablement is related to a medical condition, the signs or
of which existed prior to 26 October 2017 – were not specifically
challenged.
evidence supports that the plaintiff had numerous pre-existing signs and
symptoms of the condition he now claims makes him
totally and permanently
disabled, or of a condition related to it. They were sufficiently serious that
they resulted in the plaintiff:
(a) seeking treatment from a psychologist;
(b) seeking treatment from his GP; and
(c) being prescribed and taking medication, and being diagnosed with,
“anxiety/depression.”
[146] In my
view, taking into account the relevant terms of the insurance policy and all of
the relevant evidence, the plaintiff cannot
satisfy the second step of the test
in respect of social phobia or any similar mental health illness that he relies
upon. I am not
satisfied, on the evidence before the court, that the plaintiff
is entitled to the TPD benefit pursuant to the policy.
spinal injury
[147] It is
noted that, in the plaintiff’s TPD claim form, he made no mention of any
C6/C7 spinal injury as preventing him from
working and was unable to provide a
good explanation for such an important omission in cross-examination.
plaintiff did not call a medically qualified witness to testify that any C6/C7
spine injury prevented him from working.
[149] There are
two CT scans, one in February 2019 and a later scan in December 2020.
[150] As to the
earlier scan, the plaintiff told Dr Wong that the C6/C7 bulge shown in the CT
scan of February 2019 was asymptomatic.
[151] I note
that, after he left Riviera, the plaintiff was going to the gym and doing
“bench presses”. In September 2020,
the plaintiff visited Dr Wong
twice in relation to an injury from the bench press and he agreed in cross
examination that he didn’t
have any symptoms associated with his C6/C7
spine at this time.
[152] I note
that Dr Wong, in a letter dated 16 December 2021, made reference to the C6/C7.
However, in later ‘TPD claim Draft
response’ to the
plaintiff’s then solicitors, Dr Wong stated:
request that I amend my answer to take into account a back injury that occurred
during his employment as a boat labourer
and detail whether the back injury
contributed to further decline in Riley’s mental health. I do not recall
Riley mentioning
this back problem. I have never treated him nor documented this
this [sic] back problem as a presenting complaint. This is the first
time I have
seen the CT report you have provided. I cannot reasonably comment on
[153] I note
that Dr Wong’s letters dated 29 October 2024 and 29 April 2021 also make
no mention of any C6/C7 injury.
relation to the earlier scan in February 2019, Dr Goode characterised the
“small right parasagittal disc bulge”
as insignificant and
incidental:
“Cervical spinal disc bulges are quite frequently
reported on CT and MRI imaging and these types of disc bulges mostly simply
reflect minor constitutional degeneration, and very frequently are simply
incidental and clinically insignificant.”
[155] As to the
latter scan report on 10 December 2024, Dr Goode’s evidence is that it did
not change his opinion, because (like
the February 2019 scan) it was inadequate
to demonstrate anything clinically relevant.
[156] Even if it
were assumed that the T2-3 or T3-4 observations had some clinical significance,
the report does not prove those things
prevented the plaintiff from working
before his insurance coverage ended.
[157] As to when
he had signs and symptoms of a C6/C7 injury, the evidence is confusing.
plaintiff’s own evidence is that he had signs and symptoms of this
existing when he worked at Riviera (that is, before
13 September 2017):
“And when do you say that back symptom manifested
first?‑‑‑It started at Riviera.
Right?‑‑‑I am telling the truth. I even swore on the Bible.
I’m telling the truth. It started at Riviera.
I went to stretch. My
supervisor said, “Stop effing around and get back to work.” And
I’d said, “I’m
just stretching my back.” All I did was
go like that to crack the vertebrae. It explains all this. I don’t know
doctor was crap, why he didn’t write “stress”.
So that’s neck pain starting in January 2019?‑‑‑Well,
it started at Riviera with the back. And then, ah, I
went to see him –
yeah, 2019. Was it – yeah, it was 2019. And then he said it’s
musculoskeletal neurological.”
[159] However,
on 30 January 2025, Dr Gupta writes a letter to Dr Sadasivan, stating that the
plaintiff has “been complaining
of upper back pain since last 5
years”. This would only backdate that pain to 2020, after which time the
plaintiff had concluded
working at Riviera.
[160] In all the
circumstances, I am not satisfied that the plaintiff was TPD by reason of a
C6/C7 spine injury.
[161] I have
considered all of the relevant evidence in relation to whether the plaintiff is
entitled to a TPD benefit pursuant to
the policy. I am not so satisfied.
[162] Accordingly,
the medical evidence supports that:
(a) the plaintiff’s mental illnesses were pre-existing, and
(b) that any back injury he suffered in 2017 was not such as to render him
totally and permanently disabled.
[163] Further, I
note that the plaintiff has, in material outside of his statement of claim,
referred to claims on other bases, including
claims for pain and suffering and
claims in relation to injuries he suffered consequent upon being assaulted by a
third party in
April 2022. These issues raised by the plaintiff are in the
nature of personal injury claims and are outside the statement of claim.
[164] I will
give the parties an opportunity to consider these reasons before they are
required to file and serve short written submissions
on the question of costs.
Within 14 days, the parties are to agree on a timetable for the exchange of
written submissions (which
are to be no more than 10 pages in length) and
provide this timetable to the Court.
[165] If it is
appropriate, I will then deal with the question of costs on the papers, unless
either party requests a hearing.
facilitate this process, I will adjourn the question of costs to a date to be
[167] The claim
is dismissed.
question of costs be adjourned to a date to be fixed.
The plaintiff clarifies in his
statement of claim that he particularly wants his ‘lifetime outlook
payment of $200,000 which
was in [his] policy, the old policy before they merged
with sunsuper’.
By reason, for example, of the
principles in
Trident General Insurance Co Ltd v McNiece Bros Pty Ltd
[1988] HCA 44
(1988) 165 CLR 107.
Life Ltd v Shuetrim
[2016] NSWCA 68
(2016) 91 NSWLR
I note that the
certificate does not refer to what the plaintiff’s occupation is.
Likely referring to the
plaintiff’s then solicitor Nari Ali of WKB TPD Lawyers.
A medical certificate from Dr
A Razack dated 22 August 2017; An email to Rivmar from Mr Byrnes- Reeves dated
13 September 2017;
An Employment Separation Certificate from Rivmar Pty Ltd
dated 23 September 2017; A referral letter from Dr A Razack dated 18 October
2017; An Employment Separation Certificate from TouchPoint HCM Solutions Pty Ltd
dated 4 June 2018; A medical report from Dr M Katz
dated 24 July 2018; A
referral letter from Dr J Cliffe dated 10 September 2018; A confidential medical
report from Dr G Patrick dated
20 October 2018; A referral letter from Dr G
Patrick dated 24 October 2018; A CT of the plaintiff’s Cervical and
Thoracic Spine
from Dr M Ryan dated 18 February 2019; A medical form from Dr M
Bersin dated 13 June 2019; A GP Mental Health Treatment Plan from
dated 25 June 2019; A referral letter from Dr J Wong dated 20 February 2020; A
Total and Permanent Disability (TPD) Benefit
Claim (Part C) –
Doctor’s Statement from Dr J Wong (undated); A Total and Permanent
Disability (TPD) Benefit Claim (Part
A) – Member’s Statement from Mr
R Byrnes-Reeves dated 20 May 2020; A medical report from Dr J Mahapatra dated 1
2021; A medical report from Dr J Wong dated 29 April 2021; A medical
opinion from Dr H Siddle dated 7 May 2021; A medical report
from Dr J Wong dated
16 December 2021; The Statement of Reasons from QInsure dated 23 June 2021; The
Internal Dispute Statement of
Reasons from QInsure dated 23 September 2021; The
Internal Dispute Statement of Reasons from QInsure dated 14 October 2021; The
opinion of Dr H Siddle dated 12 August 2022; The medical opinion of Dr S
Goode dated 12 August 2022; A response to procedural fairness
attachments previously provided to QInsure dated 31 August
MetLife Insurance
Ltd v Hellessey
[2018] NSWCA 307
, at [7]-[8] and
Hannover Life Re of
Australasia Ltd v Jones
[2017] NSWCA 233
, at [127].
Insurance Ltd v Hellessey
[2018] NSWCA 307
, at [13]. See also
Insurance Ltd v MX
[2019] NSWCA 228
Including setting out the
details of the matters stated in the plaintiff’s complaints and
submissions after the original decision.
Superannuation
(State Public Sector) Deed 1990
See cl 9.12 and the
definition of ‘Member’ in the insurance policy.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (438 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter