URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCAT/2025/427.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Ombudsman v Atkins [2025] QCAT 427 (28 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Health Ombudsman v Atkins
[2025] QCAT 427
DIRECTOR OF PROCEEDINGS ON BEHALF OF THE HEALTH OMBUDSMAN
(applicant)
MALCOLM THOMAS JAMES ATKINS
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
Occupational regulation matters
DELIVERED ON:
17 September 2025 (decision)
28 October 2025 (reasons)
HEARING DATE:
17 September 2025
DECISION OF:
Judicial Member Rinaudo AM
Assisted by:
Dr R Bailey
IT IS THE DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL THAT:
section 107(2)(b)(iii)
Health Ombudsman Act 2013
(‘HO Act’), the respondent has behaved in a way that constitutes
professional misconduct.
to section 107(3)(a) of the HO Act, the respondent is reprimanded.
to section 107(3)(e) of the HO Act, the respondent’s registration is
to section 107(4)(a) of the HO Act, the respondent is disqualified from applying
for registration as a registered health
practitioner for a period of twenty
to section 107(4)(b)(i) of the HO Act, the respondent is prohibited from
providing any health services until such time as
the respondent obtains
registration as a health practitioner under the
Health Practitioner
Regulations National Law (Queensland)
or a corresponding law of a State o
Territory of Australia.
be no order as to costs.
CATCHWORDS:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS –
CHIROPRACTORS – where the respondent has breached professional
by entering into and maintaining an inappropriate personal relationship with a
patient – where the respondent has
financially exploited the patient
– where the respondent failed to keep adequate records regarding the care
of the patient
– where the parties reached an agreed position as to the
characterisation of the conduct as professional misconduct ‑–
whether the respondent’s registration should be suspended for a period or
Health Ombudsman Act 2013
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (Queensland)
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Chiropractic Board of Australia v PLE (Review and Regulation)
Fittock v Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner (No 2)
[2015] SASCFC
Health Ombudsman v KGY
[2024] QCAT 337
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Cherian (Review and
Regulation)
[2021] VCAT 1480
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
M Price, Legal Officer of the Office of the Health Ombudsman
Respondent:
J Liddle instructed by Meridan Lawyers
REASONS FOR DECISION
matter has been brought by the Director of Proceedings on behalf of the Health
Ombudsman against Malcolm Thomas James Atkins.
The respondent has been
registered as a chiropractor since 14 July 2004. He obtained a Bachelor of
Applied Science (Clinical Science)
and a Bachelor of Chiropractic Science in
2004. He is presently 52 years old.
respondent is referred to the Tribunal for having breached professional
boundaries by entering into and maintaining an inappropriate
relationship with an elderly patient (‘
doing so, financially exploiting her. In addition, it is alleged the respondent
failed to keep adequate records regarding
his care of this patient.
[3] The facts
and circumstances of the referral have been agreed between the parties and set
out in the Statement of Agreed and Disputed
Accordingly, there are no facts in dispute and the parties have agreed the
respondent's conduct constitutes professional
misconduct.
[4] The facts
are summarised as follows:
(a) The respondent had a clinical relationship with the patient from 7 December
2015 until May 2020.
(b) Over that approximate four and a half years, the respondent entered into and
maintained an inappropriate personal relationship
with the patient, during which
he socialised with the patient and, by accepting gifts of accommodation and
money from her, financially
exploited the patient.
(c) On a number of occasions, the patient gave the respondent significant sums
of money, totalling $182,000.
(d) The patient was 85 to 89 years of age at the time the respondent violated
professional boundaries in relation to the patient.
[5] Over the
same period, the respondent failed to keep adequate records regarding his care
for the patient:
(a) His treatment notes for the patient were incomplete, insufficient, and
occasionally illegible.
(b) The respondent's records regarding his care for the patient did not
disclose, or did not adequately disclose, various important
information,
including details of his initial consultation with the patient or her progress.
[6] After the
complaint was received by the Office of the Health Ombudsman on 23 August 2021
and following investigation and referral
to the Director of Proceedings for
consideration pursuant to
Health Ombudsman Act 2013
’), on 23 December 2022, the applicant referred the
matter to the Tribunal.
[7] The only
issue to be determined by the Tribunal is whether the respondent's registration
should be suspended for a period or cancelled.
applicant seeks that the respondent's registration be cancelled and that the
respondent is disqualified from applying for
registration as a registered health
practitioner for a period of two years.
respondent submits that in the interests of avoiding an unnecessary punitive
effect to Mr Atkins, his registration should
be suspended for a period slightly
less than two years, namely 20 months.
[10] In respect
of characterisation of the conduct, the Tribunal notes that the parties agree
the conduct amounts to professional
misconduct as defined by s 5 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (Queensland)
Tribunal has given consideration to the facts as set out in the SADF and is
satisfied that the conduct amounts to professional
misconduct as set out in s 5
of the National Law. Professional misconduct as defined in s 5
Unprofessional conduct by the practitioner that amounts to conduct that is
substantially below the standard reasonably expected of
a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience.
Tribunal has had regard to the meaning of ‘
substantial
considered by the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia in
Fittock v Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner (No 2)
[2015] SASCFC 167
in the context of the
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA), which stated
it is apparent that what is required is more than a mere departure from the
standard of conduct required of a practitioner. In the
context of this appeal,
“substantial" connotes a large or considerable departure from the standard
required. This large or
considerable departure could be the result of the extent
and seriousness of the departure from the requisite standard of conduct,
deliberateness of the conduct, the consequences for the client or other aspects
of the conduct.
Tribunal has also had regard to the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
’) Code of Conduct which
Practitioners must be ethical and trustworthy. Patients trust practitioners
because they believe that, in addition to being competent,
practitioners will
not take advantage of them and will display qualities such as integrity,
truthfulness, dependability and compassion.
Patients also rely on practitioners
to protect their confidentiality.
Tribunal notes the relevant features of the boundary violations as set out in
the applicant’s submissions as
(a) The serious nature of the boundary violation, such as:
(i) The vulnerability of the patient, given her age and medical history, and the
power imbalance between her and the Respondent;
(ii) The exploitative nature of the relationship, which the patient must have
believed was one of genuine friendship;
(iii) The duration of the inappropriate personal relationship (being
approximately four and a half years);
(iv) The significant sum of money expended by the patient on the Respondent and
his family over that period;
(v) The Respondent’s repeated acceptance of very large sums of money,
ranging from $7,000 to $100,000, and totalling $182,000;
(vi) The Respondent’s repeated acceptance of the extra payments and the
various small gifts to his family;
(vii) The intimacy involved in the boundary violation, including involving the
patient in dinners, the Respondent’s family
holidays, and permitting the
patient to give gifts to his family; and
(b) The apparent motivation for the Respondent’s conduct would appear to
be his own financial benefit; and
(c) The Respondent did not desist of his own accord. He failed to terminate the
treating relationship with the patient, despite the
clear conflict of interest.
Rather, it was the patient who ceased the treating
relationship.
Tribunal is satisfied that the respondent's exploitative conduct is inconsistent
with his being a fit and proper person to
hold registration in the profession.
In this regard, the Tribunal notes the submission in subparagraph 45(a) of the
applicant’s
submissions that ‘
The boundary violation should not
be characterised as a mere error of judgement’
. The conduct is
intrinsically serious and cannot be viewed as an isolated episode. The Tribunal
accepts that the respondent's motivation
appears to be his own financial
[16] In respect
of the allegation regarding inadequate record keeping, the Tribunal notes the
submission made in the matter of
Chiropractic Board of Australia v PLE
(Review and Regulation)
[2024] VCAT 1014
at [31] that inadequate record keeping is serious because poor and inadequate
notetaking can pose a risk to patients. Further,
the Tribunal notes the
following from the decision of
in the event that another practitioner assumes care of the patient, it is
important that there be detailed notes to provide an overview
for the new
practitioner in relation to treatment already provided, to ensure that
appropriate steps are taken in providing continuing
care. ... Good care includes
formulating and implementing a reasonable management plan and maintaining
adequate records that report
relevant details of clinical history, clinical
findings and determinations, investigations, information given to patients,
and other management details in a form that can be understood by
other health practitioners.
Tribunal also notes that in respect of health records, the Chiropractic Board of
Australia Code of Conduct provides
Maintaining clear, appropriate and accurate health records is essential for the
continuing good care of patients. Chiropractors should
be aware of relevant
State and Territory legislation in relation to health records management. Good
practice involves:
a) keeping accurate, up-to-date and legible records that report relevant details
of clinical history, clinical findings and determinations,
investigations,
information given to patients, medication and other management
d) ensuring that records contain sufficient information to allow another
chiropractor to continue the management of the patient and
to facilitate
continuity of chiropractic care
Christopher Scott Burrell, registered chiropractor, provided his opinion in
respect of allegation three against the respondent.
Dr Burrell opined that the
respondent not only fell below the expected standard but fell significantly
below that standard.
[19] Dr Burrell
described the subpar quality of the clinical records as a significant
This deficiency is likely to impede Dr Atkins delivery of high-quality care to
his patient as it is unreasonable for Dr Atkins to
rely on his memory alone from
visit to visit. Moreover, this deficiency could potentially disrupt the
continuity of chiropractic
treatment for the patient. Specifically, if the
professional relationship with Dr Malcolm Atkins were to end, yet the patient
to continue receiving chiropractic care, the lack of comprehensive
records would pose a challenge. This is a failure of a fundamental
that Dr Atkins has to his patients.
[20] For these
reasons, the applicant seeks the cancellation of the respondent's registration.
General Principles
Tribunal acknowledges the imposition of sanction includes the principle that the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is essentially
protective, not punitive. For the
paramountcy of the health and safety of the public, personal deterrence, general
deterrence and
the maintenance of both professional standards and public
confidence must be taken into account in assessing the ongoing risk posed
practitioner. An assessment of this risk must also include:
(a) an assessment of the degree to which the practitioner has developed insight
into his conduct;
(b) evidence of rehabilitation; and
(c) other matters that may be regarded as aggravating or mitigating
circumstances.
agreed between the parties that for the Tribunal to cancel the respondent's
registration, the Tribunal must be satisfied
the respondent is not a fit proper
person to be registered as a chiropractor as at the date of the hearing.
Tribunal has had regard to the decision of
Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Australia v Cherian (Review and Regulation)
[2021] VCAT 1480
, in which it
was noted at [60] that:
Cancellation of registration involves a finding that, at the time of the
determinations, the practitioner is not suitable for registration,
and that if
the practitioner seeks to return to the profession, he or she must re-apply. In
contrast with suspension, which assumes
suitability at the end of the period of
suspension, cancellation sends a clear message of unsuitability to practise by
to the impugned conduct ...
Respondent’s Submissions
respondent submits, and the Tribunal accepts, that if the respondent is out of
practice for more than two years, he will
no longer satisfy the requirements of
the registration standard in order to be eligible for registration. The
respondent submits
that this would mean he would need to be supervised for a
period. It is submitted that this will likely be very difficult given the
findings that will be made against the respondent. The respondent notes that the
Tribunal should have regard to the respondent's
expressions of remorse, as set
out in his affidavit, as well as his conduct, including that he offered to make
repayment of the monies
in as early as 2020, and his admissions in these
proceedings. It is noted that substantial repayments to the detriment of the
respondent's
financial circumstances have been made. It is submitted that the
Tribunal should accept that the respondent:
(a) has reformed his character;
(b) is very unlikely to engage in any further misconduct; and
(c) is currently a fit and proper person and should be presumed fit to resume
practice at the end the imposed period out of practice.
submitted that given the respondent’s age, limited other qualifications
and work experience, and financial circumstances,
the period out of practice
will cause him real hardship. It is submitted that should be taken into account
in determining the length
of any suspension or disqualification. The respondent
submits that to avoid unnecessary punitive effect to the respondent, the time
out of practice should be less than two years. It should be noted the applicant
submitted that it considered a period of 20 months,
as submitted by the
respondent, was within the appropriate range of sanction which could be imposed
on the respondent.
Discussion and Decision
Tribunal does not accept the respondent's submission that the passage of time or
delay between the conduct and the date of
hearing is a relevant consideration.
In this regard, the Tribunal notes the decision in
Health Ombudsman v KGY
[2024] QCAT 337
overriding concern of these proceedings in any sanction imposed to protect the
public. Of itself, delay does not ameliorate
that concern. Indeed, it may
exacerbate it. However, delay can have a mitigating effect where the imposition
of any particular sanction
causes demonstrable injustice.
punishment is not the aim of sanctions imposed by the Tribunal, although it may
be an effect of them. Significant delay can
produce a result whose effect is to
impose a greater punishment or detriment on a practitioner than those in like
circumstances.
Delay can also have an effect in mitigation because what might
otherwise be future intentions as to rehabilitation and change can
now be seen
to have been matched by actions and effects ...
Tribunal accepts the submission that, in this case, the delay has operated to
the respondent's advantage, as by 2022 the
respondent had agreed to repay the
patient's family the amount of $182,000 and had repaid a significant portion of
The Tribunal notes the
report provided by the respondent from psychologist, David McLennan, dated 15
August 2025, which states:
I confirm that Mr. Malcolm Atkins is currently attending psychological therapy
with me to address professional boundary issues, including
matters related to
dual relationships, as identified under AHPRA requirements.
Mr. Atkins has engaged willingly in this process and is participating in
sessions with the intention of supporting his professional
rehabilitation.
Tribunal notes that this report is recent and has been made a substantial time
after the respondent's conduct was referred
to the Tribunal in December 2022.
The Tribunal is satisfied the respondent has shown only a limited degree of
insight and remorse
for his conduct. Over the intervening years, he has only
more recently sought medical assistance for his actions and has not undertaken
any steps in relation to gaining an appropriate understanding of his ethical
obligations by undertaking any training or education
relevant to his conduct.
[29] Clearly, in
this case, there is an important need to consider specific and general
deterrence. While specific deterrence is important
in respect of the
practitioner, the Tribunal considers that general deterrence, condemning the
behaviour undertaken by the respondent,
is extremely important. The Tribunal
does not consider this would be met by suspension of the respondent's
registration in this case.
[30] In order to
maintain both professional standards and public confidence in the profession,
the Tribunal considers that the appropriate
sanction is cancellation in this
case. However, given the applicant's concession in respect of the range for the
period of cancellation,
the Tribunal is satisfied that a cancellation for 20
months would be appropriate and would meet the aims and objectives of the HO
addition, the applicant seeks a prohibition order pursuant to section
107(4)(b)(i) of the HO Act. The respondent does not
oppose the making of the
prohibition order and the proposal for it to run concurrently alongside the
period during which the respondent
is out of practice.
all the circumstances, the Tribunal's orders are as follows:
section 107(2)(b)(iii)
Health Ombudsman Act 2013
’), the respondent has behaved in a way that
constitutes professional misconduct.
to section 107(3)(a) of the HO Act, the respondent is reprimanded.
to section 107(3)(e) of the HO Act, the respondent's registration is
to section 107(4)(a) of the HO Act, the respondent is disqualified from applying
for registration as a registered health
practitioner for a period of twenty
to section 107(4)(b)(i) of the HO Act, the respondent is prohibited from
providing any health services until such time as
the respondent obtains
registration as a health practitioner under the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (Queensland)
or a corresponding law of a State or
Territory of Australia.
be no order as to costs.
Applicant’s Submissions,
filed in the Tribunal 4 November 2024, 3 [12] (‘Applicant’s
Submissions’).
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (Queensland)
Fittock v Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner (No 2)
[2015] SASCFC 167
Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency and National Boards,
Code of Conduct
June 2022) ‘Professional Values and Qualities’ [c].
Applicant’s Submissions,
6 [38] (citations in original).
Statement of Agreed and
Disputed Facts, filed in the Tribunal 19 September 2024, 3 [17]
(‘Statement of Agreed and Disputed
Chiropractic Board of
Australia v PLE (Review and Regulation)
[2024] VCAT 1014
Chiropractic Board of
Code of Conduct for Chiropractors
(at June 2022) r 9.4.
Affidavit of Christopher
Scott Burrell, affirmed 25 June 2024, Exhibit CSB-03, 11 [3(c)].
Ibid [3(d)].
Health Ombudsman v
[2024] QCAT 337
, [25]-[26] (citations omitted).
Statement of Agreed and
Disputed Facts, 9 [62].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (247 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter