URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2002/65.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Royal Hotel Maryborough [2002] QLAT 65 (18 July 2002)
Mr Leigh D. Wanless
Chief Executive of the Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading
APPEAL NUMBER
65 of 2001/02
PROPOSED PREMISES
Royal Hotel, 328 -336 Kent Street, Maryborough
HEARING DATE
4 JUNE 2002
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST
Refusal of extended hours permit (on a regular basis) to allow trading from
6.00am daily
Ms A Lindon (Presiding Member)
Mrs J Harrington
DECISION DATE
18 JULY 2002
BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL
1. On 26 June 2001 Mr Leigh D. Wanless (“the appellant”) and
licensee of a general licence in respect of the Royal
Hotel, 328-336 Kent
Street, Maryborough, lodged an application for an extended hours permit to allow
trading at the hotel to commence
from 6.00am daily on a regular basis. The
trading hours for the premises were from 10.00am to 1.00am Monday to Tuesday,
to 3.00am Wednesday to Saturday and from 10.00am to 12 midnight on
2. The application was advertised pursuant to s.118(1)( c) of the
(“the Act”) and two objections were received. An
objections conference was held but no resolution was obtained of the
objectors’ concerns.
3. The Assistant Commissioner of Police North Coast Region was asked to comment
on the application pursuant to
of the Act and objected to the
application on the basis of concerns raised by the Officer in Charge,
Maryborough who suggested a
more appropriate time for opening to be 8.00am. The
officer is concerned that the granting of this permit would create a disturbance
to residents of the Centre Point Motel directly above the subject premises. He
is also concerned that when other licensed venues
have extensions to 5.00am on
occasions such as public holidays, their patrons will congregate for that hour
gap waiting until the
subject premises opens causing a
disturbance.
4. The Maryborough City Council (“the Council”) was also asked to
comment on the application pursuant to
s.102(B)(2)
of the Act which states that
the chief executive must:
“(a) give a copy of an application to the local government for the area in
which the licensed premises are situated; and
(b) ask the local government to give the chief executive written recommendations
and written reasons for the recommendations, within
a stated reasonable period,
(c) have regard to the local government’s recommendations and reasons
received within the stated reasonable period and, to
the fullest extent
practicable and consistent with this Act’s objects, adopt the
recommendations in deciding the
application.”
5. The Council’s ultimate advice to the Chief Executive by letter dated
10 October 2001 was as follows:
“(a) that the Council has now been made aware that the owners of the Royal
Hotel will be unable to operate poker machines within
his establishment, in
conjunction with his proposal to open at 6.00am to provide a buffet breakfast
facility to patrons, without
an extension to his current licensed hours.
the owner of the Royal Hotel has also advised that to ensure the viability of
the proposal to provide a buffet breakfast facility
at a competitive price, the
availability of poker machines is considered by the owner to be an integral part
of the proposal
in view of the additional information provided to Council in (a) and (b) above,
Council now wishes to withdraw its objection
to the application of Mr L Wanless
for an extension of the licensed hours for the Royal Hotel from 6.00am Monday to
6. On 13 March 2002 the Chief Executive determined to refuse the application for
an extended hours permit to allow trading from 6.00am,
whilst 8.00am trading was
granted. The grounds for that decision were:
“If the application were granted - undue offence, annoyance,
disturbance or inconvenience to persons who reside or work or
do business in the
locality concerned, or to persons in or travelling to or from an existing or
proposed place of public worship,
hospital or school is likely to
If the application were granted - the amenity, quiet or good order of the
locality concerned would be lessened in some way;
The applicant has not demonstrated public need for the application for an
Extended Hours Permit pursuant to
Section 116
7. The appellant lodged a
Notice of Appeal dated 16 April 2002 against this
determination.
ITEMS FOR DETERMINATION
8. The appeal, although arising out of an application lodged before the
amendments to the Act which came into force on 1 July 2001,
falls to be heard in
accordance with the new post 1 July 2001 procedure contained in
provides that the appeal is by a rehearing on the evidence that was before the
Chief Executive: see
Showgirls (Aust) Pty Ltd v Chief Executive
(unreported decision of Liquor Appeals Tribunal, No. 52 of 2001/02, February
2002). Pursuant to the transitional provision
, the Chief Executive in
determining the application after 1 July 2001, applied the old
contained a public need test, having sought and received a community impact
statement from the appellant.
Section 21(2)(a)(i)
of the Act provides that in
exercise of its jurisdiction, the Tribunal has the powers and discretions of the
Chief Executive in respect
of the matter under appeal. The combined effect of
the application of
(2)(a)(i) is that this appeal is to be
determined on the basis of the old public need test rather than the public
interest test contained
in the amended
see discussion at paragraph 11 of
Showgirls (Aust) Pty. Ltd
9. The Tribunal must determine whether pursuant to
the extended hours
sought are necessary to provide for the reasonable requirements of the public
for liquor and related services
in the locality concerned. If the Tribunal is
so satisfied then it must proceed to consider the matters specified in
s.121(5)(d)(e)(f)
and (g) which are objections made to the grant of the
application, comments received from the Council and the Police, and the question
as to whether there would be any impact on the amenity of the community
concerned if the permit were to be granted.
LOCALITY TO
WHICH APPLICATION RELATES
10. The appellant submitted a Community Impact Statement in support of the
application and although he did not specifically address
the relevant locality
it can be inferred from information in that statement that he considers the
whole of Maryborough as the locality.
Liquor Licensing Officer P Reinhold in
his very helpful report dated 7 March 2002 points out this flaw in the
appellant’s
submission but says that it is reasonable to assume that the
locality will be the whole of Maryborough City as the hotel is located
the CBD and the Tribunal in the absence of any evidence to the contrary accepts
11. The Community Impact Statement provides population figures based on 1999
Australian Bureau of Statistics calculations of 25,033.
This is supplemented by
reported tourist growth figures from three million in l990 to 9.7 million in
2000 for the Maryborough, Wide
Bay and Fraser Coast area. There is a forestry
based industry around Maryborough with workers on three shifts, however, Mr
says that it is unlikely that the workers would use the subject
premises for breakfast.
12. The Royal Hotel is heritage listed and is located in the Maryborough CBD and
has had several renovations over the years. It
offers a large buffet style
dining area, al fresco style boardwalk dining and gaming facilities.
Incorporated in the hotel complex
is a gift and florist shop and a gymnasium and
above the Hotel is the 33 roomed Royal CentrePoint Motel. There is ample
parking within 100 metres of the hotel. No entertainment is planned
at the venue. The appellant wishes to provide an international
5 star buffet
breakfast for $9.50 with this service being subsidised by gaming
13. In support of his application the appellant provided a questionnaire signed
by 23 business people in close proximity to the Royal
Hotel who do not object to
the early opening hours, but some aspects of the accuracy of the questionnaire
are questioned by Liquor
Licensing Officer Nell in his report. Mr Nell who is
based in Maryborough visited the subject site on 27 September 2001 and provided
a comprehensive report. It lists 17 active general licences and one on-premises
(cabaret) licence in the Maryborough City area.
At that time none of the
licences had extended hours prior to 10.00am. However, the Carriers Arms Hotel
had filed an application
to open from 8.00am at the time of this
application.
14. Mr Harrison, an objector, lodged a written objection dated 11 October 2001
on need and amenity issues and attended this hearing.
He said in his objection
letter to the Division that:
Maryborough has venues which primary purpose is to serve food and I
believe enough of these are opened at reasonable times for anybody
have early breakfasts.”
15. Mr Nell’s recommendations contained in his report at P. 49 of the
Appeal Book states as follows:
“It appears that the application has been made to facilitate an
application to extend gaming hours and that the provision of
breakfast will be
ancillary to gaming. The information indicates that cheap breakfasts will be
used to attract the gambling public
I believe that the applicant has failed to demonstrate a public need. The
Community Impact statement provided in support of the
application is misleading
and not consistent with or relevant to the present situation in
Maryborough
The issue of altering the application to allow a commencement time of 8.00am was
discussed with the applicant but rejected
The applicant has the opportunity to provide breakfasts without extending
licensed hours but has indicated that this would not occur
without gaming.
Should any application to extend gaming hours be unsuccessful, the applicant
stated that he is not willing to proceed
with the proposal to supply
My recommendation is that the application for extended hours be
16. As did Mr Nell, Mr Reinhold in his report also refers to the opportunity for
the applicant to provide meals without extended
trading hours and refers to the
Division Guideline 19 as the means by which this could be achieved. The
Tribunal is of the view
that the Guideline does not make it clear that a general
licence could operate outside trading hours. Nevertheless, the appellant
indicated to Division Officers his rejection of the provision of meals without
gaming being available at the same time. In fact,
he had not taken up the
option of the 8.00am opening at the time of this hearing.
17. Mr Reinhold poses the question in his report as to whether patrons have
either a requirement for liquor services from 6.00am
or a reasonable expectation
for that service. He says that locality is a key factor in this equation as it
would require that a
sufficiently large number of patrons would rise early
enough to require breakfast at sunrise and this is not likely to be the case
Maryborough. The applicant, in the Tribunal’s view, has not demonstrated
evidence of existence of such a
18. The chief executive and in an Appeal, the Tribunal, must be mindful of the
Objects of the Act, especially
which is to:
“facilitate and regulate the optimum development of the tourist, liquor
and hospitality industries of the State having regard
to the welfare, needs and
interests of the community and the economic implications of
19. However this Object must be balanced with the requirements of the other
pertinent sections of the Act regarding “need”
and amenity. Under
the legislation governing liquor licensing at the time of this application, a
public need must be established
before further consideration of an application.
In the case of an extended trading hours permit application, the Act imposed a
requirement on the chief executive to consult with the Council as
previously mentioned in this decision.
20. The Tribunal is not able to determine by the evidence before us the process
by which the chief executive decided to set aside
the positive obligation
imposed by s.102B(2)( c). However it is assumed that he weighed his obligations
under this section of the
Act against the information contained in his
departmental officers’ reports and the objections from the Police and
other objectors.
In fact he took up the Police suggestion that 8.00am opening
was a more appropriate time. Perusal of the evidence in the Appeal
indicates, therefore, that the normal procedure of investigation followed this
application for extended trading hours.
21. During the course of the hearing the appellant requested a provisional
licence to trial the early opening hours so that he could
demonstrate to
objectors there would be no amenity issues, He said in order to allay
objectors’ concerns that patrons departing
from nightclubs would
congregate and wait for his premises to open, thus causing a disturbance, he
would not open for breakfasts
when the nearby nightclubs are granted one-off
permits for 5.00am closing. However
c) does not allow an extended
hours permit to be issued for more than six months in any case, and the question
of need would have
to be satisfied before a licence could be issued.
22. It is clear that the licence has been sought because it is a requirement of
the Queensland Office of Gaming Regulation before
poker machines could operate
and that the appellant’s ability to provide the breakfast envisaged is
dependent on the costs
being subsidised from poker machine revenue. It is
unfortunate for the appellant that the two licenses are issued by different
authorities
and that the Chief Executive and in his shoes, the Tribunal must be
satisfied that a public need is demonstrated for the extended
hours sought for
liquor and related services in the locality.
23. Having taken into consideration all the matters set out in sub section
116(3) and (4) to which it must have regard, the submission
of public need, and
the views of Mr Nell and Mr Reinhold, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the
additional two hours in the morning
sought by the appellant are necessary to
meet the reasonable requirements of the public for liquor and related services
in the locality
24. Having reached that conclusion the appeal ought to be dismissed and it is
not necessary for us to proceed to consider the amenity
issues raised by the
ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal orders that:
the appeal be dismissed;
the decision of the Chief Executive
of 13 March 2002 be confirmed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (54.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter