URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QADT/2009/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lane v Hamilton [2009] QADT 13 (22 May 2009)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL QUEENSLAND
Lane v Hamilton
[2009] QADT 13
KAREN JANICE LANE
Complainant
ANTHONY HAMILTON
PROCEEDING:
Final hearing
DELIVERED ON:
22 May 2009
DELIVERED AT:
President DA Savage S.C.
HEARING DATES:
22 May 2009
the Respondent pay the Complainant the sum of $8,600 within 28 days of the date
of this Order.
CATCHWORDS:
Sexual harassment – texts and e-mail messages - non-appearance by
respondent at hearing - compensation.
CASES CITED
Hopper v Mount Isa Mines Ltd and Others
[1997] QADT 3
LEGISLATION CITED:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
REPRESENTATION:
The complainant was self represented. No appearance by respondent.
THE COMPLAINT
Complainant, Ms Karen Janice Lane, alleges that she was sexually harassed
by the Respondent, Mr Anthony Hamilton. She seeks monetary
compensation.
June 2008, Mr Hamilton offered Ms Lane employment with a business that
he proposed to commence. On 14 June 2008, Ms Lane resigned
previous employment. She commenced work for Mr Hamilton on 16 June
2008. Shortly prior to her commencing employment Mr
Hamilton discussed
with Ms Lane the unhappy state of his relationship with his partner
Ms Diane McEachern, who was a friend of Ms
the day Ms Lane commenced work, Mr Hamilton sent her an e-mail. After
having again referred to the tension in his relationship
with Ms McEachern,
Mr Hamilton wrote:
“Now! A point which has been playing
on my mind for a little bit of time for now. as you know I am not backward and
forward in being myself, I may tend to be a bit forward with you at
times, ‘PLEASE’ do not take it the wrong way! I
sleaze, its just I am relaxed with you around, but I am not making a pass at
you, we have one GREAT thing in common
and from what I can see from my side of
the fence, a lot more too! The GREAT thing I am referring too is we are both
Loving, caring and perfectionist, ‘Go on, say it, I am
right ain’t I? I know you are getting over a real bad marriage,
want to let you know that I know what you are going through and are sensitive to
those needs and wants that you are experiencing
at this point in time.
But on the other side of the coin, I have been hurt and burnt so many times I
have become fire and bullet proof love. Getting to
a point I really need to say
..... A possible scenario could be......As you know we are both professional
people, but if you ever
walked in our office or wherever we are doing business
with just say a while blouse and a black mini on with heels, I might say and
think, ‘you look yummy today’ and just get on with what I am doing
and never give you a second look for the rest of the
day. It would certainly be
better than looking at the wall all day! LOL
I am upfront and honest, kind and very giving of myself. I will help anyone
who wants to help themselves. I am also a bit touchy
feely, but without
intruding into the other persons space, That’s important to me.
As you may have already heard from me “waffling” on, I have done
a lot with my life, and just want to be happy, and will
do everything in my
power to assist those nearest and dearest to me (including you) very happy and
content with their lot in life.
I love our conversations, we just seemed to
have clicked, whilst respecting each others boundaries. IF I EVER OFFEND YOU,
let me know dear. And I will do the same for you.
Due to the nature of OUR jobs we will be at close quarters at times.
‘NOT A BAD THING” MMMMMMMMM good in fact from where
I am sitting
anyway! I sincerely apologize for being honest and frank, but that’s me,
take it or leave me!
You really have aright to know what you are dealing with as far as I am
concerned, but I only ask 1 thing of you babe, LOYALTY! I
am going to tell you
things I have not even got around to telling Di, in other words keep it mum and
it will come out when it has
to, if its meant to be its meant to be!
My brother Simon is a barrister in law, my 2 living sisters are very wealthy
in their own right, my mother was a CPA with Price Waterhouse
Coopers (partner)
my older sister Robyn as a consultant gynaecological surgeon and my twin sister
is my ROCK and my HERO as weird
as that may sound unusual to you,
“IT’S A TWIN THING!
Little me, well I am me alone in this world (no family) or siblings, if you
see me crying sometimes, chuck me a hug will ya?
I do have Di and Chris however as long as they want me, I do not own or
control them and they know that if they are not happy, the
door is always open
for them to move on if they wish.
I have a personal $$$$$$ worth of $22.6 million, but would give all away in a
heartbeat if that makes me happy.
DO MY A FAVOUR ONCE YOU HAVE READ THIS PLEASE? SEND ME A SMS TO DI’S
MOBILE NUMBER<NOW MINE<SO ENTER THAT IN YOUR PHONE
PLEASE<SAY IN THE
TEXT, “ITS ALL GOOD” THEN I WILL KNOW I AM DOING THIS
WELCOME ABOARD
Kindest Regards
did not respond.
Mr Hamilton
asked Ms Lane to come to his personal residence at Sandgate on Saturday
21 June 2008. The asserted purpose of this attendance
was according to
Ms Lane: “We were going to proof read an e-mail and send it back,
which task might lead into the early hours
of the morning and if I wanted to I
could stay the night”.
case is that the real purpose of Mr Hamilton arranging for her to come to
his home was so that he could be alone with
her on the Saturday evening when
Ms McEachern was not present. Ms Lane says that in order to avoid
this she made several excuses
Eventually that led to Mr Hamilton travelling with her to collect her
and the three returned to Mr Hamilton’s residence.
Mr Hamilton
“Ms Lane and I at my insistence went to a unit
in Beenleigh to see her 15 or 16 year old daughter for the purpose of bringing
her back to my and my fiancé’s home at Sandgate where we were
living at the time. I did this because I felt that it
would not only make
Ms Lane feel safe, but to try to mend a rift that Ms Lane and her
daughter had at that time, Ms Lanes daughter
was and had set herself up in
furnished unit, and at the time I remember even commenting to her daughter at
how well she was getting
her life on track. Ms Lane to my understanding
through information that my partner has given very freely I might add, has had
abusive relationships, and her 2 daughters have different fathers, for
that I do not judge her! I myself have had 2 previous marriages,
and they were
only ended when my then wives drifted apart because of my then career in the
military. I also have a daughter in her
20’s and she is very successful
in her chosen profession. Ms Lane also knew that myself and my
fiancé were and are
very well off financially and my fiancé even
has commented to me since this has all come to the light of day, that
gave no indication on the next morning when she and my stepson
returned from Caloundra that Ms Lane or her daughter had been upset
given any outward indications that something was amiss! My legal advisers have
also taken this point on board. Ms Lane and I
had a somewhat tumultuous
working relationship and through my fiancé, a some what unusual personal
relationship, due to the
fact that I have always regarded Ms Lane as an
acquaintance and not a friend. I even pointed out to Ms Lane on more than
one occasion
that she was a “MAN HATER” and she was always very
quick to point out the opposite. I did however say on one occasion
that IF and
only if, I was ever single that she and I might possibly and now knowing what I
know about this woman, not very likely,
at maybe dating or something to that
extent only. My fiancé knows all about this and has taken it in the
context that it
was given, an off the cuff comment! I and my fiancé are
very happy and our relationship and that of my step son is getting
stronger by
the day, and we are in very swift preparation at the moment for our upcoming
wedding. Ms Lane purchased a bottle of
Jim Beam Bourbon with her own
money, from an outlet in Logan City and drank it very copious in a large amount
on the night that her
and my daughter were at our home in Sandgate, this is all
documented with my solicitors.”
have serious concerns about the truth of a substantial part of what
Mr Hamilton says, given the contemporaneous e-mail texts to
which I have
referred. It seems, for instance, that Mr Hamilton was much more
interested in Ms Lane than the above statement indicates.
Mr Hamilton
may be taken to deny that there was any purpose to Ms Lane’s
attendance at his premises other than for work.
says that that night Mr Hamilton touched her, kissed her on the forehead on
several occasions and attempted to kiss her on
the lips. This is not denied.
It seems to me very unlikely that if Ms Lane was personally attracted to
Mr Hamilton she would have
sought to have embarked on such a relationship
by inviting her teenage daughter along for the evening. I prefer
version of these events to Mr Hamilton’s to the
extent the versions differ.
am fortified in that view by the fact that Mr Hamilton’s explanation
contained in documents sent to the Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner says that
matters which may have aided in his defence are all well documented by his
solicitors. He did not appear
at the hearing. He has not been represented
before the Tribunal by solicitors. No documents were produced either to the
or to the Commissioner to support his case.
Monday 23 June 2008 Ms Lane says that she received two text messages
on her mobile phone in the early evening. At 6.57 pm Mr Hamilton,
Ms Lane says, texted her as follows:
“I told you when you
commenced with me that this was not a 9 to 5 job.”
And then at 7.16 pm Mr Hamilton texted:
“OK. So I guess I cant rely on you to fill the void I was expecting.
I am working 18 hour days now and have not even touched
the actual things that I
have to do myself, so I guess another 5 hours a day will not hurt me. Talk
Wednesday if you want.”
then asked Mr Hamilton by email whether he was happy with her work. On
Tuesday, 24 June at 12.21 am Mr Hamilton emailed Ms
Why would I be having 2
thoughts about you? I
know some texts were sent on my phone to you, but “NOT” from me
Have a good day at hospital 2morrow please, Ty for today. “Is all
good”. Can you do me a big favour? please do not
talk to Di about any
thing we discuss, its giving me grief, not your fault ...........
“MINE” Please understand, trying
my best to calm waters, Please call
me 2morrow and let me know wot you think.
Kindest Regards
PS: Owe U 2 dozen roses on “secretaries day” LOL”
is impossible on the material in evidence to decide whether Mr Hamilton
sent the two text messages from his phone on 23 June.
It is however plain
that the two messages were sent from Mr Hamilton’s phone to Ms
Lane’s phone. It seems thus that
they were either sent by
Mr Hamilton or by Ms McEachern. If they were in fact sent by
Mr Hamilton the emails demonstrate that Mr
Hamilton was unhappy with
Ms Lane, not because of Ms Lane’s work performance but because
of her apparent unwillingness, until
that time, to have expressed any interest
in his advances. If the texts were in fact sent by Mr Hamilton’s
partner then they
are merely evidence that Mr Hamilton’s partner was
at least suspicious of the relationship which she thought Mr Hamilton was
attempting to develop with Ms Lane. It is enough to find that
Mr Hamilton was then intent upon making personal advances to Ms Lane
despite her apparent lack of interest in responding to them.
24 June 2008 Mr Hamilton came to Ms Lane’s residence to fix
her computer. He had earlier told her that he did not intend
to tell his
partner that he was doing this but instead proposed to say that he was going to
his brother’s. His express reason
for doing this was that his partner was
“getting funny towards” Ms Lane. Again it seems likely Mr
Hamilton was intent
upon creating situations where he could be alone with Ms
Tuesday 1 July 2008, Mr Hamilton sent Ms Lane a further email.
The email provided:
here are the photos, and by the way if you ever got off that cute toosh of
yours and put yourself on the market for a relationship,
you never know who may
come a knocking! Mmmmm could even be me, so there ya go. Said it! But for now
we are and it is ‘
ITS ALL GOOD
is not suggested by either party that Ms Lane responded to this email.
says the employment package offered to her by Mr Hamilton was extremely
generous. She says in her evidence that it amounted
to $900 per week. She
described that as “the opportunity of a lifetime”. She says, and it
does not seem to be disputed
that Mr Hamilton’s fiancé was her
friend. She was embarrassed by the situation created by Mr Hamilton. She
I accept that she continued her work seeking to ensure that she would
have as little contact as possible with Mr Hamilton unless
it was expressly for
work purposes.
3 July 2008 Mr Hamilton and his partner moved from Sandgate to
Caloundra. Ms Lane was invited to come and see the apartment that
Mr Hamilton and his partner would live in. She refused. She had then been
in employment for approximately three weeks but she had
received no salary in
all that time. She shortly thereafter demanded her salary. This was met with a
response which complained
as to her work ethics and the like.
Mr Hamilton’s
response to Ms Lane’s complaint, insofar as there is one, makes serious
criminal allegations against her.
He goes to the extent of alleging that the
complaint is a manufactured one. He says in part in his response to the
Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner:
“I can forward all the
emails and other things that may assist you in making an assessment on this
matter. I had also logged
in on Ms Lane’s computer to check my own
emails on occasions, and I feel that my password had been captured on the
also I had allowed Ms Lane to use my mobile phone on numerous
occasions and I even had inadvertently left it at her home on a couple
occasions, Of which I now regret very much! “
Suffice to say that there is no evidence of the serious allegations that
Mr Hamilton makes about Ms Lane in that or other regards
in his advice
to the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner.
left her employment with Mr Hamilton and returned shortly thereafter to her
former employment.
THE STATUTORY PROHIBITION
Anti-Discrimination Act
prohibits sexual harassment.
Section 119
of the Act under Chapter 3 provides:
Meaning of sexual harassment
Sexual harassment happens if a person--
(a) subjects another person to an unsolicited act of physical intimacy; or
(b) makes an unsolicited demand or request (whether directly or by
implication) for sexual favours from the other person; or
(c) makes a remark with sexual connotations relating to the other person; or
(d) engages in any other unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature in relation to
the other person;
and the person engaging in the conduct described in paragraphs (a), (b), (c)
or (d) does so--
(e) with the intention of offending, humiliating or intimidating the other
(f) in circumstances where a reasonable person would have anticipated the
possibility that the other person would be offended, humiliated
or intimidated
by the conduct.”
given of the operation of this section include physical contact unnecessary
familiarity, sexual propositions and unwelcome
and uncalled for remarks or
insinuation about a person’s sex life.
DISPOSITION
the evening in question at Sandgate and during the course of or directly after
Ms Lane had finished her duties of employment, she
was subjected to the
unsolicited act of physical intimacy involving Mr Hamilton kissing her on
the forehead and attempting to kiss
her on the lips. In the several emails the
contents of which I have set out above, Mr Hamilton made unsolicited
demands or suggestions
or remarks as described in
, (c) and (d).
Mr Hamilton
did not do these things with an intention of humiliating or intimidating
Ms Lane but it seems to me that the circumstances
which I have found are
those in which a reasonable person would anticipate the possibility that
Ms Lane would be offended, and she
was so offended.
Mr Hamilton’s
misconduct has been compounded by his apparent refusal to pay Ms Lane her
wages and having made unsubstantiated
allegations of criminal misconduct about
her claim made in the Tribunal dated 16 March 2009, Ms Lane seeks
monetary compensation for her hurt, humiliation, embarrassment
and distress.
She says in her complaint that because of the loss of her income she was faced
with possible eviction from her residence
and had to approach charitable groups
for financial assistance to see her over.
claim for compensation has two aspects: first, her hurt, humiliation and
distress occasioned by the above events; and secondly,
her loss of remuneration
for her employment over a period.
financial stringency and the distress were comparatively mild, by which I only
mean compared to much more persistent conduct engaged
in over long periods of
time that are sometimes seen in this Tribunal (e.g.
Hopper v Mount Isa Mines
Ltd and Others
[1997] QADT 3).
That is not to underestimate either the
nature of the hurt that Ms Lane has been occasioned or the gravity of the
misconduct of
Mr Hamilton in that regard. And again,
Mr Hamilton’s conduct is made more serious by the failure to
apologise and the manner
in which the defence of the complaint was undertaken,
though he did not have the courtesy to appear to explain himself or to
substantiate
any of the serious allegations that he has made.
think in all the circumstances Ms Lane should be awarded the sum of $5,000
inclusive of interest as compensation for the hurt, humiliation
and distress
component of her claim.
to her economic loss, she was not paid $900 per week as agreed for the period of
three weeks simply because she would not succumb
to Mr Hamilton’s
advances, nor was she paid for the week between when she resigned her employment
by reason of the harassment
and recommenced her old employment. I think that
should be compensated in the sum of $900 per week for each of those four
therefore assess Ms Lane’s entitlement to compensation in the sum of
order Mr Hamilton to pay Ms Lane the sum of $8,600 within 28 days
of delivery of these reasons and order to him.
Savage S.C.
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal Queensland
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (412 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter