URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vyncan Pty Ltd v Seeley, G. J & K. M. [2003] QBT 13 (19 March 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 013
Vyncan Pty Ltd v Seeley
[2003] QBT B305-02
VYNCAN PTY LTD
SEELEY GJ & KM
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
19 March 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
24, 25, 26 February & 3 March 2003
DECISION OF:
Ms J McVeigh
CATCHWORDS:
BUILDING CONTRACTS-Whether contractor can enforce cost plus
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
Domestic Building Contracts Act 2000
, section 55
REPRESENTATION:
RESPONDENT:
SOLICITORS:
MacDonnells
RESPONDENT:
Direct access brief
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Introduction
These proceedings are the first in the
tribunal requiring consideration of the operation of section 55 of the
Domestic Building Contracts Act
David Hartley, his wife and family were
friendly with Grant and Kylie Seeley and their family. Mr Hartley is a director
Pty Ltd, a company which holds a builders
Mr Hartley, through his company Vyncan Pty
Ltd, and Mr Seeley, through various corporate and business entities, had been
in a number of business transactions.
In January 2001 Mr and Mrs Seeley
purchased vacant land at 72 Summerhill Drive, City View, Cairns. Mr Seeley was
so excited by the
purchase that he telephoned Mr Hartley who was then overseas
with his family on holiday in Canada. Mr Seeley was anxious to proceed
construction of a residence on the block and asked Mr Hartley whether he would
be involved with the design. Mr Hartley
prepared preliminary
In May 2001 Mr Seeley asked Mr Hartley
whether he would prepare a building contract so that Mr Seeley could provide it
to his financiers
to obtain funds to construct the residence. Neither of them
intended that the contract to bind them beyond May 2001.
Vyncan Pty Ltd and Mr and Mrs Seeley
executed a lump sum contract on 15 May 2001 (Exhibit 7). They also executed a
letter dated 29
May 2001 indicating that the contract was cancelled.
There is a dispute about the facts
surrounding the execution of a subsequent costs plus contract. There is no
dispute that Vyncan
Pty Ltd and Mr and Mrs Seeley entered into a costs plus
contract dated 18 June 2001. The costs plus contract was in the form prepared
by the Queensland Master Builders Association. The contract schedule described
the works as
“concrete masonry 2 storey residence with basement car
The schedule identified the contract plans as four pages
prepared by Buck Design signed on 18 June 2001. The schedule contained a
notation beside the specifications
“not applicable”.
Likewise there was a notation beside the prime cost items and provisional sums
“not applicable”
Item 6 of the schedule, which provides for
the estimated total cost of the works provided
“five thousand dollars
. Some time after Vyncan Pty Ltd had given the contract to
the Seeleys the figure $500,000 was struck through and figure of $450,000
inserted and initialled by Mr and Mrs Seeley, but not by Vyncan Pty Ltd. The
contract schedule contained the warning immediately
below item 6 that
“The Estimated Total Cost of the Works is not guaranteed by the Builder
and is subject to adjustment by the Actual Cost incurred
in respect of the
Works. It may also be subject to change in accordance with Clauses 7.3, 7.7, 9,
11.9, 11.12, 12, 13, 14, 25, 26,
27 and 30 of the General
Conditions.”
Item 7 of the schedule provided that the
total cost of the works was
The cost plus fee component to be paid to
the builder was agreed at 15% of the Actual Cost of the Works.
Item 26 of the contract schedule
indicated that progress payments were to be made in an alternative negotiated,
rather than at designated
stages. The alternative, found in appendix D,
described the stages and the value as follows:
Name of Stage or Description of Stage of Works if different from Method
% of Total Costs of the Works
Lower floor and Garage floor
Upper floor
Frame stage
Enclosed stage
Fixing stage
To be advised
Final payment to be adjusted to the final of cost plus 15%
Save for the completion stage, the stages
and value for each stage mirrored those in the 15 May contract that had been
Part E of the schedule identified the
following fixtures and fittings as being not included in the Estimated Total
Costs of the Works
but shown on the Plans and/or
Specifications:
TV/Intercom gate
specialised
There are factual disputes about what
occurred during the course of construction of the residence. There is no doubt
that numerous
variations were requested and that the items listed in part E
were, for the most part, constructed.
Window 3 had not been installed. The
subcontractor refused to install it as it believed it could not be built to
comply with relevant
codes. On 11 October 2001 the applicant advised the
respondents that they could either engage another subcontractor or commence
legal proceedings against the current subcontractor at their cost. On 15
November 2001 Mr and Mrs Seeley chose the later course.
Mr and Mrs Seeley moved in on the weekend
of 30 November 2001.
On 19 August 2002 Vyncan Pty Ltd
instituted proceedings in this tribunal against Mr and Mrs Seeley claiming
payment in an amount of
$223,706.28 plus interest and legal
A defence was filed on 7 October 2002.
An Amended Statement of Claim was filed on 6 December 2002. A further Amended
Statement of
Claim was filed on 13 December 2002.
The matter was heard in Cairns on 24, 25
and 26 February 2003. The hearing concluded by video-link on 3 March
The applicant alleged that in breach of
the cost plus contract the respondents had failed to pay it money owing under
the contract,
being $279,984.63 (including interest calculated in accordance
with the contract to 30 November 2002). The applicant also claimed
interest at
15% on overdue payments pursuant to clause 26 of the cost plus contract schedule
and clause 11.9 of the general conditions
of the contract on and from 30
November 2002.
The respondents alleged that the cost
plus contract was entered into in contravention of section 55 of the DBC Act,
with the consequence
that the applicant could not enforce the contract against
In the alternative to its claim under the
contract, the applicant sought an order pursuant to section 55(4) of the DBC Act
respondents pay it $279,984.63, that being the unpaid costs incurred by
it in performing the building works under the contract, plus
a reasonable
profit, on the ground that it would not be unfair to the respondents if such an
award were made. An alternate interest
claim was also
Section 55 of the DBC Act
“Cost plus contracts
building contractor must not enter into a cost plus contract that would be a
regulated contract unless-
the contract is included in a
class of contracts prescribed under a regulation;
the cost of a substantial
part of the subject work can not reasonably be calculated without some of the
work being carried out.
Maximum penalty –
100 penalty units.
(2) A building contractor must not enter
into a cost plus contract that would be a regulated contract unless the contract
a fair and reasonable estimate by the building contractor of the total
amount the building contractor is likely to receive under
Maximum penalty – 100 penalty
(3) If a building contractor enters into a cost plus
contract in contravention of this section, the building contractor can
enforce the contract against the building owner.
(4) However, the tribunal may, on an application made to the tribunal by the
building contractor, award the building contractor
the cost of providing the
contracted services plus a reasonable profit if the tribunal considers it would
not be unfair to the building
owner to make the award.”
The issues for consideration in these
proceedings were whether Vyncan Pty Ltd (“the applicant”) had
entered into the cost
plus contract in contravention of either section 55(1) or
55(2) of the DBC Act.
If the applicant has contravened either
subsections 55(1) or 55(2), then the issue for determination is whether it
should be awarded
the cost of providing the contracted services plus a
reasonable profit, which requires establishing those costs and a reasonable
profit and consideration of whether it would not be unfair to the respondents to
make such an award.
Evidence – Agreed
It is common ground that the respondents
have paid the applicant $513,159.22.
There is no significant difference
between the quantity surveyors’ costing of the completed residence. Mr
Wilson placed an
“as built” value of $715,350 exclusive of GST. Ms
Hayes costed the completed house at $713,553 exclusive of
Evidence - Applicant
Mr Hartley made two statements (Exhibits
2 and 3). He attended for cross-examination.
Counsel for the respondents submitted
that Mr Hartley was
“an appallingly evasive and unresponsive
. It was submitted he was slow to answer questions. While no
doubt there was a difference in emphasis between his statement and
the evidence
which emerged during the cross-examination, which is hardly surprising, in my
view Mr Hartley honestly attempted to
answer the questions put to him.
Counsel for the respondents placed a
significant emphasis on the letter Mr Hartley wrote on 3 August 2001 (attachment
G to Exhibit
2). I was satisfied with Mr Harley’s explanation of the
circumstances in which the letter came to be written which was supported
contemporaneous documents (attachments H, I and particularly L to Exhibit
Mr Hartley impressed me as a man who
attempted to give honest evidence. He candidly conceded that he was not aware
of the DBC Act
at the time it was enacted. He candidly conceded that he had
never read section 55 of the DBC Act until it was provided to him by
solicitor after these proceedings commenced.
His version of events leading to the
formation of the cost plus contract and of events which occurred after work
commenced vary in
many respects to those of Mr Seeley. In areas where there is
a difference I prefer the evidence of Mr Hartley. The reason for this
on my part is more fully canvassed when I consider the evidence of Mr Seeley
The applicant relied on a statement by
Peter Edmonds (Exhibit 1). Mr Edmonds was not required to attend for
cross-examination. I
accept his unchallenged evidence that he is the managing
director of Queensland Tile Distributors Pty Ltd, which has five retail
in Queensland and which is the largest ceramic tile retail outlet in Cairns. I
accept his evidence that within the building
industry, with the builders he
deals with, the most common PC allowance made by them is $25 per square metre.
His evidence is of
no relevance and therefore of no assistance to
The applicant relied on expert evidence
by Grant Wilson (Exhibit 10). Mr Wilson is a quantity surveyor. I accept Mr
Wilson has appropriate
expertise to express opinions in these proceedings.
Mr Wilson conferred with Ms Hayes, the
quantity surveyor engaged by the respondents, and together they prepared a joint
report (Exhibit
There was very little difference between
the opinions of the quantity surveyors when one takes into account the different
assumptions
upon which each prepared their report.
Some challenge was made to Mr Wilson
because in May 2002 he had provided a construction estimate to Mr Seeley which
was approximately
$100,000 less than his current estimate. I accept Mr
Wilson’s explanation that he was not retained by Mr Seeley. I accept
his opinion was based on information made available to him in May 2002 and that
he subsequently revised his opinion based on
considerably more information made
available to him by the applicant.
I accept that when giving his report Mr
Wilson did so independently. He did not appear to me to be partisan in his
The applicant relied on valuation
evidence from Mr Stewart, valuer (Exhibit 12). Due to an unfortunate
communication break-down Mr
Stewart did not attend for cross-examination during
the scheduled week of hearing. The proceedings were adjourned in order that
might be cross-examined by video link.
Mr Stewart valued the land and
improvements as at 16 February 2003 at $975,000. I accept that he was
appropriately qualified to express
expert opinion. He was not able to express
an opinion on the opinions of the other valuers who had given evidence, because
not considered the value of the property at the date chosen by each of
them. He was unshaken during cross-examination in respect
appropriateness of the comparative sales he used as part of his valuation
Evidence - Respondents
Mr and Mrs Seeley made two joint
statements (Exhibits 13 and 14). Mrs Seeley was not required for
cross-examination. Mr Seeley was
required for
cross-examination.
Counsel for the applicant submitted that
Mr Seeley presented as
“a vague, reluctant, at times non-responsive or
even evasive, an unreliable witness, who was prepared to misstate the truth
his own ends”
. Nine examples of his willingness to misstate the truth
were provided.
Mr Seeley is one of the most unimpressive
witnesses I have ever seen. A number of instances of his dishonesty were
identified during
the course of his cross-examination. I give but a few
examples. In paragraph 5 of Exhibit 13 Mr Seeley stated that he contacted
Hartley in Canada and told him that
“we had bought a great block of
land for $180,000”
. The transfer document (Exhibit 16) indicates that
the consideration was $150,000. The stamp duty imprint on the transfer
that stamp duty was paid on the amount of $150,000. It must therefore
be the case that Mr Seeley lied when he completed the necessary
declaration, or when he swore to the accuracy of his
Mr Seeley provided a contract to his
financiers knowing at the time it was provided that it was not to be the
building contract used
for the construction of his residence.
In his cross-examination on 25 February
2003 Mr Seeley said that he and his wife owned a BMW four wheel drive which was
worth $110,000.
He said the vehicle was bought in November 2001. During his
cross-examination on 26 February 2003 he denied saying that he and
owned the BMW, saying that a company of which he is a director owned the car.
On 25 February he said he was the
director of one, but corrected himself to say two companies. On 26 February he
indicated his desire
to clarify that statement as it appeared that only in the
previous week he had signed documents to become a director of another company.
His explanation was that he did not know if the documents had been lodged.
Obviously the fact of lodgement of the documents does
not change the fact that
one is a director of a company.
Mr Seeley gave evidence that he and his
wife had expended more than $35,000 on landscaping and other works and yet could
only provide
supporting documentation for less than one fifth of that amount.
Given the balance of his evidence I cannot accept that the respondents
spent anything like the amount claimed on landscaping and finishing off the
Counsel for the applicant was able to
identify many other inaccuracies and inconsistencies between his statements and
the evidence
he gave in cross-examination.
Having formed a general view that Mr
Seeley is prepared to say anything that suits him at the time, and given his
tendency to attempt
to defeat the revenue, for example by avoiding paying stamp
duty and tax as a consequence of entry into various cash transactions,
place any significant weight on any evidence of Mr Seeley. In instances where
the evidence of Mr Seeley is in conflict
of that of Mr Hartley I prefer the
evidence of Mr Hartley.
The respondents relied on evidence from
Ms Hayes, quantity surveyor (Exhibit 20). I accept that Ms Hayes is
appropriately qualified
to express opinions in these proceedings. Her opinions
are based on assumptions which, for reasons set out below, I find to have
invalid. Thus while it may be that based on the assumptions that she made her
opinions are accurate, given the assumptions
were not sustained in fact, her
opinions are of less use to me than those of Mr Wilson.
The respondents relied on the evidence of
Leslie Small, registered valuer (Exhibit 21). Mr Small prepared his valuation
November 2001. In his opinion the fair market value of the house and
land on that day was $625,000 of which he attributed $210,000
to the fair market
value of the land. He observed that this valuation did not take into account
the landscaping works.
Mr Small did not impress me as an
unbiased expert attempting to assist the tribunal in resolving the issues at
hand. He said he had
made a typographical error in his valuation and that one
of the properties he had used as a comparable was superior, not inferior
had stated. Had he said so during his examination in chief I would have had no
difficulty with his correction. Remaining
silent until cross-examined on such a
significant mistake did not impress me.
Despite not having seen the valuation
prepared by Mr Stewart he expressed the opinion it was
. He indicated that because he had only been paid a small
amount to do the valuation it was acceptable for him not to have seen inside
of the three properties which he compared to the subject property. He presented
defensively during the course of his cross-examination.
He appeared totally
lacking in comprehension of the role of an expert witness. He did not assist me
resolve the issues.
The respondents relied on the opinions of
Rod Goodman-Jones, registered valuer (Exhibit 22).
Mr Goodman-Jones expressed the opinion
that on 20 September 2002 the current market value of the property was $800,000.
While Mr Goodman-Jones appeared
appropriately qualified to express expert opinion, unfortunately it seemed that
he had adopted a particular
mind set which made him unable to make assumptions
which he was asked to make during the course of cross-examination and to comment
on how such assumptions would change his opinion. This is a disappointing
attitude by a supposedly independent
Submissions - Applicant
Counsel for the applicant provided
thorough and detailed written submissions. He submitted that his client could
enforce the cost
plus contract because he could prove
the cost of a substantial part of the
work could not reasonably have been calculated without some work being carried
the contract contained a fair and
reasonable estimate by the building contractor of the total amount it was likely
to receive under
the contract.
Although he submitted that
section 55 should be read as presenting alternative hurdles, he submitted that
if it is the case that his
client was required to clear both, on the facts of
this case it had been established that there was an enforceable cost plus
He submitted that the relevant date for
considering the tests laid down by section 55 of the DBC Act was the date that
the contract
was entered into. In support of this submission he observed that a
“cost plus contract” was defined in schedule 2 of
the DBC Act as
“a domestic building contract under which the amount the
building contractor is to receive under the contract cannot be calculated
the contract is entered into, even if prime cost items and provisional sums are
He relied on the evidence of Mr Wilson,
quantity surveyor, in support of the submission that the amount the builder was
under the contract was only capable of calculation on the basis of a
final contract and drawings, an agreed scope of works and an
agreed finishes
schedule. He submitted that at the time the contract was prepared there was no
agreement on the scope of works relating
to the exclusions identified in Part E
of the contract and further that there was no agreement on the finishes relating
to the subsequent
variations to the scope of work. He submitted that at the
time the contract was entered into there was no operative specification
could only be inferred that the plans were in many respects provisional and that
they were in large measure subsequently superceded
It was further submitted that the concept
in section 55(1)(b) of the DBC Act is sufficiently
broad to encompass design work and more general administrative tasks that are
associated with finalisation of the inclusions, finishes and the precise scope
of works that the project was ultimately to involve.
That being so, it is
submitted that it was open for a finding to be made on the evidence of Mr
Hartley and Mr Wilson in particular
that the cost of the substantial part of the
work could not reasonably be calculated without some work (that is
administrative work)
involving the delineation of the project, being carried
It was submitted that the concept of
“calculation” as it appears within section 55(1) of the DBC Act
obviously involves
something more than “estimation” as contemplated
by section 55(2) of the DBC Act. It is submitted that calculation requires
assessment by reference to actual, rather than merely hypothetical, works to be
undertaken whereas the concept of estimation legitimately
involves elements of
assumption.
It was submitted that it was uncontested
that this site had obvious problems and constraints which necessitated
excavation and the
importation of fill to raise the building platform by about a
It was submitted that as the respondents
wanted the house built in the quickest possible timeframe and given the male
respondent’s
tendency to change his mind and preference for the more
expensive things in life precise calculation was not possible. More importantly
it was submitted when the contract was formed the respondents were undecided in
respect of a significant part of the works being
that part described in Part E
of the contract. It was submitted that unless and until those works and
finishes were finally decided
the amount the building contractor was to receive
under the contract could not be calculated. At best an estimate could be
and that was the $500,000 estimate in respect of the known scope of
works. It was submitted that item 7 of the contract schedule
contains an
express acknowledgement that the total cost of the works was
It was submitted that the relevant date
to determine whether the cost estimate was fair and reasonable was the date of
the cost plus contract. It is submitted that the tribunal should be
guided by the quantity surveyors in assessing the fairness and
reasonableness of
the estimate. In that regard it was submitted that where there is a difference
of opinion Mr Wilson should be
preferred to Ms Hayes on the basis that he took
the opportunity to refine his estimate using source documents relating to
not readily apparent from a visual inspection, unlike Ms
It was submitted that the approach of
working back from known facts adopted by the quantity surveyors was appropriate
on the basis
that it was well established that evidence of subsequent matters is
admissible, not so much to prove hindsight, but more properly
foresight, in other words, it was submitted that courts and tribunals should
prefer subsequent facts to prophecy where
evidence of such facts is available at
the hearing (
Housing Commission of NSW v Falconer
(1981) 1 NSWLR 547
Nelugaloo Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1947] HCA 58
(1984) 75 CLR
It was submitted that even if the
tribunal accepted the respondents’ contention that some variations were
part of the original
scope of works, the estimate was still conservative having
regard to the assessment of Mr Wilson who assessed the original scope
at $473,496.61 and who would have made an allowance of plus or minus
On the basis that the cost plus contract
was valid it was submitted that the applicant was entitled to a decision in its
$289,889.58 calculated as follows:
Building Costs (including GST) less credit for carpet
$641,763.75
Legal expenses pursuant to clauses 30.2(ll) and (oo) of the contract
including GST
Builders margin at 15%
Total cost plus 15%
$764,937.09
Less amount paid to date
$513,159.22
Total unpaid
$251,777.87
Plus interest on overdue invoices pursuant to the contract to 3 March 2003
continuing at a daily rate of $103.47
Total contract claim
$289,889.58
In the event that findings were to be
made against the applicant in respect of the cost plus contract, it was
submitted that the cost
of providing the contracted services was $703,083.96
calculated as follows:
Building Costs (including GST) less credit for carpet
$641,763.75
Legal expenses pursuant to clauses 30.2(ll) and (oo) of the contract
including GST
Plus interest on overdue invoices pursuant to the contract continuing at a
daily rate of $103.47
$703,083.96
It was submitted that the cost of
providing the contracted services was to be the actual costs, not costs assessed
by a quantity surveyor,
that is the costs to be found in the job cost report.
In the event that the quantity surveyors evidence was to be preferred it was
submitted that Mr Wilson had assessed the as built cost at $643,224 and Ms Hayes
had assessed it at $659,748.
It was submitted that as the applicant
had been required to take out a loan to meet its financial commitments as a
result of the respondents’
failure to pay the amount claimed, the
applicant should be compensated by an award of interest at the contractual rate
was submitted that the interest charge provided in the contract was
the consideration for providing the service akin to a loan from
the applicant to
the respondent for the arrears of payment recognising the applicant would be out
of pocket during any delayed period
of payment.
It was submitted that 15% was a
reasonable rate of profit on the evidence of Mr Hartley and the quantity
Counsel for the applicant advanced
various definitions of the word unfair including the Macquarie definition
“1. not fair; biased or partial; not just or equitable; unjust. 2.
marked by deceptive dishonest practices”.
It was submitted that had
the Legislature intended the concepts of misleading and deceptive conduct or
quantum merit based on restitutionary
principles to play a part in the operation
of the provision then it would have used those terms, not the word
It was submitted that the respondents
rely on an isolated reading of the letter 3 August 2001, progress certificates
and specifications
in support of their allegation that the applicant had assured
them during the course of construction that the total cost would not
$535,500. It was submitted that the allegation had not been made out.
In respect of the 3 August 2001 letter it
was submitted that the document itself, Mr Hartley’s evidence about it and
the correspondence
following it made it clear that there had been no assurance
that the total cost would not exceed $535,500.
It was submitted that the progress claims
were prepared in a way requested by the respondents and for the
respondents’ own purposes
for their dealing with their financier. It was
submitted that an analysis of the progress certificates on their face together
the evidence of Mr Hartley established their limited and unrelated purpose
in respect of the cost plus contract. It was submitted
that the test of
unfairness ought not reward the owners in circumstances where they have
misconducted themselves for their own ends.
In respect of oral indications made
during the course of the works it was submitted that the evidence of Mr Hartley
should be preferred
to that of Mr Seeley.
In respect of the allegation that the
work performed by the applicant had increased the value of the
respondents’ land by $540,000
at the most, it was submitted that the
valuation evidence was of limited use given that the residence was not a static
in time or value. It was submitted that the work and effort of the
builder had resulted in a lasting monument to be enjoyed on a
daily basis. It
was submitted that on the basis that the respondents remain in the house and the
absence of any evidence of an intention
to sell the residence that they continue
to be enriched by enjoying the built environment and enhanced views created by
the applicant.
It is submitted that weight should be
placed on the evidence of the valuers whose assessment of the as built costs was
$786,885 (Mr
Wilson) and $785,000 (Ms Hayes).
In respect of the valuers it was
submitted that the evidence of Mr Stewart should be preferred on the basis that
he took due account
of the artificially raised site and drew from a wide source
of comparatives to assist his assessment in a limited
It was submitted that Mr Goodman-Jones
had applied to narrow a scope in relation to his comparatives thus depriving
himself of a true
set of comparable prestige homes in Cairns. It is noted that
he assessed the value for insurance purposes as $700,000 to $750,000.
submitted that the evidence of Mr Small should be rejected because of his use of
only three comparatives of which he had
little knowledge and because of the
manner in which he gave his evidence.
Counsel for the applicant addressed
issues of personal and financial hardship on the part of the respondents,
despite the fact that
it was not pleaded. It was submitted that the veracity of
such claims was extremely doubtful having regard to the unsatisfactory
of Mr Seeley and the absence of any consistent
documentation.
Submissions - Respondent
I was also considerably assisted by
written submissions from counsel for the respondents.
Counsel for the respondents submitted
that section 55 of the DBC Act provided two hurdles for the applicant in these
proceedings.
He submitted that the applicant had failed to establish that the
contract met the requirements of either subsection 55(1) or subsection
the DBC Act.
He submitted that the applicant’s
emphasis on the difficulty of costing or quoting for the work in the absence of
detailed drawings
and a detailed specification ignored the policy behind the
legislation, which he submitted was to force the parties to work out the
specifications and details so that they would not have to enter into a cost plus
contract. He drew attention to the evidence of
Ms Hayes to the effect that
there was no reason why the project could not have been costed had the parties
done the necessary work
to prepare detailed drawings and a detailed
specification. He observed that there was common ground between the quantity
to the effect that the completed residence did not incorporate any
experimental design or novel construction methods.
In his submissions and throughout the
hearing, counsel for the respondents attempted to place significance on the
specification which
had been attached to the earlier fixed price contract
(Exhibit 8). While he conceded that it had no contractual force, he submitted
that its contents provided important background detail.
Counsel for the respondents conceded that
the identification of the original scope of works required the resolution of
issues of credit.
He submitted there was little difficulty in determining the
scope of works as at 3 August 2001 and placed considerable emphasis
attachment G to Exhibit 2.
As to the timing of the making of the
estimate, he submitted that pursuant to section 55(2) of the DBC Act it was
necessary for the
applicant to state a fair and reasonable estimate of the
likely cost at the time of the contract and further, pursuant to section
80(2)(f) of the DBC Act, it was necessary for the applicant to state a fair and
reasonable estimate of the likely cost of the variations
when the scope of work
was enlarged around 3 August 2001.
He submitted that cost plus contracts are
not beneficial to consumers and gave some examples on the facts of this case of
disadvantages of a cost plus contract. He focused on that part of the
claim relating to legal expenses in particular. The applicant
is claiming
$21,098.64 for legal expenses for pursuing the glazier in the tribunal. He
submitted that this claim, together with
the 15% margin, whilst recoverable
under a cost plus contract, is not beneficial to consumers. He observed that
the expense was
out of all proportion to the total glazing account and submitted
that, had this been a fixed price contract, the applicant would
not have dreamt
of spending such monies in pursuing the glazier. He submitted that because the
applicant had an open cheque book
it expended a disproportionate amount of money
pursuing the glazier.
He also drew attention to the evidence of
Ms Hayes to the effect that the original scope of work was worth $640,000,
rather than the
estimated $500,000.
When approaching the question of
fairness, counsel for the respondents submitted that it was necessary to draw
analogies from other
branches of the law. He suggested that the closest analogy
was to a claim in restitution where a builder is unable to enforce a
He submitted that the principles identified in
Pavey & Matthews Pty Ltd v
[1987] HCA 5
(1986) 162 CLR 221
where the principles that were
applicable.
He submitted that while in many cases it
might be that a builder’s entitlement under section 55 of the DBC Act
might simply
be in accordance with the assessment of a quantity surveyor, in the
present case there were unusual features which pointed to a different
conclusion. He submitted that there was a gross underestimation of the likely
end cost and that the land had not been proportionately
enhanced in value. He
submitted that the only fair decision in this case would be to hold the builder
to its estimate.
It was submitted that the fact that the
builder had not complied with the DBC Act was important in determining its fair
reward. Attention
was drawn to the decision of Deane J in
Matthews Pty Ltd v Paul
(above) when he said
“any identifiable real
detriment sustained by (the owner) by reason of the failure of the (builder) to
ensure that the requirements
of the statutory provision were satisfied had to be
taken into account”
It was submitted that in the present case
there was an identifiable real detriment amounting to $200,000. It was noted
J also identified a category of case in which unsolicited but
subsequently accepted work is done in improving property in circumstances
remuneration for the unsolicited work calculated at what was a reasonable rate
would far exceed the enhanced value of the property,
in which case it would be
wrong to only consider a fair remuneration for the work involved. While
conceding that the work in this
case was not unsolicited, nevertheless it was
submitted that the question of enhancement in value was still a relevant
consideration.
A second analogy was suggested to
sections 37
and 100 of the
Fair Trading Act 1989
A third analogy was drawn to equitable
doctrines. It was submitted that in
Giumelli v Giumelli
(1999) 73 ALJR
, in a case of equitable estoppel, the Court indicated that a representor
should be held to what he had promised.
It was submitted that the loss that the
respondents had suffered through the applicant not complying with the Act was
the loss of opportunity to sign a fixed
price contract at $535,500; or
the opportunity not to build the house
It was submitted that the valuation
evidence was led in order to counter any argument that the respondents would
reap a windfall were
they not to pay the claim in full. It was submitted that
the valuation evidence demonstrated that there was no windfall because
did not proportionately enhance the value of the land.
It was submitted that the relevant date
for valuation was 30 November 2001, that being the date the applicant believed
its work was
practically complete and the date upon which the respondents moved
into the premises. It was submitted that it was wrong to value
the property at
present value on the basis that market fluctuations, up or down, since practical
completion were completely irrelevant.
It was submitted that the expert valuer
relied on by the applicant had not only chosen the wrong date, but had also
failed to make
allowance for monies expended by the respondents and on the
assumption that the window would be completed.
It was submitted that the valuations of
Mr Small and Mr Goodman-Jones should be preferred.
Counsel for the respondents identified
three options in assessing the reward that the applicant might be given which
would not be
unfair to the respondents as:
$22,340.78 being the difference between
the payments made and the estimate of 3 August 2000;
$30,000 being the figure in (a) plus a
further adjustment for variations made after 3 August 2000;
up to $40,000 being (b) plus $10,000
legal expenses because the respondents authorised the applicant to bring the
claim against the
It was submitted that any claim for
interest under the
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
refused on the basis that the applicant had only itself to blame for its
predicament and the inconvenience of a four day
In the alternative, if a finding were
made that the contract was enforceable, it was submitted that the applicant was
not entitled
to the claim as calculated by it. It was submitted that the
figures in the job cost report were “doctored” because the
report did not include GST. It was submitted that Mr Hartley’s approach
of excluding the GST was suspicious and that
the tribunal should not accept his
evidence that no cash deals or contra deals had been done to avoid GST. It was
submitted that
the job cost report being exclusive of GST was only a matter that
came to light during the course of the evidence.
It was submitted that within the job
cost report there were four objectionable items which should not be allowed.
These items were:
legal fees;
glazing; and
rectification of work under the
It was submitted that it would be
reasonable to assess recoverable costs at say $600,000 and that when the 15%
margin was added the
cost would be $690,000.
It was submitted that the applicant was
entitled to interest at 15% per annum under the contract from seven days after
the date of
each unpaid progress claim and that further submissions on interest
would be necessary if an interest award were to be
Did the applicant
contravene section 55(1) or section 55(2) of the Domestic Building Contracts Act
In my view there is no doubt that a
building contractor might contravene section 55 of the DBC Act in two
by entering into a cost plus contract in
circumstances in which the cost of a substantial part of the subject work can be
calculated before work is carried out, and
by failing to make a fair and reasonable
estimate of the total amount it is likely to receive under the
Contravention in either way would bring
section 55(3) of the DBC Act into operation. It is necessary for the applicant
to prove that
it did not contravene the DBC Act in either way in order for it to
enforce the cost plus contract.
As a matter of logic and based on the
definition of costs plus contract under the DBC Act, I find that the possibility
of contravention
referred to in subsection 55(3) of the DBC Act must be
considered at the time of entry into the contract.
In this case there is no question that
the contract was entered into on 18 June 2001, despite the fact it was not
signed by the respondents
for some considerable period after that date. I
reject submissions on behalf of the respondents that 3 August 2001 is a relevant
date upon which to consider possible contraventions as it is obviously
subsequent to entry into the contract. The argument in respect
of section 80 of
the DBC Act is irrelevant to the pleaded case.
In my view not only is the document
dated 3 August 2001 irrelevant when it comes to considering contravention of
section 55(3) of
the DBC Act, it does not assume anything like the significance
placed on it by Dr Jenson in his submissions. I accept Mr Hartley’s
version of the circumstances in which it was written, that is at the request of
the male respondent, in order to justify borrowing
an additional $80,000 from
the financier. I find that it had no contractual
significance.
The next matter to be addressed is the
identification of “
the subject work”
at 18 June 2001. The
contract defines
“the whole of the Work
to be carried out by the Builder under the Contract, a description of which is
contained in Item 3 of
the Schedule and includes Variations to the
. Item 3 describes the work as
“concrete masonry two
storey residence with basement carpark”
I accept the submissions of counsel for
the applicant that the subject work included construction of the residence and
the necessary
design and administrative work required to finalise the scope of
work required by the respondents. Self evidently the design and
administration
work could not be carried out until the respondents had made decisions about
what if any of the items excluded by
schedule E they wanted
I reject the submissions of counsel for
the respondent that the scope of work in the cancelled contract had any
significance in identifying
“the subject work”. The parties
themselves agreed that it would not; both when they cancelled the lump sum
and when they completed the schedule to the cost plus
Mr Hartley’s evidence, which I
accept, was that he could not calculate the cost of a substantial part of the
work because of
the nature and difficulty of the site, because Mr Seeley was
pushing to have the work completed in the quickest possible timeframe
because of his knowledge of Mr Seeley’s tendency to change his mind. He
also relied on the fact that the drawings were
insufficiently detailed, no
detailed specification had been prepared and completed and thus it was not
possible to fix a price.
I note that as was observed in the joint
report neither quantity surveyor was able to identify the scope of the subject
work at the
time the contract was entered into with the result that neither
quantity surveyor attempted to calculate the cost of the subject
work at the
time the contract was entered into.
Each quantity surveyor expressed the
opinion that if they had the four drawings, an agreed scope of works and an
agreed finishes schedule
they could have come up with a reasonable estimate on
the basis that PC allowances would be made in respect of finishes. I find
at the time the cost plus contract was entered into there was no agreed scope of
works and there was no agreed finishes schedule.
Thus it would seem that if
neither quantity surveyor could carry at the task it would not be reasonable to
expect the applicant
to have done so.
I accept the submissions of Mr Morzone
that there is a difference between calculating and estimating. Calculation
implies use of
actual figures, which plainly cannot be available on entry into a
contract, while estimation implies forecasting on the basis of
a known scope of
works. I suspect that the choice of different words in sec 55(1) and 55(2) with
consequent construction difficulty
is yet another example of drafting error
rather than legislative subtlety (see McGill SC DCJ
Redcliffe Demolitions P/L
(D5981-01, 24 May 2002 at paragraph 46). In my
view it would be impossible for anyone to calculate costs at the time of entry
a contract. If it were intended that the costs were to be estimated, on
the facts of this case, I find that the costs could not
have been estimated.
Did the contract contain a fair and reasonable
estimate of the total amount the applicant was likely to receive under the
The amount the applicant was likely to
receive under the contract was, at the time the contract was made, entirely
dependent upon
which, if any, of the excluded items the respondents might choose
to have the applicant construct. I find it appropriate to limit
consideration of the reasonableness of the estimate to the items not excluded by
Part E of the schedule to the contract on the
basis that when the contract was
entered into none of the Part E items were included in the scope of work to be
performed. Plainly
variations should not be taken into account as they were
unknown at the time the contract was entered into and therefore their value
could not be part of the amount the applicant was likely to receive.
Mr Hartley estimated $500,000 for the
construction of the house. He made his estimate based on information from the
Rawlinson’s
handbook. I find this is an appropriate tool for use by a
contractor when making an estimate.
In the opinion of Mr Wilson the actual
cost of the original residence, putting aside the excluded items and variations,
but including
GST and margin, was $538,643. He thought it reasonable that the
estimate be ±15%, that is if the building cost was up to $551,085
estimate was reasonable.
Ms Hayes did not prepare an estimate the
value of the original scope of works. Her work was based on an assumption that
the specification
had some relevance. Clearly the parties had agreed to the
contrary. Whatever background the specification might have provided,
time attachment I to Exhibit 2 was signed, it was superseded. Consequently Ms
Hayes’ evidence did not assist me in
assessing the reasonableness of the
estimate as that was not a task she was instructed to
As the evidence of Mr Hartley was
supported by Mr Wilson’s as built calculation I find that the estimate
made at the time the
contract was entered into was fair and
reasonable.
What is the applicant entitled to
I find that the applicant has not
contravened either subsection 55(1) or 55(2) of the DBC Act. It is therefore
entitled to recover
$251,777.87 together with interest calculated in accordance
with the contract. I understand that to be $38,111.71 to 3 March 2003
$103.47 per day thereafter.
The cost includes the legal expenses
incurred in the claim against one of Vyncan Pty Ltd’s subcontractors. Not
only did the
respondents authorise the claim (attachment Y to Exhibit 3), they
did so knowing the risks (attachment X to Exhibit 2).
The amount takes into account the
reduction in respect of the carpet, in respect of which the applicant abandoned
its claim during
the hearing.
No deduction has been made for the cost
of converting the staircase into a curved shape, which involved consequential
respondents have not established that what was done was in the
nature of rectification rather than alteration.
Should the applicant be awarded the cost of providing
the contracted services plus a reasonable profit?
In the event I am wrong in my findings
and that the applicant has contravened section 55 of the DBC Act I will address
the issue raised
in section 55(4) of the DBC Act.
Section 55(4) of the DBC Act contains
jumbled concepts. Reference to fairness immediately causes one to turn
one’s mind to
concepts of equity, yet rather than express the entitlement
to an award in similar equitable language the statute refers to the cost
providing the contracted services. Thus it would seem that the first thing to
be resolved is establishing the cost to the applicant
of providing the services.
In my view this can only be the actual costs. Based on the applicant’s
job cost records I find
that the cost of providing the contracted services was
$664,972.25.
I reject Dr Jensen’s criticism of
the manner in which the job cost report was presented, that is without GST.
There is nothing
remarkable in the software package that the applicant used to
keep its records. As Mr Wilson observed, it is common in the building
that job costs are kept in this manner. There was no suggestion that the
applicant has not discharged his liability for
GST. I find that the GST is part
of the cost of providing the services.
While I accept that there was an
inevitable cost to the applicant of effectively providing credit to the
respondents on money outstanding,
I cannot find that the provision of credit was
a contracted service. The applicant’s entitlement to interest would be
in section 93 of the Act, not section 55 of the DBC
I find that 15% was a reasonable profit.
That was the margin that the parties agreed. It was in the range considered
reasonable by
the quantity surveyors.
On the facts of this case, if I were
wrong in my findings about the non-contravention of section 55 of the DBC Act,
in the alternative
I would have found that it would not have been unfair to the
respondents to award the applicant $251,558.86. I would make this decision
because in my view it is the respondents’ conduct that must be scrutinised
when deciding whether it would be unfair to them
to award the applicant the
costs of providing the contracted services. The facts of this case demonstrate
that the respondents’
predicament is one of their own making. They were
not prepared to take the time to make the choices required to establish a
scope of work and specification and thus a fixed price. They rejected
the opportunity offered to them to bring work to a halt so
that the project
could be thoroughly documented and administered in accordance with such
documentation. Once the work commenced
they chose the best of everything
knowing they would have to pay for it. In that regard I prefer the evidence of
Mr Hartley that
he informed the respondents on a number of occasions that they
could choose what they liked as they would be paying for it. The
fact that the
mounting cost was not appreciated by them was their own doing. They agreed to a
schedule of progress payments aligned
to the cancelled contract, apparently so
they need not alert their financier to the change in contractual arrangements.
to add all the items excluded in item E of the schedule and to vary
the works considerably.
I reject the submission that the
respondents lost an opportunity to sign a fixed price contract at $535,000 or
not to build at all.
There was no evidence before me that I accept that either
opportunity was open to them.
The respondents have the daily benefit
of residing in a quality home with panoramic views of Cairns built in accordance
requirements. In my view it would not be unfair to them to award the
applicant a sum sufficient to compensate it for the cost of
constructing the
was similar to the actual costs of
construction calculated by the quantity
surveyors. This is another reason it could not be unfair on the facts of this
they pay for what they received.
While there may well be cases in which
one would be assisted by valuation evidence in deciding questions of fairness,
the evidence
in this case was not of significant use to me. There appears to be
an unfortunate ignorance among the population of experts and
those who engage
them of the guidelines for expert witnesses in the tribunal (which are not
significantly different to the guidelines
promulgated by the Federal Court and
other courts). Practice Direction No. 8 clearly explains the expert’s
duty, which is
to assist the tribunal, not the party retaining the expert. The
Practice Direction also provides guidance for the conduct of experts’
conferences.
In these proceedings I was provided with
opinions from three valuers. Each valuer chose a different date upon which to
make his valuation.
There is no good reason why each valuer could not have been
asked to consider the valuation of the other valuers on the date chosen
and to indicate agreement and disagreement and reasons for the disagreement. I
would have found this of assistance. Instead
of obtaining such assistance I was
merely told during the course of cross-examination of each valuer that he had
not considered the
accuracy of the opinion of the other who had chosen a
different date of valuation. Indeed, in the case of Mr Small, he had not even
read the work of the other valuers.
I observe that at least one valuer is of
the opinion that the Seeley’s residence and the land upon which it sits is
worth $975,000
and for all I know the other valuers may be of the same opinion
valuation evidence is inconclusive it does not assist me in addressing the issue
of unfairness.
The respondent will pay the applicant
$251,777.87 for its claim within twenty one days of the date
The respondent will pay the applicant
$38,111.71 interest to 3 March 2003 and $103.47 per day until payment is
Any party wishing to make submissions on
costs should do so within seven days of the date hereof.
Any party wishing to make submissions in
reply should do so within fourteen days of the date
..................................................
J. MCVEIGH -- MEMBER
Queensland Building
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 013
Application No:
Vyncan Pty Ltd
C/- MacDonnells Solicitors
P O Box 5046
CAIRNS QLD 4870
Respondent:
GJ & KM Seeley
C/- Dr CG Jensen
PO Box 1883
CAIRNS QLD 4870
– Queensland Building Tribunal Act
Upon hearing Mr Morzone of counsel on
behalf of the applicant, and Dr Jensen of counsel on behalf the respondent, the
Queensland Building
Tribunal makes the following orders:
The respondent will pay the applicant
$251,777.87 for its claim within twenty one (21) days of the date
The respondent will pay the applicant
$38,111.71 interest to 3 March 2003 and $103.47 per day thereafter until payment
Any party wishing to make submissions in
respect of costs will do so within 7 days of the date
Any party wishing to make submissions in
reply will do so within 14 days of the date
......................................................
MS J. MCVEIGH – MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Date: 19 March 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter