URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2021/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Michelmore v Hail Creek Coal Holdings Pty Limited & Ors [2021] QLAC 4 (17 December 2021)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Michelmore v Hail Creek Coal Holdings Pty Limited & Ors
Ian Ferguson Michelmore
(appellant)
Hail Creek Coal Holdings Pty Limited, Marubeni Coal Pty Ltd, Nippon
Steel Australia Pty Limited, Sumisho Coal Development Queensland
(respondents)
LAC No LAC005-21
LAC No LAC006-21
Land Court No MRA119-20
Land Appeal Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
Appeal from the Land Court of Queensland
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
17 December 2021
DELIVERED AT:
5 November 2021
WA Isdale, Member of the Land Court
Preston J, Acting Member
of the Land Court
1. Extend the time for Mr Michelmore to appeal against the decision of
the Land Court dated 27 May 2021 to 2 July 2021.
2. Dismiss the appeal against the decision of the Land Court dated 27
3. Dismiss the appeal against the decision of the Land Court dated 19
4. Order the appellant to pay the respondents’ costs of
proceedings LAC005-21 and LAC006-21 in this Court.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL – application for extension of time to appeal –
compensation determination – factors to be considered –
delay was lawyer’s mistake – time extended
compensation determination – whether misapplication of
case – applicability of principle for valuing loss of commercial
opportunity – choice of different valuation methods
– admissibility
and weight of expert evidence – applicability of liberal estimate
APPEAL – costs – compensation determination –
whether appellable error shown
Land Court Act 2000
Mineral Resources Act 1989
2PL Superannuation Pty Ltd v Skilton
[2020] QLAC 5
Anson Holdings Pty Ltd v Wallace (No 2)
[2010] 31 QLCR 130
[2010] QLAC 4
Asuzu v Council of the New South Wales Bar
Association
[2012] NSWCA 406
Avery v No 2 Public Service Board
[1973] 2 NZLR 86
Bocardo SA v Star Energy UK Onshore Ltd
[2011] 1 AC 380
[2010] UKSC 35
, considered
Brewarrana Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Highways
(1973) 32 LGRA 170
Brisbane City
Council v Valuer-General
(1978) 140 CLR 41
[1978] HCA 40
Buttcroft Pty Ltd v Edgar
(2011) 32 QLCR 278
[2011] QLAC 7
Collins v Livingstone Shire Council
(1972) 127 CLR 477
Commonwealth of Succession Duties (SA) v Executor Trustee
and Agency Co South Australia Ltd
(1947) 74 CLR 358
[1947] HCA 10
Crompton v Commissioner of Highways
(1973) 32 LGRA 8
Daily Examiner Pty Ltd v Mundine; Brown v Mundine
[2012] NSWCA 195
Dasreef Pty Ltd v Hawchar
(2011) 243 CLR 588
[2011] HCA 21
distinguished
Emerald Quarry Industries Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
(South Australia)
(1979) 142 CLR 351
[1979] HCA 17
Ford v La Forrest
[2002] 2 Qd R 44
[2001] QCA 455
Gallo v Dawson
(1990) 93 ALR 479
[1990] HCA 30
Gatti v Shoosmith
[1939] Ch 841
Geita Sebea v
Territory of Papua
(1941) 67 CLR 544
[1941] HCA 37
Glencore Coal Queensland Pty Ltd v Keys
[2014] QLAC 2
Gorczynski v Annandale Services Pty Ltd; Gorczynski v Perera;
Gorczynski v Leichhardt Council
[2004] NSWCA 71
Nominal Defendant
(1966) 117 CLR 423
[1966] HCA 36
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Hughes v National
Trustees Executors & Agency Co Australasia Ltd
[1978] VicRp 27
[1978] VR 257
Jackamarra v Krakouer
(1998) 195 CLR 516
[1998] HCA 27
Jess v Scott
(1986) 12 FCR 187
; [1986] FCA 473,
Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
(1981) 48 LGERA 409
Lonergan & Anor v Friese (No 2)
[2020] QLAC 4
Malec v J C Hutton Pty Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR
[1990] HCA 20
Mallett v McMonagle
[1970] AC 166
Martin v The Nominal Defendant
[1954] 74 WN (NSW) 121
Melwood Units Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Main Roads
Morton Bay Regional Council v Mekpine Pty Ltd (No 2)
(2014) 35 QLCR 273
[2014] QLAC 5
Palata Investments v Burt
and Sinfield Ltd
[1985] 2 All ER 517
Pamalco Pty Ltd v
Minister administering the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974 (No 3)
(1991) 71 LGRA 441
Parker v NRMA
(1993) 11 ACSR 370
Pfizer Ireland Pharmaceuticals v Samsung Bioepis Au Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 573
Queensland Industrial Minerals Pty Ltd v Younger
and Ors; Queensland Industrial Minerals Pty Ltd v Ryan (No 2)
(2017) 38 QLRC
[2017] QLC 54
R v Secretary of State for the Home
Department; Ex parte Mehta
[1975] 1 WLR 1087
[1964] 3 All ER 933
Raja Vyricheria Narayana
Gajapatiraju v The Revenue Divisional Officer, Vizagapatam,
[1939] UKPC 15
[1939] AC 302
Re Fitzgerald & Anor and S R Struber & Anor
Re Xalco Pty Ltd v Colonial Agricultural Company Ltd
[2005] QLRT 124
Redeam Pty Ltd v South Australian Land Commission
(1977) 40 LGRA 151
Salter Rex and Co v Ghosh
[1971] 2 QB
Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL
(1994) 179 CLR 332
[1994] HCA 4
, considered
Sophron v The Nominal Defendant
(1957) 96 CLR
[1957] HCA 27
Spencer v The Commonwealth
(1907) 5 CLR
[1907] HCA 82
Stollznow v Calvert
[1980] 2 NSWLR 749
Sydney Water Corporation v Caruso
(2009) 170 LGERA 298
, considered
Tomko v Palasty (No 2)
(2007) 71 NSWLR 61
[2007] NSWCA 369
Wills v Minerva Coal Pty Ltd (No 2)
19 QLCR 297
[1998] QLC 149
Zimmerebner v Hawkins & Ors
(1999) 20 QLCR 71
[1999] QLC 19
APPEARANCES:
G Thompson QC with E Morzone QC (instructed by Emanate Legal) for the
S Holt QC (instructed by Allens) for the respondent
[1] CROW J: I agree with the reasons and orders proposed by
Member Preston.
[2] MEMBER ISDALE: I agree with the reasons and orders
proposed by Member Preston.
[3] MEMBER PRESTON J:
and outcomes of application and appeals
[4] Mr Michelmore is aggrieved with the Land Court’s
determination of compensation under
Mineral Resources Act 1989
(Qld) (MR Act), in respect of a mining lease (MLA 700026) over part of his land
at Fort Cooper, west of Mackay. The Land Court determined
compensation in the
sum of $530,530 inclusive of the 10% statutory uplift under s 281(4)(e) of the
MR Act. Mr Michelmore considers
this sum to be insufficient
compensation.
[5] Mr Michelmore has a right of appeal under s 282(1) of the
MR Act against the Land Court’s compensation determination under
the MR Act. The time period within which a party is required to appeal is within
20 business days of the date of determination
or within such further period as
the Land Appeal Court, on the application of that party in that behalf prior to
the lodgement of
the appeal, considers appropriate in any particular
circumstances: s 282(1) of the MR Act.
[6] The date of the Land
Court’s determination was 27 May 2021, so that the period of 20 business
days expired on 24 June 2021.
Mr Michelmore did not appeal within this period.
Instead, Mr Michelmore has applied, by General Application filed on 2 July 2021,
for the Land Appeal Court to extend the period of 20 business days within which
he may appeal the compensation determination of the
Land Court. No date was
specified in Mr Michelmore’s application but it would need to be until at
least 2 July 2021, being
the date on which application was made for leave to
extend the time to appeal.
[7] Mr Michelmore’s application for
extension of time to appeal was opposed by Hail Creek Coal Holdings Pty Ltd
(Hail Creek),
the holder of the mining lease who is required to pay compensation
to Mr Michelmore.
[8] Mr Michelmore’s application for extension of
time to appeal included a draft Notice of Appeal, which would constitute the
appeal should time to appeal be extended. This draft Notice of Appeal raised
eight grounds of appeal.
[9] The application for extension of time to appeal
was listed to be heard concurrently with the proposed appeal, if the time period
for appeal were to be extended. This had the advantage of allowing this Court to
evaluate the strength of the proposed appeal. This
is one of the factors that is
relevant to be taken into account in considering whether it is appropriate in
the particular circumstances
to extend the time to appeal.
[10] Consequent
on the Land Court’s determination of compensation on 27 May 2021, the Land
Court determined on 19 July 2021,
under s 281(7) of the MR Act, that Mr
Michelmore pay Hail Creek’s costs of the proceedings, relating to certain
specified aspects.
Mr Michelmore, by Notice of Appeal filed on 30 July 2021,
appealed against the Land Court’s determination of costs, also under
s 282(1) of the MR Act. This appeal against the costs determination was
within the 20 business day period for appeal. The Notice
of Appeal raised 13
grounds of appeal. This appeal against the costs determination was also listed
to be heard at the same time as
the application to extend time to appeal and the
appeal against the compensation determination.
[11] I consider that, in the
particular circumstances of this case, it is appropriate to extend the time
within which Mr Michelmore
can appeal beyond the 20 business days provided for
by s 282(1) of the MR Act. Factors favouring an extension of time to appeal are
the shortness of the delay, the adequacy of the explanation for the delay, the
injustice to Mr Michelmore if time to appeal were
not to be extended, and the
lack of material prejudice to Hail Creek if time to appeal were to be extended.
A factor tending against
granting an extension is the poor prospects of success
of the appeal, however, it is sufficient that the appeal can be said to be
fairly arguable.
[12] Although I consider time to appeal should be extended,
the appeal against the compensation determination should nevertheless
dismissed. Mr Michelmore has not established appellable error.
consider that Mr Michelmore’s appeal against the costs determination
should be dismissed. Although the grounds of appeal
against the costs
determination are framed so as to stand independently of any appeal against the
compensation determination, in
reality, their salience and success depend upon
Mr Michelmore being successful in his appeal against the compensation
determination.
The fate of the appeal against the costs determination is
therefore entwined with the fate of the appeal against the compensation
determination. Mr Michelmore has not established separate error sufficient for
this Court to disturb a decision on costs. Mr Michelmore
should also be ordered
to pay Hail Creek’s costs of the application to extend the time to appeal,
and the appeal, against the
compensation determination and of the appeal against
the costs determination.
compensation determination
[14] Hail Creek lodged an application for a mining lease over
that part of Mr Michelmore’s land on which is constructed the
accommodation village that houses workers at the Hail Creek Mine (an area of 138
ha). The proposed term of the mining lease is 20
years. Under s 279(1)(a) of the
MR Act, the mining lease could not be granted unless “compensation has
been determined (whether
by agreement or by determination of the Land Court)
between the applicant and each person who is the owner of land the surface of
which is the subject of the application and any surface access to the mining
lease land.” Mr Michelmore and Hail Creek were
unable to reach agreement
on the compensation payable.
[15] The Chief Executive of the Department of
Resources referred the proceeding to the Land Court for it to determine the
compensation. The Land Court was required to settle the amount of
compensation to which Mr Michelmore is entitled as compensation
in accordance
with s 281(3) of the MR Act. In the case of compensation referred to in s 279 of
the MR Act, Mr Michelmore is entitled
to compensation for:
(i) deprivation
of possession of the surface of land of the owner;
(ii) diminution of the
value of the land of the owner or any improvements thereon;
(iii) diminution
of the use made or which may be made of the land of the owner or any
improvements thereon;
(iv) severance of any part of the land from other
parts thereof or from other land of the owner;
(v) any surface rights of
(vi) all loss or expense that arises;
as a consequence of the
grant or renewal of the mining lease
[16] Although s 281(3)(a) refers to
multiple matters or “compensations concepts” that are to be taken
into account in
determining the amount of compensation payable, this assessment
is not to be undertaken by accumulating figures arrived at following
and discrete treatment of each matter: Wills v Minerva Coal Pty Ltd (No 2)
[1998] QLC 149
(1998) 19 QLCR 297
at 315, 320; Zimmerebner v Hawkins & Ors
[1999] QLC 19
(1999) 20 QLCR
at 77, 87; Re Fitzgerald & Anor and S R Struber & Anor
[2009] QLC 76
. It was common ground that there was one issue in determining the amount
of compensation – what is the value to be given to
the surface of the
land? (at [4] of the judgment). The parties agreed that as the proposed term of
the mining lease was 20 years,
the grant of a mining lease may be likened to a
compulsory acquisition of land for a limited period. In this circumstance, the
compensation
payable should be determined using the principles and practices of
valuation that are applicable to assessing land that has been
compulsorily
acquired: see SG and PM Smith v RA Cameron
(1986) 11 QLCR 64
Wills v Minerva Coal Pty Ltd (No 2) at 313; Zimmerebner v Hawkins & Ors at
[17] The parties agreed that if the highest and best use of the land
were to be for grazing, the value of the land is $189,475 (the
pastoral value of
the land) (at [5] of the judgment). However, the parties agreed that in fact the
highest and best use of the land
is for an accommodation village (at [5] of the
[18] The parties disagreed as to the valuation method to be used
to calculate the value of the land for an accommodation village.
Michelmore’s valuer, Mr Caleo, used a net present value (NPV) approach,
which involved calculating the present value of
the potential rent that would be
paid over the 20-year term of the lease (at [42] of the judgment). Hail
Creek’s valuer, Mr
Cavanagh, used what he termed a direct comparison
method, which involved deriving a premium from sales of other land that
the value over and above the value for the alternative use (at [47] of
the judgment). This difference in valuation method led to
widely different
amounts of compensation, Mr Caleo valuing the land at around $7,000,000 and Mr
Cavanagh valuing the land at $530,530
(at [6] of the judgment). The primary
member found that the NPV approach suffered from a number of problems, making it
to apply to determine the value of the subject land (at [43], [44] of
the judgment). The primary member found the direct comparison
method had fewer
problems and was the appropriate methodology to apply (at [46] and [61] of the
judgment). Using this method, the
primary member assessed compensation in the
amount of $482,300 (at [62] of the judgment). After applying the statutory 10%
the amount of compensation became $530,530 (at [66] of the judgment).
application for extension of time to appeal the compensation
determination
The factors to be considered
[19] Section 282(1) of the MR Act confers a discretion on the
Land Appeal Court to extend the time for institution of an appeal against
determination of the Land Court made under s 281 of the MR Act beyond the 20
business days provided for by s 282(1). The grant
of an extension of time under
s 282(1) is not automatic. The time period of 20 business days for institution
of an appeal fixed by
the subsection must prima facie be obeyed. One purpose of
fixing a time period for appeal under the subsection is “to achieve
table for the conduct of litigation in order to achieve finality of judicial
determination. A successful litigant has an interest
in knowing that a claim
against him has been determined and that he is no longer ‘at
risk’”: Hughes v National
Trustees Executors & Agency Co of
Australasia Ltd
[1978] VicRp 27
[1978] VR 257
at 263. When the time fixed by the subsection for
appealing has expired, “the litigation is at an end; the successful party
is entitled to the benefit of the judgment in his or her favour”: Gallo v
(1990) 93 ALR 479
[1990] HCA 30.
[20] Although the
subsection, by fixing the time within which an appeal is to be instituted, seeks
to achieve finality of judicial
determinations, it also recognises that such
fixing of a time to appeal might work injustice in the particular circumstances.
overcome this potential injustice, the subsection gives the Land Appeal Court
a discretion to extend the time to appeal beyond the
time fixed by the
subsection. As McHugh J observed in Gallo v Dawson at 480:
“The object of the rule
is to ensure that those Rules which fix times for doing acts do not become
instruments of injustice.
The discretion to extend time is given for the sole
purpose of enabling the court or justice to do justice between the parties: see
Hughes v. National Trustees Executors and Agency Co. of Australasia Ltd
[1978] VicRp 27
[1978] VR 257
at 262. This means that the discretion can only be exercised in
favour of an applicant upon proof that strict compliance with the
work an injustice upon the applicant.”
[21] In determining whether the applicant will suffer injustice
if time to appeal were not to be extended, it is relevant to have
regard to the
history of the proceedings, the conduct of the parties, the nature of the
litigation and the consequences for the parties
of the grant or refusal of the
application for extension of time: Gallo v Dawson at 480; Re Xalco Pty Ltd and
Colonial Agricultural
Company Ltd
[2005] QLRT 124
[22] In order to
justify the Court extending the time to appeal, there must be some material on
which the Court can justifiably exercise
its discretion: Ratnam v Kumarasamy
[1964] 3 All ER 933
at 935; Gallo v Dawson at 481. In determining whether strict
compliance with the time for appeal fixed by the subsection will work
injustice, the Court may have regard to a number of factors, including the
length of delay, the reason for the delay, the prospects
of success of any
appeal, and extent of prejudice to the respondent: Palata Investments v Burt and
Sinfield Ltd
[1985] 2 All ER 517
at 520; Jackamarra v Krakouer
(1998) 195 CLR
[1998] HCA 27
–[6]; Tomko v Palasty (No 2)
(2007) 71 NSWLR 61
[2007] NSWCA 369
; Buttcroft Pty Ltd v Edgar
(2011) 32 QLCR 278
. Elaborating on these four factors:
(a) The length of the delay: By itself, a short delay, and
hence a short period for which an extension is time is needed, might more
readily be excused and for less weighty reasons than a long delay: Martin v The
Nominal Defendant
(1954) 74 WN (NSW) 121
at 124; Jess v Scott
[1986] FCA 365
(1986) 70 ALR 185
(b) The reason for the delay: Re Xalco Pty Ltd and Colonial
Agricultural Company Ltd at [6]; Buttcroft Pty Ltd v Edgar at [3]. The
the delay will influence what is required to explain the delay. The longer the
period of delay, the more persuasive the
explanation needs to be: Jess v Scott
at 193; Gallo v Dawson at 481; Pfizer Ireland Pharmaceuticals v Samsung Bioepis
[2017] FCA 573
. The cause of the delay will also be
important. The fact that the reason for the delay was a mistake or an omission
of the applicant’s
lawyers might, but need not necessarily, amount to
sufficient justification to grant an extension of time to appeal: Gatti v
[1939] Ch 841
at 845; Salter Rex and Co v Ghosh
[1971] 2 QB 597
601; R v Secretary of State for the Home Department; Ex parte Mehta
[1975] 1 WLR
at 1091; Palata Investments v Burt and Sinfield Ltd at 521; Avery v No 2
Public Service Board
[1973] 2 NZLR 86
at 91, 92; Jess v Scott at 186–194.
However, the fact that the reason of the delay is the applicant’s
mistake or omission, of itself, “cannot constitute an
impenetrable bar to the making of an order refusing an application for
extension of time”: Daily Examiner Pty Ltd v Mundine; Brown v Mundine
[2012] NSWCA 195
. There is no fixed general rule that when the failure
to file an appeal within the time period fixed by the statutory provision for
appeal (here, in s 282(1) of the MR Act) is attributable to the fault of the
applicant’s lawyers, that necessarily amounts
to sufficient justification
for granting an application to extend the time to appeal to be granted: Martin v
The Nominal Defendant
at 124–125; Sophron v The Nominal Defendant
[1957] HCA 27
[1957] HCA 27
; Stollznow v Calvert
[1980] 2 NSWLR 749
(c) The prejudice suffered by the respondent: Just as the
consequences for the applicant if time to appeal were not be extended need
considered, so too do the consequences for the respondent if time to appeal were
to be extended: Gallo v Dawson at 480; Buttcroft
Pty Ltd v Edgar at [3]; Re
Xalco Pty Ltd and Colonial Agricultural Company Ltd at [6];
prospects of success of any appeal: Gallo v Dawson at 480; Buttcroft Pty Ltd v
Edgar at [3]; 2PL Superannuation Pty Ltd v
[2020] QLAC 5
–[63] and see also Ford v La Forrest
[2002] 2 Qd R 44
[2002] QCA 455
. It will generally be sufficient for the applicant to demonstrate a
fairly arguable case without a detailed evaluation of the prospects
of the proposed appeal: Jackamarra v Krakouer at [9], [66] (principle 4); Tomko
v Palasty (No 2) at [58]. However, the
strength of the prospects of success that
may be needed to justify an extension of time to appeal will depend on the other
favouring or disfavouring an extension of time to appeal. For example,
if there is no explanation, or no satisfactory explanation,
for the delay and
there will be material prejudice to the respondent if time were to be extended,
the applicant may need to show
that the proposed appeal has more substantial
merit that merely being fairly arguable: Tomko v Palasty (No 2) at [14]; Asuzu v
of the New South Wales Bar Association
[2012] NSWCA 406
Moreover, where the application to extend time to appeal is heard concurrently
with the proposed appeal, the Court will be in a
good position to evaluate the
prospects of success of any appeal.
[23] I will now evaluate the application to extend time to
appeal having regard to these factors.
length of delay
[24] Mr Michelmore delayed making application for leave to
extend the time to appeal until 2 July 2021, six business days after the
business day period provided for by s 282(1) of the MR Act had expired on 24
[25] Mr Michelmore initially submitted, although he later did so
without conviction, that the delay might only be three business days
this period of 24 June 2021 to 2 July 2021 was within the lockdown that the
Queensland Government had imposed for the
COVID-19 pandemic. During this time
the Land Court Registry was physically closed for three business days, however,
documents were
able to be lodged electronically. Hence, there was nothing
preventing Mr Michelmore’s solicitor from lodging the appeal within
business day period electronically rather than physically at the Land Court
Registry. Moreover, the physical closure of the
Registry was not the reason for
Mr Michelmore’s appeal not being lodged within time. Indeed, Mr
Michelmore’s solicitor
did lodge the appeal during this lockdown period,
on 2 July 2021, so that the lockdown did not in fact prevent the appeal being
The delay is, therefore, six business days, a relatively short period.
The reason for the
[26] Mr Michelmore’s explanation for the delay was that
his solicitor mistakenly believed the appeal period to be 42 days, as
Land Court Act 2000
(Qld) (LC Act), rather than 20 business
days, as provided for in s 282(1) in the MR Act. Apart from baldly stating in an
that he had this mistaken belief, Mr Michelmore’s solicitor did
not explain the source of his mistake, or the steps, if any,
he took to check
the relevant legislation or the Land Court’s website to ascertain what was
the applicable time period within
which the appeal against the Land
Court’s compensation determination under s 281 of the MR Act needed to be
lodged. The solicitor
did not explain why, as an experienced legal practitioner
who practises in the Land Court, he did not refer to s 282 of the MR Act,
the statutory provision conferring the right of appeal and specifying the time
and manner within which an appeal must be brought,
or to the Land Court’s
website specifying the appeal period for an appeal against a compensation
determination. Had the solicitor
examined either the MR Act or the Land
Court’s website, he would have ascertained that the appeal period is 20
business days.
[27] All appeals are creatures of statute. Any right to
appeal, and the time and manner in which an appeal is to be lodged, are to
ascertained by reference to the statute conferring the right to appeal. Here,
the decision against which an appeal is sought to
be made is the determination
of the Land Court under s 281 of the MR Act. The very next section in that Act,
s 282, provides the
right to appeal against a determination made under s 281 and
specifies the time period within which and the manner by which an appeal
the provision is to be brought: s 282(1) and (2) of the MR Act. The time period
is 20 business days or such further period
as the Land Appeal Court considers
appropriate in the particular circumstances.
[28] An appeal against a
determination of the Land Court under s 281 of the MR Act is not provided for by
s 65(1) of the LC Act. Section
65(1) does provide that a party intending to
appeal against a decision of the Land Court must, within 42 days after the
decision is given to the party, serve notice of appeal against the
decision on all other parties to the proceedings and the Registrar
of the Land
Appeal Court but that is not the source of the right to appeal against a
determination of the Land Court made under s
281 of the MR Act. That right of
appeal is given by s 282(1) of the MR Act.
[29] Accordingly, had Mr
Michelmore’s solicitor examined the statutory provision conferring the
right of Mr Michelmore to appeal
against the Land Court’s determination of
compensation under s 281 of the MR Act, namely s 282(1) of the MR Act, he would
seen that the applicable appeal period is 20 business days. Equally, if the
solicitor had examined the Land Court’s website
he would have been
informed expressly that the applicable appeal period for an appeal against a
compensation determination is 20
business days, not 42 business days for other
appeals to the Land Appeal Court. The Land Court’s website states under
the heading
“Appeal period”:
must file and serve your appeal to the Land Appeal Court within 42 days after
the Land Court makes the order with the decision
you’re appealing.
Note: The legislation applying to your matter may specify a different time
limit. For example, under the
Mineral Resources Act 1989
, the time limit
for filing and serving an appeal against a compensation determination for mining
activities is 20 business days.
Check the relevant legislation
carefully.”
[30] In these circumstances, the solicitor’s explanation
for the delay is not reasonable. As was observed in 2PL Superannuation
Skilton at [30], it is not a sufficient explanation for a delay to establish
“the subjective holding of an erroneous
belief”, as the Court
“must look at the circumstances objectively”. In this case, the
belief that Mr Michelmore’s
solicitor held about the applicable appeal
period “must be looked at objectively to see how reasonable such a belief
be”. Viewed objectively, a solicitor in the position of Mr
Michelmore’s solicitor could be expected to apply reasonable
care, skill
and attention to ascertaining Mr Michelmore’s right to appeal against the
Land Court’s compensation determination
under s 281 of the MR Act and the
time and manner within which such an appeal needs to be brought. This would
require examining the
applicable legislation conferring the right of appeal and
specifying the time and manner in which the appeal is to be made, namely
of the MR Act. For confirmation, a competent solicitor would also check the Land
Court’s website on the appeal period.
Doing either or both of these, could
not have led the solicitor to form and maintain the belief he said he did hold
as to the appeal
period being 42 days rather than 20 business days. The
explanation for the delay is therefore not objectively reasonable.
[31] Nevertheless, the cause of the delay is the conduct of Mr
Michelmore’s solicitor, not Mr Michelmore. Mr Michelmore was
entitled to
rely on his solicitor to ascertain and take the necessary steps in the time
period for appealing the compensation determination.
The solicitor’s
mistake as to the time period for appeal is not one with which Mr Michelmore
should be saddled: Hall v Nominal
[1966] HCA 36
(1966) 117 CLR 423
; Jackamarra v Krakouer at [66] (principle 7).
The prejudice
suffered by Hail Creek
[32] Mr Michelmore asserted that Hail Creek will suffer no
prejudice if an extension of time to appeal were to be granted. Even if
delay, and hence the period for which an extension of time to appeal is needed,
were to be six business days, that time period
would cause no prejudice to Hail
[33] Mr Michelmore conceded that any appeal against the Land
Court’s compensation determination will hold up the grant of the
lease to Hail Creek, as the mining lease cannot be granted until compensation is
determined (s 279(1)(a) of the MR Act), which
includes determining any appeal
against the compensation determination (s 279(2)(b) of the MR Act).
Nevertheless, Mr Michelmore argued,
the accommodation village in respect of
which the mining lease is to be granted is already constructed and in operation.
subject of an existing lease, Registered Lease 702889733, which
commenced on 1 July 1998 and runs until 1 July 2023. Hail Creek is
currently in
possession and is entitled to remain in possession until the expiry of the
lease. Any appeal against the Land Court’s
compensation determination will
be disposed of, and thereafter the mining lease can be granted, before the
expiry of the current
lease on 1 July 2023. Thus, extending the time for Mr
Michelmore to appeal the Land Court’s compensation determination will
cause prejudice to Hail Creek.
[34] Hail Creek contested that it will not
suffer prejudice if the time for Mr Michelmore to appeal is extended. The fact
mining lease in respect of the accommodation village cannot be granted
until compensation is determined, including determination
of any appeal against
the Land Court’s determination, creates operational uncertainty for Hail
Creek. It needs to plan for
the contingency that the mining lease might not be
granted by the date of expiry of the current lease. The accommodation village
houses the substantial workforce needed to operate Hail Creek’s nearby
mine. If Hail Creek cannot secure the right to occupy
and use the accommodation
village on Mr Michelmore’s land, it will need to establish alternative
accommodation for its workforce
elsewhere. There is a lead time in doing so,
including in finding and leasing alternative land, obtaining all necessary
to construct and use the accommodation facilities, and constructing
the accommodation facilities so that they are ready to be used
from the first
day after the expiry of the current lease.
[35] Hail Creek submitted that, in
these circumstances, the late filing of the appeal and the consequential delay
to the final determination
of compensation does result in prejudice to Hail
Creek, as it delays the grant of the mining lease and Hail Creek’s ability
to secure operational certainty for the accommodation of its workforce needed to
run its mine.
[36] Hail Creek also submitted that Mr Michelmore’s
delay in filing an appeal against the Land Court’s compensation
determination
needs to be viewed in the context of the history of the
proceedings and the conduct of the parties, matters that the courts have
recognised are relevant in evaluating the competing prejudices to the parties:
see Gallo v Dawson at 480 and Re Xalco Pty Ltd and
Colonial Agricultural Company
Ltd at [6]. Hail Creek set out a detailed chronology in its written submissions
from the time of it
making application for the mining lease on 4 January 2018,
some three and a half years ago, to the end of the hearing before the
in April this year. This chronology showed that Mr Michelmore, in objecting to
the grant of the mining lease and in conducting
the proceedings before the Land
Court, has time and again failed to adhere to statutory requirements and Court
orders, thereby delaying
the resolution of the proceedings and the grant of the
mining lease. Mr Michelmore’s failure to file an appeal against the
Court’s compensation determination within time compounded the extensive
delay that has already occurred in the timely
conduct and resolution of the
proceedings.
[37] I find that Mr Michelmore’s delay in filing the
appeal within the time specified by s 282(1) of the MR Act for an appeal
against the Land Court’s compensation determination under s 281, will not
cause material prejudice to Hail Creek. It may be
accepted that in evaluating
the consequences for the parties if time to appeal were to be extended it is
relevant to have regard
to the history of the proceedings and the conduct of the
parties. But even doing so does not disturb the fact that the resolution
proposed appeal against the compensation determination can be, and will be,
achieved well prior to the expiry of the current
lease on 1 July 2023. The
application for an extension of time to appeal has been heard concurrently with
any proposed appeal, so
that this Court’s decision will resolve both the
application and the appeal. In these circumstances, the prejudice that Hail
Creek fears it will suffer will not transpire.
prospects of success
[38] The test for assessing the prospects of success of a
proposed appeal is undemanding; it is ordinarily sufficient for the applicant
demonstrate a fairly arguable case without a detailed evaluation of the
prospects of success of the proposed appeal: Jackamarra
v Krakouer at [9], and
[66] (principle 4), Tomko v Palasty (No 2) at [58]. Mr Michelmore has met this
test – the proposed appeal
is fairly arguable. This is sufficient to
justify extending the time for Mr Michelmore to bring the appeal. The fact that,
evaluation of the appeal, I am of the view that the appeal should be
dismissed, for the reasons I give below, does not gainsay that
the appeal is
fairly arguable.
Time to appeal should be extended
[39] Having regard to these factors, I consider it is
appropriate in the particular circumstances to extend the time within which
Michelmore can appeal against the compensation determination on the grounds
raised in the draft notice of appeal.
The appeal against the compensation
determination
[40] Mr Michelmore’s draft notice of appeal raises eight
grounds of appeal:
(a) Grounds 1 and 2: misapplication of the Raja principle
(referring to the Privy Council’s decision in Raja Vyricheria Narayana
Gajapatiraju v The Revenue Divisional Officer, Vizagapatam,
[1939] UKPC 15
[1939] AC 302
(the Raja grounds);
(b) Ground 3: failure to apply the principles for
the valuing of a commercial opportunity in Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL
(1994) 179 CLR 332
[1994] HCA 4 (Sellars)
(the Sellars grounds);
(c) Grounds
4 and 5: acceptance of the direct comparison method of valuation of Hail
Creek’s valuer (the direct comparison method
(d) Ground 6:
failure to accept the net present value (NPV) method of Mr Michelmore’s
valuer (the NPV ground);
(e) Ground 7: failure to find that the evidence of
Hail Creek’s valuer did not meet the criteria for admissibility of expert
evidence in Dasreef Pty Ltd v Hawchar
(2011) 243 CLR 588
[2011] HCA 21
(the Dasreef ground); and
(f) Ground 8: failure to apply the
principle in Commonwealth of Succession Duties (SA) v Executor Trustee and
Agency Co South Australia
(1947) 74 CLR 358
[1947] HCA 10
that doubts be
resolved in favour of a more liberal estimate favouring the claimant, Mr
Michelmore (the liberal estimate ground).
[41] I will deal with each of these sets of grounds.
[42] Mr Michelmore contended that the part of his land that is
the subject of the mining lease, and on which the accommodation village
built, should be valued on the basis that, absent the mining lease, a
hypothetical purchaser would pay a price for the land
that reflects the high
likelihood, almost certainty, that Hail Creek would have renegotiated the
current lease at the end of its
term in July 2023. Any such renegotiation of the
lease would have been a market rental for three reasons. First, cl 7.3 of
requires Hail Creek to remove any buildings or structures erected on
the land at the expiry of the lease, and to repair and make
good the land.
Second, if Hail Creek did not renegotiate the lease, it would suffer
considerable loss and cost in removing the improvements
at the expiration of the
current lease, repairing the land, obtaining development approval (DA) for an
alternative site, and re-establishing
the improvements and infrastructure at the
alternative site. Third, the existing accommodation village is an essential
of the Hail Creek mine and the mining lease is required to provide
ongoing security of the infrastructure of the accommodation village.
advancing this argument, Mr Michelmore relied on a principle, said to be derived
from the Privy Council’s decision in
Raja, in support of the proposition
that the value of the land should not be reduced because Hail Creek might be the
only potential
purchaser. Mr Michelmore submitted that in Raja, the Privy
Council allowed an increased value for land that had been compulsorily
where that land was worth considerably less unless used for the purpose for
which it was being compulsorily acquired. The
potentiality in the acquired land,
which can be taken to fruition only by the acquiring authority, is to be
considered in valuing
the land for the purposes of assessing compensation. If
there is an attribute of the land which would be of value to the acquiring
authority only, then the value of that attribute must form part of the market
value: Raja at 316–317.
[44] Mr Michelmore contended that the Land
Court misunderstood how he relied on the Raja principle. The primary member
the Raja point in paragraphs [37] and [65] of the judgment:
“[37] Counsel for Mr Michelmore submit that the appropriate approach
to valuation is that expressed in Vyicherla Naryana Gajapatirajup
Bahadur Garu v
Revenue Divisional Officer, Vizagapatam (“Raja”); that the
potentiality in the acquired land, which can
be taken to fruition only by the
acquiring authority, is to be considered in valuing that land for the purposes
of assessing compensation.
Further, if there is an attribute of that land which
is only of value to the acquirer, then the value of that attribute must form
part of the market value. Counsel submit that Raja applies because the value of
the subject land is enhanced by its proximity to
Hail Creek Mine and the fact it
has a DA for the accommodation village. The proposition is unexceptional.
Clearly, the subject land
must be valued having regard to its location and the
DA. I am not persuaded that Raja advances Mr Michelmore’s case beyond
general proposition.
[65] It is a mistake to value the land, and
assess compensation, through the lens that Hail Creek is compelled to acquire
because the costs of relocation mean it has no other option. It is a
mistake to assume that Hail Creek would buy the land or enter
into a commercial
lease at whatever price Mr Michelmore might nominate. To do so ignores the
Spencer requirement that the purchaser
is not so anxious to buy that he would
overlook any ordinary business consideration. That Hail Creek might be the only
does not justify an extortionate valuation. Perhaps Mr Michelmore once
may have been able to persuade the mine owner/operator to
pay compensation over
the odds for the grant of the ML, but that is not a matter that should factor in
my decision.”
[45] Mr Michelmore submitted that these findings missed
the critical point that he was making about the Raja principle. The critical
point was that, absent the grant of the mining lease, the likelihood was high or
almost certain that Hail Creek would have renegotiated
an extension of the
existing lease for another 20 years and would not have removed the accommodation
village from the land or sought
to find alternative accommodation for the
mine’s workforce.
[46] Accordingly, Mr Michelmore submitted, the
compensation payable should have been assessed, not just on the basis of its
to the Hail Creek mine and the fact that it has a development
approval” (as the primary member found at [37] of the judgment),
rather on the basis of it continuing to be used by Hail Creek as an
accommodation village. Mr Michelmore submitted that the market
value of the
subject land as an accommodation village should not have been discounted for the
risk that either:
(a) it would not be so used, whether because of “the
possibility of Hillalong using the camp as anything more than a mere
possibility”
(at [14] of the judgment) or that “there is little, if
any demand for accommodation that is not attached to the Hail Creek
(at [14] of the judgment) or
(b) “there would need to be changes to the
existing DA to permit a camp to be used by workers that are not employed by Hail
Creek” (at [18] of the judgment).
[47] Mr Michelmore submitted that the primary member, in
discounting the market value of the subject land for these risks, failed
apply the Raja principle. Mr Michelmore submitted that this discounting of the
value of the subject land also failed to apply
the approach to compensation
suggested in Geita Sebea v Territory of Papua
(1941) 67 CLR 544
[1941] HCA 37
Sebea) and Collins v Livingstone Shire Council
(1972) 127 CLR 477
[48] In Geita Sebea, the Crown compulsorily acquired land on which
it had constructed an aerodrome. The Crown might have been the
only possible
purchaser, but as pointed out in Raja’s case, it was necessary to assume a
sale at a price that reflected the
value of the land’s potentiality. In
Geita Sebea, the land’s potentialities included the already constructed
Williams J at 558 observed:
“It is true that the Crown was
free to acquire other suitable lands of the same dimensions and construct an
aerodrome there,
but to do so would require considerable outlay, so that the
resumed lands had the potentiality that, having been improved to the
already mentioned, the Crown would be willing to acquire them for their
agricultural value plus the value of the expenditure
already made rather than to
have to purchase other lands at their agricultural value and then have the
trouble and expense of improving
them to the same extent. Assuming, therefore,
that the appellants were willing vendors and the Crown was a willing purchaser
price would be determined having regard to the fact that the vendors would
know that the Crown would pay this amount but no more,
and the Crown would know
that the vendors could reasonably expect this price.”
[49] Williams J
continued at 559:
“If, as appears to be probable, the buildings can be
removed, their only materiality in the assessment of the compensation would
that it would benefit the Crown to pay something more for the resumed land
rather than to have to go to the expense of removing
and re-erecting them
elsewhere.”
[50] Mr Michelmore submitted that, similarly in the present
case, compensation should be assessed on the basis that it would benefit
Creek to pay “something more” for the subject land rather than to
have to go to the expense of removing and re-erecting
elsewhere the
accommodation village currently on the subject land. Mr Michelmore submitted
that the valuation of the subject land
by Hail Creek’s valuer, Mr
Cavanagh, which was accepted by the primary member, failed to include a
sufficient premium that
reflected this fact that Hail Creek would pay
“something more” for the subject land.
[51] Mr Michelmore
submitted that the primary member’s failure properly to apply the Raja
principle is illustrated by the primary
(a) finding that Raja did not advance Mr Michelmore’s
case beyond the general proposition that the subject land must be valued
regard to its location and the development approval (at [37] of the
(b) finding that the Raja principle ignores the requirement in
Spencer v The Commonwealth (1907) 5 CLR 418;
[1907] HCA 82
that the purchaser is
not so anxious to buy that he or she would overlook any ordinary business
consideration (at [65] of the judgment);
(c) failing to find the land
should be valued, and thus compensation assessed, upon the basis that, absent
the mining lease, a hypothetical
purchaser would not have discounted the
purchase price for any or any significant risk that Hail Creek would not have
renewed the
[52] Hail Creek disputed that the primary member had
misunderstood or misapplied the Raja principle or the approach suggested in
Sebea to assessing compensation. Raja is authority for the proposition
that, in assessing market value, regard is to be had not merely
to the use the
land is being put at the time but also to the uses to which the land is
reasonably capable of being put in the future,
being the potentialities of the
land: Raja at 313. That is so even if the owner could not exploit a potentiality
of the land and
the only person that could do so is the acquiring authority:
Raja at 314. The only possible purchaser of a potentiality is usually
willing to pay for it: Raja at 317. Hence, even where the only possible
purchaser of the land’s potentiality is the acquiring
authority, the court
in awarding compensation must ascertain the price that would be paid by a
willing purchaser to a willing vendor
of the land with its potentiality in the
same way as it would ascertain the price in the case where there are several
possible purchasers:
Raja at 323.
[53] However, this proposition in Raja has
no direct application to the present case, which was not concerned with the
potentialities
of the subject land. It was common ground between the parties
that the highest and best use of the subject land is as an accommodation
village. The land has approval for this use and is being used for this purpose.
The primary member so found. There was no need to
consider the potentialities of
the land to be used for any other purpose. This was not a case, such as occurred
in Raja or Geita
Sebea, where the land had a potentiality to be used for a
purpose and the only possible purchaser of that potentiality was the acquiring
[54] Hail Creek submitted that Raja is also authority for the
proposition that, in assessing the market value, the disinclination
vendor to part with the land and the urgent necessity of a purchaser to buy the
land must both be disregarded. Neither must
be considered as acting under
compulsion. This reinforces that the market value of the subject land is not to
be estimated as its
value to the purchaser: Raja at 315, 316. This proposition
was accepted by the primary member, as her comments in [65] of the judgment
[55] Raja does not, however, dictate how, in any given case, the
potentiality of the land is to be assessed quantitatively, even where
only one likely purchaser of the land. Raja does suggest that the seller would
seek and the buyer would be willing to pay
something more for the potentiality
than the value of the existing use of the land, but it does not say how much
[56] Hail Creek noted that in Bocardo SA v Star Energy UK Onshore Ltd
[2011] 1 AC 380
[2010] UKSC 35
, Lord Brown (with whom Lord Walker at [46] and
Lord Collins at [94] agreed) pointed out at [85] that Raja’s case
no assistance at all as to how much the acquiring authority
should be regarded as willing to pay for the particular value of the
him” and that “compensation was plainly not to be assessed on the
basis of the owner ‘obtaining for himself
a share in [the] value [of the
land to the promoter for his scheme].” Lord Brown at [86] suggested that
in practice “a
more or less token increase of what otherwise would be
assessed as the land’s market value tends to be made in all deference
to” Raja’s case.
[57] In the present case, Hail Creek’s
valuer, Mr Cavanagh, opined, and the primary member accepted, that the value of
the subject
land as an accommodation village would be two and a half times the
pastoral value of the land. The application of this multiple of
pastoral value of the land is consistent with:
(a) the only realistic buyer of the land as an accommodation
village being Hail Creek;
(b) the notion that Hail Creek would pay something
more than pastoral value, but given the location and features of the land and
absence of any real competition could not be expected to pay significantly
more. Hail Creek cannot be treated as acting under compulsion.
The evidence
supported that there are other potential options and advantages to a relocation
of the accommodation village on the
(c) the notion that Mr
Michelmore would require something more than pastoral value, but given the
location and features of the land
and the absence of any real competition, could
not be expected to be paid much more. There is also a substantial risk to Mr
that if Hail Creek did pursue other options or if it did not take up
a 20 year lease, Mr Michelmore would be left with something
akin to the pastoral
value of the land.
[58] Accordingly, Hail Creek submitted that the result in this
case, with compensation being assessed at 2.5 times the pastoral value
land, is consistent with Raja. It is also consistent with the approach to
compensation suggested in Geita Sebea. The primary
member did not, therefore,
err in law or principle in her understanding or application of either Raja or
Geita Sebea.
[59] The question of the market value of the land was a factual
one to be resolved by the primary member on the valuation evidence
before her.
There was no error in the primary member preferring the evidence of one valuer,
Mr Cavanagh, over the evidence of the
other valuer, Mr Caleo.
[60] I find
that Mr Michelmore has not established that the primary member misunderstood or
misapplied any principle established in
Raja or the suggested approach to
compensation in Geita Sebea. I accept and adopt Hail Creek’s submissions
that the primary
member did not err in any of the ways contended for by Mr
Michelmore. In particular, the primary member’s findings in [37]
impugned by Mr Michelmore, do not reveal that the primary member misunderstood
or misapplied the Raja principle or the
approach to compensation suggested in
Geita Sebea.
[61] In [37], the primary member recorded Mr Michelmore’s
submission that Raja’s case required compensation to be assessed
regard to “the potentiality in the acquired land, which can be taken to
fruition only by the acquiring authority”
and that “if there is an
attribute of that land that is only of value to the acquirer, then the value of
that attribute must
form part of the market value.” This is the same
proposition advanced by Mr Michelmore on this appeal. The primary member noted
that the “potentiality” or “attribute” of value to the
acquirer, here Hail Creek, is the accommodation village
on the subject land.
There is a DA for this use, the accommodation village has been constructed in
accordance with the DA, and the
accommodation village is currently being used
for this purpose. The accommodation village is of particular value to Hail Creek
of its proximity to the Hail Creek mine. The primary member so found,
noting Mr Michelmore’s submission that Raja applies because
the value of
the subject land is enhanced by its proximity to the Hail Creek mine and the
fact that it has a DA for the accommodation
village. This finding does not
reveal that the primary member misunderstood Mr Michelmore’s submission,
but rather it was a
succinct encapsulation of the potentiality or attribute of
the subject land that is of value to the assumed acquirer, Hail Creek.
revealed an understanding and application of Mr Michelmore’s submission on
the Raja principle.
[62] The primary member noted that she was “not
persuaded that Raja advances Mr Michelmore’s case beyond that general
proposition”, which was that “the subject land must be valued having
regard to the location and the DA”. This statement
was a recognition that
in the present case, the existing use of the land as an accommodation village
was the highest and best use
of the land and was not in fact a potentiality of
the land. Hence, Raja’s case, which addresses valuation of a potentiality
of land that is of value to the acquirer, was not directly applicable. The
“potentiality” claimed by Mr Michelmore in
the present case, the
accommodation village constructed on the land that is used for the mine workers
of the Hail Creek mine, was
in fact an “actuality”, which formed
part of the market value of the land. The primary member valued the land, and
determined compensation, having regard to this attribute of the land. It
is for this reason that the primary member stated that Raja’s
case did not
advance Mr Michelmore’s case beyond the general proposition.
primary member’s statements in [37] of the judgment do not, therefore,
reveal a misunderstanding or misapplication
of Raja’s case.
primary member’s statements in [65] equally do not reveal any
misunderstanding or misapplication of either Raja or
Geita Sebea. The primary
member was there simply making the point that the fact that there might be only
one possible purchaser of
the land, the acquiring authority or person, does not
mean that the purchaser would have to pay whatever price the owner might
that would be inconsistent with the Spencer requirement that the
purchaser is not so anxious to buy that he would overlook any ordinary
consideration. Thus, the primary member noted, the fact “that Hail Creek
might be the only purchaser does not justify
an extortionate valuation”.
These statements are consistent with both Raja and Geita Sebea. Both cases did
decide that a purchaser
desirous of purchasing the potentiality of the land will
pay “something more” than the value of the land for its existing
use, but neither affords assistance as to how much more the purchaser would pay.
This was recognised in Bocardo at [85]. It may be
“a more or less token
increase on what otherwise would be assessed as the land’s market
value” (Bocardo at [86]).
In the present case, the primary member assessed
far more than a token increase, accepting as appropriate a multiple of 2.5 times
the pastoral value of the land.
[65] The primary member’s statement
that the fact that Hail Creek might be the only purchaser does not justify an
extortionate
evaluation is not a misunderstanding of Raja, but instead a proper
understanding of it. Raja emphasised that neither the vendor nor
the purchaser
should be considered as acting under compulsion; neither can force the other to
buy or sell (at 312). The value is
what “a willing purchaser will pay and
not what a purchaser will pay under compulsion” (at 316) or “the
would be paid by a willing purchaser to the willing vendor, and not
the price that would be paid by a ‘driven’ purchaser
to an unwilling
vendor” (at 322–323). Moreover, as noted in Bocardo at [85], in
applying Raja, “compensation was
plainly not to be assessed on the basis
of the owner ‘obtaining for himself a share in [the] value [of the land to
the promoter
for his scheme]’.” In the present case, this means
compensation is not to be assessed on the basis that Mr Michelmore
for himself a share in the value of the land to the purchaser, Hail Creek, for
its use of the accommodation village for
its mine workers.
[66] The primary
member’s comments in [65], therefore, do not reveal any error in
understanding or application of Raja or Geita
[67] Insofar as Mr
Michelmore challenges the multiple of 2.5 used by the primary member to
determine the market value of the subject
land as an accommodation village
compared to its pastoral value, that is a finding of fact available on the
evidence. The primary
member accepted the evidence of Hail Creek’s valuer,
Mr Cavanagh, in this regard, in preference to the evidence of Mr
Michelmore’s
valuer, Mr Caleo. Mr Cavanagh examined sales of land with
existing accommodation and sales of land bought with the intention of
constructing
mine worker accommodation. He found that the sales reflected a
premium of between 100% and 250% over and above the value for the
alternative
use (at [47] of the judgment). The primary member accepted Mr Cavanagh’s
evidence (at [61] of the judgment). In
contrast, the primary member generally
was concerned about Mr Caleo’s capacity to give the Court independent
advice and stated
that she had “no confidence in Mr Caleo’s
evidence” and “can give little or no weight to it” (at [36],
for the reasons given in [27]–[35], and see also [49] and [52] of the
judgment). More particularly, the primary member found
that Mr Caleo’s
evidence of relevance to the direct comparison method, including as to what
premium he would assign from his
assessments of value, was “grossly
overstated”. For instance, to arrive at his valuation of $7,000,000, Mr
Caleo would
have to apply a premium of 3694%. When Mr Caleo was asked to use Mr
Cavanagh’s direct comparison method, to derive a premium
comparable sales of land, he thought he would assign a premium of 500%, far more
than the 100% to 250% derived by Mr Cavanagh.
The primary member noted that
neither party sought for her to rely on or adopt Mr Caleo’s suggestion of
500% (at [49] of the
[68] There is no error of law or principle
of assessment in a court preferring or rejecting the evidence of one valuer
rather than
another: Pamalco Pty Ltd v Minister administering the National Parks
and Wildlife Act 1974 (No 3)
(1991) 71 LGRA 441
at 451. The primary
member’s rejection of Mr Caleo’s evidence and acceptance of Mr
Cavanagh’s evidence does not,
therefore, reveal any error of law or
[69] In evaluating the competing valuation evidence, the primary
member enjoyed advantages not available to this Court. As this Court
observed in
Glencore Coal Queensland Pty Ltd v Keys
[2014] QLAC 2
there will be cases where this Court may be in as good a position as the Land
Court to reach conclusions about matters
of fact, including the value of land,
there will inevitably be other cases where the Land Court, having observed the
valuers giving
evidence, will enjoy advantages not available to this Court.
Thus, whether or not a sale is sufficiently comparable to the property
valued, to provide useful evidence is a matter of expert opinion, which may not
be capable of an exact "exposition of reasoning".
The adjustments which may have
to be made to the value of a property as shown by its sale, in order to reach a
conclusion about the
value of another property, will involve judgments, which
sometimes can be "nothing more than the best guess that can be made". In
determining whether to accept or reject a valuer's evidence of this nature, an
exposition of judicial reasoning to explaining findings
of fact is "inherently
an incomplete statement of the impression which was made upon [the judge] by the
primary evidence". There
will inevitably be cases where a court at first
instance, in choosing between the conflicting evidence of experts, is influenced
by matters of impression. In such cases it is still necessary to recognise the
advantages enjoyed by the Land Court.”
[70] Mr Michelmore has not
established error sufficient to justify appellate interference with the primary
member’s findings
preferring the evidence of Mr Cavanagh over the evidence
of Mr Caleo generally or particularly in relation to the multiple that should
applied to derive the value of the land as an accommodation village.
these reasons, I reject grounds 1 and 2.
[72] Related to the first two grounds of appeal is the third
ground. Mr Michelmore contended that another reason why the market value
land would be assessed on the basis that it would continue to be used by Hail
Creek as an accommodation village, without any
or any significant discount for
the risk that it would not be so used or that there would be changes to the
existing DA to permit
the accommodation village to be used by workers not
employed by Hail Creek, is derived from the decision in Sellars. Mr Michelmore
submitted that “the probability of a future commercial rental return from
Hail Creek could be approached by the application
of the principles applied in
valuing a future hypothetical chance (commercial opportunity) derived from
Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum
NL (Sellars)” (at [74] of appellant’s
written submissions).
[73] In Sellars, the High Court held that although the
civil standard of proof – the balance of probabilities – applies
proof of historical facts, what has happened, proof of future possibilities and
past hypothetical situations involves assessing
the degree of probability that
an event would have occurred, or might occur: at 350, 365–367. The Court
referred with approval
to the earlier decision of Malec v J C Hutton Pty Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 638
at 639–640;
[1990] HCA 20
in turn citing Mallett v
[1970] AC 166
at 176, that “in assessing damages which depend
upon its view as to what will happen in the future or would have happened in
future if something had not happened in the past, the court must make an
estimate as to what are the chances that a particular
thing will or would have
happened and reflect those chances, whether they are more or less than even, in
the amount of damages which
it awards.”
[74] Mr Michelmore submitted
that in the present case, a hypothetical purchaser would have considered it
highly likely or almost certain
that the current highest and best use of the
land as an accommodation village would have continued for the expected life of
That likelihood will inform the price which a hypothetical purchaser
would pay. Having regard to this high likelihood or almost certainty,
compensation payable should not have been discounted for any or any significant
risk that the accommodation village would not
continue to be used by Hail Creek
or that there would have been changes to the DA to allow other workers to use
the accommodation
village. Mr Michelmore contended that the primary member erred
in not addressing this submission.
[75] Hail Creek disputed the application
of Sellars to Mr Michelmore’s claim for compensation under the MR Act but,
if potentially
Sellars were to apply, it would be inconsistent with application
of the Spencer test. Sellars applies to claims for loss of a valuable
opportunity, not claims for compensation. A claim for loss of a valuable
opportunity is concerned with likelihoods and possibilities.
The plaintiff must
establish that a valuable opportunity exists and that the plaintiff could and
would have done the things necessary
to pursue the opportunity. Subjective
assessments of likelihoods and probabilities need to be made.
Creek submitted that a claim of this nature is fundamentally at odds with the
application of the Spencer test. The Spencer
test assumes there will be a
transaction between a willing but not anxious buyer and a willing but not
anxious seller, whereas a
claim for loss of opportunity requires an assessment
of whether there would in fact be a transaction. Applying the Spencer test,
court does not consider the likelihood of the possibility of a sale transaction,
it assumes there will be a sale, or the actual
terms on which it might be
[77] Hail Creek submitted that, in the absence of either authority
applying loss of opportunity principles to the determination of
compensation
under the MR Act or evidence seeking to undertake this exercise, there is no
reasonable basis to contend that the primary
member, in applying the Spencer
test to determine compensation, erred in her approach.
[78] I find that Mr
Michelmore has not established that the primary member erred in not applying
Sellars to determine the compensation
payable to Mr Michelmore under the MR Act.
As Hail Creek has submitted, Sellars has no direct application in determining
value of the subject land. The market value was to be determined by
application of the Spencer test, which does not involve application
principle deriving from Sellars for an assessment of damages for the loss of a
commercial opportunity. Of course, an assessment
of the market value of the land
may involve making findings concerning the likelihood or possibility of certain
events happening,
such as a change of zoning of the land or the grant or
modification of a development approval to permit a higher and better use of
land, but such findings of fact will be made on the evidence before the court
and in the usual way, not by applying any principle
deriving from Sellars.
[79] The primary member did not err in not expressly applying Sellars in
determining the compensation payable under the MR Act to
Mr Michelmore. I reject
direct comparison method grounds
[80] In the Court below, the parties were at issue as to the
method of valuation that should be used to assess the market value of
subject land. Mr Michelmore contended for a net present value (NPV) approach,
while Hail Creek contended for a comparable sales
approach, referred to by its
valuer as a direct comparison method. The NPV method involved determining the
present value of the rental
returns for occupation of the accommodation village
over the 20 year term of any lease of the land. The direct comparison method
involved comparing the premiums paid for a higher or better use of land beyond
the existing use of the land which was the subject
of the sale and applying that
premium to the agreed pastoral value of the subject land to determine the market
value of the land
for its highest and best use as an accommodation village.
[81] The primary member accepted that the appropriate methodology to apply
was the direct comparison method rather than the NPV approach
(at [46] of the
judgment). Mr Michelmore contended that the primary member erred in accepting
the direct comparison method rather
than the NPV approach (ground 4) or,
alternatively, erred in applying the direct comparison method, including by
taking into account
sales of land that are not comparable or accepting notional
premiums that are not applicable (ground 5).
[82] Mr Michelmore accepted
that the comparable sales approach is usually the best method to estimate the
market value of the land,
however, this depends on there being comparable sales.
The greater the difference between the comparable properties and the subject
land, the less reliable is the evidence of the sales of the allegedly comparable
properties: see Crompton v Commissioner of Highways
(1973) 32 LGRA 8
23–24; Brewarrana Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Highways
(1973) 32 LGRA 170
179–180; Redeam Pty Ltd v South Australian Land Commission
(1977) 40 LGRA
at 156; Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
at 434–436; Pamalco Pty Ltd v Minister Administering the
National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974 (No 3) at 447. This was recognised
primary member at [41]:
“Adjustments for comparable sales may be so
great that a court may hold that the land is in no sense comparable, and the
can provide no evidence of value. In the absence of comparable sales, a
valuer can look to the return which a purchaser would expect
from the land, or
the capitalisation of the rental.”
[83] Mr Michelmore contended that in
this case, with one exception, the comparable sales used by Hail Creek’s
valuer, Mr Cavanagh,
were not of existing accommodation villages or approved
accommodation village land sales, and hence were not in fact comparable.
exception was the sale of land at 72 Golf Course Road, Sarina on which an
approved accommodation workers village had just been
constructed. Mr Cavanagh
did not use these comparable sales to directly derive the market value of the
subject land, as would be
conventional if a comparable sales approach were to be
used. Instead, Mr Cavanagh used the sales to derive a premium that may have
paid by the purchasers over and above the value of the site for its existing use
to reflect the potential to be used for an
alternative use. The primary member
explained this approach at [47]:
“Mr Cavanagh looked at comparable
sales of land with existing accommodation and sales of land bought with the
intention of constructing
mine accommodation. He found that the sales reflected
a premium of between 100% and 250% over and above the value for the alternative
use. Mr Cavanagh adopted the highest premium of 250% and applied it to the
subject land’s value as grazing land, giving a value
of $3,500/ha, a total
of $482,230.”
[84] Mr Michelmore submitted that the primary member
erred in accepting Mr Cavanagh’s direct comparison method as the
appropriate
methodology to be applied. First, Mr Cavanagh’s method was not
a comparable sales approach, as with the exception of the Sarina
sale, the sales
used by Mr Cavanagh were not comparable. Second, Mr Cavanagh’s direct
comparison method was not a conventional
comparable sales approach, but instead
sought to derive a premium for the sales that could be applied to the subject
pastoral value to derive the value of the land as an accommodation
village. Third, this approach was subjective: “the premiums
assessed and
relied on by Mr Cavanagh were inherently subjective and by their nature provided
a blunt instrument for comparison purposes”
(at [84(a)] of the
appellant’s written submissions).
[85] Mr Michelmore submitted that
these difficulties with Mr Cavanagh’s method should have led the primary
member to find that
the method was not appropriate.
[86] Alternatively, if
the direct comparison method was an appropriate methodology, Mr Michelmore
contended that the primary member
erred in accepting the premium accepted by Mr
Cavanagh, as it was too low. The only sale that provided a direct comparison
subject land was the Sarina sale. On a proper analysis of the Sarina
sale, it revealed that a premium in excess of the 250% premium
derived by Mr
Cavanagh was appropriate. Mr Michelmore submitted that the primary member
thereby erred in accepting Mr Cavanagh’s
premium of 250%.
Creek submitted that Mr Cavanagh’s direct comparison method was a form of
comparable sales approach. Hail Creek noted
that Mr Michelmore accepted that a
comparable sales approach is the conventional approach and is usually to be
preferred. Both valuers
in this case agreed that the direct comparison approach
is the preferred method of valuation (recorded at [39] of the judgment).
primary member also recognised this (at [38]). That Mr Cavanagh used the direct
comparison method to derive premiums above the
value for the alternative use
that could be applied to the pastoral value of the subject land, rather than
directly deriving the
value of the subject land from the comparable sales, did
not cause his method not to be a form of direct comparison approach. Hail
submitted that “Mr Cavanagh’s direct comparison method provides an
objective comparison assessment by way of premiums
paid above alternative land
use values for land proposed to be used for accommodation village
purposes” (at [66] of the respondents’
reply to appellant’s
submissions). It was open to the primary member to accept that approach. Indeed,
having rejected the evidence
of Mr Michelmore’s valuer, Mr Caleo, in its
entirety and hence his NPV method, Hail Creek submitted it is difficult to see
what other approach the primary member could rationally have adopted.
[88] As to the alternative contention in ground 5, Hail Creek submitted that
the primary member’s consideration of Mr Cavanagh’s
comparison method generally and the Sarina sale particularly, did not reveal any
error of law or principle of assessment.
Mr Cavanagh used the Sarina sale to
derive the premium that could be applied to the pastoral value of the subject
land in order to
determine the value of the subject land as an accommodation
village. The primary member accepted Mr Cavanagh’s evidence and
as she was entitled to do.
[89] I find that Mr Michelmore has not
established that the primary member erred in law or principle in accepting as
the appropriate
methodology to be applied in order to determine the market value
of the land Mr Cavanagh’s direct comparison method instead
Caleo’s NPV method or in accepting Mr Cavanagh’s evidence applying
the direct comparison method in preference to
Mr Caleo’s evidence.
[90] Mr Cavanagh’s direct comparison method was a form of comparable
sales approach. The paucity of sales of land with an approved
and constructed
accommodation village meant that the market value of the subject land could not
be derived directly from the sales
of other land with an accommodation village,
which would have been a conventional application of the comparable sales
approach: see
at [40] of the judgment. The Sarina sale was the only sale of land
with an approved and constructed accommodation village. Although
Mr Caleo sought
to derive a market value directly from the Sarina sale, by reducing the sale
price to a per hectare rate (at [50]
of the judgment), the primary member did
not accept his evidence generally (at [36], [49] and [52]) or his analysis of
sale particularly (at [50], [54]–[61] of the judgment). Mr
Cavanagh used the comparable sales, including the Sarina sale, instead
a premium that the market is willing to pay for a site with development
potential for a workforce accommodation village
(at [47], [51] of the judgment).
Mr Cavanagh found that the sales reflected a premium of between 100% to 250%
over and above the
value for the alternative use (at [47] of the judgment). The
premium of 250% was derived from the Sarina sale, which site he considered
superior to the subject land (at [59]-[60]).
[91] The primary member found
(at [61]) that:
“Mr Cavanagh’s approach of assessing the premium
a purchaser will pay for the prospect of developing mining accommodation
more accurate assessment of the decision-making process a hypothetical purchaser
is likely to undertake. It does not suffer
from an attempt to draw comparable
values from incomparable sales. In my view, Mr Cavanagh has accounted for Mr
Caleo’s criticism
by adopting the maximum premium. I prefer Mr
Cavanagh’s approach.”
[92] There is, therefore, no merit in Mr
Michelmore’s argument that Mr Cavanagh’s direct comparison method
was not a form
of comparable sales approach, which both valuers accepted was the
preferred method of valuation, or that in its application it involved
sales that were not comparable.
[93] The primary member found that, in the
particular circumstances, Mr Cavanagh’s direct comparison method was the
appropriate
methodology to apply (at [46] of the judgment). In so finding, the
primary member considered the criticisms of Mr Caleo, Mr Michelmore’s
valuer (at [48]–[55] of the judgment). The primary member rejected Mr
Caleo’s criticisms not only because of her overall
finding that little or
no weight should be placed on Mr Caleo’s evidence (at [36], [49] and [51]
of the judgment), but also
substantively, by highlighting the difficulties with
Mr Caleo’s evidence (at [48]–[61] of the judgment). The primary
member also addressed the criticisms Mr Michelmore made in submissions, which
were to the same effect of those raised on this appeal
particularly but also [50]–[61] generally of the judgment).
circumstances where different valuation methods are equally available on the
evidence, the choice of one valuation method
over another as being the
appropriate methodology to be applied in the particular circumstances, does not
involve any error of law
or principle of assessment: Leichhardt Municipal
Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd at 418–419. It was reasonably open
the primary member on the evidence to find that the direct comparison method
used by Mr Cavanagh was to be preferred over the NPV
method used by Mr Caleo.
The primary member’s reasons for so preferring Mr Cavanagh’s method
to Mr Caleo’s method
were themselves logical, rational and evidence-based.
Mr Michelmore’s mere disagreement with Mr Cavanagh’s method, and
primary member’s application of it, is insufficient to establish any error
in the primary member’s decision.
[95] Having chosen the valuation
method of the direct comparison method, the choice of which sales transactions
were comparable and
the respects in which they were or were not comparable were
questions of fact. A court will not err in law by selecting or rejecting
transaction as comparable, unless in doing so the court ignores a principle of
assessment of compensation or rejects as wholly
irrelevant to the assessment of
compensation, a transaction which prima facie affords some evidence of value and
rejects it for reasons
which are not rational: Melwood Units Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Main Roads
[1979] AC 426
at 432; Brisbane City Council v
Valuer-General for the State of Queensland
(1978) 140 CLR 419
[1978] HCA 40.
[96] Thus, the question of whether the Sarina sale was a
comparable sale that could be used to derive the value of the subject land
one of fact, not law: Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
at 433. Equally, the question of the adjustments
that ought to be made to the
Sarina sale to derive the value of the subject land is a question of fact, not
law. Any error in analysing
the adjustments made by one valuer in preference to
those made by another will generally be an error of fact, unless in doing so
court ignores a principle of assessment of compensation or rejects as wholly
irrelevant, for grounds which are not rational,
a matter which prima facie
affords some evidence of value: Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer
Terminals Pty Ltd at 434, and
see also Emerald Quarry Industries Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Highways (South Australia)
[1979] HCA 17
(1979) 142 CLR 351
at 355–356;
[1979] HCA 17.
The primary member did not, therefore, err in accepting as
comparable the Sarina sale or accepting the adjustments that Mr Cavanagh
that sale to derive a premium to be used to assess the value of the subject
[97] The Sarina sale was the central sale used by Mr Cavanagh, and
accepted by the primary member, to derive the premium of 250% that
was used to
assess the value of the subject land for its highest and best use as an
accommodation village. The primary member addressed
specifically the
disagreement between the valuers about whether the sale price was $2,000,000 or
$2,500,000, finding the sale price
to be the former and not the latter (at
[54]–[57]) of the judgment). That was a finding of fact open to the
primary member
on the evidence. The primary member also accepted Mr
Cavanagh’s analysis of the Sarina sale in preference to Mr Caleo’s
analysis (at [60] of the judgment). No error is revealed in the primary
member’s analysis and application of the Sarina sale.
[98] I reject
grounds 4 and 5.
[99] Grounds 4 and 5 contended that the primary member erred in
accepting and applying the direct comparison method. Ground 6 is the
converse of
these grounds, contending that the primary member erred in not accepting and
applying the NPV method. Mr Michelmore submitted
that the primary member erred
in finding that the NPV method had the same problems as the direct comparison
method (at [43] of the
judgment), and did not cure the problems inherent in the
direct comparison method but instead mirrored and amplified these problems
[34] of the judgment).
[100] Mr Michelmore put this ground in three ways.
The first was to decry Mr Cavanagh’s direct comparison method. Mr
repeated the submission he had made on grounds 4 and 5, identifying
perceived problems with Mr Cavanagh’s direct comparison
method, including
the deficiency of directly comparable sales. Mr Michelmore submitted that these
problems should have led the primary
member to reject the direct comparison
method, which would have left the NPV method as the only available methodology
to be applied.
[101] The second was to speak up for the NPV method. Mr
Michelmore submitted that the NPV method was the appropriate methodology to
apply in the circumstances. He submitted:
“The evidence of rentals
being paid for the occupation of workers accommodation land was the only
substantial body of evidence
that provided a sufficiently comparative basis to
assess compensation for the loss of income that would be derived from subject
site [sic] absent the ML. That evidence included a broad range of
accommodation site rentals including existing village sites in
rural townships
and remote sites on broad acre grazing properties. It showed a reasonably
consistent pattern both in terms of rental
range and Lessee obligations”
(at [91] of appellant’s written submissions).
[102] Mr Michelmore
submitted that this should have led the primary member to use the NPV method to
assess compensation or, alternatively,
as a check method on the value derived
from the direct comparison method. Mr Michelmore noted that Mr Cavanagh,
although preferring
the direct comparison to the NPV method, nevertheless did an
assessment of compensation using the NPV method. That assessment resulted
amount of $2,403,933, which was nearly five times the amount he had calculated
using the direct comparison method. Mr Michelmore
submitted that this difference
in the amount of compensation Mr Cavanagh assessed using the different methods
showed that the direct
comparison method was flawed compared to the NPV method.
[103] The third way was to challenge the findings that the primary member
made, or failed to make, about the NPV method. As already
noted, Mr Michelmore
challenged the findings the primary member made in [43] and [44] of the
judgment, although except for asserting
that the primary member erred, Mr
Michelmore did not explain why those findings were in error.
Michelmore submitted that the primary member further erred in not making certain
findings about three inputs in the NPV method,
which the primary member should
have made if she had used the NPV method. These three inputs were:
1. the number of rooms at the accommodation village on the
subject land to be used to calculate the potential rental return, whether
fully approved rooms (1207), or the number of rooms used currently
2. the gross applied room rate to be used, whether the lower room
rate calculated by Mr Cavanagh or the higher room rate urged by
Mr Michelmore;
3. whether the additional discount proposed by Mr Cavanagh should be
applied “to acknowledge a prudent purchaser would not take
the risk and
pay a value for the land on a fully let basis” or should not be applied as
argued by Mr Michelmore because of
the high likelihood or almost certainty that,
but for the mining lease, Hail Creek would have renewed the lease on commercial
for another 20 years.
[105] Mr Michelmore contended that the primary member erred in
failing to make the findings he contended should have been made regarding
three inputs.
[106] Hail Creek submitted that this ground is but another way
of putting grounds 4 and 5. The primary member was entitled to reject
Caleo’s evidence and the NPV method in favour of Mr Cavanagh’s
evidence and the direct comparison method. The primary
member considered the
points that Mr Michelmore has repeated on this appeal as to why the NPV method
should be adopted, but rejected
them. No error was involved in doing so.
[107] I find that Mr Michelmore has not established that the primary member
erred in not applying the NPV method. As Hail Creek submitted,
this ground adds
little, if anything, to grounds 4 and 5. The primary member was faced with a
choice between competing valuation
methods, Mr Cavanagh’s direct
comparison method or Mr Caleo’s NPV method, and she chose the former over
the latter. No
error of law or principle of assessment was involved in doing so.
Having chosen to apply the direct comparison method instead of
the NPV method,
there was no warrant to make any findings of fact regarding any inputs to the
NPV method, including the number of
rooms, the gross applied room rate or any
additional discount. The primary member cannot have erred in law or fact in not
findings regarding inputs to a valuation method, the NPV method, that she
did not apply. In this circumstance, it matters not that
there was disagreement
between Mr Cavanagh and Mr Caleo on these inputs to the NPV method. The primary
member’s rejection of
Mr Caleo’s evidence and the NPV method made it
unnecessary to resolve this disagreement between the valuers on the application
of the NPV method.
[108] I reject ground 6.
[109] Mr Michelmore submitted that Mr Cavanagh failed to
identify any or any sufficient explanation for his methodology or the deductions
and discounts applied by him. Mr Michelmore did not identify which methodology
this alleged failure applied to, although the examples
given in submissions
would appear to relate to the NPV method rather than the direct comparison
method. Mr Michelmore submitted that
this failure involved a failure to meet the
requirements for admissibility of expert evidence and led to the evidence having
little probative force.
[110] Mr Michelmore invoked the statement of
principle for the admissibility of expert evidence in Dasreef at [91] that
expert opinion is inadmissible unless the expert states in chief the
reasoning by which the expert conclusion arrived at flows from
the facts proved
or assumed by the expert so as to reveal that the opinion is based on the
expert’s expertise”: see also
[111] Hail Creek noted
that the concerns raised by Mr Michelmore about Mr Cavanagh’s evidence all
relate to the NPV method,
not the direct comparison method. In this respect, the
ground goes nowhere, as the NPV method was not Mr Cavanagh’s preferred
methodology and was not accepted by the primary member. Criticism of Mr
Cavanagh’s evidence on a method that the primary member
did not adopt do
not found a proper ground of appeal.
[112] Hail Creek further noted that the
principle in Dasreef concerns the admissibility of expert evidence. The time to
take the objection
that Mr Michelmore now makes was at the hearing before the
primary member. Mr Cavanagh’s evidence on the NPV method was admitted
the hearing in the court below and he was cross examined by Mr Michelmore on it.
Insofar as the point now taken by Mr Michelmore
goes to the weight of Mr
Cavanagh’s evidence on the NPV method, Mr Michelmore had the opportunity
to make that submission to
the primary member. The primary member had the
opportunity to, and did in fact, assess the credibility and weight to be given
the competing expert evidence of Mr Cavanagh and Mr Caleo, preferring Mr
Cavanagh’s evidence over Mr Caleo’s evidence.
This assessment of the
competing expert evidence was one for the primary member to make and there is no
basis to disturb her reliance
on the expert evidence of Mr Cavanagh in
preference to that of Mr Caleo.
[113] I find that Mr Michelmore has not
established that the primary member erred in accepting and giving weight to the
evidence of
Mr Cavanagh in preference to the evidence of Mr Caleo. Mr
Michelmore’s reliance on Dasreef is misplaced. First, no objection
taken at the hearing before the primary member or on the appeal to this Court as
to the admissibility of Mr Cavanagh’s
evidence, either generally or in
relation to the NPV method particularly, on the ground that his evidence failed
to disclose the
basis or reasoning for his expert opinion. Second, the objection
now taken is to Mr Cavanagh’s evidence on the NPV method,
but that method
was not accepted by the primary member. It matters not whether Mr
Cavanagh’s evidence on the NPV method did
or did not state the basis or
reasoning for his opinions in circumstances where the primary member did not
rely on the NPV method
and hence on any evidence on that method. Third, it was
reasonably open to the primary member to prefer, and to give weight to, the
evidence of one expert over that of another expert. In making that evaluation of
competing evidence, the primary member took into
consideration the content of
the evidence and the manner in which the evidence was given. That is what Mr
Michelmore contended ought
to have been done. The fact that it was done in a
different manner with a different result to how Mr Michelmore contended it
have been done is immaterial.
[114] I reject ground 7.
liberal estimate ground
[115] Mr Michelmore contended that the primary member erred in
failing to apply the principle that, in assessing the compensation
“doubts are resolved in favour of a more liberal estimate”:
Commissioner of Succession Duties (SA) v Executor
Trustee and Agency Company of
South Australia Ltd at 374. Mr Michelmore did not identify any particular
respect in which this principle
was said not to have been applied by the primary
member. Mr Michelmore had made a similar sweeping submission to the primary
The primary member dealt with it, saying:
“Mr Thompson QC
reminded me that, where there is a doubt in compensation cases, that doubt must
be resolved in favour of the
claimant. That principle has two caveats. The first
is that its application does not change the test of value to be applied.
adopting a liberal view does not justify applying a test for value
that is otherwise inappropriate. The second is that the resolution
occurs applied in the exercise of my discretion to achieve a just result. That
means that if there are two equally plausible
results, I should choose the
result that favours the claimant. It does not mean that if there is no evidence
to support a proposition,
or the evidence is doubtful, I should accept it
because it will favour the claimant.”
[116] Hail Creek submitted that
Mr Michelmore pitched this ground too highly: it is not the law that a court
must resolve every doubt
in favour of a person entitled to compensation. The
primary member’s response to the same submission made in the court below
in [63] of the judgment was correct in law and in application to the facts of
[117] I find that Mr Michelmore has not established that the
primary member erred in failing to apply the principle that doubts should
resolved in favour of a more liberal estimate of compensation, including for the
reasons given by Hail Creek. Mr Michelmore has
not identified any particular
issue on which there was doubt and in respect of which the primary member should
have resolved it in
favour of Mr Michelmore. The liberal estimate principle did
not dictate either the valuation method or the evidence of one valuer
another that the primary member should accept. The primary member was required
to evaluate the evidence of the competing witnesses
and make findings from the
evidence in the usual way. The liberal estimate principle did not demand that
the primary member apply
a valuation method that she found to be inappropriate
in the circumstances or the evidence of a valuer in which she had no confidence
and to which she could give little or no weight, just because to do so might
award a greater amount of compensation to Mr Michelmore.
[118] To have done
so would have involved error, as Allsop P found in Sydney Water Corporation v
(2009) 170 LGERA 298
[2009] NSWCA 391
–[4], where the
primary judge had done just that:
“2 The primary judge’s
expression of principle (for that is what it was) as to how she would resolve
competing expert
evidence at [81] of her reasons was wrong and revealed legal
error for the purposes of the
Land and Environment Court Act
(NSW) (“LEC Act”), s 57.
3 The general principle that
in determining compensation to a dispossessed owner doubts should be resolved in
favour of a more liberal
estimate is well-known: see generally A Hyam The
Law Affecting Valuation of Land in Australia (4th Ed 2009 Federation
Press) at 316-318.
That does not, however, detract from the need to engage with
and evaluate evidence and competing witnesses. If, however, upon engagement
assessment, the judicial valuer finds, for example, as Anderson J did
in Cook and Edwards v City of Sterling
(1991) 4 WAR 469
reasoning of both valuers was not fallacious, that their respective
capitalisation rates were open, that none took into
account irrelevant
considerations and no errors otherwise appeared, the proper conclusion might be
that there are simply two open
views on the relevant issue – as there can
be in ascribing a value: cf Fenton Nominees Pty Ltd v
Valuer-General
(1981) 47 LGRA 71
at 76-77. In such circumstances, applying
the general principle would be uncontentious.
4 It is not helpful to
examine the scope of the general principle in the abstract beyond saying that it
is not a licence to accept
one expert over another without undertaking the task
of assessing the evidence in the usual way. If a judge properly undertakes that
task, the evaluation of the evidence may well persuade the judge to accept the
evidence favouring the resuming authority. That would
be a product of assessing
the evidence. That process is not to be abandoned as the statement of the judge
at [81] of her reasons
would suggest she did.”
[119] I reject ground
on appeal against the compensation determination
[120] Mr Michelmore has not established any of the grounds of
appeal against the primary member’s compensation determination.
should be dismissed with costs.
Appeal against the costs decision
[121] Mr Michelmore appealed against the primary member’s
decision on 19 July 2021 ordering Mr Michelmore to pay Hail Creek’s
of the proceedings of and incidental to the hearings on 4 and 11 December 2020
and the application brought on 1 March 2021,
and thrown away by the adjournment
of the hearing on 14 December 2020. Mr Michelmore contended that the primary
member should instead
have ordered Hail Creek to pay Mr Michelmore’s costs
of and incidental to the proceedings. Alternatively, Mr Michelmore contended
that the primary member should have ordered Hail Creek to pay Mr
Michelmore’s costs of an incidental to the proceedings up
to the date of
the expiry of Hail Creek’s offer of 1 December 2020 to settle the
proceedings and that there be no orders as
to costs from the date of expiry of
that offer.
[122] Mr Michelmore raised 13 grounds in his notice of appeal
against the costs decision. He did not elaborate, by way of written
submissions in this Court, on these grounds.
[123] Grounds (a) and (b)
contended that the primary member erred in finding at [8] that the default
position in compensation cases
under the MR Act is that each party should bear
their own costs, following this Court’s decision in Lonergan & Anor v
[2020] QLAC 4 (Lonergan
No 2) at [27], instead of finding that, in
the context of s 281(3)(vi) of the MR Act, the default position is that the
owner of land
should be compensated for his costs of the proceedings. Beyond
making these bare assertions, Mr Michelmore did not submit why the
member erred in following this Court’s decision in Lonergan No 2 or why
this Court’s decision in Lonergan No
2 was wrong.
[124] Ground (c)
challenged the primary member’s finding of fact in [11] that it was
“not quite true” that Mr Michelmore
had no choice about these
proceedings and in [32] that the proceedings were in the nature of a
“commercial contest”,
but did not explain why these finding were in
[125] Grounds (d), (e) and (f) referred to Hail Creek’s offer
made on 1 December 2020 offering to settle the proceedings by
Michelmore compensation in the amount of $2,200,000, with each party bearing its
own costs of the proceedings. Ground (d)
contended that the primary member erred
in failing to make certain findings such that there would be no basis for
ordering Mr Michelmore
to pay Hail Creek’s costs up to the date of that
offer. Ground (e) challenged the primary member’s finding in [39] that
Michelmore’s non acceptance of the offer was one of the “missed
opportunities”. Ground (f) contended that the
primary member erred in
failing to make certain findings such that, at the time the offer expired, it
was reasonable for Mr Michelmore
not to have accepted the offer and instead to
have awaited further evidence before accepting any offer of compensation. Beyond
these assertions, Mr Michelmore did not elaborate as to why the primary
member erred in these ways.
[126] Ground (g) concerned Mr Cavanagh’s
evidence, contending that the primary member erred in failing to find his
did not disclose the basis and reasoning for his opinions (the Dasreef
point), that Mr Michelmore acted reasonably in not accepting
any offer of
compensation until Mr Cavanagh did provide a satisfactory explanation for his
calculation and deductions, and that Mr
Michelmore succeeded in having
compensation assessed in an amount greater than Mr Cavanagh’s primary
assessment (although not
his later assessment that was accepted by the primary
member). Why the primary member was in error in failing to make these findings
was not explained.
[127] Ground (h) concerned Hail Creek’s failure to
renew its offer of 1 December 2020 or to make any other offer in an amount
greater than the amount of compensation that was later assessed by the Court. Mr
Michelmore contended that the primary member failed
to find that Hail Creek had
failed to renew its offer or to make a new offer. Why this mattered was not
explained; the important
point for the primary member’s decision was that
Hail Creek’s offer of 1 December 2020 offering to settle for $2,200,000
was over four times the amount that the primary member later assessed to be the
compensation payable to Mr Michelmore.
[128] Grounds (i) and (j) concerned
the primary member’s rejection of Mr Caleo’s evidence in the
compensation determination.
Ground (i) contended that the primary member (in
[19] and [39] of her costs decision) misstated the basis upon which she had
Mr Caleo’s evidence in her compensation determination. Ground (j)
contended that the primary member erred in failing to find
that she had rejected
Mr Caleo’s evidence on a different basis. Why there was any misstatement
or how any misstatement raised
an appellable error were not
[129] Grounds (k) and (l) concerned Mr Michelmore’s conduct
of the proceedings. Ground (k) challenged the primary member’s
that he did not present “an arguable and well organised case” (at
[13]) and had acted “unreasonably”
(at [28]). Ground (l) challenged
the primary member’s award of costs against Mr Michelmore in circumstances
where she had earlier
found that his conduct was not “vexatious, dishonest
or grossly exaggerated” (at [32]), that “he was entitled to
the professional advice he had received” (at [19]) and that “there
is no evidence that Mr Michelmore himself
acted inappropriately” (at
[31]). Mr Michelmore did not explain why the primary member erred in making the
findings referred
to in ground (k) or why, notwithstanding the primary
member’s findings referred to in ground (l), the findings referred to
(k) were not sufficient by themselves to justify the award of costs against Mr
Michelmore.
[130] Ground (m) merely asserted what order for costs Mr
Michelmore contended that the primary member ought to have made, and then
contended that the primary member erred in not making that order.
Creek submitted that the primary member had an unfettered discretion to award
costs when exercising the power under s 27A
of the LC Act or s 281(7) of the MR
Act: Queensland Industrial Minerals Pty Ltd v Younger and Ors; Queensland
Industrial Minerals
Pty Ltd v Ryan (No 2) (2017) 38 QLRC 210;
[2017] QLC 54
[4]. However, that discretion must be exercised judicially, for reasons that can
be explained and substantiated, and “without
caprice, having regard to
relevant considerations and established principles”: Queensland Industrial
Minerals Pty Ltd v Younger
at [4]; Anson Holdings Pty Ltd v Wallace (No 2)
[2010] 31 QLCR 130
[2010] QLAC 4
; Morton Bay Regional Council v Mekpine
Pty Ltd (No 2)
(2014) 35 QLCR 273
[2014] QLAC 5
[132] Hail Creek
submitted that this Court would not interfere in the primary member’s
exercise of the costs discretion absent
any error of the kind articulated in
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 504–505;
[1936] HCA 40.
submitted that Mr Michelmore can only succeed if this Court finds that there was
some error in fact or law by the primary
member exercising her discretion, or if
the result of the exercise of the discretion was so manifestly wrong as to
bespeak error,
even if the error cannot be identified. Hail Creek submitted that
none of the grounds raised in the notice of appeal against the
costs decision,
without any elaboration by way of submission, establish that the primary member
erred in any of these ways articulated
in House v The King.
primary member gave adequate reasons for her decision to award costs, which drew
on the primary member’s knowledge
of Mr Michelmore’s conduct of the
proceedings, the evidence he adduced and the case he made at the hearing before
is nothing in the reasons that reveal error sufficient to warrant
appellate interference with the exercise of the costs discretion.
find that Mr Michelmore has not established any appellable error in the primary
member’s costs decision. The bare assertion
of error in the grounds of
appeal, without any explanation, falls short of what is necessary to establish
error sufficient to justify
appellate interference with the primary
member’s exercise of the costs discretion. As Hail Creek submitted, this
not lightly interfere in the exercise of the costs discretion, unless
error of the kind articulated in House v The King is established.
Mr Michelmore
has not done so. The grounds of appeal to a large extent appear to repeat
submissions made by Mr Michelmore in the
court below, and assert that the
primary member erred in not accepting those submissions. That does not establish
appellable error.
[135] As Hail Creek also submitted, the primary member was
in an advantageous position to determine the appropriate costs order. The
primary member witnessed the whole hearing, including the conduct of the
parties, the evidence adduced, the submissions made and
the tactical shifts that
took place during its course. The primary member was able to appreciate far
better than this Court the nuances
involved in the hearing: see for a similar
statement about the peculiarly advantaged position of a trial judge in
determining an
appropriate costs order, Parker v NRMA
(1993) 11 ACSR 370
[136] It is for such reasons that the authorities establish “that
something beyond a mere difference in opinion with the trial
judge must be found
before a court of appeal grants leave to re-agitate cost determinations, so
classically an area where judicial
minds may legitimately differ”:
Gorczynski v Annandale Services Pty Ltd; Gorczynski v Perera; Gorczynski v
Leichhardt Council
[2004] NSWCA 71
. Equally, where there is a right of
appeal, such as in this case, there needs to be something beyond a mere
difference in opinion
with the primary member before this Court will interfere
with the costs determination.
[137] I would dismiss the appeal against the
costs decision.
[138] I have found that Mr Michelmore’s application to
extend the time to appeal against the compensation determination should
granted, but the appeal against the compensation determination should be
dismissed. Mr Michelmore’s appeal against the costs
decision should also
be dismissed.
[139] As far as the costs of this application and these
appeals are concerned, I consider it is appropriate to order Mr Michelmore
pay Hail Creek’s costs. The application to extend time to appeal was heard
concurrently with the appeal against the costs
determination. The latter appeal
occupied the bulk of time in preparation and hearing compared to the former
application to extend
time for bringing the appeal. It is appropriate that costs
of the former be costs in the latter and that costs follow the event of
latter. Mr Michelmore, having been unsuccessful in the appeal against the
compensation determination, should pay Hail Creek’s
costs of both the
application to extend time to appeal and the appeal against the compensation
determination.
[140] The costs of the appeal against the costs determination
should also follow the event, so that Mr Michelmore should pay Hail
Creek’s costs.
[141] I propose that the Court should make the
following orders:
the time for Mr Michelmore to appeal against the decision of the Land Court
dated 27 May 2021 to 2 July 2021.
2. Dismiss the appeal against the decision of the Land Court dated 27 May
3. Dismiss the appeal against the decision of the Land Court dated 19 July
4. Order the appellant to pay the respondents’ costs of proceedings
LAC005-21 and LAC006-21 in this Court.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (466 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter