URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTBCCM/2009/49.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Global Perpetual Investments Pty Ltd v Body Corporate for Oscar on Main CTS 24605 [2009] QCCTBCCM 49 (27 October 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
GLOBAL PERPETUAL INVESTMENTS PTY LTD v BODY CORPORATE FOR OSCAR ON MAIN
[2009] CCT KL036-09
GLOBAL PERPETUAL INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
BODY CORPORATE FOR OSCAR ON MAIN CTS 24605
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
27 October 2009
DELIVERED AT:
DECISION ON THE PAPERS OF:
Mr K D Dorney QC
CATCHWORDS:
Application for adjustment of lot entitlements in Contribution Schedule
– where respondent neither supports nor opposes adjustment,
criticisms by other lot owners of applicant’s expert report –
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 46
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
application in this proceeding was filed on 18 June 2009. It seeks an
adjustment of the lot entitlements in the Contribution
Schedule to the community
titles scheme known as “Oscar on Main” Community Titles Scheme 24605
The applicant is the owner of Lot 93 in that CTS.
application is brought pursuant to
section 48(1)(b)
Body Corporate and
Community Management Act 1997
facilitated by
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act
respondent is the Body Corporate for the CTS. It filed its defence on 14 August
has been no order made by the Tribunal granting legal representation to any
party pursuant to section 76(2)(e) of the
24 August 2009 the Tribunal ordered the applicant to file a copy of its
expert’s report, the QBS Strata Management Pty Ltd
Report. It was filed
on 26 August 2009 and will be designated as the “QBS Report”, being
a report dated February 2009.
Also on that day, the Tribunal ordered that, by
consent, the application be determined by the Tribunal “on the
if possible.
has been possible to decide all of the proceeding on the papers. Consequently,
the Tribunal will order a relevant adjustment in
the Contribution Schedule.
Legislation
states that the Tribunal may decide all of a proceeding
from a consideration of the documents filed, without the parties or witnesses
appearing, if the parties to the proceeding agree. Since that has occurred, the
Tribunal has proceeded to decide the proceeding
in such a way.
far as the adjustment of lot entitlements is concerned, section 48(1)(b) of the
states that the owner of a lot in a community titles scheme may
apply, under the
, for an order that the Tribunal for the
adjustment of a lot entitlement schedule. By force of section 48(5)(a), the
order of the
Tribunal must be consistent with, if the order is about the
contribution schedule, the principle stated in section 48(6). In turn,
48(6) states that, for the contribution schedule, the respective lot
entitlements should be equal, except to the extent to
which it is just and
equitable in the circumstances for them not to be equal.
then sets out criteria for deciding just and equitable
circumstances. In particular, while section 49(3) states that the matters
the Tribunal may have regard to for deciding justice and equity for a
contribution schedule are not limited to the matters stated
in section 49,
section 49(4) states that the Tribunal may have regard to –
the community titles scheme is structured;
nature, features and characteristics of the lots included in the scheme;
purposes for which the lots are used.
section 49(5) the Tribunal may not have regard to any knowledge or understanding
the applicant had, or any lack of knowledge or
misunderstanding on the part of
the applicant, at the time that the applicant entered into a contract to buy the
lot owned by the
applicant about –
lot entitlement for the subject lot or other lots included in the community
titles scheme; or
purpose for which a lot entitlement is used.
section 47(2) a contribution schedule lot entitlement for a lot is the basis for
calculating –
lot owner’s share of amounts levied by the body corporate, unless the
extent of the lot owner’s obligation to contribute
to a levy for a
particular purpose is specifically otherwise provided for in the
value of the lot owner’s vote for voting on an ordinary resolution if a
poll is conducted for voting on the resolution.
but importantly, section 48(10) states that if the Tribunal orders an adjustment
of a lot entitlement schedule, the body corporate
must, as quickly as
practicable, lodge a request to record a new community management statement
reflecting the adjustment ordered.
Relevant principles
seminal case is
Fischer v Body Corporate for Centrepoint Community Titles
Scheme 7779
[2004] QCA 214
[2004] 2 Qd R 638.
, the Court of Appeal stated the following principles and
approaches:
the trial judge
had concluded that the application of the size of the lot and the number of
bedrooms in the lot produced little by
way of differentiation between the lots:
at 643 [21];
while the Court
of Appeal in the end accepted Mr Linkhorn’s schedule, the Court had
earlier stated, with respect to both experts,
that the precise mechanism by
which the experts arrived at a table of appropriate lot entitlements for each
lot “was not explained
and was not necessary”: at 643 [17] –
since there was
no detailed analysis of the methodology adopted by both experts (because it was
not in issue between the parties to
the appeal),
binding authority for any conclusion that the way in which the methodology was
applied there must uncritically be applied
in every succeeding proceeding;
as to principle,
the preferable view is that a contribution schedule should provide for
“equal contributions” by lot owners,
except insofar as some lots can
be “shown” to give rise to particular costs to the body corporate
which other lots do
not: at 644 [26];
considerations of “amenity, value or history” are to be disregarded
because what is at issue is the “equitable”
distribution of the
“costs”: at 644 [26];
Example 3 in the
Explanatory Notes relevant to the 2003 Amending Act shows that, in a basic
scheme, if all the lots are residential
lots ranging in size “from a small
lot to a penthouse”, the contribution schedule lot entitlements
“generally would
be equal”, and lots in the scheme, despite being of
“differing size or aspect would be
to have equal
contribution schedule lot entitlements” (emphasis added): at 644-645
in the relevant
Second Reading Speech it was said that the costs concerning a contribution
schedule should be borne “in proportion
to the benefit, not in proportion
to the unit’s value” since it “is not a contribution linked to
an ability to
pay, but as a payment for services”: at 645 [29];
is intended to produce a contribution lot entitlement schedule which
divides body corporate expenses equally, except to the extent
that the lots
“disproportionately” give rise to those expenses, or
“disproportionately” consume services:
at 645 [30];
the starting
point for an adjustment is that the entitlements “should be equal”
and a departure from that principle is
allowable “only” where it is
just, or fair, to recognise inequality, with the focus of the inquiry being the
which a lot “unequally causes” costs to the body
corporate: at 645 [31];
if the inquiry
is limited to the extent to which a lot causes costs, or consume services, above
or below the average, one can “readily
determine” what the
contribution lot entitlement should be, but if the inquiry be wider and include
such “nebulous criteria”
as the structure of the scheme, or the
nature, features and characteristics of the lots in the scheme, or the purposes
they are used, there is “no intelligible basis” on which a
vast variety of circumstances might be relied upon to depart
from and therefore
“erode” the principle said to be paramount, that there should be an
equality of entitlements: at
645 [32]; and
section 49 of
, and in particular, section 49(4), should be construed as
meaning that those identified matters to which a court may have regard
regarded “only” to the extent, if any, that they affect the
“cost of operating” a community titles
scheme: at 646 [33].
Respondent’s defence
respondent body corporate has taken the position that it neither supports nor
opposes the application. But having received certain
criticisms from some
owners, it attached to its defence copies of such criticisms. Further, it
stated that it had obtained an independent
“review”, and attached a
copy of that.
Consideration of QBS Report
the applicant has relied solely upon the QBS Report, it is necessary first to
consider its analysis and whether it supports
the claimed adjustments sought by
the applicant. Before turning to a detailed consideration of the factors
considered by this Report,
it is noted that the physical description of the
scheme land shows that there is but one building. This is a high rise structure
which contains all 93 Lots.
levels of the building and surrounding grounds are as follows:
there is an
underground level containing basement parking and storage areas, as well as
exhaust fans and ancillary and general infrastructure
service facilities;
ground level which includes a reception area and foyer, Lot 1 and other
facilities such as swimming pools, a tennis court,
a gymnasium, a barbeque area
and a resident’s lounge;
there are then
30 levels which contain residential apartments and common property foyers, as
well as service infrastructure rooms;
finally, there
is roof top level with a motor room and an exclusive use area on the roof top
which contains a swimming pool area for
the benefit of the owner of Lot 93.
exclusive use areas require that the owner or occupier keep the area in a clean
and tidy condition.
is a caretaking agreement which does not terminate until 22 May 2018.
set out in the Report, it is to both the Administration Fund and the Sinking
Fund that resort must be had to determine the annual
costings relevant to this
CTS. Despite some criticism appearing in the “independent” review
prepared by a Mr Ian Willis
dated July 2009, the fact that the total costs are
stated to be $496,503.04 in this Report does not show to the Tribunal’s
satisfaction that the criticism made can be sustained, especially where the
Tribunal has not been favoured with any further “evidence”.
instance, the report that is said to contain a different Sinking Fund figure is
not produced. Furthermore, since the estimated
life of various Sinking Fund
items differs significantly, ranging from 1 year to 25 years, it is difficult,
particularly in the absence
of contrary evidence, for the Tribunal to accept
that the selected figure for the Sinking Fund of $154,119.37 is inaccurate for
purposes for which it is used.
considering the ways in which the categories of costs have been divided, there
is clearly no difficulty with Method A (where
costs are shared equally).
respect with Method B, where costs are shared on the basis of lot area, it can
be seen that at least the repainting of the building
is a cost that can be
rationally allocated using that method.
C, which deals with costs shared on the basis of total area including exclusive
use areas, is said to cover the same roof top,
water proofing and repainting of
the exterior of the building as Method B.
D allocates to it costs shared on the basis of lot area plus the roof top area.
This is stated to primarily relate to balustrading
Nevertheless,
when looking at Table 2 and its use of Methods B, C and D, it can be seen that
what has been done is that Method B has
been used as the basis for the costs for
cleaning windows and, with respect to typical lobbies, for the costs of
maintenance, repair,
replacement and repainting, with Method C being limited to
the painting of the building façade and the repairing and replacing
roofing membrane, leaving Method D to deal with the balustrading (already
mentioned).
it might, in other circumstances, be arguable that the roofing membrane costs
are really something that all lots receive
the benefit from, in that security
from external weather conditions is important for the whole building, there is
nothing which is
of such significance that even an incorrect allocation of costs
concerning the roofing membrane would mean an impermissible conclusion
reached concerning the final lot entitlement allocations.
Consequently,
subject to any criticisms which prove to be valid as made by the several lot
owners other than the applicant, it is
open to the Tribunal to accept that the
proposed lot entitlements suggested by this Report, or some variant of them,
would meet the
principles dictated by the legislation, as interpreted in
Consideration of criticisms by lot owners other than the
the Tribunal has already considered part of the criticism raised by Mr Willis,
the remaining criticisms by him will be now further
considered.
criticising the conclusion that the expenses relating to typical lobbies are
apportioned by Method B (relying upon lot area), the
alternative suggestion that
the apportionment be by the number of lots on each floor is difficult to follow,
unless it is a suggestion
that the expenses be allocated equally. This
difficulty with the suggestion is particularly important since there is no
anywhere which has been done on a floor-by-floor basis. While in
other circumstances it might be appropriate to take such an equal
neither has it been shown here by any evidence that where different floors have
different number of lots some inequality
between floors containing different
numbers of lots is shown to be fair and equitable.
for the criticism that there has been no use of the number of potential bedrooms
contained within a lot compared to the total bedrooms
overall as a method of
apportioning expenses relating to usage, not only is such a view one that
suffers from the foible of relying
upon uneducated intuition, but there is no
factual basis for concluding that any specific number of people will occupy
every specific
bedroom and, even if there were to be such evidence, that each
such person identified used the facilities and amenities provided
in exactly the
same way as every other occupier so as to generate some kind of “user
pays” approach. Variations to occupancy
capacity are not only seasonal
but depend upon what the owner-occupier or landlord of each particular lot might
do not only from
year to year but from month to month. As such, it is
inherently incapable of being calculated in a way which
one that can be “readily determined”.
in the absence of any “time and motion studies” performed by any
expert and given to this Tribunal, it is impossible
to rely upon the approach
as to the costs of onsite management, community power and exterior painting, it
is impossible to dissect the costs of each
of those items in a way that shows
that it is just and equitable that some kind of inequality should pertain. In
any event, there
is no evidence that the apportionment undertaken by this critic
is necessarily correct, or necessarily reflects inequality in a way
satisfies justice and equity. After all, all facilities and amenities that are
part of the common property and are not subject
to exclusive use are equally
open to be used by all lot owners and lawful occupiers as they see fit.
majority of the other critics rely upon irrelevant bases as determined by
. That is, they raise considerations of amenity, value or
history, or seek to include the “nebulous criteria” which
determined provides no intelligible basis on which to determine
what the contribution lot entitlements should be.
specifically, it is not the function of this Tribunal to adjourn an application
so as to await an uncertain possibility of legislative
intervention of an
unknown kind. Rather, it is the duty of such a tribunal to hear and determine
matters in accordance with the
objects of the
. These objects, so
far as they are relevant here, are dictated by section 4(1)(b) which states that
such objects include having
the Tribunal deal with matters in a way that is
“just, fair, informal, cost efficient and
” (emphasis
for a methodology based upon bedrooms, as already observed, there is no
necessary consequence of the legal analysis undertaken
requires the adoption of the “bedroom” method as necessarily
appropriate. When the report of Mr Sheahan is referred
the method is described as “(p)otential accommodation factor”. For
reasons already canvassed, “potential”
accommodation is fraught with
immense dangers of its own, particularly about assumptions concerning the number
of persons to be present
in the lot for the whole of a 365 or a 366 day year.
Additionally, there is absolutely no evidence, and certainly none led in this
case, that additional occupiers of any particular lot add significantly to the
use of the facilities and amenities. Plus, it cannot
be established that the
“most logical determinate” for the number of residents is the number
of bedrooms. If this approach
were to be mandated for all proceedings, it would
make a mockery of the Example 3 in the Explanatory Notes which refers, as has
been noted, to lots, despite being of different size or aspect, being
“expected” to have “equal” contribution
schedule lot
entitlements.
conceded by one of the critics, the Tribunal cannot take into account moral
issues, and such a limitation is not only against directly
taking such into
account but also indirectly. Thus, to talk about certain lots being
“detrimentally affected” is simply
to state a legal consequence of a
decision. It is not for the Tribunal to make decisions based not upon what
Parliament has determined
is the law, particularly where the Court of Appeal has
extensively interpreted such legislation, but according to some concern about
“detrimental” affectation. Inevitably, when a CTS such as this
spans a period during which there is a significant change
in legislation, there
are going to be effects, and to describe them as detrimental, or beneficial,
misunderstands the nature of the
legal process, particularly when the moral
approach is asserted to be connected with a “reduction in value”,
is absolutely clear. That is, it must be
“disregarded”.
respect to the critics who contend that the basis of their opposition is that
all purchases made in the CTS were made on an understanding
of the then existing
arrangement concerning lot entitlements, the context provided by the terms of
section 49(5) of the
applies not only to applicants but also to
the way in which all lot owners can legitimately advance reasonable legal views.
is, since an applicant cannot ask the Tribunal to have regard to any
knowledge or understanding the applicant had, or any lack of
knowledge or
misunderstanding on the part of the applicant, at the time the applicant entered
into a contract to buy the lot owned
by the applicant, a similar approach to
opponents must also apply.
for the alleged subsidisation of the larger lots by the smaller lots concerning
water rates and charges for water consumption,
it is, and has been, within the
power of the Body Corporate itself to change the liability basis for owners or
occupiers of lots
for utilities services supplied for the benefit of owners or
occupiers. This is pursuant to section 196 of the
cannot be placed on the Tribunal for a step that can be taken by the Body
Corporate itself, should it wish to do so.
for “unfairness” generally, if the application of the legislation,
as correctly interpreted, to the facts in question
has adverse financial
impacts, then it is in the political sphere that any remedy must be sought. It
must always be remembered that
the judicial arm of government is quite separate
from the executive and legislative arms of government.
reason why the proposed lot entitlement for Lot 36 is stated in the QBS Report
to be different from lots seemingly similar to
it is that the allocation in
Table 5, using the “area” method, has allocated an additional 11
points to the apartment
area allocation of 158 points and 17 points for the
exclusive use car park area. Since there has been no evidence led by the
that the approach by QBS is wrong, the Tribunal is simply in the
position that it must accept the method used by QBS because the
evidentiary onus
lies on those responding in this kind of proceeding.
it is asserted by some critics that many of the costs of the expenditure items
included in Method A are for the “quantity”
of services and
therefore are directly related to area, such a contention is merely intuitive
– and therefore not necessarily
rationally based. The problem with being
intuitive is that although sometimes intuition leads to the correct answer,
without a factual
background supporting the relationship between the actual cost
of the service and the area of the lot in question, it is impossible
to draw the
necessary connection. For example, even if large lots have more sprinklers in
their apartment – for which the
owners would have to pay separately and
from their own funds – there is no evidence that shows that “all
costs associated
with fire prevention” should be allocated according to
Method B. After all, nearly all costs associated with the various fire
components to be paid for by the body corporate would be in the body corporate
common property area. Similarly, for emergency lights,
because there is no
exclusive use for common property areas – apart from those specific
allocated as exclusive use areas –
emergency lights are logically for the
benefit of all who have legal access to any part of the CTS.
there was, in truth, relevant factual evidence to establish the assertions in
question, they could easily have been the subject
of evidence in this case.
They have not been.
for those critics who rely upon “value”, despite the fact that it
must be disregarded, the very purpose of the Interest
Schedule in the Community
Management Statement is to reflect “value”. Specifically, section
47(3) of the
states that the interest schedule lot entitlement
for a lot is the basis for calculating –
lot owner’s share of common property;
lot owner’s interest on termination of the scheme, including the lot
owner’s share in body corporate assets on a termination
unimproved value of the lot, for the purposes of a charge, levy, rate or tax
that is payable directly to a local government, the
Commissioner of Land Tax or
other authority and is calculated and imposed on the basis of unimproved
for the criticism that there were errors in the determination of assessing the
square metrage for exclusive use areas for Lots
1, 21, 30 and 70, the margins of
any error – even if there had been independent evidence establishing it as
are so small as to have no effect on the final allocation of
lot entitlements for the lots in question (at least apart from Lot 1,
the owner of Lot 1 has never been given the opportunity to contest the
assertion).
Conclusions
the inherent inaccuracy in using area as a basis for Methods B, C and D, it
gives a false appearance of precision to allocate
different lot entitlements
based upon an actual difference of, say, $30.00 (approximately).
taking, in Table 1 of the QBS Report, the “estimated total
contribution” for each lot, granting it an accuracy
to two significant
figures only (thereby rounding up or down to achieve those significant figures)
gives rise, in the Tribunal’s
view, to a more fair and equitable
adjustment. Such an approach would yield, for Lot 1, an adjusted lot
entitlement for the Contribution
Schedule of 56. For Lot 2 it would be 53, and
the application states that the applicant reserves its rights to make a
submission on the question of costs if the matter
is determined in its favour,
the Tribunal has formed the provisional view that there should be no order as to
reason for reaching that provisional conclusion is that, having considered
Tamawood Limited v Paans
[2005] QCA 111
[2005] 2 Qd R 101
and sections 70 and 71 of the
there has been
no order for legal representation made;
the respondent
has taken the position that it neither supports nor opposes the
application;
the decision has
been reached “on the papers” without the need for any hearing;
applicant was not able to obtain the result it sought by a resolution without
dissent at the AGM of the Body Corporate held
on 21 May 2009, it had no option
other than to make an application in circumstances where section 70 of the
clearly states that the main purpose of Division 7 is to have the
parties pay their own costs unless the interests of justice require
Nevertheless,
since neither party has had an opportunity to address the Tribunal on costs,
both parties will be given seven (7) days
to file submissions, if any, on this
issue of costs.
______________________________
MR K D DORNEY QC
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (799 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter