URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2025/287.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Surman v Gateway Lawyers (A Firm) [2025] QSC 287 (7 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Surman v Gateway Lawyers (A Firm)
[2025] QSC 287
MARK ANDREW SURMAN AS TRUSTEE OF THE KJM FAMILY
(plaintiff)
GATEWAY LAWYERS (A FIRM)
(defendant)
BS 4928 of 2023
Trial division
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
7 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
29 September 2025. Plaintiff’s closing submissions filed 1 October
The claim filed on 24 April 2023 is dismissed
CATCHWORDS:
LIMITATION OF ACTIONS – LIMITATION OF PARTICULAR ACTIONS –
SIMPLE CONTRACTS, QUASI-CONTRACTS AND TORTS – ACCRUAL
OF CAUSE OF ACTION
AND WHEN TIME BEGINS TO RUN – TORTS – ACTIONS AGAINST SOLICITORS
– where the defendant acted
for the former trustee (‘Marks’)
of a trust (‘KJM Trust’) on the purchase of a residential unit
the unit was purchased using the funds of a company
(‘Ashala’) of which Marks was the sole director and shareholder,
whose shares were held on trust for a beneficiary (‘Featherstone’)
of the KJM Trust – where Ashala leased commercial
premises from
Featherstone – where Ashala had not paid rent under its lease or lodged
tax returns in two years before its funds
were used to purchase the unit –
where a liquidator appointed to Ashala later brought proceedings against
Featherstone (who
had replaced Marks as trustee of the KJM Trust) alleging that
the payment of Ashala’s funds to purchase the unit was an uncommercial
transaction under the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) – where judgment
was given in favour of the liquidator and Featherstone was ordered to transfer
the unit to Ashala –
where Featherstone unsuccessfully appealed that
judgment – where the current trustee of the KJM Trust alleged that the
was negligent in failing to attend to the preparation and lodging of
Ashala’s tax returns, in advising on the purchase of the
unit and in
relation to a later audit by the ATO – where the claimed loss comprised
legal costs incurred by Featherstone in
defending the liquidator’s
proceeding and the value of the unit – where the defendant alleged that
the cause of action
was time barred because Featherstone incurred the legal
costs more than six years before the proceeding was commenced – where
plaintiff contended that the cause of action did not accrue until the appeal of
the judgment in favour of the liquidator was
dismissed – whether the cause
of action was time barred
Limitations of Actions Act 1974
(Qld), s 10.
Ashala Model Agency Pty Ltd (in liq) v Featherstone
[2017] 2 Qd
[2016] QSC 121
Ashala Model Agency Pty Ltd (in liq) v
Featherstone (No 2)
[2016] QSC 300
Australian Executor Trustees
(SA) Ltd v Kerr
[2021] NSWCA 5
Badenach v Calvert
257 CLR 440
[2016] HCA 18
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
Commonwealth v Cornwell
(2007) 229 CLR
[2007] HCA 16
Dominic v Riz
[2009] NSWCA 216
Featherstone v Ashala Model Agency Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2018] 3 Qd
GLJ v Trustees of Roman Catholic Church for Diocese of
(2023) 280 CLR 442
[2023] HCA 32
Gorczynski v W &
FT Osmo Pty Ltd
(2010) 77 NSWLR 62
[2010] NSWCA 163
Guirguis Pty Ltd v Michel’s Patisserie System Pty Ltd
[2018] 1 Qd R 132
Hawkins v Clayton
(1988) 164 CLR 539;
[1988] HCA 15
Heydon v NRMA Ltd
(2000) 51 NSWLR 1, cited
HTW Valuers
(Central Qld) Pty Ltd v Astonland Pty Ltd
(2004) 217 CLR 640
[2004] HCA 54
Jadwan Pty Ltd v Rae & Partners (A Firm)
[2020] FCAFC 62
Jones v Dunkel
(1959) 101 CLR 298
[1959] HCA 8
Segal (t/a Segal Litton & Chilton) v Fleming
[2002] NSWCA
Waimond Pty Ltd v Byrne
(1989) 18 NSWLR 642
Wardley Australia Ltd v Western Australia
(1992) 175 CLR 514
[1992] HCA 55
Watson v Foxman
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
Winnote Pty Ltd (in liq) v Page
(2006) 68 NSWLR 531
The plaintiff appeared on his own behalf
S McCarthy for the
SOLICITORS:
The plaintiff was not legally represented
McInnes Wilson Lawyers for the
Introduction
plaintiff (
) brings this claim as trustee of the KJM Family
). The KJM Trust was established in mid-2007 with Kristy
) as its trustee and Darrell Featherstone (
Featherstone
) and members of his family as beneficiaries. Ms Marks remained
the trustee of the KJM Trust until 6 April 2011, when Mr Featherstone
her as trustee.
[2] Ms Marks was
also, relevantly, the sole shareholder of a company called Ashala Modelling
Agency Pty Ltd (
) and, until 23 February 2007, the sole director of
that company.
defendant (
) was a firm of solicitors. Philip Leach was a
principal of Gateway throughout the period which is the subject of Mr
claims. Gateway’s practice was conducted as a partnership
between Mr Leach and Andrew Brown until October 2008, when Mr Brown
retired from
the partnership due to the onset of Alzheimer’s disease. Mr Leach then
conducted Gateway’s practice in
his own right as a sole practitioner until
he ceased legal practice in July 2011.
is common ground that Gateway performed work involving Ashala and the KJM
(a) In mid-2005, Mr Leach drafted a deed by which Mr
Featherstone “agreed to indemnify ... [Ashala] against all costs, claims
and expenses that [Ashala] may be subject to” (
(b) In July 2007, Mr Leach prepared the documents which established the KJM
(c) In August 2007, Mr Leach acted on behalf of Ms Marks on her purchase, as
trustee of the KJM Trust, of a residential unit located
in Alice Street,
the Alice Street unit
). As described more fully below, the
funds used to purchase the Alice Street unit were paid from Ashala’s bank
[5] Gateway also
accepts that, in 2009, Mr Leach provided advice to Mr Featherstone in respect of
an audit by the Australian Taxation
) of the tax affairs of Mr
Featherstone, Mr Featherstone’s daughter (
[6] In 2012, a
liquidator was appointed to Ashala. The liquidator brought proceedings against
Mr Featherstone (who had by that time
replaced Ms Marks as trustee of the KJM
Trust) alleging that the payment of Ashala’s funds to purchase the Alice
Street unit
was voidable as an uncommercial transaction. At the conclusion of
those proceedings, Mr Featherstone was ordered to transfer the
Alice Street unit
to Ashala. Mr Surman alleges that if Gateway had given proper advice, Mr
Featherstone, as trustee of the KJM Trust,
could have avoided the cost of
defending proceedings brought by the liquidator of Ashala and the loss of the
Alice Street unit.
[7] Mr Surman
claims that Gateway acted negligently in three respects:
(a) in failing to properly attend to the preparation and lodging of
Ashala’s tax returns;
(b) in advising Ms Marks, as trustee of the KJM Trust, in relation to the
purchase of the Alice Street unit; and
(c) in advising Ms Marks, as trustee of the KJM Trust, with respect to the ATO
[8] In defending
Mr Surman’s claims, Gateway submits that any cause of action in negligence
is statute barred. Further, Gateway
denies that it was engaged to prepare and
lodge Ashala’s tax returns. It disputes the scope of its retainer in
relation to
the purchase of the Alice Street unit. It also disputes the scope
of the retainer to provide advice with respect to the ATO audit.
Finally, it
submits that the evidence adduced by Mr Surman is not sufficient to establish a
breach of any duty it owed to the trustee
of the KJM Trust, or that any breach
of duty caused the loss claimed by Mr Surman.
[9] In that
context, the issues for determination are:
(a) Is the claim statute-barred?
(b) If the claim is not statute-barred:
(i) Was Gateway retained to prepare and lodge Ashala’s tax returns?
(ii) What was the scope of the retainer concerning the purchase of the Alice
Street unit?
(iii) What was the scope of the retainer concerning the ATO audit?
(iv) Having regard to the scope of those retainers, did Gateway breach its duty
(v) Were the losses claimed by Mr Surman caused by a breach of Gateway’s
duty of care?
Factual background
[10] From about
September 2002 to May 2005, Mr Featherstone operated a model agency business
from premises in Albert Street, Brisbane
the Albert Street premises
Ms Marks worked in Mr Featherstone’s business from around the beginning of
Featherstone’s evidence was that, by 2005, he had decided to sell his
model agency business to pursue another business
venture. His attempts to sell
were not successful. He contemplated discontinuing the model agency business
and leasing out the
Albert Street premises. He was concerned, however, that the
fit-out he had installed to accommodate the model agency business would
removed if he leased the premises on the open market. In those circumstances,
Ms Marks approached him about running her own model
agency business from the
Albert Street premises. Mr Featherstone deposed that Ms Marks wished to
incorporate a new company to run
her business. Ashala was incorporated for that
purpose. Mr Featherstone deposed that he and Ms Marks agreed she would hold all
the shares in Ashala on trust for him. He explained this was to protect his
financial interest in the Albert Street premises and
allow him to quickly
reclaim possession of those premises if Ms Marks’ business was
unsuccessful. In return, Mr Featherstone
would provide the Deed of Indemnity in
favour of Ashala.
[12] On 1 July
2005, Mr Featherstone agreed in writing to lease the Albert Street premises to
Ashala for a term of three years. The
agreed rent was $166,050 per annum,
payable yearly in advance. Mr Featherstone executed the Deed of Indemnity in
favour of Ashala
on the same date.
[13] For two
years after the lease of the Albert Street premises, Mr Featherstone did not
request that Ashala pay the annual rent
and no rent was paid. This position
changed when Mr Featherstone decided to purchase the Alice Street unit. Mr
Featherstone deposed
that, after taking advice from Gateway, he and Ms Marks
agreed at a meeting on 4 August
that Ashala would pay
$460,000 as rent under the lease for the Albert Street premises. That amount
would then be used to pay the
purchase price for the Alice Street unit to be
held by Ms Marks as trustee of the KJM Trust.
purchase of the Alice Street unit settled on 21 August 2007.
[15] Ashala had
ceased trading by the end of 2007. Mr Featherstone attributes this to the
impact of the Global Financial Crisis.
The company was deregistered by the
Australian Securities and Investment Commission (
) on 12 October
[16] As already
observed, the ATO audit commenced in 2009.
[17] On 24 July
2012, by orders of this court, Ashala was reinstated and put into liquidation.
The liquidator brought proceedings
in this court against Mr Featherstone as
trustee of the KJM Trust.
above, in 2016, at the conclusion of those proceedings, Jackson J held that
Ashala’s payment of the purchase price
for the Alice Street unit was an
uncommercial transaction. His Honour made orders which required that Mr
Featherstone, as trustee
of the KJM Trust, transfer the Alice Street unit to
Featherstone appealed the judgment of Jackson J. That judgment, including the
order that Mr Featherstone transfer the Alice
Street unit to Ashala, was stayed
pending the determination of the appeal. The appeal was dismissed on 3 November
Following that dismissal, Mr
Featherstone transferred the Alice Street unit to Ashala pursuant to the orders
made by Jackson J.
Is the claim statute-barred?
action in negligence (which is not an action in respect of personal injury)
within 6 years from the date on which the cause
Mr Surman commenced this
proceeding on 24 April 2023. Accordingly, any negligence action that accrued
before 24 April 2017 would
be statute-barred.
show the existence of a completely constituted cause of action in negligence, a
plaintiff must be able to show that a duty
of care was owed to it by the
defendant, the defendant breached that duty of care, and that breach of duty
caused damage to the plaintiff.
Accordingly, in the ordinary case, it is at the
time that a plaintiff sustains damage that the cause of action arises for
[21] Where there
is a claim for economic loss the cause of action does not arise until the
plaintiff suffers actual damage; prospective
loss is not
sufficient.
A plaintiff who is
exposed to a contingent loss or liability sustains no actual damage until the
contingency is fulfilled.
once a plaintiff suffers actual damage then the cause of action accrues and time
will commence to run under the relevant
limitation period regardless of whether
the plaintiff discovers, or could on reasonable inquiry have discovered, that
such damage
had been sustained.
Time will run even if, at the time the plaintiff first suffers actual damage, it
would be difficult to assess the extent of that
and even though substantial
loss occurs at a later point in time as a consequence of the same
[22] A defendant
bears the onus of establishing that actual and measurable loss first occurred
before a date six years prior to the
commencement of the
proceeding.
However, the fact
that a breach has caused actual loss of a measurable kind can sometimes be
self-evident or clear beyond
[23] In this
proceeding, Mr Surman pleads three breaches of duty by Gateway:
(a) failing to prepare tax returns and annual returns for Ashala and failing to
lodge such returns with the ATO and ASIC;
(b) failing to exercise reasonable care and skill in advising Ms Marks about
risks associated with using Ashala’s funds to
purchase the Alice Street
(c) failing to exercise reasonable care and skill in advising Ms Marks in
relation to the ATO audit and, more specifically, in failing
to advise Ms Marks
that she should re-register Ashala and cause it to pay its outstanding tax
liabilities, rather than following
the ATO’s suggestion that she or Mr
Featherstone should personally pay the tax liabilities of associated entities,
the outstanding tax liability of Ashala.
[24] Although
three breaches are pleaded, Mr Surman only pleads that the third breach caused
the trustee of the KJM Trust to suffer
[25] The loss
pleaded by Mr Surman includes legal costs and expenses in the amount of
$158,351.85. He pleads that the trustee of
the KJM Trust incurred and paid
those costs in defending proceedings brought by the liquidator of Ashala. The
further and better
particulars of the statement of claim state that these costs
comprised the following payments:
(a) $2,200.00 paid to Mr Dietz of Counsel;
(b) $815.10 paid to Stockley Furlong Lawyers;
(c) $42,570.14 paid to HWL Ebsworth Lawyers;
(d) $35,000 paid as security for costs of the appeal
against the judgment of Jackson J ordering the transfer of the Alice Street unit
(e) $24,821.35 paid to Lillas Loel Lawyers;
(f) $53,000 paid to Irish Bentley Lawyers.
evidence establishes that Mr Featherstone, as trustee of the KJM
(a) incurred the obligation to pay costs to his own legal representatives on the
following dates:
(i) 11 October 2012, in respect of the payment referred to at
(ii) 16 October 2012, in respect of the payment referred to at
(iii) between 30 November 2015 and about June 2016, in respect of the payments
referred to at
(iv) between 12 April 2016 and 30 March 2017 in respect if the payments referred
(b) was ordered to pay the amount of $35,000.00 as security for costs of his
appeal against the judgment of Jackson J, referred to
above, in three tranches as
(i) $15,000 on or before 19 August 2016;
(ii) $10,000 on or before 9 September 2016;
(iii) $10,000 on or before 7 October 2016;
(c) on 16 December 2016, was ordered by Jackson J to pay the liquidator’s
costs of the proceeding against
[27] Mr Surman
did not suggest that Mr Featherstone had not paid the costs invoiced by his own
legal representatives. To the contrary,
trust account statements issued by Mr
Featherstone’s solicitors establish the fact of payment of most of those
costs. Where
the fact of payment was not proved directly by the documentary
evidence, I infer that Mr Featherstone paid those costs in satisfaction
payment obligation he incurred.
$35,000.00 that Mr Featherstone paid as security for costs for his appeal was
subsequently paid out to the liquidator after
the appeal was dismissed.
[29] As to the
liquidator’s costs that Jackson J ordered Mr Featherstone to pay, the
evidence included two tax invoices issued
by Ashala to Mr Featherstone on 13
November 2018, for a total sum of $53,000.00 which included the notation
“Payment of agreed
legal costs”. During cross-examination, Mr
Featherstone accepted that those documents evidenced the payments made to
the costs order made by Jackson
[30] Gateway
submits that this evidence of Mr Featherstone having incurred and paid
substantial legal costs before 24 April 2017 compels
the conclusion that any
cause of action against it in negligence is statute barred.
[31] In support
of that submission, Gateway relies on the decision of the New South Wales Court
of Appeal in
Gorczynski v W & F T Osmo Pty
That case involved the
appeal of a decision to refuse leave to a plaintiff to commence proceedings
against an insurer in respect
of loss suffered by reason of the negligence of a
firm of engineers. The plaintiff claimed that the engineers owed him a duty of
care when providing certificates to the local council. The certificates
concerned construction works undertaken on a building on
a neighbouring property
which was attached to a building on the plaintiff’s property.
[32] The loss
the plaintiff sought to claim was constituted by costs he incurred in commencing
and prosecuting proceedings against
his neighbours and the council for the
purpose of obtaining an order that the building work, the subject of the
certificates, be
demolished. The plaintiff incurred some of those legal costs
more than six years before he commenced his claim. One of the grounds
insurer relied on to oppose the grant of leave for the plaintiff to proceed
directly against it was that the plaintiff’s
claim against the engineers
was statute barred.
[33] At trial
and on appeal, the plaintiff argued that the characterisation of a liability to
pay legal costs in a litigious matter
as “a loss” was contingent
upon the making of orders for the recovery of costs. On that argument, no
actual loss was
sustained by reason of the client’s liability to pay his
or her solicitor’s costs where the payment of such costs was
potentially
contingent upon the making of costs orders in the client’s favour. Tobias
JA (with whom Giles and McColl JJA agreed)
rejected that
His Honour held that
the questions whether the plaintiff obtained a costs order in his favour, and
was able to recover costs from
third parties, went only to the ultimate
quantification of the plaintiff’s loss. It did not alter the fact that
the plaintiff
sustained a measurable loss by incurring the obligation to pay his
legal costs and paying those costs. In circumstances where the
plaintiff had
first incurred such costs more than six years before he filed his claim against
the engineers, that claim was statute
[34] In response
to Gateway’s assertion that the claim against it is statute barred, Mr
Surman relies on the fact that Mr Featherstone
appealed the judgment of Jackson
J and was granted a stay of that judgment pending the determination of the
appeal. He submits that
the granting of the stay “eliminated” any
cause of action held by the trustee of the KJM Trust until the Court of Appeal
delivered its judgment on 3 November 2017. On that basis, the limitation period
did not expire until 3 November 2023; after he had
commenced this proceeding.
Mr Surman submits that no cause of action arose in respect of the legal costs Mr
Featherstone incurred
in defending the proceeding brought by the liquidator of
Ashala until the appeal of Jackson J’s judgment had been determined.
is because the costs relate to the alleged negligence of Gateway, which could
not be established until the Court of Appeal’s
decision was handed
[35] I do not
accept Mr Surman’s submissions. As explained at
above, to succeed in his negligence
claim, Mr Surman would be required to establish that Gateway owed a duty of care
to the trustee
of the KJM Trust, that it breached this duty, and that the
trustee suffered actual damage because of the breach. Proof of the elements
the cause of action was not contingent on the decision of the Court of Appeal.
As regards the claim to recover legal costs, a
successful outcome on appeal
would not have meant that Mr Featherstone suffered no loss by reason of the
third alleged breach of
duty by Gateway. The making of costs orders in Mr
Featherstone’s favour following a successful appeal would have changed the
ultimate quantification of the loss, but, consistently with the reasoning in
(which I agree with), it would not alter the fact that the
trustee suffered loss when those legal costs were incurred and paid.
am satisfied on the evidence that Mr Featherstone (as trustee of the KJM Trust)
incurred and paid legal costs before 24 April
2017. I am further satisfied that
by incurring the obligation to pay, and in fact paying, those legal costs, Mr
Featherstone sustained
a measurable loss. Mr Surman now seeks to recover that
loss from Gateway. In circumstances where Mr Featherstone first incurred
legal costs more than six years before this proceeding was commenced, Mr
Surman’s claim is statute barred. Accordingly,
the claim must be
[37] In case I
am wrong in concluding that the cause of action is statute barred, I have
addressed the remaining issues below. Before
doing so, I set out some general
principles concerning, firstly, the duty and standard of care imposed by law on
solicitors, and
secondly, the application of the civil standard of proof in
cases where there is conflicting evidence.
The duty and standard
of care imposed on solicitors
[38] Solicitors
owe a duty of care to their clients to have and to exercise a degree of skill
and care that is to be expected of persons
professing and practicing in their
area of expertise. The standard of care is the standard appropriate to a member
of the profession
with the relevant specialist
[39] The limits
on a solicitor’s duty to advise has been the subject of differing analysis
in the authorities over time. It
was once thought that the duty to advise was
limited by the terms of the retainer from the client. The solicitor was said to
no obligation to give advice going beyond the specifically agreed task or
function he or she had been retained to perform. Later
decisions held that what
was described as a “penumbral” duty to advise might exist in
relation to matters that were not
directly within the ambit of the retainer from
the client.
Since that time the
existence of such a “penumbral” duty has been
Nevertheless, courts
continue to recognise the possibility that a solicitor’s performance of
his or her retainer, and what
he or she learns during the performance of that
retainer, may require that the solicitor not only undertake the specific
specified in the retainer but also provide advice about risks which
have come to the attention of the
What reasonable care
requires a solicitor to do in performing his or her retainer must be determined
based on facts of the particular
application of the civil standard of proof
Featherstone and Mr Leach have given conflicting accounts of the relevant
instructions.
Watson v Foxman
McLelland CJ in Eq observed that it was a matter of experience that memory
of what was said in a conversation is fallible for a variety
of reasons. The
degree of fallibility ordinarily increases with the passage of time,
“particularly where disputes or litigation
intervene, and the processes of
memory are overlaid, often subconsciously, by perceptions or self-interest as
well as consciousness
consideration of what should have been said or could have
been said.”
[42] It is for
this reason that courts endeavour to test the veracity of a witness’
testimony by reference to objective facts
proved independently of that
testimony, particularly by reference to contemporaneous documents.
Consideration should be given to
a witness’ motives, the apparent logic of
events and the overall
probabilities.
GLJ v Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of
Kiefel CJ, Gageler
and Jagot JJ stated:
“A court is not bound to accept
uncontradicted evidence. Uncontradicted evidence may not be accepted for any
number of reasons
including its inherent implausibility, its objective
likelihood given other evidence, or the trier of fact simply not reaching the
state of ‘actual persuasion’ which is required before a fact may be
found. ...”
before extracting the statement by Dixon CJ in
“does not authorise a court to choose between guesses, where the
possibilities are not unlimited, on the ground that one guess
seems more likely
than another or the others. The facts proved must form a reasonable basis for a
definite conclusion affirmatively
drawn of the truth of which the tribunal of
fact may reasonably be satisfied.”
Honours’ reference to the state of “actual persuasion” was a
reference to the adoption by Dixon J (as
his Honour then was) of Professor
Wigmore’s statement defining the civil standard of proof in
v Briginshaw
including the
statement that:
“... when the law requires proof of any fact,
the tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence
it can be found. It cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical
comparison of probabilities independently of any belief in
[45] This means
that each element of a cause of action must be proved to the reasonable
satisfaction of the court, with the court
feeling an actual persuasion of its
occurrence or
Gateway retained to prepare and lodge Ashala’s tax returns?
[46] There is no
dispute that, in the period Mr Brown carried on the legal practice of Gateway in
partnership with Mr Leach, Mr Brown
also carried on practice as a registered tax
[47] Mr Surman
alleges that, by an oral agreement made on or about 1 July 2005, Gateway (by Mr
Brown and Mr Leach) agreed to act as
solicitors for Ashala. The particulars of
that allegation state that Ms Marks requested that Gateway undertake all
taxation compliance
tasks on behalf of Ashala, including preparing and filing
its tax returns with the ATO; and that Gateway (by Mr Brown) agreed to
that work for Ashala. As already noted, Gateway denies that it was engaged to
perform this work.
[48] Mr Brown
did not give evidence. As explained above, it is common ground that Mr Brown
retired from practice in October 2008
due to the onset of Alzheimer’s
[49] Ms Marks
also did not give evidence. Mr Surman’s written opening statement stated
that he would call Ms Marks to give
evidence in support of his claims. However,
when the trial commenced, he explained that he could not afford to pay her
accommodation costs. Those costs might have been avoided if Mr
Surman had applied for leave for Ms Marks to give evidence by telephone
audio-visual link. Mr Surman (who represented himself with the assistance of Mr
Featherstone) did not apply for such leave.
[50] Accordingly,
there was no evidence led from either of the persons alleged by Mr Surman to
have formed the agreement that Gateway
would prepare and lodge Ashala’s
tax returns. There was also no documentary evidence of the existence or terms
of the alleged
evidence as there was concerning this aspect of Mr Surman’s claim came
from Mr Featherstone and Mr Leach.
Featherstone deposed that he was present at a meeting held at Gateway’s
offices in approximately June 2005 between Ms
Marks (on behalf of Ashala) and
both Mr Leach and Mr Brown. He stated that Mr Brown agreed that Gateway would
undertake all taxation
compliance tasks Ashala was required to complete,
including the preparation and lodging of tax returns.
Featherstone further deposed that Ms Marks asked him to speak to Gateway on her
behalf many times during the 2005/06 and 2006/07
financial years, including
February 2007. He deposed
in general terms to having attempted to speak to Mr
Brown on several occasions about Ms Marks’ concerns, but that Mr Brown
rarely returned telephone calls. He stated that when he was able to speak to Mr
Brown, he was told that everything was under control
and given excuses as to why
the matter in issue had not been completed. He deposed that he did not consider
the issues raised by
Ms Marks to be his problem, so he did not pay too much
attention to them. That is consistent with his statement during
cross-examination,
relation to things like tax returns, owing, or whatever, it – it’s
just something I didn’t want to
turn – turn my mind to. I – I
presumed that it would get done at a certain point, but it wasn’t my
responsibility,
and I wasn’t concerned about it.”
[54] Finally, Mr
Featherstone deposed that, during a meeting between himself, Ms Marks and Mr
Leach on 3 June 2007, Mr Leach telephoned
Mr Brown in Mr Featherstone’s
presence. During that telephone call Mr Brown advised that he had completed
Ashala’s tax
return for the 2005/06 financial year and would soon lodge
that return with the ATO.
[55] Mr Leach
deposed that Mr Brown generally performed simple tax returns for individual
clients. He stated that he has no recollection
of Gateway being retained to
perform taxation compliance tasks on behalf of Mr Featherstone, Ms Marks or
Ashala. He also has no
recollection of being telephoned by Mr Featherstone or
Ms Marks regarding outstanding tax compliance tasks.
[56] In his
written closing submissions, Mr Surman also placed significant emphasis on an
email which Mr Leach sent to his professional
indemnity insurer, Lexon, on 15
February 2017 concerning Mr Featherstone’s appeal from the decision of
Jackson J. In that
email, Mr Leach stated:
“... at the time
of this matter taking place my then firm’s insurance policy was held for
the benefit of myself and Andrew
Brown. Both of us were involved in this
[57] Mr Leach
sent that email after he had received a copy of a letter which Lexon had sent to
Mr Leach’s bankruptcy trustee,
advising that Lexon had received a demand
from Mr Featherstone and asking whether the bankruptcy trustee would proceed to
a claim for indemnity under the insurance policy in respect of that
[58] When Mr
Leach was taken to the email in cross-examination, the following exchange
“Okay. Thank you. So it appears that Mr –
based on that [email], it appears that Mr Brown was involved in this matter
you may have forgotten; is that possible?---Mr Brown was a partner of mine in
that law firm from February 1998 through to October
2008, so yes.”
Surman also gave evidence that he and Mr Featherstone met Mr Leach at
Gateway’s offices in about August 2009. Mr Surman
recalled that meeting
occurred straight after Mr Surman had been interviewed by the ATO during the
audit of Mr Featherstone and Ms
Marks. Mr Surman’s evidence about what
occurred at that meeting generally concerned discussion about the ATO audit
below). However, Mr Surman also stated that he recalled Mr Leach
saying at the meeting that Mr Brown was no longer working with
Mr Leach because
of illness, and that Mr Brown had caused all the ATO problems by not lodging
Ashala’s tax return.
Consideration
evidence of Mr Featherstone and Mr Leach might be reconciled on the basis that
the agreement was reached at a meeting in
deposed to, but Mr Leach no longer has any memory of that meeting. I am not
persuaded, however,
that is a sufficient reason to accept Mr
Featherstone’s evidence about the formation of the alleged retainer in the
of evidence from Ms Marks, or from any contemporaneous documents, which
corroborates Mr Featherstone’s account.
surprising that Mr Featherstone can recall a discussion between Ms Marks and Mr
Brown more than 20 years ago concerning
Ashala’s tax affairs, particularly
when he says that subject was not a matter of concern to him at the time.
[62] It is also
relevant that Mr Featherstone deposed to having expended more than $760,000 in
relation to the Alice Street unit and
to having “absolutely nothing to
show for it” after the transfer to Ashala pursuant to the judgment of
Jackson J. By
this proceeding, Mr Surman seeks to recover part of that lost
expenditure from Gateway. Given the effect which Ashala’s failure
comply with its tax obligations (and Mr Featherstone’s knowledge of that
state of affairs) had on the company’s solvency
and on the resulting
decision of Jackson J to order the transfer of the Alice Street unit to
and the unsuccessful
appeal from that decision,
now plainly in Mr Featherstone’s interests to attribute blame for the lack
of attention to Ashala’s tax affairs
to Mr Brown and Gateway.
[63] As to Mr
Leach’s email to his professional indemnity insurer, Mr Surman submits
that the only reason that Mr Leach would
tell the professional indemnity insurer
that Mr Brown was “involved in this matter” was because Mr Brown was
in Ashala’s tax affairs (it being common ground that Mr Brown had
left the firm before the ATO audit commenced). That is,
Mr Surman relies upon
the email as an admission by Mr Leach that Gateway (by Mr Brown) had been
engaged to perform the work necessary
to ensure that Ashala complied with its
obligations.
[64] I do not
accept that the email should be read in that way. I consider that the
“involvement” Mr Leach was referring
to was Mr Brown’s
potential exposure, by reason of his position as a partner in Gateway, to
liability in respect of the demand
Mr Featherstone had sent to Lexon. That
reading is consistent with the reference in the email to the insurance policy
for Mr Brown’s benefit as well as Mr Leach. It is also
consistent with Mr Leach’s reference to Mr Brown’s position
partner in Gateway when he was asked about the email in cross-examination. I do
not accept that Mr Leach’s statement
in the email to Lexon corroborates Mr
Featherstone’s account of the formation of the alleged retainer.
[65] I also do
not accept Mr Surman’s evidence that, in a meeting where the ATO audit was
discussed, Mr Leach said that Mr Brown
had caused all the ATO problems by not
lodging Ashala’s tax return. I consider that evidence to be inherently
implausible.
If it were true, Mr Leach must have made the statement knowing
that it would expose him to potential liability (as Mr Brown’s
for a failure by Gateway to properly attend to Ashala’s tax affairs.
There is no reason to think Mr Leach would act
in that way. Furthermore, I can
see no logical reason why Mr Leach would have thought that the cause of Mr
Featherstone’s
problems with the ATO was Ashala not having lodged a tax
return. Documents concerning the ATO audit show that Mr Featherstone had
lodged an income tax return for the financial years from 2000/01 to 2007/08. A
letter the ATO sent to Mr Featherstone confirmed
that the ATO would be auditing
his income tax return for the 2008/09 financial year and investigating whether
he was required to
lodge returns for the prior years. That letter stated that
the ATO may require access to financial records of entities associated
Featherstone. However, Mr Featherstone would not have appeared as a director or
shareholder in a company search for Ashala.
There is no reason to think that,
when the ATO commenced the audit, it was aware that Mr Featherstone was
associated with Ashala.
Plainly, the cause of Mr Featherstone’s problem
with the ATO was his own failure to comply with his personal tax obligations.
Mr Leach had no reason to attribute those problems to anything that Mr Brown had
done or failed to do.
[66] Ultimately,
if I had not found that Mr Surman’s claim is statute barred, I would not
have reached the state of actual persuasion
required to make a finding that Ms
Marks engaged Gateway to prepare and lodge Ashala’s tax
What was the scope of Gateway’s retainer with
respect to the purchase of the Alice Street unit?
Featherstone deposed that, on 3 June 2007, Mr Leach agreed on behalf of Gateway,
to act for Mr Featherstone and Ms Marks in
their personal capacities and in
relation to their involvement with the KJM Trust. Mr Featherstone stated that
he asked Mr Leach
to advise as to any issues that might adversely affect the
proposed purchase of the Alice Street unit so that he could consider any
exposure to risk and then take all necessary steps to ensure the unit was
protected. He deposed that Mr Leach advised that the Alice
Street unit should
be purchased through a discretionary trust and that this trust should remain
separate from any business activity.
relevantly, Mr Featherstone deposed that he specifically asked Mr Leach to
advise about any adverse issues that might affect
the proposed acquisition of
the Alice Street unit where funds from Ashala’s account would be used for
the purchase, representing
payment of the rent Ashala owed, but had not paid,
under its lease of the Albert Street premises.
Featherstone deposed that after the discussion on 3 June 2007, he instructed Mr
Leach to prepare documents to establish what
became the KJM Trust and undertake
the conveyance of the Alice Street unit to Ms Marks as trustee of that trust.
Mr Leach subsequently
performed the work required to establish the KJM Trust
with Ms Marks as trustee and acted on the conveyance of the Alice Street
[70] Mr Leach
deposed that he was engaged by Mr Featherstone in July 2007 to establish the KJM
Trust with Ms Marks as trustee. He
was informed that the reason for
establishing the KJM Trust was that Mr Featherstone wished to purchase the Alice
Street unit for
his own use, but did not want his name to appear on any public
registers, including the Titles Office, as the owner of any assets.
stated that Mr Featherstone also instructed him to act on the conveyance of the
Alice Street unit.
[71] Mr Leach
said that he could not recall being asked by Mr Featherstone to provide advice
on any issues that may adversely affect
the Alice Street unit, or of any steps
that might be taken to protect the unit, other than to use the discretionary
trust structure.
He deposed that he was not informed by Mr Featherstone, or Ms
Marks, (and that he otherwise had no other reason during the course
conveyance to put him on inquiry) that Ashala was funding the purchase of the
Alice Street unit; about any consequences as
to Ashala’s insolvency, or
that Ashala had failed to pay tax in the years preceding the purchase of the
Alice Street unit.
[72] Mr Leach
deposed that his usual practice when advising clients at that time was to
consider risks a client might be exposed to
by entering into transactions,
provided he was instructed with facts which gave rise to a basis to identify
such risks. He stated
that if he had been informed of Ashala’s
involvement in the purchase of the Alice Street unit he would have considered
need to advise Mr Featherstone about any risks which might arise from that
transaction, including that Mr Featherstone and Ms Marks
might be exposed to
taxation risks due to what he described as “Division 7A loans” from
companies to their shareholders
or associated entities. He deposed that he
would have recommended that Mr Featherstone obtain advice from a tax
accountant.
cross-examined, Mr Leach maintained that he had no recollection of Mr
Featherstone mentioning Ashala, telling him that the
Alice Street unit had been
purchased by funds obtained from Ashala, or saying that the Alice Street unit
had to be protected at all
Consideration
[74] Mr Surman
submits that, in seeking to resolve the conflicting evidence given by Mr
Featherstone and Mr Leach, I should be satisfied
that Mr Featherstone gave the
instructions as described at
above. He submits that Mr
Featherstone’s account of his instructions is more probable than Mr
Leach’s account because
it is objectively likely that, in circumstances
where (on Mr Surman’s case) Gateway had failed to properly attend to the
preparation
and lodgement of Ashala’s tax returns, Mr Featherstone would
consider it appropriate to inform Mr Leach of the source of the
purchase the Alice Street unit.
[75] There are
two difficulties with that submission.
, as set out above, I am not
satisfied that Gateway was retained to prepare and lodge Ashala’s tax
returns. Absent such a retainer,
there would be no reason for Mr Featherstone
to expect that Mr Leach was aware that Ashala had outstanding tax liabilities.
, the submission does not sit comfortably with Mr
Featherstone’s evidence in cross-examination that he knew, after the Alice
Street unit was purchased, the funds in Ashala’s bank account were reduced
to approximately $3,000, and that Ashala had unpaid
tax liabilities for 2005 and
2006. Mr Featherstone said that this “wasn’t a big
at the time. This
description of the non-payment of Ashala’s tax liabilities as “not a
big deal” undermines the
submission that this circumstance would have
caused him to tell Mr Leach that Ashala’s funds were being used to
purchase the
Alice Street unit.
[76] Against Mr
Surman’s argument, Gateway submits that there are good reasons why Mr
Featherstone would not have told Mr Leach
that he intended to use Ashala’s
funds to purchase the Alice Street unit. In cross-examination, Mr Featherstone
accepted that
when he entered into the lease of the Albert Street premises to
Ashala and the Deed of Indemnity, he appreciated that the rent due
lease to Ashala was covered by the Deed of
Gateway submits this
demonstrates that, considered objectively, Mr Featherstone was prepared to
breach the indemnity he provided
to Ashala by taking its funds for his personal
benefit in circumstances where there is no evidence of any other source of funds
to purchase the Alice Street unit.
[77] I accept
Gateway’s submission that Mr Featherstone is unlikely to have sought
advice from Mr Leach about the consequences
of him breaching the Deed of
Indemnity he gave in favour of Ashala. I do not accept Mr Featherstone’s
evidence that he understood
the Deed of Indemnity only operated if Ashala could
not afford to pay the rent under the lease of the Albert Street
That evidence is
inconsistent with the broad words used in the Deed of Indemnity.
[78] Furthermore,
bearing in mind the fallibility of memory, where there are no contemporaneous
documents recording the matters discussed
between Mr Featherstone and Mr Leach
in June 2007, I am not persuaded that Mr Featherstone’s account is an
accurate description
of what he said to Mr Leach concerning the purchase of the
Alice Street unit.
[79] Ultimately,
if I had not found that Mr Surman’s claim is statute barred, I would not
have reached the state of actual persuasion
required to make a finding that Mr
Leach was given instructions in the terms deposed to by Mr Featherstone, as
described at
above. I would not have been
satisfied that Gateway’s retainer in respect of the Alice Street unit
extended beyond establishing
the KJM Trust and acting for Ms Marks as trustee of
that trust on the purchase of the Alice Street unit. I would not have been
that, in performing that retainer, Mr Leach became aware of facts that
required him to also provide advice about risks associated
Ashala’s funds to purchase the Alice Street unit.
the scope of the retainer with respect to the ATO audit?
Featherstone’s evidence on this issue was as follows:
(a) On 18 August 2009, the ATO contacted him by telephone and informed him that
an audit had been commenced against him and all entities
associated with him,
including the KJM Trust and Ashala. The ATO recommended that he seek legal
advice and then confirm whether
he would be prepared to be formally interviewed
by the ATO. The ATO told him that, as part of any interview, he would be
to provide the details of the purchase of the Alice Street unit, where
the funds used to purchase the Alice Street unit came from
and an explanation of
the circumstances of the purchase.
(b) He attended Gateway’s offices on 19 August 2009 and met with Mr Leach,
together with Ms Marks. Mr Leach advised him (and
Ms Marks) that they should
comply with any lawful direction given by the ATO in relation to the audit.
(c) He then attended the ATO office at Mt Gravatt on the afternoon of 19 August
2009 where the ATO provided him with a confirmation
of audit letter. He
informed a taxation officer named Siobhan Heilbronn that both he and Ms Marks
agreed to be formally interviewed.
Those interviews were conducted on several
occasions over the following two weeks.
(d) During the ATO interviews Ms Heilbronn requested an explanation as to why
Ashala had not complied with its tax obligations, as
well as confirmation of the
source of funds used to purchase the Alice Street unit. In response, he
explained that Ashala’s
non-compliance was the result of Mr Brown failing
to lodge tax returns on time but confirmed to Ms Heilbronn that he would ensure
tax returns were finalised and that any amount Ashala owed to the ATO would be
immediately paid. He told Ms Heilbronn that the funds
used to purchase the
Alice Street unit had come from Ashala’s bank account.
(e) During an interview on 3 September 2009, Ms Heilbronn informed him that
although the ATO had power to apply to a court to reregister
Ashala, the ATO
preferred not to do so. Ms Heilbronn stated that the audit would be
satisfactorily finalised if outstanding personal
income tax returns for him, Ms
Marks and Morgan were lodged with the ATO, and tax paid in accordance with the
ATO’s assessment
of those returns, based on all net income earned by any
entities associated with him and Ms Marks (including Ashala). Ms Heilbronn
recommended that he and Ms Marks seek further legal advice before agreeing to
the ATO’s proposal.
(f) He and Ms Marks then met with Mr Leach at Gateway’s offices. He
informed Mr Leach about what had transpired in the ATO
interviews, including him
having told the ATO that Ashala’s funds were used to purchase the Alice
Street unit. He told Mr
Leach that the ATO preferred not to reregister Ashala
and that the matter would be resolved if he, Ms Marks and Morgan lodged tax
returns which included any amount that Ashala would have owed to the ATO. He
requested Mr Leach’s advice concerning both his
personal position as well
as his interest in the KJM Trust. Ms Marks also requested Mr Leach’s
advice concerning both her
personal position and her position as trustee of the
(g) Mr Leach advised him and Ms Marks that they should immediately comply with
the ATO’s proposal, and provide the proposed
personal tax returns for
himself, Ms Marks and Morgan to Mr Leach so that he could review those returns
and provide further advice.
(h) Because he was concerned about the Alice Street
unit being protected, he typed up a letter and returned to Mr Leach’s
to have him sign (
Confirmation
(i) On about 2 November 2009, he provided the proposed personal tax returns for
the 2005/06 and 2006/07 financial years for himself,
Ms Marks and Morgan to Mr
Leach together with covering letters which stated that the income recorded in
each tax return had been
earned from Ashala. He asked Mr Leach to review the
proposed tax returns, the covering letters and bank statements for Ashala for
the 2005/06 and 2006/07 financial years and advise whether the proposed tax
returns and covering letters would meet the requirements
of the ATO proposal to
finalise the audit.
(j) Mr Leach advised him and Ms Marks that the
proposed tax returns and the covering letters would meet the requirements of the
proposal. Mr Leach said that Gateway would forward the tax returns and
letters to the ATO immediately and, provided the assessed
tax was paid
immediately, that would finalise the matter and “the unit would be
(k) He recalls that he and Mr Leach had a
conversation on that occasion to the following effect:
Featherstone: Are you positive that lodging these returns in our personal
names and paying the amounts will definitely ensure that
the unit is
Leach: Definitely. The ATO won’t come after you once you have paid the
money because you have fully cooperated. If there is
ever any problem in the
future, you could just subpoena the officer you dealt with to get the full story
out. There’s nothing
to worry about.
Featherstone: Are you positive that we shouldn’t get Ashala Model
Agency Pty Ltd re-registered and pay the money through the
Leach: Definitely not. That could just irritate them and make this situation
worse. Everyone is being nice and getting along at
the moment so keep it that
way. Just make sure you pay the money owing on the tax returns straight
(l) The tax returns were lodged and the ATO issued notices of assessment. He
paid the tax assessed on those returns. The ATO then
provided a letter to him,
and to Ms Marks, stating that the audit had been finalised and no further action
would be taken.
Leach’s evidence was as follows:
(a) In mid to late 2009, Mr Featherstone informed him that the ATO was auditing
the personal tax affairs of Mr Featherstone, Ms Marks
and Morgan. Mr
Featherstone told him that Mr Featherstone, Ms Marks and Morgan had not filed
tax returns or paid tax for a number
(b) Mr Featherstone said the ATO had proposed that if Mr Featherstone, Ms Marks
and Morgan remitted tax in certain amounts (which
he could no longer recall)
then as far as the ATO was concerned that would settle the debts owed by them
personally and entities
associated with them that the ATO had investigated. The
ATO did not want the natural persons involved in the audit to reregister
entities that had been deregistered for the purpose of making separate
remittances on behalf of those deregistered entities.
(c) To the best of his recollection, Mr Featherstone did not mention Ashala
specifically. Mr Featherstone did not inform him (and
he was not otherwise
aware) that Ashala had been deregistered. Mr Featherstone did not specifically
mention the Alice Street unit
or a need to “protect” that unit. He
was aware that other real property assets were held by trusts associated with Mr
Featherstone.
(d) Mr Featherstone did not inform him then (or at any time) that Ashala’s
funds had been used to purchase the Alice Street
unit. The settlement proceeds
were drawn by bank cheque. He only became aware later, from the decisions of
Jackson J and the Court
of Appeal in the liquidator’s proceeding, that Mr
Featherstone or Ms Marks had caused Ashala to pay the purchase price.
(e) He advised Mr Featherstone that if the ATO had established that Mr
Featherstone, Ms Marks and Morgan owed tax, on a personal
basis, in the amounts
raised by the ATO in the audit interviews then, unless there was some basis to
challenge that, the necessary
personal returns would need to be lodged and paid
as soon as possible.
(f) He told Mr Featherstone that if the ATO had advised that lodging of returns
and remittance of tax by the audited individuals
would satisfy the ATO and no
further action would be taken, then it was a sensible and practical position to
take to follow their
(g) Mr Featherstone subsequently presented him with
the Confirmation Letter to sign. He no longer recalled signing the Confirmation
Letter but accepted that it appears to bear his signature.
(h) He has no recollection of Mr Featherstone having provided him with proposed
tax returns, or Ashala’s bank statements, and
being asked to advise on
risks arising from those documents. He does not think he was instructed to give
such advice, or that he
gave such advice, because it raised issues outside his
area of expertise. His general practice in such situations was to refer such
requests to a specialist. Further, it was his usual practice to confirm oral
advice in writing.
(i) He has no recollection of having a conversation with Mr Featherstone to the
effect set out at
did not discuss protecting the Alice Street unit specifically or re-registering
any specific entity with Mr Featherstone.
Surman’s evidence challenged Mr Leach’s assertion that he only
became aware that the Alice Street unit had been
purchased with Ashala’s
funds from the judgments handed down in the liquidator’s proceeding. Mr
Surman stated that Mr
Featherstone and Mr Leach discussed that matter at the
meeting at Gateway’s offices after he had been interviewed by the ATO
above), and that he had
“heard them discuss it many, many times since and prior to the Court of
Appeal finding.” Mr
Surman stated that he had attended many meetings with
Mr Leach and Mr Featherstone regarding various court proceedings over a
period before the Court of Appeal decision was handed down. He said
the following issues were always raised and discussed at those
(a) The Alice Street unit had been lost due to Mr Leach telling Mr Featherstone
to pay the money to the ATO in the way it was paid
rather than having them
reregister Ashala. Mr Leach would always state that he should have made the ATO
reregister Ashala.
(b) ATO officers cannot be subpoenaed to give evidence. Mr Leach would always
state that if he had been aware of that then he would
have insisted that Ashala
be reregistered.
Confirmation Letter which Mr Featherstone prepared for Mr Leach to sign was in
the following terms:
“I refer to our previous conversations in
relation to an audit being conducted by the Australian Taxation Office on myself
Kristy Marks.
I confirm your advice to me that, rather than re-registering various
companies, that Kristy and I are to lodge our outstanding personal
tax returns
and pay any tax taking into account the tax obligations of all entities to the
satisfaction of the Australian Taxation
By following the above you confirm that it will satisfy any money owing to
the Australian Taxation Office by either of us personally
or any companies
referred to through the audit which will in turn protect any assets Kristy and I
may own in either our own names
or on behalf of any Trusts.
By counter-signing this letter you agree that you confirm the contents of
this letter as your advice to me.”
Consideration
[84] From the
accounts of Mr Featherstone and Mr Leach, and the terms of the Confirmation
Letter, I am satisfied of the following
(a) Mr Featherstone informed Mr Leach of the ATO proposal to finalise the audit
– namely that tax found to be owing would be
paid through the lodgement of
personal tax returns and remittance of tax in accordance with those returns,
with the ATO not requiring
associated companies which had been deregistered to
be reregistered to remit outstanding tax;
(b) Mr Featherstone sought confirmation from Mr Leach that compliance with the
ATO proposal would satisfy the tax obligations of
himself and Ms Marks and any
associated companies referred to by the ATO during the audit and protect assets
which he or Ms Marks
might own personally or on trust;
(c) Mr Leach provided advice which caused Mr Featherstone to follow the course
proposed by the ATO including, as stated in the Confirmation
confirming that acting in accordance with the ATO proposal would satisfy the
relevant tax obligations and protect any
assets held by Mr Featherstone or Ms
critical difference between the accounts of Mr Featherstone and Mr Leach is
whether Mr Featherstone mentioned matters which
would have raised the need for
Mr Leach to warn Mr Featherstone of the risk that compliance with the ATO
proposal might not avoid
the events which transpired. That is, whether Mr Leach
became subject to a duty to warn Mr Featherstone that, even if Mr Featherstone
paid the tax in the amount and manner sought by the ATO following the audit: the
ATO might subsequently alter its stated position
that such payment would satisfy
the outstanding tax liabilities of deregistered companies such as Ashala; that
Ashala might be reregistered
and a liquidator might be appointed to it; that a
liquidator might successfully challenge the payment of Ashala’s funds to
purchase the Alice Street unit; that the trustee of the KJM Trust might be
ordered to transfer the Alice Street unit to a liquidator
be subject to a duty to provide such a warning, Mr Leach would have had to have
known or been informed of the following matters
when Mr Featherstone sought
advice on the ATO proposal:
(a) Ashala was one of the deregistered companies that the ATO had referred to or
investigated during the audit;
(b) prior to its deregistration, Ashala owed outstanding tax obligations to the
(c) the trustee of the KJM Trust had used Ashala’s funds to purchase the
Alice Street unit;
(d) as a consequence of using Ashala’s funds to purchase the Alice Street
unit, Ashala was unable to pay its outstanding tax
obligations and became (or at
the least was at risk of becoming) insolvent.
[87] As with Mr
Featherstone’s account of his instructions to Mr Leach in June 2007 when
the Alice Street unit was purchased
above), I am not persuaded that Mr
Featherstone’s account is an accurate description of what he said to Mr
Leach when he sought
advice on the ATO proposal. In particular, I do not accept
that Mr Leach told Mr Featherstone that the Alice Street unit “would
safe” if he paid tax assessed on the proposed individual tax returns (see
above) or that the two of them
had a conversation to the effect set out at
above. Given the events which
transpired in the years after the ATO audit leading to the loss of the Alice
Street unit, Mr Featherstone’s
account of that conversation strikes me as
entirely self-serving.
[88] I am not
persuaded that Mr Featherstone raised with Mr Leach the need to ensure that the
Alice Street unit was protected, as
distinct from a more general concern about
protecting unspecified assets. If protecting the Alice Street unit was Mr
Featherstone’s
primary concern, and he specifically raised that concern
with Mr Leach, I would expect him to have recorded that in the Confirmation
Letter. He did not do so. The language used in the Confirmation Letter
reflects only a general concern to protect “any”
(unspecified)
assets that either Mr Featherstone or Ms Marks “may” own, in either
of their personal capacities or as
trustees. That general reference does not
support Mr Featherstone’s evidence that he sought Mr Leach’s advice
protecting the Alice Street unit specifically.
[89] The words
used in the Confirmation Letter also do not support Mr Featherstone’s
assertion that he asked Mr Leach whether
Ashala (specifically) should be
reregistered. In the Confirmation Letter, Mr Featherstone talked in general
terms about “re-registering
various companies”, and about compliance
with the ATO proposal satisfying any money owed to the ATO by “any
referred to through the audit”. Again, if Mr Featherstone had
asked Mr Leach whether Ashala should be reregistered (whether
because its funds
were used to purchase the Alice Street unit or the fact that it did not pay tax
before it was deregistered) I would
expect Mr Featherstone to have referred to
the company specifically in the Confirmation Letter.
Surman’s evidence does not provide any significant support for Mr
Featherstone’s account of his discussions with
Mr Leach. Mr
Surman’s reference to particular matters having been discussed between Mr
Featherstone and Mr Leach many times
over a period of years up to the conclusion
of the liquidator’s proceeding (see
above) raises significant doubts as
to the accuracy of Mr Surman’s memory of what was discussed at the time Mr
Featherstone
sought advice on the ATO proposal. There is at least a significant
possibility (and to my mind a likelihood) that, over time, Mr
Surman has come to
believe that matters which might have been discussed with Mr Leach in the period
after Ashala was reregistered
and the liquidator brought his proceeding were
discussed much earlier. Consequently, I have real doubt as to whether Mr Surman
accurately recalled the events that occurred and the matters that were
discussed at the relevant time.
[91] Ultimately,
if I had not found that Mr Surman’s claim is statute barred, I would not
have reached the state of actual persuasion
required to make a finding that,
when Mr Featherstone sought advice on the ATO proposal, Mr Leach knew or was
informed about the
following matters described in
above. Consequently, I would not
have reached the state of actual persuasion required to find that
Gateway’s duty to take reasonable
care in advising about the ATO proposal
required it to identify and warn about a risk that compliance with that proposal
might still
see the trustee of the KJM Trust lose the Alice Street
Did Gateway breach its duty of care to the trustee of the
[92] As I would
not have been satisfied that Gateway was retained to prepare and lodge tax
returns for Ashala, it follows that I would
also not have been satisfied that
Gateway breached any duty of care in that respect.
[93] As I would
not have been satisfied that Gateway’s retainer in respect of the Alice
Street unit extended beyond establishing
the KJM Trust and acting for Ms Marks
as trustee of that trust on the purchase of the Alice Street unit, it follows
that I also would
not have been satisfied that Gateway breached its duty of care
by failing to provide advice about risks associated with using Ashala’s
funds to purchase the Alice Street unit.
[94] As I would
not have been satisfied that Gateway’s duty to take reasonable care in
advising about the ATO proposal required
it to warn about a risk that compliance
with that proposal might still see the trustee of the KJM Trust lose the Alice
Street unit,
it follows that I would also not have been satisfied that Gateway
breached any duty of care by failing to advise that (contrary to
proposal) Ashala should be reregistered, lodge its own tax returns and pay its
outstanding tax obligations.
Were the losses claimed by Mr Surman
caused by a breach of Gateway’s duty of care?
[95] Given the
conclusions I would have reached on the questions of duty of care and breach as
explained above, it further follows
that if I had not found that Mr
Surman’s claim is statute barred, I would not have been satisfied that any
breach of duty by
Gateway caused the loss claimed by Mr
[96] For the
reasons set out at
above, Mr Surman’s claim is
statute barred and must be dismissed.
[97] I will hear
the parties as to
Mr Featherstone did not
explain in his evidence why Ms Marks would make such an agreement on behalf of
Ashala at a time when (as
admitted on the pleadings) she was no longer a
director of the company. By 4 August 2007, the sole director of Ashala was a Mr
Marshall. Mr Featherstone did not mention Mr Marshall in his evidence.
Ashala Model Agency Pty Ltd
(in liq) v Featherstone
[2016] QSC 121
[2017] 2 Qd R 1.
Featherstone v Ashala Model
Agency Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2017] QCA 260
[2018] 3 Qd R 147.
Limitations of Actions
1974 (Qld), s 10(1)(a).
Commonwealth v Cornwell
[2007] HCA 16
(2007) 229 CLR 519
Wardley Australia Ltd v
Western Australia
[1992] HCA 55
(1992) 175 CLR 514
Wardley, 532; HTW Valuers
(Central Qld) Pty Ltd v Astonland Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 54
(2004) 217 CLR 640
, 655 [29].
Hawkins v Clayton
(1988) 164 CLR 539, 543, 587, 599-600;
Commonwealth v Cornwell
[2007] HCA 16
229 CLR 519
Winnote Pty Ltd (in liq) v Page
[2006] NSWCA 287
(2006) 68 NSWLR
, 539 [40] (
, 542 [61].
Segal (t/a Segal Litton
& Chilton) v Fleming
[2002] NSWCA 262
D W Moore & Co Ltd v Ferrier
Statement of claim filed 24
April 2023 (Court document 1), paragraphs 19 and 20.
The copy of the second page
of the Trust Account Statement evidencing these payments obscures the date the
final payment was made,
however, the statement records the closing balance of
the trust account as at 30 June 2016 as nil.
Ashala Model Agency Pty
Ltd (in liq) v Featherstone (No 2)
[2016] QSC 300.
Transcript 1-36:32 to
[2010] NSWCA 163
(2010) 77 NSWLR 62.
[2010] NSWCA 163
(2010) 77 NSWLR 62
[132]-[135].
Heydon v NRMA Ltd
(2000) 51 NSWLR 1, 117 [362] (
Hawkins v Clayton
(1988) 164 CLR 539, 585;
Waimond Pty Ltd v Byrne
(1989) 18 NSWLR 642
, 118 [364];
David v David
[2009] NSWCA 8
Badenach v Calvert
[2016] HCA 18
(2016) 257 CLR 440
, 457 [57];
Dominic v Riz
[2009] NSWCA 216
Australian Executor
Trustees (SA) Ltd v Kerr
[2021] NSWCA 5
Jadwan Pty Ltd v Rae
& Partners (A Firm)
[2020] FCAFC 62
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
Guirguis Pty Ltd v
Michel’s Patisserie System Pty Ltd
[2017] QCA 83
[2018] 1 Qd R 132
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 280 CLR 442
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
When Mr Leach was
cross-examined, he said he understood that Mr Brown had since passed away
although there was no direct evidence
of that fact.
Transcript 1-28:37-40.
Ashala Model Agency Pty
Ltd (in liq) v Featherstone
[2016] QSC 121
[2017] 2 Qd R 1
, 10 [58], 11-16 [78]-[105],
31-32 [177]-[180].
Featherstone v Ashala
Model Agency Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2017] QCA 260
[2018] 3 Qd R 147
, 156 [24], 167 [76], 170
[88]-[90], 172 [96], 176-177 [129]-[132].
Transcript 1-28:9 to
Transcript 1-25:33-42.
Transcript 1-27:21-34.
The contents of the
Confirmation Letter are set out below.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (370 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter