URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hyde v Qbsa [2003] QBT 30 (20 February 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 030
Hyde v QBSA
[2003] QBT Q072-02
QUEENSLAND BUILDING SERVICES AUTHORITY
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
20 February 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
13 August 2002
DECISION OF:
CATCHWORDS:
REPRESENTATION:
SOLICITORS:
Wilson Ryan Grose
RESPONDENT:
In-house solicitor – Mr Budden
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
This is an application by Noel Hyde
(“the applicant”) pursuant to s.105(1) of the Queensland Building
Tribunal Act 2000
(“the Act”) to review certain decisions of the
Queensland Building Services Authority (“the Authority”) made
March 2002.
By one of those decisions the Authority
refused to categorise the applicant as a permitted individual pursuant to
s.56AD(1) of the
The other decision of the Authority was
to suspend the applicant’s licence held under the Act for the reason
stated that the
applicant had breached a condition of the licence placed upon
the licence pursuant to s.35 of the Act. The contravention was particularised
the fact that the applicant became Bankrupt on 29 March 2001. The notice of
suspension in fact refers to “the company”
which is of course
incorrect. The applicant traded and held the relevant licence in his own
Application to be Categorised as a Permitted
There is little issue with respect to
most of the relevant facts in this application.
The applicant is a builder carrying on
business in the Townsville region of Queensland.
The applicant became bankrupt on the
March 2001.
As a result of that bankruptcy, the
applicant became an “excluded individual” pursuant to the provisions
of s.56AC of
the Act. S.56AC(1)(a) defines “relevant bankruptcy
event” as an individual becoming bankrupt. Further, the person remains
excluded individual for a period of five years after the relevant bankruptcy
Accordingly, by reason of the operation
of s.56AC(1) of the Act, the applicant would have remained an excluded
individual until the
March 2006.
Upon becoming an excluded individual,
certain consequences apply which I do not think I need deal with in any detail
for the purposes
of this application.
By s.56AD(1) of the Act, an individual
is given the right to make application to the Authority to be categorised as a
individual” for a relevant event where that individual
has been advised by the Authority or otherwise becomes aware that the
considers the individual to be an excluded individual for the relevant
Clearly, the relevant event in question,
in this application, is the bankruptcy of the applicant.
S.56AD(8) of the Act confers on the
Authority a discretion to categorise an individual making such an application as
“a permitted
individual” for the relevant event but only if the
Authority is satisfied that the individual took “all reasonable
to avoid the coming into existence of the circumstances that
resulted in the happening of the relevant event.
Shortly stated, it is the
applicant’s case, that he did take “all reasonable steps” to
avoid the coming into existence
of the circumstances which led to his
bankruptcy.
It seems relatively clear that the
financial misfortune which befell the applicant arose out of his involvement
with the construction
of a dwelling in Sturt Street,
Townsville.
The applicant had a business practice of
building dwelling homes in circumstances which allowed him to build on several
perhaps build a pair so that he could reside in one while completing
The applicant purchased land at 405
Sturt Street Townsville, above what is known as “the cutting”. He
purchased 3 lots.
He sold one of the lots and then constructed a dwelling on one
of the remaining block and sold that for $360,000.00. He then constructed
was described as “a luxury house” on the remaining block. The
evidence was that the cost of construction was in
the vicinity of $440,000.00
without any allowance for the applicant’s own time or the land
The applicant planned to live in the
dwelling until it was sold.
The applicant, I accept, believed that
it would be likely that upon completion he would be able to sell the property
for somewhere
in the vicinity of $650,000.00 to $700,000.00.
I accept that the applicant truly
believed that that was the sort of range for which the property could be sold at
the relevant time
and I also accept that the applicant based that assumption
upon his general knowledge of the property market in Townsville. The
had been building in Townsville for a long period of time and there is no
dispute that he was a competent and skilled builder.
Effectively, it was as a result of the
inability of the applicant to sell the Sturt Street property at an appropriate
price which
eventually brought about the sale of the property by the mortgagee
bank for some $390,000.00 as mortgagee in possession.
In his evidence the applicant said that
had he been able to sell the property of about $500,000.00 then he would have
been able to
avoid the resulting bankruptcy.
The applicant persisted in trying to
sell the property for a higher price and said that he felt confident that a
higher price could
be obtained.
September, 1999 the
applicant changed his bank and his borrowings to the ANZ Bank. His indebtedness
to the Commonwealth Bank, his
previous bankers had risen from around $400,000.00
In 1999 the applicant obtained the
services of Mr John Snellgrove, of Knoble First National Real Estate. A
marketing brochure was
prepared and the property was offered for sale at a price
of $595,000.00.
The applicant said that Mr Snellgrove
was experienced in the sale of luxury homes.
I had a statement from Mr Jeffrey
Pascoe, a Director of Ferry Property Management, a real estate company. Mr
Pascoe had been involved
in the real estate industry for some 39 years and
conceded that he was close friend of the applicant.
Mr Pascoe described the
applicant’s building work as excellent and had some experience of the
property in Sturt Street.
Mr Pascoe says that he is aware that the
applicant had had a price of some $700,000.00 on the property at one stage but
by the time
that he was instructed to attempt to sell the property the listed
price had been reduced and Mr Pascoe advised the applicant that
he thought the
property would sell for about $500,000.00.
In this application, the Authority does
and has in its Reasons for Decision, put considerable weight upon what it
perceives as the
failure of the applicant to seek and act upon advice of others
such as real estate agents, valuers and builders as to the likely
market price
for which the Sturt Street property could be sold.
The sort of enquiries and investigations
which the applicant should have made must be judged as to the reasonableness of
not doing so having regard to the circumstances of the applicant.
Clearly if the applicant was involved in the construction of a
large number of
dwellings at any one time such as some of the well known large building firms
then one can see
circumstances where a person in that position might well seek the advice of
marketing experts and the like. Perhaps even the advice
of an economist in
certain cases might be appropriate.
However, given the nature of the
applicant’s business and his particular circumstances, including his
apparently past successful
building experience in the Townsville region I am
satisfied that the applicant did take such steps as were
reasonable.
I do not accept that the applicant has
been unreasonable in failing to seek the sort of advice and information which
the Authority
argues that he should have.
There were certain other issues relating
to a property at Yarrawonga where the applicant conceded that he made an under
in relation to the costs associated with the building contract. I
accept that the applicant became involved in that mater because
of reasonable
attempts which he was making to avoid the coming about of the circumstances
which lead to his bankruptcy.
Also the applicant experienced problems,
which were beyond his control, with respect to work being carried out on a
property at Mysterton.
In respect of both of the latter
matters, I am satisfied that the efforts of the applicant with respect to those
matters were as a
direct result of him making attempts, and I accept reasonable
attempts, to prevent the coming about of the circumstances which gave
his bankruptcy.
In other words, the applicant was making
reasonable attempts to generate income in order to satisfy his requirements to
the mortgagee
bank and other creditors to prevent his bankruptcy
Once again, these steps were made
necessary by reason of the applicant’s inability to sell the Sturt Street
property at an amount
to satisfy his mortgagee and
For the applicant to be classified as a
permitted individual, the Authority (and now the Tribunal) must be satisfied
that the individual
took all reasonable steps to avoid the coming into existence
of the circumstances which resulted in the happening of the relevant
As I have already said, the relevant
event itself is the bankruptcy, but clearly the Act does not require that the
applicant must
have taken all reasonable steps to avoid the bankruptcy as such,
but rather the circumstances which resulted in the
bankruptcy.
In this case it is clear that the
circumstance that resulted in the bankruptcy was the failure to realise, from
the sale of the Sturt
Street property, sufficient funds to satisfy the
applicant’s financial liabilities and in particular those to the mortgagee
The question, therefore, is whether or
not I am satisfied that the applicant did take all reasonable
Reference has been made in the
submissions to the Tribunal by both the applicant and the Authority to the
second reading speech of
July 1999 of the Honourable J.C.
Spence with respect to s.56AD and also the explanatory notes with respect to the
Queensland Building Services Authority Amendment Bill
It is apparent, that both the second
reading speech and the explanatory notes to some extent seem to put the
“test” that
an individual would have to satisfy, in order to be
classified as a permitted individual, somewhat higher than the legislation seems
to require.
Certainly, reference to the second
reading speech and the explanatory notes would seem to indicate that the purpose
of the provisions,
which entitles a person to have permitted individual status,
may well only apply where the events which are relevant have occurred
wholly without the involvement or fault of the individual himself. For example,
in the explanatory notes to the
Queensland Building Services Authority Amendment
(referred to in the outline of the parties) the notes
Section 56AD sets out the process whereby an
excluded individual may be categorised as a “permitted individual”.
provision exists to allow individuals who have undergone a bankruptcy event
through absolutely no fault of their own to continue
to operate in the building
industry...
The sole ground for categorisation as a permitted
individual is set out in s.56A(8), namely that the Applicant can demonstrate
all reasonable steps were taken to avoid the occurrence of the facts giving
rise to the relevant event. This ground is intended
to restrict classification
as a permitted person to instances where the Applicant has been the victim of
fraud or defalcation by,
for example, a partner or spouse...”
It seems to me, that upon reading the
section itself, such a test cannot be supported.
I accept, that the purposes of the
legislation is clearly to impose strictures on persons who become bankrupt from
continuing to carry
on business as builders and to regulate their activities.
However, it is clear that the section
provides a mechanism by which a person can apply to be regarded as a permitted
individual and
the test which must be satisfied prior to the Authority
exercising its discretion, is that the individual must satisfy the Authority
that such person has taken all reasonable steps to avoid the circumstances
leading to the event.
Certainly, the applicant attempted to
maximise the return he could obtain on the sale of the property but in so doing
it seems to
me that he was not acting unreasonably. Selling real property in
any market can be difficult and in particular in a regional area,
I accept that
the pool of potential buyers particularly, of more expensive homes is limited.
The Tribunal in considering an
application such as this is entitled to, and is required to exercise its
discretion having regard to
all of the evidence which was initially before the
Authority including any new or fresh evidence put before the
If the Tribunal in this case has to
consider the exercise of the discretion the Tribunal is not limited to an
analysis of the rights
or wrongs of the decision of the Authority
but must consider all the material and exercise the discretion
conferred by s.56AD(8) (see generally
Queensland Building Services Authority
(Decision of the 20
June 1997 District Court Queensland
Appeal No. 1209 per Brabazon DCJ).
The applicant carries the onus of
establishing that he indeed took all reasonable steps.
Now that the application is before the
Tribunal, the Tribunal has a discretion under S.56AD(8). However, the question
as to whether
or not that discretion should be exercised in favour of the
applicant does not arise until the threshold test is satisfied. That
whether or not the applicant has satisfied the Tribunal that he took all
reasonable steps to avoid the coming into existence
of the circumstances that
resulted in his bankruptcy.
Bariesheff v Queensland
Building Services Authority
[2002] QBT 21
the words of the Tribunal in
O’Connell v Queensland Building Services
The use of the
expressions “all reasonable steps” indicates that the Act does not
require that the applicant took all
possible steps. It may be that in hind sight
or if judged from the point of view of a persons of perfection one could
conclude that
there were steps which, if taken, might have avoided the coming
into existence of such circumstances. However, the test is not that
Whether or not the applicant has taken
all reasonable steps, will of course vary from case to case. Indeed, minds might
well differ
on the answer.
It has been suggested that the test to
be applied is “not an objective one”.
December, 2001 were cited with approval, were it was said as
“...in approaching the question of
whether all reasonable steps have been taken to avoid the relevant event, one
puts oneself
in the shoes of, in this case, the Applicant, his experience, his
education and his knowledge of the world. In my view the test is
objective one, the test is not what an insolvency practitioner would have done,
nor is the test what a professional company
director would have done, it is, is
what this man ...did reasonable for him to have done”
With respect is seems to me that it is
difficult to categorise the test as object or subjective. Certainly, the
“knowledge and
experience” of the applicant must be
considered.
In dealing with a similar provision
under S.30(1)(c)(ii) of the Limitations of Actions Act 1974 which uses the
expression “...taken
all reasonable steps...” Thomas JA in
Muir v Franklins
[2001] QCA 173
said at para
“Whether the claimant has taken all
reasonable steps is to be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable person
endowed with
the knowledge and experience of the plaintiff.”
His Honour and Mullins J went on to cite
the decision in
Pizer v Ansett Australia Ltd
[1998] QCA 298
para 15 with approval.
It seems to me therefore that the test
is an objective one but paying due regard to those matters referred to by the
O’Connell v Queensland Building Services Authority
(supra) and their Honours in
Pizer v Ansett Australia Ltd
Muir v Franklins
I accept that when the applicant was
suffering difficulties as a result of his inability to sell the property, he
took steps to try
and avoid the circumstances which led to his
bankruptcy.
I accept that he sold his beach house
and car and used the proceeds thereof to finance his liabilities.
I also accept that the applicant’s
wife inherited a sum of $30,000.00 at about that time and that money was also
paid into the
applicant’s operating account to try and cover his
liabilities.
The applicant gave evidence that he had
always conducted business in his own name and never in a corporate of other
entity. He also
gave evidence that he only ever had one banking account which
he maintained for both his personal and business
The applicant made no attempts to hide
or protect his assets and I am satisfied that he did everything he reasonably
could, given
his particular circumstances, in terms of generating income to
avoid the circumstances leading to his bankruptcy.
I accept that there was a change in the
building industry following the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax which
in the result
made it more difficult for the applicant to obtain work and thus
maintain a cash flow to service his debts.
The applicant also gave evidence that he
went to Dubbo in New South Wales to work so that he could generate income and
all of that
income so generated was paid into his
It may well be, that the applicant did
make an error of judgment at some stage in the sale of the Sturt Street
Notwithstanding, I am satisfied on all
the evidence that this is a case where the applicant has taken all reasonable
steps to avoid
the circumstances which lead to the event.
The Discretion
I must then consider whether or not I
should exercise my discretion in favour of the applicant.
It is conceded that the applicant is a
competent builder and nothing is alleged which suggests that other than for the
relevant bankruptcy,
any of the behaviour of the applicant would warrant an
exercise of the discretion other than in his favour.
I have had regard to the statements
before the Tribunal as to the applicant’s building reputation and
experience.
In all the circumstances I consider this
an appropriate case in which to exercise the discretion in favour of
categorising the applicant
as a permitted
individual.
Application to Review the Decision to
Suspend the Applicant’s Licence
However, the situation is somewhat more
complicated when one has regard to the other matter before
The applicant’s licence was
suspended by reason of his failure to satisfy the relevant financial
requirements stated in the
Board’s Policies (Section 35(2)(a) of the
Of course, at all relevant times, the
applicant was an undischarged bankrupt.
In the normal course a person who
becomes a bankrupt is generally discharged from bankruptcy after a period of
three years, although
of course that period can be varied in certain
circumstances (S.149(4) of the Bankruptcy Act 1996).
Interestingly, s.56AC(1)(b) of the Act
extends the period during which a person will be regarded as an excluded
individual in the
event of the person becoming bankrupt for a period of five
years after the relevant bankruptcy event happens.
Clearly then, it is contemplated, that a
person will remain an excluded individual for such period of five years unless
he is successful
in having the Authority exercise its discretion to categorise
him as a permitted individual.
One would think, that after the
person’s discharge from bankruptcy (in the normal course after 3 years)
then the person might
well be in a position to satisfy the financial
requirements as stated in the Board’s Policy.
I must admit, that it is difficult to
comprehend a situation where a person would be able to satisfy those
requirements whilst he
remained an undischarged bankrupt.
It is not until a person is discharged
from Bankruptcy that the person is released from all debts provable in the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
The Policy requirements of the Authority
have been published and I have been provided with a copy of the Policy published
in the Queensland
Gazette on the 4
August 2000. The Policy
requires that a licensee satisfy four tests. The first is called the net
tangible assets test, the second
a liquidity ratio, the third – financial
monitoring requirements and the fourth – independent review report or
The Authority, as I have indicated, in
its letter of the 7
March 2002 sets out as particulars of the
allegation that the applicant had failed to satisfy the relevant financial
requirements,
the facts of his bankruptcy.
As far as I can gather from the Policy,
there is no requirement as such that the applicant not be “a
Expressing the particulars in such terms
is perhaps not all together that helpful in deciding what aspect of the Policy
the applicant
is alleged to have failed to satisfy.
However, I think it is relatively clear
that it is in particular test No. 1 “Net Tangible Assets” that the
applicant would
fail to satisfy.
For builders, test No. 1 requires that
the builder have a minimum level of net tangible assets of
$15,000.00.
The applicant produced evidence to the
effect that a Jose Marrar Goicoechea and Steven Juan Goicoechea and Lotus Glen
Pty Ltd, were
willing to provide a bank guarantee in the sum of $15,000.00 as
security to support an application for a building licence by the
That may well be sufficient to establish
an asset item, but against that, the liabilities of the applicant must also be
considered.
The submissions on behalf of the
applicant argue that the view taken by the authority as to what are liabilities
for the purposes
of applying the policy is not correct.
At paragraph 4.1 of the submissions, the
applicant argues that if the Authority’s construction was correct, then
be absolutely no circumstances whatsoever where a bankrupt person can
hold a builder’s licence at all.
As I have already said, there will be
circumstances where a person may be categorised as a “permitted
individual” but
will not be a bankrupt. Such a situation may arise after
a period of three years following the bankruptcy.
If one has regard to the liabilities of
an applicant in such circumstances as including those which have not been
released by his
discharge from bankruptcy then, notwithstanding, the
availability of the bank guarantee, to which I have referred, I am satisfied
that it is unlikely that an applicant would be able to satisfy the financial
requirements.
I say “unlikely” because
there is no evidence before the Tribunal as to what the state of the
applicant’s financial
circumstances were, either at the time of his
bankruptcy or at the time of the hearing.
Failing such evidence I cannot be
satisfied, on the application, that the applicant would be able to satisfy the
financial requirements.
Clearly, assuming that the applicant has
no other assets than for the bank guarantee (and because of the reasons in this
I really do not need to determine whether or not in fact the bank
guarantee in any event is sufficient) then any liabilities at all
that the applicant’s net asset situation would clearly be less than the
minimum required.
In the circumstances, it follows that I
reject the application with respect to the review of the decisions to suspend
the applicant’s
licence and in that regard I confirm the Decision of the
Authority made the 7
March 2002 to suspend the applicant’s
Accordingly, I formally order as
The Decision of the Queensland Building
Services Authority to refuse to categorise the applicant as a permitted
individual pursuant
to s.56AD(1) of the Queensland Building Services Authority
Act 1991 is reversed.
The Decision of the Queensland Building
Services Authority that the applicant’s licence be suspended made the
March 2002 is confirmed.
Should there be any issue as to costs,
the Tribunal will relist the
.............................................
A.J. MOON - MEMBER
QUEENSLAND BUILDING TRIBUNAL
24 February
Queensland Building Tribunal [2003] QQBT 030
Application No: Q072-02
Applicant: NOEL HYDE
C/- Wilson Ryan & Grose
TOWNSVILLE Q 4810
Respondent: QUEENSLAND BUILDING SERVICES AUTHORITY
Edmondstone Street
SOUTH BRISBANE Q 4101
Section 93 –
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
Upon hearing Mr Martinez on behalf of the applicant and Mr Budden
on behalf of the respondent, the Queensland Building Tribunal makes
following orders:
That the Decision of the Queensland
Building Services Authority (“the Authority”) to refuse to
categorise the applicant
as a permitted individual pursuant to s.56AD(1) of the
Queensland Building Services Authority Act 1991
That the Decision of the Authority that
the applicant’s licence be suspended made on 7 March 2002 is
Should there be any issue as to costs,
the Tribunal will relist the
............................................
A.J. MOON - MEMBER
QUEENSLAND BUILDING
24 February 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (118 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter