URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2006/88.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GMAV, Re [2006] QGAAT 88 (19 December 2006)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL,
[2006] QGAAT 88
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Guardianship Application
Administration Application
Administration Application
In the matter of GMAV
MATTER NUMBERS:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
DATE OF HEARING:
30 October 2006
DATE OF ORDER:
30 October 2006
DATE OF REASONS:
19 December 2006
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
C Endicott Deputy President
B Cotterell Member
Professor A
Ashman Member
CATCHWORDS:
IMPAIRED CAPACITY-GUARDIANS-ADMINISTRATORS-ENDURING POWER OF
ATTORNEY-REVOCATION-Adult with Alzheimer’s type dementia-Where
had failed to act or to act diligently-Where family conflict-Where other
appointee preferred.
Guardianship and Administration Act
Principles 1
GUARDIANSHIP
That the Adult Guardian is
appointed as guardian for GMAV for the following personal matters
(a) Accommodation decisions.
This guardianship order
remains current for twelve (12)
ADMINISTRATION
That The Public Trustee of
Queensland is appointed as administrator for GMAV for all financial
That the administrator will
provide a financial management plan to the Tribunal within four (4)
The Tribunal directs the
administrator to provide accounts to the Tribunal when
This order remains current
until further order of the Tribunal.
ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
The following Enduring Power
of Attorney for GMAV is revoked pursuant to
Powers of Attorney
and S84(2) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(a) The Enduring Power of Attorney dated 31 December 2005 appointing GL and EG
as attorneys for financial, personal and health matters
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
[1] On 21 August 2006 an application was lodged with the Tribunal by GR and GE
seeking their appointment as guardians and administrators
for their mother GMAV.
[2] GMAV had appointed another daughter AH as her attorney under an Enduring
Power of Attorney given on 16 June 2003. GMAV subsequently
appointed her son GL
and EG as her attorneys for personal and financial matters under an Enduring
Power of Attorney given on 31 December
[3] A referral was made to the Office of the Adult Guardian on 6 March 2006
that she was unable to
have contact with her family and friends interstate, that the proceeds from the
sale of GMAV’s property
interstate may not have been applied for her sole
benefit and that GMAV may not be receiving adequate care.
[4] In a report dated 25 August 2006, a senior investigations officer of the
Office of Adult Guardian recommended that GMAV needed
an administrator and
supported the appointment of The Public Trustee of Queensland as administrator
[5] On 29 August 2006 an application was lodged with the Tribunal by the
Assistant Adult Guardian seeking the appointment of The
Public Trustee of
Queensland as administrator for GMAV. The hearing of the applications was
scheduled for 30 October 2006.
The Issues and the
Legislation
[6] The issues for the Tribunal
have capacity for the matter?
need for a Guardian? If so, who should be appointed;
Is there a need for an Administrator?
If so, who should be appointed?
[7] The Tribunal has the power in
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(the Act) to appoint a Guardian for a personal
matter or an Administrator for a financial matter only if the Tribunal is
as to the following:
(a) the adult has impaired capacity for the matter; and
(b) there is need for a decision in relation to the matter or the adult is
likely to do something in relation to the matter that involves,
or is likely to
involve, unreasonable risk to the adult’s health, welfare or property:
(c) without an appointment-
(i) the adult’s needs will not be adequately met; or
the adult’s
interests will not be adequately protected.
[8] Capacity is defined in Schedule 4 of the Act as:
, for a person for a matter, means the
person is capable of-
(a) understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the matter;
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
communicating the
decisions in some way.
[9] In making a determination as to whether there is a need for a guardian and
administrator, the Tribunal took into account the
fact that GMAV had in December
2005 appointed GL and EG as her attorneys for personal and financial matters
under an Enduring Power
of Attorney.
THE PARTIES
[10] The active parties who attended the hearing were the Adult GMAV, the
applicants GR and GE, a representative from the Office
of the Adult Guardian,
the attorneys GL and EG and a representative from The Public Trustee of
Queensland. RG, AH, WT and AW attended
at the hearing as interested parties.
The Evidence
[11] In addition to the written material contained on the Tribunal file, all of
the parties attending the hearing were given the
opportunity to express their
views. These views where specifically relied on by the Tribunal are discussed
DOES GMAV LACK CAPACITY FOR THE MATTER?
[12] The Tribunal was provided with reports from several medical health
professionals who had examined GMAV at different times during
the period from
early 2003 to September 2006. While the opinions of health professionals as to
GMAV’s capacity to make decisions
in 2003, 2004 or 2005 are useful when
considering the validity of decisions made at those times, those earlier
opinions are not as
useful when considering the extent of GMAV’s decision
making capacity as at the date of the hearing of the applications made
[13] In considering the issue of whether GMAV currently has capacity for
decision making, the Tribunal preferred the more recent
medical opinion as to
GMAV’s current capacity to make decisions over medical opinions expressed
or formed some time ago.
[14] Dr Sarah van Staden is a general medical practitioner with a practice in
Queensland. In a report to the Adult Guardian dated
27 April 2006, Dr van Staden
stated that she had been treating GMAV at that time for about a month. Dr van
Staden reported that GMAV
had dementia which impaired her cognitive ability. She
considered that GMAV was not capable of making decisions freely and voluntarily
and that GMAV did not have the capacity to make an Enduring Power of Attorney.
Dr van Staden expressed an opinion that GMAV could
make all simple decisions but
no complex decisions.
[15] Dr Carolyn De Wytt is a neurologist with a practice in Queensland. She
examined GMAV during a consultation on 23 May 2006. Dr
De Wytt was unable to
obtain a history of her illness from GMAV but Dr De Wytt set out in her report
the history that was given by
GL and EG. This history included a diagnosis of
Alzheimer’s disease since 2002 and the taking of Aricept for 3 years. Dr
Wytt noted the comment by GL that GMAV’s condition had deteriorated
[16] Dr De Wytt conducted a Mini Mental State Examination and reported a score
of 16 out of 30. Dr De Wytt expressed an opinion that
GMAV had a moderately
severe dementia of the Alzheimer’s type and that GMAV was incapable of
making informed decisions about
her own care or her financial affairs. Dr De
Wytt reported that she had no reliable clinical information concerning
decision making capacity prior to 23 May
[17] The Tribunal is satisfied that the medical evidence has established that
GMAV has a moderately severe dementia of the Alzheimer’s
medical condition impacts on her cognitive functioning, as evidenced by the Mini
Mental State Examination conducted in
May 2006 and in particular has resulted in
an impaired ability to understand the nature and effect of decisions about her
and financial affairs. The Tribunal determines that the presumption
that GMAV has capacity for personal and financial matters has
been rebutted.
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF A GUARDIAN?
[18] GMAV appointed GL and EG as her attorneys for personal and financial
matters in an Enduring Power of Attorney document on 31
December 2005. The power
of attorney for personal matters could be exercised when GMAV lost capacity. The
medical evidence has established
that GMAV has impaired decision making capacity
for personal matters and that her capacity has been impaired since at least
[19] According to
Guardianship and Administration Act
, the Tribunal can appoint a Guardian for a personal matter for an adult
with impaired decision making capacity only if the Tribunal
is satisfied that
there is need for a decision or the adult is likely to do something that
involves, or is likely to involve, unreasonable
risk to the adult’s health
and welfare and without an appointment of a Guardian the adult’s needs
will not be adequately
[20] Prima facie, there is no need for the appointment of a Guardian if GMAV has
validly appointed attorneys and if her needs can
be adequately met by her
attorneys making personal decisions for her.
[21] In the application lodged by the Adult Guardian it was contended that it
was not appropriate for the attorneys to be left in
place to make personal
decisions for GMAV as the attorneys had in fact not acted on the powers granted
to them under the Enduring
Power of Attorney document and there were decisions
that had to be made for GMAV.
[22] It is contended in the application for the appointment of a Guardian by GR
and GE that it was not appropriate for the attorneys
to make personal decisions
for GMAV as there was conflict between the decision makers and GMAV’s
family and it was further
contended that GMAV did not have capacity when she
made the Enduring Power of Attorney.
[23] In view of the contentions raised in the application as to the validity of
the appointment of the attorneys and as it has been
determined that GMAV now has
impaired capacity, it is necessary to determine if the Enduring Power of
Attorney document made on 31
December 2005 is valid.
[24] The medical evidence provided to the Tribunal establishes that GMAV was
first diagnosed with dementia in early 2003. Examinations
conducted during 2003
recorded her Mini Mental State Examination scores as 23 out of 30 and 25 out of
30 and she was commenced on
Aricept to improve her memory and cognitive
functioning. The medication appeared to have had a good effect as in 2004 her
general medical practitioner recorded GMAV’s cognitive status as
[25] In late 2003, a Dr Paul Babich met GMAV and was involved in her treatment
for a variety of physical ailments mainly leg ulcers.
He states in a report
dated 15 September 2006 that he was aware that GMAV was being treated at the
time with Aricept and he considered
that she had done very well on this
medication. He found her dementia to be mild and that she could pass tests he
set her in terms
of recall and executive function.
[26] He ceased to be involved with GMAV in late 2005 when she moved from
interstate. Dr Babich expressed the opinion that GMAV was
understanding the meaning and implications of an Enduring Power of Attorney.
[27] Another general medical practitioner, Dr Fiona Dyall, was involved in the
treatment of GMAV during 2005. In a health professional
report dated 13 April
2006 given to the Adult Guardian, Dr Dyall states that she had treated GMAV from
14 April 2005 to 18 November
2005. Dr Dyall reported that GMAV had a mild level
of dementia. She expressed an opinion that GMAV would not be able to make
decisions about personal and financial affairs but she could make simple
decisions. Dr Dyall considered as at the last date that
she saw GMAV, namely on
18 November 2005, that GMAV had the capacity to execute an Enduring Power of
[28] The Tribunal was not provided with medical evidence as to GMAV’s
capacity as at 31 December 2005. There was medical evidence
that GMAV’s
capacity for making complex decisions was impaired in November 2005 but that she
retained sufficient capacity to
be able to understand the nature and
consequences of making an Enduring Power of Attorney. There was medical evidence
that GMAV no
longer had the capacity to make an Enduring Power of Attorney by
April 2006.
[29] In the absence of medical evidence that could establish more accurately
when GMAV lost the capacity to make an Enduring Power
of Attorney, the Tribunal
finds in accordance with
Guardianship and Administration Act
and General Principle 1 under Schedule 1 of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
that the presumption of capacity to make an Enduring
Power of Attorney on 31 December 2005 has not been rebutted for
[30] GL gave evidence that he considered that he was appointed as attorney to
act in emergency situations only. In a letter to the
Office of Adult Guardian
that is quoted in the report of the Adult Guardian dated 25 August 2006, GL
stated that his appointment
as attorney was made primarily for GMAV’s
safety and in case of medical emergency, not to take control of her finances and
make decisions for her. He had stated at one stage an intention not to exercise
his decision maker power until he was certain of
his legal standing as
[31] The reports of Dr Sarah van Staden indicate that the attorneys were both
involved in arranging medical care for GMAV from early
2006. They would have
been aware of her deteriorating capacity to make her own decisions due to the
progress of her dementia.
[32] The applicants GR and GE state that GL was responsible for GMAV moving out
of her duplex interstate and going to live with GL
and EG in 2004. The
applicants state that they were not told about this change of residence and that
their efforts to communicate
with GMAV were hindered from that time. The
applicants state that GL and EG were responsible for the decision to remove GMAV
interstate to Queensland sometime prior to Christmas 2005 and that the
applicants were not given the opportunity to say goodbye to
[33] The applicants GR and GE state that contact between GMAV and family members
has been denied for about 2 years and that this
denial of contact constitutes
inappropriate personal decision making by GL and EG. The applicants raise their
concerns about GMAV’s
state of health and they complain that GMAV’s
extended family has been denied information about her health.
[34] The applicants GR and GE identified the type of personal decisions that
have to be made for GMAV, which are effectively a decision
as to where she
resides and a decision as to the provision of health care suitable for her
[35] The Adult Guardian identified that there was a need for decisions to be
made about suitable contact arrangements taking into
consideration with whom
GMAV resides and how contact with other family members is affected by the choice
of residence.
[36] The Tribunal finds that, apart from arranging health care, the attorneys
generally failed to act on their power to make personal
decisions for GMAV
despite being provided with information that their appointment as personal
decision makers had been activated
by at least April 2006 when GMAV lost her
capacity for personal matters.
[37] The Tribunal considered that it was clear from the documents lodged with
the Tribunal and from the oral evidence given at the
hearing that there was
significant conflict between the attorneys and other members of GMAV’s
family over whether she should
continue to reside in Queensland or return
interstate, over what level of residential and health care support she required
what contact her extended family should have with GMAV.
[38] The Tribunal considers that the evidence establishes there is a need for
personal decisions to be made for GMAV. The escalating
nature of the conflict
had prevented effective resolution of the concerns expressed by family members
being reached and had resulted
in decisions being deferred about these matters.
[39] The Tribunal is satisfied that there is a need for decisions to be made
that the attorneys
appointed by GMAV have to date failed to act diligently in seeking to address
the concerns raised by members of
GMAV’s family that would enable
appropriate decisions to be made for GMAV. The attorneys have not appeared to
appreciate that
their responsibilities came into effect when GMAV lost capacity
for personal decision making and they had until recently effectively
their responsibilities to make personal decisions for GMAV.
[40] The Tribunal finds that GMAV’s needs will not be adequately met
without setting aside the grant to the attorneys of decision
making power for
personal matters. Due to the escalating level of conflict within GMAV’s
family, it would be very difficult
for the attorneys to now attempt to exercise
personal decision making power for GMAV. The Tribunal considers that a guardian
be appointed to make personal decisions for GMAV.
IF SO WHO SHOULD BE APPOINTED?
[41] In the application lodged by the Adult Guardian with the Tribunal, despite
indicating that there were decisions as to accommodation,
health care and day to day issues to be made, no one was nominated as an
appropriate guardian of GMAV. The
Adult Guardian indicated that the four adult
children of GMAV could act as her Statutory Health Attorneys.
[42] At the hearing, the representatives of the Adult Guardian continued to
acknowledge a need for a personal decision maker, particularly
as to contact
between GMAV and her extended family, but the representatives told the Tribunal
that they considered that the Adult
Guardian could not put into place
arrangements that would ensure contact as the Adult Guardian had no means of
improving the ability
of family members to communicate with GMAV and with each
[43] GMAV told the Tribunal that she did not consider that she needed someone to
make personal decisions for her. She was happy to
receive help with her
decisions from GL and EG as she trusted them and she enjoyed living with them.
She expressed distrust of the
applicants GR and GE as she considered that they
would put her in a nursing home if they had the power to make decisions for her.
[44] GL submitted that he should make personal decisions for his mother and this
view was supported by EG.
[45] GR had nominated herself as joint guardian with GE in her application to
the Tribunal. During the course of the hearing, GR
indicated she could
appreciate that it would be sensible to appoint an independent person to be
guardian if there continued to be
conflict between family members as to what was
in the best interests of GMAV.
[46] She was nevertheless prepared to take on the role of decision maker jointly
with her brother GE. She was opposed to GL and EG
continuing to holding decision
making power for GMAV. She expressed her doubts that the present care givers
could continue to provide
24 hour residential care for GMAV and that they had
not been willing to consider appropriate care alternatives for GMAV.
[47] GE expressed views similar to those of GR. He did not want GL and EG to
continue as decision makers for personal matters as
they had not communicated
information about GMAV’s state of health to the rest of the family.
[48] AH supported GL and EG as personal decision makers. She could not see the
present need for a formal appointment of a guardian
as she was impressed by what
GL and EG had been doing to assist her mother. She could see the value of a
professional person making
decisions if any serious health care questions arose
and in that case she would prefer the appointment of an independent decision
[49] RG submitted that the guardian should be someone who can make the right
decisions for his grandmother based on what is best
[50] GMAV’s family is polarised between two factions. One part of the
family considers that it is in her best interests for
GMAV to remain in
Queensland with her son GL and his partner while the other part of the family
considers that it is in the best
interests of GMAV to live close to those
members of her family who reside in interstate. There is conflict over the type
of residential
care currently required by GMAV. There is significant conflict
[51] GL, GR and GE did not explain to the Tribunal how any resolution or even
reduction of this conflict could be achieved if any
of them were to be appointed
as guardian for GMAV. The Tribunal was left with the impression that goodwill
and trust had been completely
lost between GL and his siblings GR and GE and
that a breakdown of communication would continue if either GL or GR and GE were
be appointed guardians.
[52] The Tribunal is satisfied that a guardian independent of the family
conflict is required to make accommodation decisions for
GMAV and that it was
appropriate to appoint the Adult Guardian to make these types of decisions.
[53] The Tribunal considered that other personal decisions would be able to be
made informally by the family once the issue of GMAV’s
accommodation was
finalised. In restricting the appointment of a guardian to the making of
accommodation decisions and limiting the
appointment to a period of 12 months,
the Tribunal is implementing a formal substituted decision making regime that is
specific and
responsive to the current needs of GMAV but at the same time is
imposing an outcome that is the least restrictive of her rights.
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF AN ADMINISTRATOR?
[54] The Tribunal can appoint an Administrator for a financial matter for an
adult with impaired decision making capacity only if
the Tribunal is satisfied
that there is need for a decision or the adult is likely to do something that
involves, or is likely to
involve, unreasonable risk to the adult’s
welfare or property and that without an appointment of an Administrator the
needs will not be adequately met.
[55] As has already been discussed, GMAV had validly appointed attorneys to make
decisions for her and under that appointment GL
and EG had the power and
responsibility to make financial decisions for her.
[56] The attorneys gave evidence that they did not want to make financial
decisions for GMAV. Although GL told the Tribunal that
he had taken possession
of GMAV’s EFTPOS card in about August 2006, he also gave evidence that
GMAV pays her own way and often
buys items at Coles with her card. GL told the
Tribunal that he and his joint attorney had not had to make any significant
decisions for GMAV.
[57] The Adult Guardian identified that there was a need for decisions to be
made about managing GMAV’s day to day finances,
managing her Centrelink
payments and managing any investments arising from the sale of her home
interstate.
[58] The Tribunal is satisfied that there is a need for decisions to be made
attorneys to date have
shown that they are somewhat ambivalent about the responsibility of acting as
her attorneys for financial
matters. They have expressed to the Adult Guardian
and at the hearing to this Tribunal a preference not to make financial decisions
for GMAV. The attorneys have not expressed an understanding of their role nor of
the obligations on them as attorneys.
[59] The Tribunal finds that GMAV’s needs will not be adequately met
without setting aside the grant to the attorneys of decision
making power for
financial matters. Once again the Tribunal notes that the level of conflict
within GMAV’s family would make
it very difficult for the attorneys to now
attempt to exercise financial decision making power for GMAV. The Tribunal
considers that
an Administrator should be appointed to make financial decisions
IF SO WHO SHOULD BE APPOINTED?
[60] GR and GE in their application had sought to be appointed as joint
Administrators. All of the parties at the hearing expressed
an opinion about who
would be appropriate to be GMAV’s Administrator. Most of the parties
indicated that they would be prepared
to support the appointment of an
Administrator independent of the family although AH primarily considered that no
formal appointment
of a substitute decision maker was necessary.
[61] Although the level of conflict between family members about financial
decisions was considerably less than the level of conflict
between family
members about personal decisions, the Tribunal noted there was a significant
degree of mistrust held by the applicants
GR and GE about the use being made of
GMAV’s funds by GL and his partner. GMAV expressed an opinion that she did
the applicants with her money.
[62] In view of the ongoing mistrust of one part of the family to the other, the
Tribunal is satisfied that an Administrator independent
of the family conflict
is required to make financial decisions for GMAV and that it was appropriate to
appoint the Public Trustee
of Queensland as her Administrator for all financial
matters. The appointment is not restricted to any specific period but is made
until further order of the Tribunal as it is unlikely that GMAV will regain
capacity to manage her own financial affairs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (153 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter