URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2025/283.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bebendorf & Ors v Emmanuel College [2025] QSC 283 (31 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Bebendorf & Ors v Emmanuel College
[2025] QSC 283
BLAKE AUGUST BEBENDORF (by his litigation guardians, RODNEY CRAIG
BEBENDORF and ELYSSA DIANNE BEBENDORF)
(first plaintiff)
RODNEY CRAIG BEBENDORF
(second plaintiff)
DIANNE BEBENDORF
(third plaintiff)
A.C.N 010 563 256
(Defendant)
BS 16642/24
Trial Division
PROCEEDING:
Originating Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
31 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
6 June 2025
party bear their own costs of the proceeding.
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
COSTS – COSTS WHERE PROCEEDINGS DISCONTINUED –
where the plaintiffs
brought a claim against the defendant for various relief relating to the
termination of the first plaintiff’s
enrolment contract – where the
plaintiffs discontinued the proceeding on the second day of hearing –
where both parties
seek costs – whether there be no order as to costs
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
(Qld) rr 304(2), 307, 681,
Chapman v Luminis Pty Ltd
[2003] FCAFC 162
Fairfield Services Pty Ltd (in liq) v Leggett
[2020] QSC 183
(2020) 5 QR 50
Nolan v Warne
[2001] QCA 537
ONE.TEL Ltd v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
[2000] FCA 270
(2000) 101 FCR
Re Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs of the Commonwealth of
Australia; ex parte Lai Qin
[1997] HCA 6
(1997) 186 CLR 622
D Savage KC and M Paterson for the plaintiffs
G Handran KC and R
McDermott for the plaintiffs
V Brennan for the defendant
SOLICITORS:
Hannams Solicitors Pty Ltd for the plaintiffs
Vocare Law for the defendant
Introduction
December 2024, the plaintiffs filed an originating application seeking interim
and final relief against the defendant College.
The first plaintiff was a former
pupil of the College. The second and third plaintiffs are the first
plaintiff’s parents. This
proceeding arose following the termination of
the first plaintiff’s enrolment at the College on 25 October 2024.
plaintiffs originally sought relief in the following terms:
(a) an interim order restraining the defendant from taking any step or giving
effect to the first plaintiff’s expulsion (Order
(b) a declaration that the first plaintiff’s expulsion was “void and
of no legal effect” (Order 3);
(c) an order that the first plaintiff’s expulsion “be set
aside” (Order 4);
(d) a further declaration that the Enrolment Contract “remains in
effect” (Order 5);
(e) specific performance of the Enrolment Contract (Order 5), which is repeated
in Order 7; and
(f) a permanent injunction restraining the defendant from “taking any step
pursuant or otherwise giving effect to the [first
plaintiff’s]
expulsion”.
originating application came on before me on the applications list on 20 January
2025, where I made various directions including
that the plaintiff file a
statement of claim.
[4] The trial
was set down to commence on 19 May 2025 and, as at that day, the only relief the
plaintiff sought was:
(a) a declaration that the enrolment contract was wrongfully terminated, and
that the first plaintiff’s expulsion was invalid
and of no effect; and
(b) damages in the amount of $106,000.00 for boarding and tuition fees at Nudgee
morning of the first day of trial, the hearing was adjourned for the parties to
provide written submissions for an order
suppressing the parties’ names.
second morning of the trial, the hearing took a different turn when counsel for
the defendant made a statement in open
court (“the defendant’s
statement”) upon which the plaintiff discontinued the proceedings.
plaintiffs state that the reason for the discontinuance was that the proceedings
became unnecessary. A Notice of Discontinuance
was filed by the plaintiffs on 29
[8] The only
remaining issue to be determined is the question of costs. The parties have
provided extensive written submission on
costs and there have been two further
hearings after the hearing concluded on 20 May 2025. The plaintiffs’
position is that
the defendant should bear the costs of the proceeding on an
indemnity basis or, alternatively, on the standard basis. The defendant
the same order against the plaintiff.
Circumstances of the plaintiff’s expulsion
understand the importance of the defendant’s statement made in court on 20
May 2025, it is necessary to detail the circumstances
of the plaintiff’s
expulsion and the parties’ conduct leading up to, and during, the
proceedings.
[10] On or about
7 October 2024, the first plaintiff and a friend created a list ranking girls in
their broader friend group based
on the shape of their bottoms (the
“initial list”). The first plaintiff recorded the list on the
application on his phone. After the first plaintiff
subsequently disseminated the initial list to approximately 8 other boys, others
began editing the shared list on their devices.
[11] The initial
list subsequently morphed into a ‘rape list’ (“the final
list”), where girls were then ranked
on their level of
‘rapeability’. In an affidavit dated 19 December 2024, the first
plaintiff deposes to ceasing involvement
with the initial list on 12 October
2024, when he says he deleted the list from his phone. He maintains that he
never created, nor
contributed to, the final list and that he only became aware
it existed after it was referred to in a video posted by other students
October 2024.
October 2024, the principal of the defendant College received a complaint
regarding “‘lists’ that had
been made about girls in senior
October 2024, the College’s Pastoral Care Director interviewed the first
October 2024, the first plaintiff was invited to attend a show cause meeting at
the College which then took place on 25
October 2024, the plaintiff’s enrolment was terminated because of his
“involvement in a serious, high-harm
breach of the College’s
behaviour expectations”.
circumstances of the first plaintiff’s termination were complicated by
media incorrectly representing that three boys
from the defendant College
(including the first plaintiff) were no longer enrolled after compiling a
“rape list”.
publication coincided with the College circulating a statement to the families
of all year 10 students. The statement represented
that a “small number of
students” were no longer enrolled following an investigation into
“inappropriate online
behaviour” of some of the students that
involved “offensive and inappropriate comments about female
October 2024, after the parents of another expelled student prompted the
defendant to correct the record, the defendant
stated, “it is an
unfortunate reality that the media will often report events
inaccurately”.
Parties’ conduct leading up to
November 2024, after the first plaintiff’s expulsion, the plaintiffs made
an open offer to the defendant seeking
from the defendant:
“(a) an acknowledgement from the school that its purported termination of
[the first plaintiff’s] contract of enrolment
was invalid and of no
(b) that the parties enter into a confidential deed of settlement which
includes the following terms:
mutual non-disparagement clause;
school providing a letter of endorsement or support of [the first plaintiff]
which our clients can use in applying to other schools;
requirement that the school support [the first plaintiff’s] admission to
another school if contacted by another school or
educational
institution.”
defendant rejected this offer on 21 November 2024.
December 2024, the plaintiffs filed an originating application with supporting
affidavits. Thereafter, further affidavits
were filed on behalf of the parties.
January 2025, the defendant made an offer to settle the proceeding on the basis
that each party bear their own costs.
January 2025, the plaintiffs’ solicitor sought clarification on whether
the defendant’s offer was made on the
basis the proceeding be dismissed.
There was no response to this clarification put before me, if one was ever
given. The plaintiffs
did not respond to the offer.
January 2025, the plaintiffs filed their statement of claim. Notably, in
paragraphs 21 and 22, the plaintiffs pleaded:
date unknown between 12 and 16 October 2024, ... one or more of the other
(a) created a “rape list” (Final List);
(b) shared the Final List with the [first plaintiff] and Other Boys; and
(c) broadcast the Final List to one or more females in the friendship
22. The [first plaintiff] did not:
(a) participate in; or
(b) know about,
the creation or publication of the Final List in the preceding paragraph
before those events occurred; and
(c) had no known, or reasonably practicable, ability to prevent those Other
Boys from engaging in the conduct in paragraph 21 [publishing
list”], in that:
(i) had the [first plaintiff] deleted the Initial list or what became of the
Initial list, based on the matters above in this paragraph,
it is to be inferred
that the (or those) (Other Boy(s)) who participated in creating the Final List
would have done so nonetheless;
(ii) based on the matters in paragraphs 18 and 20 the [first plaintiff] believed
that his act in deleting the current “List”
deleted the Initial list
and edits since made to it.”
[25] In its
defence, filed 26 February 2025, the defendant responded to these
paragraphs:
“31. As to paragraph 21 of the Statement of
Claim, the College:
(a) says the Student from the Other School created the Final List;
(b) otherwise does not admit the allegations pleaded therein on the usual
32. As to paragraph 22 of the Statement of Claim:
(a) The College objects to paragraph on the basis of the Irrelevancy
(b) The College admits the [first plaintiff] did not create nor edit the [rape
(c) the College denies subparagraph 22(c)(i) on the basis that it is
(d) as an explanation for the denial in subparagraph (c), the College
(i) if the [first plaintiff] did not create the Initial List; or
(ii) if the [first plaintiff] did not publish the Initial List; or
(iii) if the [first plaintiff] had told those to whom he published the Initial
List that they were not to change the Initial List
and were to immediately
delete it upon receipt; then
(iv) it is equally reasonable to infer those who participated in creating the
Final List would never have done so.
(e) the College otherwise does not admit the allegations pleaded therein on
the usual grounds.”
[26] On 17 April
2025, the defendant made a second offer to the plaintiffs. The terms of the
offer were that the plaintiffs discontinue
the proceedings with an order that
the plaintiffs pay the defendant’s standard costs up to the date of the
offer. The plaintiffs
did not respond to the second
Plaintiffs’ written opening at trial
[27] Ultimately,
the proceedings were discontinued by the plaintiff on 20 May 2025 prior to
opening its case in court. Accordingly,
the premature “finalisation”
of the proceedings, means that I do not have the benefit of evidence tested
within the framework
of the pleadings as to the issues to be determined.
[28] However,
both parties provided written submissions, prior to the first day of trial,
framing the issues to be determined at the
plaintiffs stated that the defendant had, as a minimum, a contractual obligation
by its principal to afford the first plaintiff
procedural fairness. They
submitted the defendant breached this obligation by failing to put to the first
plaintiff “the allegations
of misconduct”, which would ultimately
form the basis of his expulsion, and failing to give him “an adequate
opportunity
to respond”.
[30] Rather, the
plaintiffs stated that the defendant relied on vague assertions that the first
plaintiff was involved in “a
serious, high-harm breach of College
behaviour expectations”. At the show cause meeting, the plaintiffs state
that it was not
put to the first plaintiff with any particularity (or at all)
what conduct the first plaintiff was alleged to have engaged in.
[31] Accordingly,
the plaintiffs stated that the defendant failed to give the first plaintiff an
adequate opportunity to respond to
the allegations.
[32] This, the
plaintiffs say, is significant in circumstances where the conduct at the heart
of this case comprises a series of incidents
starting with the publication of
the initial list, then involving lists ranking girls on various other
attributes, then involving
girls making lists ranking boys on various attributes
and culminating in the publication of the final list.
plaintiffs state that the conduct and harm associated with participating in the
creation of the initial list is substantially
less serious than the conduct and
harm associated with participating in the creation of the final list. However,
by virtue of the
defendant’s failure to properly articulate allegations of
misconduct to the first plaintiff, he had no way of knowing whether
was being alleged to have contributed to the final list, the initial list, or to
have engaged in some other conduct. He
was, therefore, unable to adequately
respond to the actual concerns and allegations made by the defendant against
[34] Accordingly,
the plaintiffs state that, in circumstances where the defendant was acutely
aware of the need to be seen to take
(a) the failure to put to the first plaintiff the precise conduct he was engaged
(b) the differential treatment as between him and another student; and
(c) the failure to fully investigate the making of lists (including the lists
said to have been created by girls at the school)
can only lead to the conclusion that the defendant’s decision to
terminate the first plaintiff’s enrolment was not tied
to the conduct he
actually engaged in.
[35] Rather, the
plaintiffs’ position is that the outcome was designed to protect the
defendant’s reputation by appearing
to take firm action, regardless of
whether it was logical, fair, or reasonable as applied to the first
[36] Accordingly,
the plaintiffs stated that the defendant breached its contractual obligation to
afford procedural fairness to the
first plaintiff. It follows that the defendant
breached the enrolment contract.
plaintiffs stated that, as a consequence of this breach, the first plaintiff had
been unable to find a school on the Gold
Coast and had to go to a boarding
school in Brisbane. The plaintiffs claim the costs of the additional tuition and
boarding school
Defendant’s written opening at
[38] In relation
to the first plaintiff’s involvement with the final list, the defendant
stated in its written opening that:
uncontroversial that on 7 October 2025, the [first plaintiff] created a document
with another student (Boy 1)
which listed girls who attended the College
according to the [first plaintiff’s] and Boy 1’s “subjective
the shape of the girls’ bottoms” ...
The Initial List was changed by the [first plaintiff], in the following days.
At a time after the [first plaintiff] stopped editing
the Initial List (which
appears to be around 12 October), others made changes to the Initial List and it
was subsequently referred
to as a “Rape List”. It is uncontroversial
that the College did not allege that the [first plaintiff] was a participant
adding names or other details to the Rape List”.
defendant’s opening submission focused on the contractual dispute and
stated that:
(a) the critical issue in the proceeding is whether the Formal Complaints Policy
was incorporated or implied into the Enrolment Contract;
(b) the Enrolment Contract required the College to put to the Student the
allegations of misconduct for the student to have been
allowed an adequate
opportunity to respond;
(c) the relevant “allegations of misconduct” in the present case
were that the first plaintiff was one of the co-creators
of the initial list and
he shared that list with his friends;
(d) no other misconduct is alleged to have been engaged in by the first
plaintiff and no other conduct is alleged (by pleading or
otherwise) to form the
basis of the principal’s decision; and
(e) the first plaintiff was sufficiently apprised of the misconduct alleged
against him.
The Defendant’s Statement on 20 May 2025
[40] On the
morning of 20 May 2025, the following exchange occurred with
“HER HONOUR: Which brings me to that first sentence.
That seems to be, from reading the material, the greatest concern for your
party? “It is clear, as I understand on the material, that he did not do
MR SAVAGE: That’s right, your Honour. That’s - - - our case.
HER HONOUR: Well, but – that is not a – that is not contested - -
by Mr Brennan.
MR BRENNAN: That’s correct, your Honour.
MR SAVAGE: Well, it’s right that the pleading says that, but
that’s because the pleading ruling construes what, in fact,
happened, if
one goes through - - - the documents”.
[41] I then
directly asked counsel for the defendant:
“HER HONOUR: Mr
Brennan, you do not say that the plaintiff wrote that rape list.
MR BRENNAN: No”.
[42] I asked the
question in many ways, including:
“HER HONOUR: Okay. But in
no way shape or form are you saying that the plaintiff wrote the rape list.
MR BRENNAN: That’s correct.”
“MR BRENNAN: The position is – and it has always been our
position – that he did not – neither start nor contribute
HER HONOUR: Okay.
MR BRENNAN: To the final list.
HER HONOUR: Not – he’s not responsible for the creation of the
MR BRENNAN: No”.
following exchange then occurred which led to the defendant’s statement,
which is at the centre of this costs dispute:
“MR SAVAGE: ...
Whatever is said now, the decision was based on a lighting of those that’d
created other lists, including
the rape list, with him, and he was the one that
was expelled as responsible for all these lists – or for his part in the
- - - whereas nobody else was expelled.
HER HONOUR: That – well, that’s your case. But, Mr Brennan, can
you put on the record the defendant’s position into
relation to this
student’s involvement with any rape list.
MR BRENNAN: This student did not create the rape list. The student did not
participate in adding any names to the rape list. The student
had no investment
in the rape list.” [This is the defendant’s statement referred to at
[6] above].
[44] Ultimately,
the meaning of the defendant’s statement assumes some importance in the
costs dispute between the parties.
plaintiffs’ counsel then raised that the only question may be the question
“HER HONOUR: So when you put this affidavit before
me, a part of this affidavit, really, deals with the fact that the plaintiffs
have felt public opprobrium because of the association with the rape list, but
the defendant has made it very clear your client –
the first plaintiff
– did not write a rape list or was connected with it.
MR SAVAGE: No. And it might’ve been that – if that’d been
made plain in the decision to expel him, and in the letter
accompanied that “to all grade 10 cohorts” and to the – every
family at the school, we probably wouldn’t
MR SAVAGE: So it may just - - be a question of costs”.
[46] After an
adjournment, counsel for the plaintiff stated:
“MR SAVAGE:
Your Honour, the parties have agreed they [sic] way to progress, subject to your
Honour’s orders. My side
propose to seek leave to discontinue the
proceedings, by reason of what has occurred in court this morning. Both parties
be heard as to the question of costs ...”
[47] This matter
has proceeded on the basis that leave was not required as the parties consented
to the discontinuance. The only remaining
issue was that of costs.
proceedings were adjourned to 22 May 2025 for the parties to file written
submissions and material with respect to costs,
which they did.
[49] On 21 May
2025, counsel for the defendant requested, through my associate, that the court
re-convene urgently.
[50] However,
the matter resumed the next day, on 22 May 2025, where it transpired that the
proceedings had taken an unexpected turn.
Essentially, correspondence had been
exchanged between counsel where an allegation was made about the
plaintiff’s legal representatives
disclosing prohibited documents to their
clients. Tensions rose between the parties to the point that Mr Morris KC
appeared (on behalf
of counsel for the defendant who may have had to appear as a
witness) to de-escalate matters and put things in their proper context.
that Mr Morris KC stated that, with hindsight, counsel for the defendant
recognised that he could have been more subtle in
his correspondence. While Mr
Morris KC indicated that counsel for the plaintiffs need not withdraw from the
matter, they did. However,
in a generous gesture, senior counsel for the
plaintiff provided further written submissions in relation to costs for which he
not charge.
[51] Whilst
counsel for the defendant raised a valid issue about the disclosure of
prohibited documents, it appears that the manner
in which he did caused this
unnecessary kerfuffle.
[52] Further
written submissions were then provided by the defendant as to the issue of costs
and the court reconvened at a later
date to hear oral submissions.
Plaintiffs’ Submissions on Costs
[53] The primary
basis for the plaintiffs’ submission that a costs order should be made in
their favour is that the defendant’s
statement on 20 May 2025 was its
first unequivocal position that the first plaintiff had no involvement with the
rape list. They
submit this statement rendered the remainder of the proceedings
unnecessary because it afforded them the public vindication that
they sought all
along. In the plaintiffs’ submission, the defendant’s refusal to
publicly disavow the first plaintiff’s
association with the rape list was
the precipitating factor underlying the proceeding.
plaintiffs state that the defendant’s statement of the first plaintiff
having no “investment” is significant
(a) dissolved once and for all any suggestion that the first plaintiff was
connected to, or responsible for, that conduct; and
(b) was a change in the defendant’s position as it previously suggested
the first plaintiff was ultimately responsible for
the final list, even if he
himself did not write it.
[55] At the
hearing on 6 June 2025, counsel for the plaintiffs framed his submission in this
“MR HANDRAN: You will not find [the defendant’s
statement], no matter how hard you divine the defence in light of the
and intentional way the statement of claim was pleaded in the context of what
proceeded [sic] the litigation. You will not
find that anywhere”.
[56] Whilst in
paragraph 32(b) of their defence the defendant admitted the first plaintiff
“did not create nor edit the [rape
list]”, the plaintiffs submit
this still left open the question of whether the first plaintiff participated
in, or knew about,
the rape list.
paragraph 32(c) and (d) of the defence, the defendant expressly denied that the
first plaintiff had no ability to prevent
other boys from creating the final
list, sharing it between themselves or broadcasting it to one or more females.
Accordingly, the
plaintiffs submit that the defendant continued to assert that
the first plaintiff participated in the final list, bore responsibility
and was invested in it. In those circumstances, the plaintiffs state that the
taint of the final list continued to stain
the first plaintiff until the
defendant’s statement.
[58] Prior to
the defendant’s statement, the plaintiffs state that they had no choice
but to bring the proceedings as the defendant
refused to take steps to challenge
the public perception that the first plaintiff created the final list.
plaintiffs provided three submissions on why it would be incorrect to suggest
that the defendant had “always”
conveyed that the first plaintiff
had no involvement in, or responsibility for, the final list.
[60] Firstly,
they submit it is factually incorrect, as demonstrated by the defendant’s
[61] Secondly,
they submit that the defendant has historically conflated all
“lists” as a singular infraction, without
attributing authorship or
responsibility to the students involved in the creation or modification of each
distinct list. A fundamental
premise of the defendant’s statement is that
each list was separate and distinct, which the plaintiffs submit is a material
departure from the defendant’s previous view.
October 2024, the defendant’s solicitors wrote to the plaintiffs’
solicitors, stating:
“On our instructions, it is not in
dispute that [the first plaintiff], with another student, created, published and
distributed
a list that rated female students on their physical features, and
particularly intimate physical features ... Whilst our client accepts
first plaintiff] may not have created the “most rapeable” list, the
reality is that he failed to cease his
involvement until females within the
school community became aware and indicated that it would be reported to the
Then further,
“The reality is that these lists have caused considerable harm to
female students within the College, with reported safety concerns
female students. This is a direct consequence of your client creating,
publishing, and distributing the initial list,
and then continuing his
involvement over the following three-day period”.
[63] Accordingly,
the plaintiffs submit that the defendant did not, at any stage prior to the
proceedings, make any concession that
the student did not contribute to the
final list, nor seek to differentiate between participation in the final list
and the other
[64] Finally,
the plaintiffs submit that the defendant provides no explanation for why the
proceedings were discontinued. The plaintiffs
state that this silent aversion
appears to be that the proceeding was discontinued for no reason at all.
Presumably, the plaintiffs
wanted the defendant to address the fact that the
discontinuance was due to their statement in court.
plaintiffs submit that, if the defendant had accepted the plaintiffs’
offer in November 2024, the plaintiffs would
have received sufficient relief on
lesser terms. The offer only required the defendant to support the first
plaintiff’s applications
to other schools and agree to a non-disparagement
[66] Whilst
damages remain in issue, the plaintiffs submit these are minor as compared to
the cost of a full trial and contend that,
by virtue of the College’s
admissions, they have achieved the public and substantive vindication they
sought in court before
plaintiffs submit that the damages were only ever ancillary to the main relief
– being the declaration that the first
plaintiff’s expulsion was
invalid and ought to be set aside.
declaration was sought by the plaintiff in the form of the defendant’s
statement. However, as counsel for the plaintiff
“It would not be an orthodox or appropriate thing
to seek minute declarations of bits on which the ultimate declaration is sought.
... The ultimate declaration gives you the relief”.
[69] Accordingly,
the plaintiffs submit that (in accordance with r 685(1) UCPR) it has become
“unnecessary to continue [this]
proceeding other than for deciding who is
to pay the costs of the proceeding”.
[70] The Court
has a general discretion to make whatever order it considers just on the
question of costs.
The plaintiff
submits that the discretion as to costs should be exercised in the
plaintiff’s favour as it would be just to
[71] Further
the plaintiffs submit that their conduct throughout the proceedings
warrants a costs order in their favour as they conducted the proceedings
reasonably and took appropriate steps to progress the matter with expedition.
[72] Conversely,
the plaintiffs submit that the defendant has not conducted the proceedings
reasonably. In particular, they refer
to the defendant suggesting that the
plaintiffs provided false statements about the first plaintiff being unable to
secure alternative
schooling. The plaintiffs submit that, due to the defendant
making “baseless attacks” and “serious allegations
to allegations of perjury”, in conjunction with their failure to retract
these allegations, they have not acted
reasonably.
[73] In the
plaintiffs’ view, the defendant’s conduct has caused the plaintiff
to incur significant costs through unreasonable
and steadfast refusal to make a
public statement vindicating the first plaintiff’s position (and instead
making serious attacks
on the plaintiffs without good reason to do
Defendant’s submissions on costs
defendant submits that they are entitled to their costs of the proceeding on the
indemnity basis. However, the defendant
also provides several alternatives,
whereby they are entitled to their costs:
(a) on the standard basis up to 28 February 2025 (on the filing of its defence)
and thereafter on the indemnity basis;
(b) on the standard basis up to 22 April 2025 (the date the defendant’s
second offer to the plaintiffs lapsed) and thereafter
on the indemnity basis;
(c) on the standard basis.
[75] The basis
for the defendant’s primary and alternative positions are that:
(a) the defendant had already clearly and unambiguously made its statement on
the first plaintiff’s lack of involvement with
the final list in its
affidavit material, Original Outline of Argument (filed 20 January 2025), and
its defence;
(b) the plaintiffs commenced or continued the proceedings for some ulterior
(c) the defendant admitted the statement in its defence;
(d) the plaintiffs refused two offers to compromise, which was imprudent in the
circumstances; and
(e) the plaintiffs effectively surrendered to the defendant by abandoning their
proceeding on the second day of the hearing.
defendant relies on the fact that the plaintiff’s originating application
did not seek any declaration or other relief
to the effect that the first
plaintiff did not create nor edit the final list.
[77] At the oral
hearing on 6 June, counsel for the defendant put it this way:
“MR BRENNAN: ... your Honour will have the leisure of
considering it, but it was never pleaded in the statement of claim that
expulsion was based upon the student being responsible for the rape list.
It’s not pleaded anywhere. The word “responsible”
doesn’t appear anywhere in the statement of claim ... Your Honour, if
we’re trying to identify the real issues in dispute
in a proceeding that
has pleadings, one looks to the pleadings, and if ... the plaintiffs wish to
vindicate the student’s right
to allege that there was some sort of denial
of procedural fairness in a contractual context, they had the right to proceed
to judgment.”
defendant, in their written submissions, contextualises the significance of
their statement in court in this way:
“Prior to 20 May 2025,
the parties to the dispute (or, at least their legal representatives) were in
furious agreement that,
at all times, the College accepted that the first
plaintiff did not create nor edit the final list. That is the gravamen of the
Concession.
So, for example:
(a) the correspondence prior the proceeding did not suggest that the
Student’s expulsion was based upon his creating or editing
(b) the Concession was not the subject of any request by the Plaintiffs’
solicitor prior to the commencement of the proceeding.
(c) the Plaintiffs did not seek any interim or final relief in the Originating
Application (filed on 23 December 2024) in terms of
the Concession.
(d) the College admitted the Concession in the Principal’s affidavit on
the first return date (on 20 January 2025).
(e) the College admitted the Concession by the College’s counsel in his
Outline of Argument on the first return date.
(f) nothing even remotely resembling the Concession was sought in any relief
pleaded in Plaintiffs’ Statement of Claim (filed
on 29 January 2025).
(g) as noted above, the Concession was expressly pleaded as an admission in the
College’s defence (filed on 26 February 2025).
(h) the Plaintiffs relied upon the Concession as an express admission in the
Plaintiffs’ Reply (filed 17 March 2025).
(i) the Plaintiffs expressly relied upon the Concession in their
Counsels’ first Outline of Argument resisting the College’s
confidentiality orders (sent to the Court on 5 May 2025).
(j) the Plaintiffs relied upon the Concession again in their Counsels’
second Outline of Argument resisting the College’s
confidentiality orders
(sent to the Court on 9 May 2025).
(k) the Plaintiffs expressly relied upon the Concession a third time in their
Opening Written Submissions (sent to the Court on 16
(l) the College made the Concession (again) in its Opening Written Submissions
(sent to the Court on 16 May 2025)”.
defendant states that the plaintiffs, at no time prior to, or during, the
proceeding sought the statement made by the defendant
in court. Rather, the
defendant’s statement was made on the second day of the trial in response
to a question from me.
defendant relies on its admissions in paragraph 31(a) and 32(b) of its defence
(extracted at [25] of these reasons) that
a “Student from [another school]
created the [rape list]” and that the first plaintiff “did not
create nor edit
the [rape list]”.
defendant submits these admissions are more expansive than the allegations made
at [22] of the plaintiffs’ statement
defendant submits that, in its defence, it could not plead to the first
plaintiff’s knowledge.
defendant submits that their defence was reasonable and that, had the plaintiffs
sought the defendant to make the statement
in open court on the first return
date, it would have been given.
[84] Further,
the defendant states that their position has been consistent throughout the
proceedings:
(a) on 10 January 2025, an affidavit from the College Principal was filed which
states, “I was also informed that there was
insufficient evidence to
conclude [the first plaintiff] had any part in the creation or contribution to
other lists”;
(b) on 20 January 2025, the defendant filed submissions which state that
“...other students changed the Updated Original List
into further
‘lists’ including a list which ultimately became known as the rape
(c) on 7 May 2025, the defendant filed their opening submissions for the trial
which state that “[i]t is uncontroversial that
the College did not allege
that [the first plaintiff] was a participant in adding names or other details to
the Rape List”.
defendant states that their position has always been consistent with their
statement made in court on 20 May 2025, which
precipitated the plaintiffs’
discontinuance.
Principal’s affidavit, the defence, the original outline, and the written
opening were all filed and read in open court.
The defendant considers the
plaintiffs were at liberty to provide these documents to any media outlet, or
those in the community,
who had mistakenly assumed that the first plaintiff had
created or had anything to do with the final list.
[87] Specifically
with reference to the media’s erroneous reporting that the first plaintiff
compiled the final list, the defendant
states that this was squarely an issue
with the media outlet (not the defendant) and was separate to the issue of the
first plaintiff’s
enrolment contract being terminated. The defendant
states that it did not convey anything to the media outlet which contributed to
its inaccurate reporting, nor could they have taken any steps to report the
inaccuracy (otherwise they would have had to reveal the
names of ex-students and
the specific reason for their terminated enrolment).
defendant submits that, given the plaintiffs did not seek declaratory relief
in the final list, the only
appropriate conclusion is that the plaintiffs prosecuted the proceedings all the
way to the second day
of hearing for a collateral purpose. The defendant states
that this purpose was wholly unconnected to the relief the plaintiffs sought
their originating application and in their statement of claim, and that it could
not be said that the defendant reasonably could
have known the plaintiffs sought
relief by way of the statement.
defendant submits that the terms of the defendant’s statement were
“not put before” the plaintiffs because
none of the terms the
plaintiffs “put before” the defendant were relied upon as the
“reason for
discontinuance”.
[90] As such,
the defendant submits that it was unreasonable for the plaintiffs to commence
the proceeding, not only for failing to
seek a declaration in the form of the
defendant’s statement but also because the plaintiffs abandoned most of
the relief sought
in the originating application. Further, the defendant submits
that this can also be viewed in the context of the defendant admitting,
positively pleading, that the first plaintiff did not create nor edit the final
[91] After the
plaintiffs rejected two offers from the defendant, the defendant states that it
was put to the expense of:
(a) serving third party notices (relevant to the plaintiffs’ claim for
(b) seeking confidential disclosure orders which the plaintiffs defended, and
which required two court appearances; and
(c) preparing for trial including drawing written opening outlines, conferring
with witnesses, and counsel’s preparation for
the hearing.
defendant submits that its correspondence to the plaintiffs on 16 April 2025 was
not improper.
Rather, for the
reasons they set out, it was a reasonable approach to litigation and not an act
of misconduct.
[93] In summary,
the defendant submits that the plaintiffs:
(a) commenced proceedings for relief they were not serious in pursuing;
(b) subsequently filed a statement of claim, which sought relief based upon a
breach of contract, including damages, which was not
(c) aggressively resisted the defendant’s application for confidentiality
orders, which only sought to protect the interests
of third parties, many of
whom were minors;
(d) compelled the defendant to defend proceedings seeking relief which sought to
impugn the defendant’s decision-making process
and the defendant’s
internal investigation of the conduct of minors when, in the result, all the
plaintiffs were seeking was
the statement by the defendant;
(e) refused to accept that the decision to expel the first plaintiff was a
reasonable consequence of the first plaintiff’s
admitted conduct; and
(f) conceded on the second day of the trial that, in fact, they were not seeking
relief from the Court but a declaration to the wider
[94] Accordingly,
the defendant submits that they:
(a) did not, and could not, know the true intent of the proceeding until it was
disclosed in the plaintiffs’ two costs submissions;
(b) defended the proceeding on the basis that they were entitled to expel the
first plaintiffs;
(c) by its Principal, had supported the first plaintiff’s enrolment in an
alternative school and expressed its intention to
continue that support (which
is unchallenged on the evidence);
(d) sought to protect the identity of, and the consequences of disclosure on,
third parties at great expense to itself and in the
face of staunch opposition;
(e) made offers which were reasonable, in circumstances where the relief sought
in the proceeding was ultimately abandoned for some
other “remedy”
(f) made concessions in its affidavit material, by its counsel in court and in
its documents which were appropriate and, on an objective
view, consistent with
the ultimate reason for the plaintiffs’ discontinuance.
Consideration
[95] The general
rule on costs is found in r 681(1) of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) (“UCPR”
681 General rule
(1) Costs of a proceeding, including an application in a proceeding, are in
the discretion of the court but follow the event, unless
the court orders
otherwise.”
[96] While the
question of costs is ultimately in the court’s discretion, the general
rule on costs should only be departed
from in the event of special or
exceptional circumstances.
question of costs in this case is more complex due to the mid-hearing
discontinuance.
the UCPR states:
685 Costs if further proceedings become
unnecessary
(1) If, for any other reason, it becomes unnecessary to continue a
proceeding other than for deciding who is to pay the costs of
the proceeding,
any party to the proceeding may apply to the court for an order for the costs.
(2) The court may make the order the court considers just.”
the UCPR states:
(1) A party who discontinues or withdraws is liable to pay --
(a) the costs of the party to whom the discontinuance or withdrawal relates
up to the discontinuance or withdrawal; and
(b) the costs of another party or parties caused by the discontinuance or
withdrawal.
(2) If a party discontinues or withdraws with the court’s leave, the
court may make the order for costs it considers appropriate.”
[100] Regarding
the question of costs for discontinued proceedings, McPherson JA considered the
power under r 685 UCPR (formerly r
Nolan v Warne
[2001] QCA 537
“[8] If for any reason it becomes unnecessary to
continue a proceeding other than to decide who is to pay the costs, then
Rule 683(1)
, any party may apply to the court for an order for the costs, and
the court may make an order it considers just: r 683(2).
is virtually a
rescript of O 91, r 16 of the recently repealed Supreme Court Rules, which was
considered in
R v Gold Coast City Council, ex p Raysun Pty Ltd
In awarding costs to the applicant in that case, Matthews J on behalf of the
Full Court said that it was enough that the applicant
had reasonable grounds for
complaint in respect of the respondent Council and an arguable case to support
the taking of proceedings
up to the time when the Council acceded to the
application.”
[101] A higher
bar was posited by McHugh J
Re Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs of the Commonwealth of
Australia; ex parte Lae Qin
[1997] HCA 6
(1997) 186 CLR 622
, where his Honour
appropriate case, a court will make an order for costs even when there has been
no hearing on the merits and the moving
party no longer wishes to proceed with
the action. The court cannot try a hypothetical action between the parties. To
do so would
burden the parties with the costs of a litigated action which by
settlement or extra-curial action they had avoided. In some cases,
however, the
court may be able to conclude that one of the parties has acted so unreasonably
that the other party should obtain the
costs of the action. In administrative
law matters, for example, it may appear that the Defendant has acted
unreasonably in exercising
or refusing to exercise a power and that the
Plaintiff had no reasonable alternative but to commence a litigation. Thus, for
R v Gold Coast City Council; Ex parte Raysun Pty Ltd
Full Court of the Supreme Court of Queensland gave a prosecutor seeking mandamus
the costs of the proceedings up to the date
when the Respondent Council notified
the prosecutor that it would give the prosecutor the relief that it sought. The
Full Court said
that the prosecutor had reasonable ground for complaint in
respect of the attitude taken by the Respondent in failing to consider
application by the prosecutor for approval of road and drainage plans.
Moreover, in some cases a judge may feel confident that, although both
parties have acted reasonably, one party was almost certain
to have succeeded if
the matter had been fully tried. This is perhaps the best explanation of the
unreported decision of Pincus J
South East Queensland Electricity Board v
Australian Telecommunications Commission
where his Honour ordered the
Respondent to pay 80 per cent of the Applicant’s taxed costs even though
his Honour found that
both parties had acted reasonably in respect of the
litigation. But such cases are likely to be rare.
If it appears that both parties have acted reasonably in commencing and
defending the proceedings and the conduct of the parties continued
reasonable until the litigation was settled or its further prosecution became
futile, the proper exercise of the cost discretion
will usually mean that the
court will make no order as to the cost of the proceedings. This approach has
been adopted in a large
number of cases.”
Chapman v Luminis Pty Ltd
[2003] FCAFC 162
, the Full Federal Court made
the following observations:
“[7] The authorities establish
the following propositions in relation to the making of costs orders in
circumstances such
as the present:
proceeding terminates before there has been a hearing, the Court should not
resolve the issue of costs by engaging in something
in the nature of a
hypothetical trial.
- this does not
mean that a Court can never make an order for costs. Often it will be unable to
do so, but in other cases an examination
of the reasonableness of the conduct of
the parties may provide the basis for an order, or a judge may be confident that
was almost certain to have succeeded if a matter had been fully
- a distinction
is to be drawn between cases in which one party, after litigating for some time,
effectively surrenders to the other,
and cases where some supervening event or
settlement so removes or modifies the subject of the dispute that, although it
be said that one side has simply won, no issue remains between the
parties except that of costs. In the former type of case, there
will commonly be
lacking any basis for an exercise of the Court’s discretion otherwise than
by an award of costs to the successful
party. It is the latter type of case
which more often creates problems, since there may be difficulty in discerning a
clear reason
why one party, rather than the other, should be bear the
[citations omitted]
[103] As to the
final point made in
an important distinction is made between two types of cases:
(a) where discontinuance occurs when one party, after litigating for some time,
effectively surrenders to the other; and
(b) where some supervening event or settlement so removes or modifies the
subject of the dispute that, although it could not be said
that one side has
simply won, no issue remains between the parties except that of costs.
surrender cases are often simpler as there will commonly be lacking any basis
for an exercise of the Court’s discretion
otherwise than by an award of
costs to the successful party.
supervening event cases can be more problematic as there can be difficulty in
discerning a clear reason why one party, rather
than the other, should bear the
ONE.TEL Ltd v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
[2000] FCA 270
(2000) 101 FCR 548
Burchett considered that the decision of
was an example of a
supervening event:
Ex parte Lai Qin
J was careful to state (at 624) that the principles which he was concerned were
those that “govern an application for
costs when a party elects not to
pursue an action because he or she has achieved the relief sought in the action
either by settlement
or by extra-curial means”. As his Honour recounted
the facts, the instant case was one where the applicant had challenged a
decision of the Refugee Review Tribunal denying her status as a refugee but,
during the pendency of her action in the High Court,
the Minister had exercised
his special discretion in her favour under s 417 of the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth). The question whether the Tribunal had or had not erred in law thus
became moot”.
[107] Bond J (as
his Honour then was) in
Fairfield Serices Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v
[2020] QSC 183
(2020) 5 QR 50
set out six “considerations which ... should
influence the exercise of the discretion in a case where the plaintiff withdraws
from the continued prosecution of a proceeding by discontinuing without any
hearing on the
, costs discretions are truly
discretionary and there are no absolute rules. In each case the discretion must
be exercised judicially,
so that the Court arrives at the order it thinks just
in the particular circumstances of the case.
, under r 681, the general rule is that costs follow the
event unless the Court orders otherwise. In
Oshlack v Richmond River
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
, 97 [67]-[68], McHugh J explained the principle
and policy underlying that general rule:
“The principle is grounded in reasons of fairness and policy and
operates whether the successful party is the plaintiff or the
defendant. Costs
are not awarded to punish an unsuccessful party. The primary purpose of an award
of costs is to indemnify the successful
party. If the litigation had not been
brought, or defended, by the unsuccessful party the successful party would not
have incurred
the expense which it did. As between the parties, fairness
dictates that the unsuccessful party typically bears the liability for
of the unsuccessful litigation.
As a matter of policy, one beneficial by-product of this compensatory purpose
may well be to instil in a party contemplating commencing,
or defending,
litigation a sober realisation of the potential financial expense involved.
Large scale disregard of the principle
of the usual order as to costs would
inevitably lead to an increase in litigation with an increased, and often
unnecessary, burden
on the scarce resources of the publicly funded system of
, where the proceedings are discontinued prior to any
hearing on the merits, the r 681 general rule cannot be applied in terms. As
McHugh J observed in
, a Court is necessarily deprived of the
factor that usually determines whether or how it will make a costs order. The
Court cannot
try a hypothetical action between the parties to determine the
question of costs ... At the time of discontinuance, usually it will
impracticable to assess the eventual prospects of success in the action ...
, it may nevertheless be appropriate to make an order
that costs are borne by one side. Each case will depend on its own facts, but
may be relevant to consider the following:
(a) (in a particular case) the conduct of the defendant prior to the
commencement of the proceeding, where such conduct may have
precipitated the
litigation.
(b) the whole of the proceeding, including whether the plaintiff has acted
reasonably in commencing and continuing to prosecute
the proceeding and whether
the defendant has acted reasonably in defending it ... but bearing in mind that
the question of reasonableness
may not be one capable of determination absent a
full hearing on the merits ... and
(c) the reasons for discontinuance..., but bearing in mind that the subjective
considerations of one party not put before the other
party will generally be
immaterial so that the discretion will be exercised on the basis of the
objective circumstances established
on the evidence.
, when evaluating the relevant considerations, there is an
important distinction between: (1) cases in which one party, after litigating
for some time, effectively surrenders to the other; and (2) cases where some
supervening event, or settlement, so removes or modifies
the subject of the
dispute that, although it could not be said that one side has simply won, no
issue remains between the parties
except that of costs ... As to this:
(a) In the former type of case, the surrender or capitulation will usually
provide a strong reason to award costs against the party
who has surrendered or
capitulated. It seems to me that this must be a partial reflection of the
principles and policies which underlie
the r 681 general rule, as identified by
McHugh J in
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72.
illustration of the type of case where one party has effectively surrendered to
the other is a case where proceedings are
dismissed or discontinued because the
applicant chooses not to proceed with them.
(b) In the latter type of case, there may be difficulty in discerning a clear
reason why one party, rather than the other, should
bear the costs, and that
might provide good reason to decide that each party should bear its own costs.
] is one example of a case falling into this category, but other
examples include
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Daleport Pty Ltd (in rec)
[2019] NSWSC 958
, where the proceeding was assessed to have become
futile in light of the fact that sequestration orders had been entered against
the defendants, and
True Conservation Association Inc v Minister
Administering the
Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995
[2008] NSWLEC
, where the passage of legislation rendered the proceeding futile.
, the Queensland rules are silent as to onus. Care must be
taken in the application of authorities from other jurisdictions where
are different. But as McMeekin J observed in
Jones v Jones
, [45], “obviously r 307(1) does provide some guide”. The
principle and policy underlying the r 681 general rule as explained
by McHugh J
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
support the outcome
dictated by r 307(1). It seems to me to follow that if the only information
before the Court is that the proceeding
was discontinued but at a date after the
first defence had been filed, there would be no reason not to exercise the r
307(2) discretion
in the same way as suggested by r 307(1). In such a case, it
would be difficult to see why plaintiffs who discontinue before the
defence must pay their opponent’s costs, but plaintiffs who wait to
discontinue for months or years after the first defence
should not. Without
more, those facts would normally be regarded as demonstrating a strong ground to
award costs against the discontinuing
plaintiffs ... But there might well be
some particular reason why the discontinuing plaintiffs should not pay an
costs, or indeed, why the opponent should pay the costs of the
discontinuing plaintiffs. Ordinarily, the law expects that “he
who asserts
must prove” ... At least on that basis, the party seeking a particular
exercise of the costs discretion must demonstrate
why it is appropriate.”
[citations omitted].
[108] I have
considered these six matters, as set out in
, in light of the
circumstances of this case.
[109] When the
trial commenced, the plaintiff sought:
(a) a declaration that the enrolment contract was wrongfully terminated, and
that the first plaintiff’s expulsion was invalid
and of no effect; and
(b) damages in the amount of $106,000.00 for boarding and tuition fees at Nudgee
[110] These
proceedings are about a contractual dispute.
[111] Importantly,
part of the factual contest between the parties was the first plaintiff’s
involvement in the final list.
The plaintiffs pleaded that the student did not
participate in, or know about, the creation or publication of the final list
it was created, shared, and broadcast.
[112] I note
that the plaintiffs did not seek a declaration in these terms. However, I accept
the plaintiffs’ submissions that
it would not be orthodox, or appropriate,
to seek minute declarations on factual matters on which the ultimate relief is
[113] It was
clear from the defence filed that the defendant accepted that the student did
not create, nor edit, the final list. This
was uncontroversial between the
parties. However, the defendant left open other inferences which could be drawn
linking the first
plaintiff to the final list.
[114] I have
considered the relevance of the defendant’s statement in court that
precipitated the plaintiffs discontinuing the
proceeding.
[115] Subjectively
for the plaintiffs, such was the power of this statement that it was enough to
cease continuing the litigation.
The plaintiffs state that they achieved the
public and substantive vindication they sought in court before the media.
[116] However,
this was a contractual dispute between the parties and success cannot be
measured by favourable media coverage or correcting
matters incorrectly reported
by the media. The plaintiffs’ subjective considerations are immaterial. As
McHugh J stated in
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
the plaintiff had a choice as to whether or not to be a party to this
litigation; the defendant did not:
“[90] The possibility of
adverse costs orders may well inhibit some individuals and groups from bringing
cases to court which
involve challenges to aspects of public law. Express
recognition of this fact does not, however, mean that the courts should remove
this inhibition by adopting a practice of declining to follow the usual order as
to costs in cases of “public interest litigation”.
Whether or not
one regards a particular applicant’s actions as well-intentioned and
striving, albeit unsuccessfully, to serve
some perceived public interest, the
respondent still faces real costs from having to defend the proceedings
successfully. The applicant
had a choice as to whether or not to be a party to
the relevant litigation. The respondent typically had no such choice. The
legislature
has chosen not to protect such applicants from the effects of
adverse costs orders, whether by an express statutory exemption or
the creation
of some form of applicants’ costs fund (138). In such circumstances, one
may well feel sympathy for the plight
of the unsuccessful applicant. But
sympathy is not a legitimate basis to deprive a successful party of his or her
[117] Whilst the
plaintiffs may have felt vindicated, the defendant’s statement did not
resolve the contractual dispute between
the parties which could only be resolved
by continuing with the trial. The ultimate dispute between the parties was still
primed for resolution by the court.
significance of the defendant’s statement is difficult to assess. The
plaintiffs state that the defendant’s
position as framed by the pleadings
was that the first plaintiff remained responsible for the final list. Paragraph
32(d) of the
defence stated:
“(d) as an explanation for the
denial in subparagraph (c), the College says:
(i) if the [first plaintiff] did not create the Initial List; or
(ii) if the [first plaintiff] did not publish the Initial List; or
(iii) if the [first plaintiff] had told those to whom he published the Initial
List that they were not to change the Initial List
and were to immediately
delete it upon receipt; then
(iv) it is equally reasonable to infer those who participated in creating the
Final List would never have done so.”
[119] Effectively,
the defendant pleaded that it may be inferred that, ‘but for’ the
first plaintiff, the final list would
not have been created.
defendant’s statement that the plaintiff had “no investment”
in the final list is a broad statement that
could subsume any ‘but
for’ scenario and, at first blush, appears to be inconsistent with the
defendant’s pleading.
The same could be said about the Principal’s
affidavit where he stated that there was “insufficient evidence to
the first plaintiff had any part in the creation or contribution to
other lists”.
[121] It may
come down to semantics with important consequences as to the meaning of
“no investment”.
defendant’s statement has to be considered in light of the pleadings,
where the defendant pleaded its ‘but for’
position. However, in the
circumstances of an evidential void and without the benefit of a full hearing,
it is difficult to make
any finding as to whether the defendant’s
(a) is inconsistent with the defendant’s previous position;
(b) resolved a factual issue between the parties; and
(c) would have impacted the ultimate result.
[123] The trial
was discontinued at a very early stage and without the benefit of hearing any
evidence. Accordingly, I cannot come
to any finding as to the conduct of the
parties prior to, or during, this litigation nor as to the merits of the
plaintiffs’
case and their prospects of success, nor whether they
surrendered or capitulated in light of an overwhelming case against them. In
language of Bond J (as his Honour then was) in
impracticable to do so.
[124] Considering
all the matters that I must, it is difficult to discern a clear reason why one
party, rather than the other, should
bear their own costs.
[125] Ultimately,
this is a case where each party should bear their own costs.
[126] Accordingly,
in my view, the most appropriate and just order is for each party to bear their
The plaintiffs subsequently
abandoned the relief at (a), (d), (e) and (f).
Namely, that he was a
co-creator of the initial list and that he distributed it to his friends by
using the Snapchat application
Services Pty Ltd (in liq) v Leggett
[2020] QSC 183
(2020) 5 QR 50
Detailed at [72] of
these reasons.
His Honour was considering the
general discretion as to costs, rather than the discretion under r 685
[2020] QSC 183
, 58 at [18].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (396 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter