URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2019/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cherwell Creek Coal Pty Ltd v BHP Queensland Coal Investments Pty Ltd & Ors [2019] QLAC 5 (25 October 2019)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF
Cherwell Creek Coal Pty Ltd v BHP Queensland Coal Investments Pty Ltd
[2019] QLAC 5
Cherwell Creek Coal Pty Ltd
ACN 063 763
(appellant)
BHP Queensland Coal Investments Pty Ltd
ACN 098 876 825
(respondent)
QCT Resources Pty
ACN 010 808 705
(respondent)
BHP Coal Pty Ltd
010 595 721
(respondent)
QCT Mining Pty Ltd
ACN 010 487
(respondent)
Mitsubishi Development Pty Ltd
ACN 009 779
(respondent)
QCT Investments Pty Ltd
ACN 010 487
(respondent)
Umal Consolidated Pty Ltd
ACN 000 767
(respondent)
Land Court No MRA1332-08
BHP Queensland Coal Investments Pty Ltd
ACN 098 876
(appellant)
QCT Resources Pty Ltd
ACN 010 808
(appellant)
BHP Coal Pty Ltd
ACN 010 595
(appellant)
QCT Mining Pty Ltd
ACN 010 487
(appellant)
Mitsubishi Development Pty Ltd
ACN 009 779
(appellant)
QCT Investments Pty Ltd
ACN 010 487
(appellant)
Umal Consolidated Pty Ltd
ACN 000 767
(appellant)
Cherwell Creek Coal Pty Ltd
(respondent)
Land Court No MRA1332-08
Land Appeal Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
Appeal from the Land Court of Queensland
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
25 October 2019
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
14 May 2019
WL Cochrane, Member of the Land
WA Isdale, Member of the Land Court
In appeal LAC006-18:
either party applies for a different order for costs in submissions filed within
14 days of the publication of these reasons,
the appellant must pay the
respondents’ costs of the appeal.
In appeal LAC007-18:
either party applies for a different order for costs in submissions filed within
14 days of the publication of these reasons,
the appellant must pay the
respondents’ costs of the appeal.
In appeal LAC001-19:
either party applies for a different order for costs in submissions filed within
14 days of the publication of these reasons,
the appellant must pay the
respondents’ costs of the appeal.
In appeal LAC002-19:
items 8, 14, 15, 19, 20, 21, 24 and 31 from order 1 made on 14 December 2018 by
President Kingham regarding the appellant’s
application filed on 25 June
order 4 made on 14 December 2018 by President Kingham regarding the
appellant’s amended application filed on 3 October
(a) substituting “(e)” for
(b) inserting after paragraph (b):
“(c) Ms Jenny McCabe and any Legal Practitioner
(with a current practicing certificate issued in Australia) who
takes over Ms McCabe’s responsibility for the respondents
in respect of
these proceedings;
(d) Mr Brett Garner subject to the terms of the undertaking
signed by Mr Garner on 20 November 2018 and with any disclosure
to him to not
take place after his position and duties are no longer as deposed to in the
Second Affidavit of Stephen James Hurford
sworn 30 July 2018;
to the appellant to apply on two days’ notice to the respondents, if Ms
McCabe and/or Mr Garner no longer hold the positions
they held when the appeal
either party applies for a different costs order in submissions filed within 14
days of the publication of these reasons, the
respondents must pay the
appellant’s costs of the appeal.
CATCHWORDS:
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
DISCOVERY AND INTERROGATORIES – DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION
OF DOCUMENTS
– PRODUCTION AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS – GROUNDS FOR RESISTING
PRODUCTION – IRRELEVANCE –
where the proceeding is being case
managed by the learned primary judge – where the primary judge ordered the
disclosure of
a category of rail agreement documents to the extent of any
clauses relating to the take or pay element of the rail agreements –
whether the primary judge erred in finding that the clauses were directly
relevant to an issue in the proceeding
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
DISCOVERY AND INTERROGATORIES – DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION
OF DOCUMENTS
– PRODUCTION AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS – GROUNDS FOR RESISTING
PRODUCTION – where the primary judge
ordered the disclosure of a category
of rail agreement documents to the extent of any clauses relating to the take or
pay element
of the rail agreements – where the party disclosed the clauses
but redacted parts of them – where the party disclosing
the documents
sought to rely on three paragraphs of a confidential affidavit to explain why
redacted parts of the clauses contained
commercially sensitive information
– whether the primary judge erred by refusing to admit the paragraphs of
the confidential
affidavit – where the primary judge had taken into
account the commercially sensitive nature of the information in the clauses
ordering them to be disclosed
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
DISCOVERY AND INTERROGATORIES – DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION
OF DOCUMENTS
– PRODUCTION AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS – GROUNDS FOR RESISTING
PRODUCTION – where the primary judge
ordered the disclosure of a category
of rail agreement documents to the extent of any clauses relating to the take or
pay element
of the rail agreements – where the party disclosed the clauses
but redacted parts of them – whether the primary judge
erred by not
permitting the redaction of the price sensitive information in the clauses
– where the primary judge had taken
into account the commercially
sensitive nature of the information in the clauses when ordering them to be
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
DISCOVERY AND INTERROGATORIES – DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION
OF DOCUMENTS
– PRODUCTION AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS – TIME AND MANNER OF
INSPECTION – where the primary judge
imposed a confidentiality regime in
respect of a category of rail agreement documents that was limited as of right
to the lawyers
of the inspecting party – whether the primary judge erred
in finding that the category of rail agreements should be subject
restricted confidentiality regime that had not been the subject of submissions
by the parties
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
DISCOVERY AND INTERROGATORIES – DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION
OF DOCUMENTS
– PRODUCTION AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS – TIME AND MANNER OF
INSPECTION –where the primary judge
imposed confidentiality orders on
specified items of various extracts of documents and transcripts relating to a
security for costs
application – whether the primary judge erred in
finding that the items were commercially sensitive and should be subject to
confidentiality orders
Adam P Brown Male Fashions Pty Ltd v Philip Morris Inc
[1981] HCA 39
, considered
Cargill Australia Ltd v Viterra
Malt Pty Ltd
[2018] VSCA 260
, considered
Cherwell Creek Coal
Pty Ltd v BHP Queensland Coal Investments Pty Ltd & Ors (No 16)
Cherwell Creek Coal Pty Ltd v BHP Queensland Coal
Investments Pty Ltd & Ors (No 18)
[2018] QLC 48
Pty Ltd v PIG Improvement Co Australia Pty Ltd
[2001] QCA 48
APPEARANCES:
DP O’Brien QC, with LV Sheptooha (instructed by Holding Redlich) for
the appellant in appeals LAC006-18, LAC007-18 and LAC001-19
and the respondent
in appeal LAC002-19
SL Doyle QC, with SJ Webster and FY Lubett (instructed by Allens) for the
respondents in appeals LAC006-18, LAC007-18 and LAC001-19
and the appellants in
appeal LAC002-19
In Land Court proceeding MRA1332-08 Cherwell Creek Coal
Pty Ltd claims compensation from the respondents which are referred to
collectively
as BMA for a loss of opportunity to commercialise a coal resource
on an area of land over which Cherwell Creek previously held an
exploration
permit (EPC545). The claim is made pursuant to special purpose compensation
provisions in chapter 12,
Mineral Resources Act
that were introduced by the
Mineral Resources (Peak Downs Mine) Amendment Act
(Qld) (the Amending Act). The proceeding is being case managed by the
learned primary judge who made a number of decisions relating
to disclosure of
documents by Cherwell Creek. The three appeals by Cherwell Creek (LAC006-18,
LAC007-18 and LAC001-19) concern orders
made by the primary judge requiring
Cherwell Creek to disclose to BMA the “take or pay” elements of rail
agreements for
the Sonoma and Drake Mines (the mines).
[2] The mines are operated by the QCoal Group of companies. The QCoal Group and
BMA are trade rivals, competing in the export market
for coking coal. QCoal Pty
Ltd is the parent company of the QCoal Group and owns 50 per cent of Cherwell
Creek with the remaining
50 per cent owned by Mr Wallin who is the managing
director of both QCoal Pty Ltd and Cherwell Creek.
[3] It is convenient to use the descriptions applied by Cherwell Creek in
identifying each of the decisions that are the subject
of the appeals. The
first appeal (LAC006-18) relates to order 1(c) made by the primary judge on 7
November 2018 that Cherwell Creek
must disclose the category 27 documents listed
in BMA’s amended application filed on 3 October 2018 (the disclosure
application)
“to the extent of any clauses relating to the take or pay
element of those agreements”. The category 27 documents had
described as “The rail agreements for the Sonoma and Drake mines referred
to in paragraph 142 of the summary of evidence
of Mr Wallin”. The reasons
for the making of that order are set out in
Cherwell Creek Coal Pty Ltd v BHP
Queensland Coal Investments Pty Ltd & Ors (No 16)
[2018] QLC 40
disclosure judgment).
[4] Pursuant to order 5 made on 7 November 2018, Cherwell Creek was required to
file and serve on BMA by 15 November 2015 any affidavit
material it intended to
rely upon to assert that any documents referred to in order 1 should be the
subject of a confidentiality
regime and serve an outline of submissions on
whether any documents referred to in order 1 should be the subject of a
confidentiality
regime. Directions were given by order 6 made on the same date
for filing and serving by BMA of any affidavit material it intended
to rely upon
to assert any documents referred to in order 1 should not be the subject of a
confidentiality regime and serve an outline
of submissions in response to
Cherwell Creek’s outline. At a hearing before the primary judge on 15
November 2018, the parties
indicated they had reached agreement about an interim
confidentiality regime in respect of the documents disclosed by Cherwell Creek
pursuant to order 1 made on 7 November 2018 and the relevant order was made by
the primary judge on 16 November 2018.
[5] There was a further hearing on 26 November 2018 in respect of the
confidentiality issue identified in orders 5 and 6 that dealt
with Cherwell
Creek’s claim to redact the documents disclosed pursuant to order 1(c)
made on 7 November 2018. In the course
of that hearing the primary judge
refused to admit paragraphs 27 to 29 of the confidential affidavit of Mr Boys
sworn on 26 November
2018 that was filed by leave on that date. That ruling is
the subject of the second appeal (LAC001-19). The primary judge gave
following reasons in making that ruling (the evidentiary
“No, look, I’ll uphold the objection, Mr
Gibson, for two reasons, firstly, I do think it is a matter that should have
been raised at the hearing of the application, if there were particular
documents that – that it was going to be argued that
they were so
confidential that they should not be disclosed. That should have been
identified at that hearing. In fact, what happened
was, the issue of
confidentiality was put off to today so that the terms upon which any
confidential material – or disputes
and the terms upon which access is to be provided, were to be debated. It was
certainly not
flagged to me that it might be argued that a document that I
otherwise ordered to be produced should not be produced because of concerns
... I will allow the objection – uphold the objection as to paragraphs
27 to 29 of the confidential affidavit of Toby Boys sworn
of November.”
[6] The third appeal (LAC007-18) arises out of the primary judge’s
decision given on 14 December 2018:
Cherwell Creek Coal Pty Ltd v BHP
Queensland Coal Investments Pty Ltd & Ors (No 18)
[2018] QLC 48
confidentiality judgment) and the refusal to permit Cherwell Creek to redact the
price sensitive information in the take or
pay clauses. (The second and third
appeals fall away, if Cherwell Creek succeeds in its first appeal.)
[7] The one appeal filed by BMA (LAC002-19) concerns two aspects of the
confidentiality judgment. The first aspect is in respect
of the confidentiality
regime imposed on BMA for the category 27 documents. The second aspect concerns
confidentiality orders imposed
by the primary judge on specified items of
various extracts of documents and transcripts relating to the security for costs
application
heard on 3 August 2016.
The relevant issue in the proceeding
[8] The primary judge considered the disclosure application in the context of
the issues raised by the pleadings in the proceeding.
The category 27 documents
were sought by BMA in relation to the issue that arose as a result of the
allegations in paragraphs 4(b)
and 4(k) of the fourth amended annexure A to the
originating application (the claim) that, but for the enactment of the Amending
Act, Cherwell Creek would have:
“(b) between May 2008 and
September 2008, prepared a margin rank and obtained preliminary engineering
studies in relation to
power and water supply, coal processing and handling and
the rail spur design to identify the optimal location of infrastructure;
(k) commenced the extraction and selling of coal from the coal resource:
(i) in respect to the bulk sample, in about April 2009; and
(ii) in respect of the mine production, in about July 2010;
(iii) consisting of a coking coal product with a 9.5%
or 10.9% ash
content and a thermal coal product with a 25% ash content;”
[9] It is pleaded by BMA in the defence at paragraph 3(b)(i)(C) in response to
paragraph 4(b) of the claim that, even if Cherwell
Creek would have obtained
MDL364 in or about May 2008, Cherwell Creek would not have proceeded with the
steps pleaded in paragraph
4(b) because:
“there were as at
May 2008 extensive constraints on access to rail and port facilities which were
necessary to enable the export
of coal from the MDLA364 coal resource and the
applicant had not secured a right of access to any such rail or port facilities
enable the export of coal from the MDLA364 coal resource;”
[10] BMA in paragraph 12(a)(iv) of the defence denies the allegations in
subparagraph (i) of paragraph 4(k) of the claim,
“there were as at April 2009 extensive constraints
on access to rail and port facilities which were necessary to enable the
of coal from the MDLA364 coal resource and the applicant had not secured a right
of access to any such rail or port facilities
to enable the export of coal from
the MDLA364 coal resource;”
[11] BMA in paragraph 12(b)(iv) of the defence denies the allegations in
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph 4(k) of the claim,
“there were as at 1 July 2010 extensive
constraints on access to rail and port facilities which were necessary to enable
export of coal from the MDLA364 coal resource and the applicant had not
secured a right of access to any such rail or port facilities
to enable the
export of coal from the MDLA364 coal resource;”
[12] Paragraph 142 of the summary of evidence of Mr Wallin is in the following
“He will say that he knew at the time through his
experience with developing the Sonoma mine that one of the ‘long lead
items’ are the negotiations with the rail provider for the design and
construction of a rail loop. He would have been keen
to get these discussions
started immediately and to have the contract signed before Christmas so the
project was not delayed over
the Christmas break. He will say that he would
have sought and (in his view) obtained a clause in the contract which would have
deferred the commencement of the take or pay element of the contract until after
the rail loop joined QR infrastructure. He will
say that he had successfully
negotiated a similar arrangement for the Sonoma project and later also
successfully negotiated for the
insertion of a clause of this nature in the
Drake mine later in 2010/2011.”
[13] The disclosure judgment at [12] proceeds on the basis of setting out the
allegations in issue identified by BMA and, relevantly,
the allegation that
Cherwell Creek would not have proceeded to develop the coal resource because of
constraints on rail and port
facilities that was responsive to Cherwell
Creek’s allegations about the timing of the extraction and selling of coal
the coal resource.
Approach on appeal against a ruling relating to practice or
[14] An appeal court generally exercises caution in reviewing decisions
pertaining to practice and procedure:
Adam P Brown Male Fashions Pty Ltd v
Philip Morris Inc
[1981] HCA 39
(1981) 148 CLR 170
, 177. To the extent the appeals relate
to discretionary procedural judgments, the appellant needs to show error of the
kind addressed
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
, 505. Cherwell
Creek relies on the approach of Kyrou and McLeish JJA on an application for
leave to appeal the trial judge’s
order permitting an overseas-based
internal legal counsel for a defendant to have access, upon undertakings, to
certain confidential
documents of the plaintiffs in
Cargill Australia Ltd v
Viterra Malt Pty Ltd
[2018] VSCA 260
“116 In our view, this is not a case where
the residual discretion should be exercised without first determining whether or
not the application for leave to appeal has a real prospect of success. Although
it concerns a matter of practice and procedure,
the sensitivity of the
confidential documents is such that the case carries with it the potential for
significant harm to be done
to one of the parties if confidentiality is lost
beyond the extent contemplated by the orders of the Court. Moreover, at least on
the case advanced by the applicants, the effect of the impugned order is that
confidential information will be made available, albeit
on strict terms, to a
senior employee of a substantial trade rival of Cargill. The risk of harm to
Cargill will subsist well after
the proceeding is finalised and thus the effect
of the impugned order is not confined to the conduct of the proceeding. In our
these considerations take the case out of the ordinary class of matters
involving practice and procedure and give it a potentially
significant
substantive character.
these circumstances, the fact that it has not been established that there is a
real risk of confidential information being disclosed
to persons outside the
intended scope of the orders is not decisive. Orders of this kind almost
inevitably entail some risk of disclosure,
even if it can be assumed that there
would be no deliberate disobedience of the orders. This is not a case in our
opinion where it
can be said that there would be no substantial injustice caused
if leave were to be refused on a discretionary
[15] It should be noted at the outset, however, that these observations by the
majority in
were made in the context of a statutory requirement
that leave to appeal only be granted if the court were satisfied the appeal had
a real prospect of success and where the authorities on the application of that
test had established that, even if the court were
satisfied that there was a
real prospect of success, there remained a residual discretion to exercise as to
whether or not leave
should be granted in respect of which the concept of
substantial injustice may be relevant (
[16] The judgment of the plurality in
Adam P Brown
noted at 177 that
there were cases in support of the view that on an appeal in respect of a
decision relating to practice and procedure
there must be both an error of
principle and the decision appealed from must work a substantial injustice to
one of the parties,
but there were also cases in support of the opposing view
that such criteria are disjunctive. The plurality then stated at
“For ourselves, we believe it to be unnecessary and
indeed unwise to lay down rigid and exhaustive criteria. The circumstances
different cases are infinitely various.”
[17] The plurality then repeated with approval the statement of Sir Frederick
In re the Will of F B Gilbert (dec’d)
[1946] NSWStRp 24
(1946) 46 SR (NSW)
, 323 and noted that “the question of injustice flowing from the order
appealed from will generally be a relevant and necessary
consideration”.
The view taken by the plurality of not being dogmatic in fixing the criteria for
an appeal against a decision
of practice and procedure, but considering the
appeal in the light of the nature of the decision under appeal and any injustice
by the decision has remained the approach to appeals against practice and
procedure decisions: see
Just GI Pty Ltd v PIG Improvement Co Australia Pty
[2001] QCA 48
The disclosure judgment
[18] There are some observations made by the primary judge in the early part of
the disclosure judgment which give context to the
reasons for ordering
disclosure of the category 27 documents. The primary judge dealt with the
allegations in issue at [16]-[20]
of the reasons:
this case, the realisation of the opportunity to commercialise the coal resource
does not depend solely on a decision
by Cherwell Creek. It must establish that
it is more likely than not that the Minister would have granted it the necessary
lease and that it would have gone on to operate the mine or sell it.
That, in turn depends on the Court being satisfied that it is
more likely than
not that Cherwell Creek could have taken certain steps required to secure a
mining lease and operate or sell the
mine, and that it would have done so.
[17] Whether it
have taken the necessary steps is a question of
. Whether it
have done so is a question of
. In either case, capacity or intention, Cherwell Creek relies
on Mr Wallin’s evidence about what he (Cherwell Creek) could
[18] In his summary, Mr Wallin has referenced what he caused other companies
associated with QCoal to do at various times for other
mining projects. BMA
described that as Mr Wallin’s
track-record
. Cherwell Creek says Mr
Wallin’s track-record is not an issue on the pleadings.
[19] Mr Wallin’s track-record may not be directly in issue, but
Cherwell Creek’s is. The allegations identified for this
application are
likelihood of those hypotheses having occurred,
had the Amending Act not
commenced. Proving a past hypothesis is different from proving an historical
[20] In this case, Cherwell Creek draws on Mr Wallin’s (and the QCoal
companies’) track-record to prove past hypotheses
and its intention.” (
footnote omitted
[19] The primary judge then explained at [23]-[24] of the disclosure judgment
the reasons why documents relating to Mr Wallin’s
and QCoal’s track
record were directly relevant in the
proceeding:
“[23] Whether dealing with allegations of
capacity or intention, Mr Wallin relies on historical facts about QCoal and its
mines, and what he personally did or decided, to prove what Cherwell Creek
could or would have done. Particularly, he explains how
his method of developing
coal mines differs from that of publicly listed coal companies. That is Mr
Wallin’s (and QCoal’s)
track-record.
[24] If evidence about those matters went to credit only, Cherwell Creek
could not lead it. In general terms, documents evidencing
such matters are
directly relevant because of the way in which Cherwell Creek has framed its
[20] Cherwell Creek does not challenge this finding that Mr Wallin’s track
record and that of the QCoal Group in commercialising
a coal resource is
directly relevant to the case advanced by Cherwell Creek as to what it would and
could have done in respect of
[21] The primary judge also had to address the issue of whether the documents
were in the possession or control of Cherwell Creek
and, if not, whether
Cherwell Creek should be required to take reasonable steps to obtain them. The
primary judge accepted at [45]
of the disclosure judgment that it was a
reasonable inference to draw for any document Mr Wallin referred to in clear and
unambiguous
terms in his summary that Cherwell Creek had a copy of those
documents. The primary judge was also satisfied at [53] of the disclosure
judgment, given Cherwell Creek’s assertion the documents were not in its
possession or control, that a
order should be made, in the
alternative, for any documents that Cherwell Creek was ordered to disclose.
[22] The primary judge’s specific reasons for ordering disclosure of the
category 27 documents are set out at [73]-[76] of
the disclosure
“[73] Category 27 is the rail agreements for the
Sonoma and Drake mines ([142] of the summary).
[74] BMA identified them as relevant to a positive case it will put in
denying two allegations made by Cherwell Creek. Firstly, that
it would have
undertaken certain studies, including the rail spur design, between May and
September 2008. Secondly, that it would
have commenced extracting and selling
coal from the coal resource, in bulk sample, in about April 2009, and in respect
of mine production,
in about July 2010.
[75] Mr Wallin said he would have negotiated a clause in the contract for the
Cherwell Creek mine to defer the take or pay element
of the contract until after
the rail loop joined QR infrastructure. He had negotiated similar clauses for
the Sonoma and the Drake
mine. The direct relevance of a clause of that nature
to BMA’s allegation of constraints on rail and port facilities is not
immediately obvious.
[76] However, Mr Wallin’s evidence explains what he would have done in
terms of rail design and the QR contract, in the context
of timing for the
Cherwell Creek mine. He would have started negotiations early so the project was
not delayed over the Christmas
break. It seems to me that the contract
arrangements are relevant to that, rather than to any question of rail and port
constraints.
For that reason, only the clauses relating to the take and pay
element of the contracts must be disclosed.”
[23] Even though BMA had based its application for disclosure of the category 27
documents on the issue of whether Cherwell Creek
would have proceeded to develop
the MDL364 coal resource given the constraints on rail and port facilities, the
primary judge at
[76] based the decision to order disclosure of the clauses
relating to the take and pay element of the rail agreements by reference
issue of timing for the Cherwell Creek mine referred to at [74] and the emphasis
in Mr Wallin’s evidence on the timing
of the negotiations he would have
undertaken in relation to the rail agreement and the terms he would have
achieved, based on the
rail agreements he negotiated for the mines.
[24] The primary judge noted in the conclusion of the disclosure judgment at
“The orders will require Cherwell Creek to disclose
commercially sensitive material. I will hear from Cherwell Creek about a
to preserve the confidentiality of documents that warrant that protection.
Because I am making a
order in the alternative, I expect that
Cherwell Creek will make submissions that address any concerns about
confidentiality held
by companies associated with QCoal as well as its
[25] Cherwell Creek appeals on the ground that the primary judge erred in
finding in [76] of the disclosure judgment that the clauses
relating to the take
or pay elements of the rail agreements for the mines were directly relevant to
an issue in the proceeding either
for failing to take into account relevant
considerations, or there was no evidence to support the finding that terms of
contracts for the mines were relevant to Mr Wallin starting
“negotiations early so the project was not delayed over the Christmas
break”, or the finding was unreasonable and illogical. The relevant
considerations that Cherwell Creek asserts the primary
judge failed to take into
account were that the only issue raised in the pleadings was whether Cherwell
Creek would have developed
the MDL364 coal resource given constraints on rail
and port facilities and the terms of rail contracts for the mines were not
relevant to that issue, or the evidence referred to in [142] of the
summary of evidence of Mr Wallin in relation to the mines was
limited to the
negotiation of a clause for the deferral of the take or pay elements of the rail
agreement with the rail provider
and only clauses relating to the deferral of
the take or pay elements of the rail agreements for the mines were directly
to that evidence. The alternative ground is that the primary judge
erred by failing to give adequate reasons for that conclusion.
[26] Cherwell Creek’s submissions are, however, premised on an
interpretation of the primary judge’s reasons in the disclosure
that does not reflect the reasoning. Although BMA had asserted on the
disclosure application that the category 27 documents
were relevant to the issue
that Cherwell Creek would not have proceeded to develop the coal resource,
because of constraints on rail
and port facilities, the primary judge found
expressly at [76] of the disclosure judgment that the rail agreements were
to the timing for the Cherwell Creek mine which must be a reference to
the allegations in paragraphs s 4(b) and 4(k) of the claim
that were expressly
put in issue in paragraphs 3(b)(i)(C), 12(a)(iv) and 12(b)(iv) of the defence.
As the primary judge observed
in effect at [74]-[76], the issues are not limited
to the positive case asserted by BMA in response to Cherwell Creek’s
but are defined by what Cherwell Creek has to establish on its own case
that is not admitted by BMA.
[27] The primary judge had been informed by Cherwell Creek’s counsel at
the hearing on 18 October 2018 that, despite the fact
that Mr Wallin made
reference to the deferral of the take or pay elements of the rail agreements for
the mines in the summary of
his evidence, there was no intention on the part of
Cherwell Creek to tender as exhibits any of those documents, asserting they were
referred to “as part of the background or the history of Mr Wallin’s
experience”. That assertion was rejected
in the findings made by the
primary judge at [23]-[24] of the disclosure judgment. The reference to the
deferral of the take or
pay elements of the rail agreements for the mines
remains in Mr Wallin’s summary of evidence.
[28] Cherwell Creek advances an alternative argument that, if disclosure were
required on the basis of the evidence referred to in
[142] of Mr Wallin’s
summary, the evidence was limited to the negotiation of a clause for the
deferral of the take or pay elements
of the rail agreements for the mines and
the disclosure should have been narrower than was ordered. First, it is
apparent from the
disclosure judgment that the primary judge’s decision to
order disclosure of any clauses relating to the take or pay element
of the rail
agreements for the mines was not based on the bare reference in [142] of Mr
Wallin’s summary of evidence, but on
their relevance to the issue in the
proceeding as to the timing of the steps that Cherwell Creek would have been
able to undertake
in commercialising the mine. Second, the deferral of the take
or pay elements of the rail agreements for the mines can be assessed
terms of the context of the content of the take or pay obligations themselves.
The success of Mr Wallin in negotiating deferral
clauses may have been related
to the price for the services under the rail agreements. Cherwell Creek has not
shown an error of
principle on the part of the primary judge in ordering
disclosure of the take or pay elements of the rail agreements for the mines.
Even though BMA is a trade rival of the QCoal Group, the decision to order
disclosure was made in the context of a foreshadowed
confidentiality regime
being imposed in respect of the category 27 documents. In the light of that
foreshadowed regime and the reliance
of Cherwell Creek on [142] of Mr
Wallin’s summary that is directly relevant to the timing of the steps that
Cherwell Creek
would have undertaken in commercialising the mine, it is apparent
that the primary judge has taken into account the question of the
interests of
justice to both BMA and Cherwell Creek in making the decision to order
disclosure of the take or pay elements of the
category 27 documents.
[29] The alternative ground of appeal alleging a failure on the part of the
primary judge to give adequate reasons proceeds on the
basis the primary
judge’s reasons for ordering disclosure of the clauses relating to the
take or pay elements of the rail agreements
for the mines were wholly contained
in [76] of the disclosure judgment. The analysis of the disclosure judgment
shows that is an
incorrect characterisation of the primary judge’s reasons
in the disclosure judgment. As submitted by BMA, the primary judge’s
reasons at [16]-[24] and [74]-[76] of the disclosure judgment provide an
explanation of the reasons for the primary judge’s
conclusion to order
disclosure of the category 27 documents to the extent of the clauses relating to
the take or pay elements.
[30] Cherwell Creek does not succeed in establishing either ground of appeal
against the order to disclose clauses relating to the
take or pay elements of
the category 27 documents.
The evidentiary ruling
[31] After the disclosure judgment was published on 30 October 2018, BMA sought
the clauses relating to the take or pay elements
of the rail agreements for the
mines from Cherwell Creek in an unredacted form. Paragraphs 27 to 29 of the
confidential affidavit
of Mr Boys was responsive to that request with Mr Boys
conveying his instructions as to how and why redacted parts of the clauses
contained commercially sensitive information to the operation of the mines.
[32] The first ground of appeal is that the primary judge erred in not admitting
those paragraphs into evidence by failing to take
into account relevant
considerations including the circumstances in which those paragraphs of the
affidavit were prepared, that Cherwell
Creek had during the hearing that
resulted in the disclosure judgment expressly raised concerns about the
confidentiality of the
documents sought by BMA and reserved its position in that
respect until after the determination of the application which was acknowledged
by the primary judge in [7] of the disclosure judgment, and to the extent that
BMA opposed the admission of those paragraphs into
evidence because of the
lateness of the affidavit, any prejudice to BMA was capable of being remedied by
an adjournment and an order
for costs. The same matters are also relied on to
express the basis for the error of failing to accord Cherwell Creek natural
or the finding was unreasonable and illogical.
[33] The second ground of appeal is that the primary judge failed to give
adequate reasons for the finding that the clauses relating
to the “take or
pay” elements of the rail agreements for the mines referred to in [142] of
the summary of evidence of
Mr Wallin were directly relevant to an issue in the
proceeding.
[34] During the hearing on 26 November 2018 counsel for Cherwell Creek submitted
that the specific figures as to the times and dates
which had been redacted in
the take or pay clauses were not relevant to the issues in the proceeding.
Paragraphs 27 to 29 of Mr
Boys’ confidential affidavit were relied on to
support the argument of relevance and also confidentiality. Although Cherwell
Creek purported to argue during this hearing against disclosure of the take or
pay elements of the rail agreements on the ground
of relevance, that issue was
determined by the disclosure judgment at [76]. Cherwell Creek’s reliance
on the alleged failure
of the primary judge to give adequate reasons for finding
that the clauses relating to the take or pay elements of the rail agreements
the mines were directly relevant to an issue in the proceeding misses the point
that was made in giving the evidentiary ruling.
The primary judge did not need
to revisit the decision that had already been made in the disclosure judgment
of those clauses.
[35] There was no inconsistency between the acknowledgements of requiring
further submissions on confidentiality in [7] and [89]
of the disclosure
judgment (reflected in orders 5 and 6 made on 7 November 2018) and the refusal
of the primary judge to receive
paragraphs 27 to 29 of Mr Boys’
confidential affidavit. The primary judge did not overlook Cherwell
Creek’s reservation
of its position in relation to confidentiality made at
the hearing on 18 October 2018, as it is apparent from the disclosure judgment
that the issue of what confidentiality regime should apply to preserve the
confidentiality of documents ordered to be disclosed was
postponed until after
the disclosure judgment. Cherwell Creek sought to rely upon paragraphs 27 to 29
of Mr Boys’ confidential
affidavit to support its argument that the take
or pay elements of the rail agreements were so commercially sensitive that they
not be disclosed at all. The question of how to preserve confidentiality
in respect of disclosable documents is a different issue
from whether documents
should be ordered to be disclosed, because of their confidential nature. It is
apparent from the disclosure
judgment that it was the former and not the latter
that was left for further submission. In those circumstances, Cherwell Creek
also fails on its first ground of appeal however expressed. The appeal in
LAC001-19 must be dismissed.
The confidentiality judgment
[36] BMA had made an application on 25 June 2018 to set aside the restrictions
in respect of the dissemination of materials relating
to the security for costs
application heard on 3 August 2016. Another Member had heard the security for
costs application and at
the conclusion of the hearing had made an order
preventing publication of, or access to, both the affidavits and the transcript
that hearing. The primary judge by orders 1 and 2 made on 20 September 2018,
but subject to orders 3 to 7, lifted the restriction
on the transcript of the
hearing in closed court on 3 August 2016 and set aside the confidentiality
restriction imposed on the information
in the affidavits that had been
identified as Cherwell Creek as confidential. Orders 3 to 7 set up a regime to
enable the parties
to agree on what parts of the transcript or the affidavits
continued to be commercially sensitive and should be the subject of a
confidentiality regime. There was then a further hearing before the primary
judge in respect of passages from the transcript
of the hearing on 3 August 2016
and parts of the affidavits relied on by Cherwell Creek on which the parties
could not agree should
be the subject of the confidentiality regime. By order 1
made on 14 December 2018 for the reasons set out in [21]-[31] of the
confidentiality
judgment, the primary judge ordered that the confidentiality
regime established by order 7 made on 20 September 2018 would apply
listed items. BMA appeals against the inclusion of items 8, 14, 15, 19, 20, 21
and 24 (the disputed items) in that list.
The appeal had also been proceeding
in respect of item 31, but Cherwell Creek’s written submissions conceded
that the appeal
should be successful in respect of item 31.
[37] The issue disposed of at [40]-[50] of the confidentiality judgment applying
to the take or pay elements of the rail agreements
for the mines was that the
price sensitive information that had been redacted in those agreements should be
disclosed, subject to
a confidentiality regime. At [42] of the confidentiality
judgment, the primary judge rejected Cherwell Creek’s argument that
price sensitive material was so commercially sensitive that it should not have
to disclose it for the reason that Cherwell Creek
did not put that argument when
the disclosure application was heard on 18 October 2018 and the primary judge
had already ordered
Cherwell Creek as a result of the disclosure judgment to
disclose the information. The primary judge observed at [43] of the
confidentiality
judgment that the take or pay clauses were impossible to
understand without access to the price sensitive material, but then noted
“There is no dispute the information is commercially
sensitive. I accept that is so. The price sensitive material explains
calculate the access charges by reference to tonnages, loading times and other
details factored into the formula. That is
commercially valuable information
for a trade rival.”
[38] Pursuant to the confidentiality judgment, by order 3 made on 14 December
2018 in respect of BMA’s disclosure application,
the primary judge ordered
the applicant must provide the information requested in category 27 in an
unredacted form. By order 4
made on 14 December 2018 in respect of BMA’s
disclosure application, the primary judge imposed the confidentiality regime for
the relevant parts of the rail agreements that excluded BMA’s in-house
counsel and another BMA employee Mr Garner from the
confidentiality regime:
“The following documents disclosed by the applicant
pursuant to paragraph 1 of the order of 7 November 2018 (being documents
in the applicant’s Fourteenth Further Supplementary List of Documents
dated 9 November 2018):
a. CCC.491791;
b. CCC.491836;
c. CCC.491930;
d. CCC.491984,
not be disclosed by the respondents, their agents or representatives to any
person other than:
(a) any solicitor or barrister acting in that capacity acting on behalf of
the respondents in this proceeding;
(b) a secretary or administrative assistant of a person identified in (a) who
is instructed by that person to undertake secretarial
or administrative work for
the purpose of the proceeding;
(c) any other person as determined by the Court or as agreed by the
applicant.”
[39] The confidentiality regime for the take or pay elements of the rail
agreements therefore differed from the confidentiality regime
that was ordered
by the primary judge to apply to other documents disclosed by Cherwell Creek
pursuant to paragraph 1 of the primary
judge’s order of 7 November 2018,
as set out in order 2 made on 14 December 2018. Apart from identical provisions
to paragraphs
(a), (b) and (c) of the confidentiality order applying to the take
or pay elements of the rail agreements, order 2 made on 14 December
permitted the documents to be disclosed to the in-house counsel of BMA and Mr
Garner. The intention of the primary judge
to protect Cherwell Creek against
inadvertent disclosure of the take or pay elements of the rail agreements was
explained in [47]
of the confidentiality judgment:
accept there could be serious consequences for Cherwell Creek if a trade
competitor misused this information. Given the confidentiality
that attaches to
commercial arrangements, it might be difficult to detect or prove its misuse.
Providing the information to an officer
of BMA might make it more easily
accessible by others who are not authorised to access it. There is a risk,
albeit speculative, that
it could be disseminated without the knowledge or
acquiescence of the officer to whom it was disclosed. In appropriate cases, the
courts have restricted access to the external lawyers and their support staff to
avoid misuse of information, whether deliberate
or inadvertent.”
[40] The primary judge acknowledged at [48]-[49] of the confidentiality judgment
the difference in the confidentiality regime that
the primary judge was
proposing for the category 27 documents compared with the confidentiality regime
that had been applied to the
disclosure of other
“[48] In striking a balance between the
parties’ legitimate interests in and apart from this litigation, I am
the price sensitive information has such commercial value there ought
to be additional protection.
[49] BMA’s lawyers seek access to the price sensitive material so they
can interpret the take or pay element of the agreements.
The counsel and
solicitors who represent BMA present with particular expertise in commercial
dealings and in the resources sector.
I see no prejudice to BMA if disclosure is
further restricted to exclude in-house counsel and Mr Garner.”
Cherwell Creek’s appeal against the confidentiality judgment
[41] Cherwell Creek appeals on a number of grounds against order 3 made on 14
December 2018 as a result of the confidentiality judgment
relating to the
disclosure application. Cherwell Creek relies on the grounds of appeal against
order 1(c) made on 7 November 2018,
as a result of the disclosure judgment, but
otherwise the first ground is that the primary judge erred in finding at [42] of
confidentiality judgment that Cherwell Creek did not argue that the
“price sensitive material” was so commercially sensitive
should not be disclosed and then relies on allegations the primary judge either
failed to take into account relevant considerations
or the finding was
unreasonable and illogical.
[42] The matters relied on for finding error are: that the disclosure
application had sought disclosure of 32 categories of documents;
Cherwell Creek
expressly raised issues about the confidentiality of the documents sought in the
disclosure application and reserved
its position until after the determination
of the disclosure application which was acknowledged in the disclosure judgment
a discoverable document may be redacted for confidentiality; order 7
made on 7 November 2018 deferred confidentiality issues concerning
relating to the take or pay elements of the rail agreements for the mines to the
hearing on 26 November 2018; on 19 November
2018 Cherwell Creek disclosed
clauses relating to the take or pay elements of the rail agreements for the
mines that had been redacted
for confidentiality; and that it was only by letter
dated 22 November 2018 the respondents sought those clauses in an unredacted
[43] The further grounds relied on in respect of this appeal were that the
primary judge erred by misconstruing the take or pay clauses
and the deferral of
those obligations in the rail agreements for the mines and finding in the
confidentiality judgment at [43] that
it was “impossible to
understand” those clauses without access to the “price sensitive
material”, the evidence
did not support such a finding, and the primary
judge erred by failing to give adequate reasons for that finding.
[44] As Cherwell Creek has not succeeded in its appeal against the order to
disclose any clauses relating to the take or pay element
of the category 27
documents, for the same reasons the grounds of appeal in relation to that appeal
likewise do not assist Cherwell
Creek in its appeal against the confidentiality
judgment in respect of providing the relevant clauses of the category 27
in unredacted form.
[45] When it is understood that the action of Cherwell Creek in providing the
clauses relating to the take or pay elements of the
category 27 documents
redacted in respect of price and other commercially sensitive information was
not disclosure in accordance
with the order 1(c) made on 7 November 2018, the
decision of the primary judge to order those clauses in unredacted form was, in
effect, repeating the order that had already been made necessitated by the
action taken by Cherwell Creek in the meantime in not
implementing order 1(c)
made on 7 November 2018 after the interim confidentiality regime was imposed by
order made on 16 November
[46] The question of disclosure of the price and other commercially sensitive
information in the take or pay clauses of the rail
agreements for the mines was
determined by the disclosure judgment. Cherwell Creek is relying on the same
arguments that it advanced
to challenge the evidentiary ruling arising out of
its reservation about the confidentiality of the documents sought in the
application at the hearing on 18 October 2018. The conclusion that
has been reached on the evidentiary ruling appeal in relation
to the difference
between the question of how to preserve confidentiality in respect of
disclosable documents (which was deferred
until after the disclosure judgment
was given) and the question of whether the documents should be disclosed,
because of their confidential
nature (that was determined by the disclosure
judgment), also disposes of this ground of appeal in relation to the
confidentiality
judgment. Relying on the same factual matters to express the
ground of appeal as the finding was “unreasonable or illogical”
not alter the outcome of the appeal.
[47] The primary judge made the observation at [43] of the confidentiality
judgment after having the opportunity at the hearing on
26 November 2018 to look
at the disclosed clauses relating to the take or pay element (including the
deferral of obligations) in
the redacted form. The redactions were those made
to the take or pay element of the agreements to exclude price sensitive
information
and the terms on which access had been granted, including the
particular rail tonnages for the mines and the Byerwen mine, the cost
and the dates for which access had been secured. The observation was therefore
made by the primary judge in the light of
her Honour’s actual
consideration of the disclosed clauses with redactions and understanding of the
parties’ submissions
as to the relevance of the price sensitive
information (as set out in [44] of the confidentiality judgment), but in the
the decision that had already been made in the disclosure judgment at
[76]. The price sensitive information was within the terms
of order 1(c) made
on 7 November 2018. Focusing on [43] of the confidentiality judgment does not
assist Cherwell Creek, as the main
reason the primary judge refused to permit
the redactions of the price sensitive material was that it was an attempt to
the decision the primary judge had made about the disclosure of
category 27 documents.
[48] Cherwell Creek’s appeal against the order that has the effect of
requiring Cherwell Creek to provide the price sensitive
and other commercially
sensitive information in the take or pay clauses in the rail agreements for the
mines in unredacted form does
not succeed. The appeal in LAC007-18 must be
BMA’s appeal in respect of confidentiality for security for costs
disputed items
[49] BMA does not dispute the categorisation process the primary judge used for
determining which documents (or parts of documents)
from the security for costs
application remained confidential. The primary judge had accepted (at [24] of
the confidentiality judgment)
that there was the inference open from the
statements made by Cherwell Creek’s solicitor in non-confidential
affidavits that
“as of mid-to-late 2015, Cherwell Creek could not pay
further security for costs because Mr Wallin or the QCoal Group could
provide those funds” (set out at [22]) and to the extent to which items
merely stated that inference, they were not confidential.
What Mr Boys had said
in paragraph 6 of his non-confidential affidavit sworn on 22 July 2016
“I am informed by Mr Christopher Wallin and believe
that if BMA had, at any time up to mid-to-late 2015, applied to the Land
and the Land Court had ordered Cherwell Creek to provide further security for
costs up to a total amount of $3.6 million, Mr
Wallin would have been able to
put up that security for costs on behalf of Cherwell Creek.”
[50] It is apparent from the submissions made to the primary judge on 26
November 2018 that this paragraph was treated by BMA as
allowing an inference
that at some point after mid-to-late 2015 or as of mid-to-late 2016 Mr Wallin
(or the QCoal Group) could no
longer put up security for costs on behalf of
Cherwell Creek. To the extent that [22] of the confidentiality judgment records
inference otherwise, both parties on the hearing of this appeal asserted the
reference in [22] to 2015 was erroneous and should be
read as 2016. That is the
ambit of the disclosure that had already occurred and the primary judge then
considered whether items
identified by Cherwell Creek as confidential fell
within that disclosure and thereby were no longer confidential which I will
as the first category of information.
[51] The primary judge did not find the disputed items fell within the first
category of information. The primary judge discerned
there was a second
category of information which was “details of and the reasons for the
financial position of Mr Wallin and
the QCoal companies” that was not in
the public domain, including “the details of QCoal’s financial
position and
the flexibility of its financing arrangements”. The primary
judge noted at [27] of the confidentiality judgment:
“With knowledge of the details of QCoal’s financial
position and the flexibility of its financing arrangements, BMA could
price to QCoal’s detriment.”
[52] The primary judge observed at [28] of the confidentiality
“As to financial reputation, QCoal is concerned
their commercial and employment relationships. Risk assessment is a key issue in
commercial dealings. As a matter of common sense,
it is likely the commercial
value of information about financial circumstances will fade with time. As BMA
submitted, there is already
some information in the public domain. However, the
details of QCoal’s and Mr Wallin’s financial circumstances are not.
It is for them to decide how much otherwise confidential information they
disclose, to whom and under what circumstances. Excluding
the information from
the confidentiality regime would deprive them of their lawful choices about such
[53] The primary judge found at [30] of the confidentiality judgment that BMA
would not be prejudiced in its preparation for trial,
if the second category of
information was subject to the confidentiality regime. On the basis the
disputed items were in the second
category of information and therefore
confidential in the sense of disclosing information that was not otherwise in
the public domain,
they were made subject to the confidentiality regime.
[54] The main issue on this aspect of BMA’s appeal is whether the disputed
items were correctly characterised by the primary
judge as falling within the
second category of information. BMA contends that the primary judge erred in
including the disputed
items within that category. There is no challenge by BMA
to the categorisation of information which the primary judge used for
determining
whether items should be the subject of the confidentiality regime.
[55] Apart from the submission that the disputed items are not confidential, BMA
asserts that the primary judge made an error of
principle in permitting Cherwell
Creek to pursue a claim for confidentiality, when Cherwell Creek had elected to
deploy the information
forensically in the proceeding to resist an application
for security for costs. Cherwell Creek concedes that the fact that it relied
the information for that purpose is a matter which should be taken into account
in determining whether the disputed items should
be the subject of the
confidentiality regime, but asserts that factor does not preclude a
confidentiality order being made in relation
to those items. Cherwell Creek
submits that when the context of the disputed items is considered, it was open
to the primary judge
to conclude the items were confidential and should be
protected by the confidentiality regime that was imposed. Cherwell Creek
that BMA’s appeal against the categorisation of the disputed items
is an appeal from the exercise of discretion on a matter
of practice and
procedure and that the approach described in
at [14] should be
followed, but that in any case there was no error of the type detailed in
House v The King
or substantial injustice to BMA which would warrant
interference by an appellate court with the primary judge’s categorisation
of the disputed items as confidential.
[56] Item 8 is a passage of transcript in which senior counsel for BMA referred
to a statement extracted from paragraph 6(g) in the
confidential third affidavit
of Mr Boys of 22 July 2016. Paragraph 6 sets out the list of reasons relied on
by Mr Wallin for why
he, the QCoal Group and other associated entities would
suffer, if a confidentiality order were not made. By comparing the extract
paragraph 6(g), it appears the transcript incorrectly records the word that is
used in paragraph 6(g) of “suspected”
as “suggested”.
Proceeding on the basis that the transcript was meant to record the word that
was actually used in paragraph
6(g), BMA submits that it was a reference to a
hypothetical statement in the affidavit as to what could happen if a
confidentiality
order were not made and does not include any details of, or the
reasons for, the actual financial position of Mr Wallin and the QCoal
as at a particular date or otherwise. Cherwell Creek submits that the statement
is more than hypothetical speculation
and must be read in the context of
publicly known facts, including that a security for costs application was made
by BMA and that,
as at mid to late 2016, Cherwell Creek could not provide
further security for costs because Mr Wallin or the QCoal Group could not
provide funds for the security. Cherwell Creek also relies on paragraph 6 of Mr
Boys’ confidential third affidavit listing
the reasons for why Mr Wallin
and the QCoal Group would suffer significant irreparable harm, if a
confidentiality order were not
made, as part of the “background
[57] It is circular for Cherwell Creek to rely on that paragraph as background
facts in the public domain, to the extent three of
the subparagraphs are
disputed items on this appeal and the disputed passage of transcript is taken
from subparagraph (g) which is
one of the disputed items. The inference that
Cherwell Creek asserts would be drawn from item 8 is in very general terms. On
test applied by the primary judge, item 8 did not fall within the second
category of information, as it was a submission made by
reference to
hypothetical circumstances and did not disclose any financial details required
for, or give rise to an inference falling
within, the second category of
information.
[58] Item 14 is an extract of three lines of transcripts of submissions being
made by BMA’s senior counsel that refers in general
terms to refinancing
of facilities. Even though a reader of the transcript may infer that prior to
the hearing of the security for
costs application QCoal Group had sought to
refinance its facilities, that does not necessarily lead to any other inference
justifies characterising the information as falling within the second
category of information.
[59] Item 15 is another passage of transcript of submissions being made by
BMA’s senior counsel. It is submitted the first
part of the passage has
no confidential character warranting a special order, as it is a reference to
refinancing. The second part
of the transcript is submitted to be within the
first category of information identified by the primary judge over which any
confidentiality had been lost. The first part of the passage does not
fall within the second category of information for the same
reason as item 14.
The second part of the passage is clearly within the first category of
information and therefore also not confidential.
[60] Each of items 19, 20 and 21 comprise a subparagraph from paragraph 6 of Mr
Boys’ confidential third affidavit. Item 19
is paragraph 6(g) of Mr
Boys’ confidential affidavit. Subparagraphs (a) to (f) of paragraph 6 of
Mr Boys’ confidential
third affidavit are not confidential. Subparagraph
(g) builds on the speculation of what might happen, as a result of it being a
publicly known fact at the time of the security costs application that the QCoal
Group mines were operating at a loss which is referred
to in subparagraph (e).
The inference that Cherwell Creek asserts should be drawn from each of items 19,
20 and 21 is a general
one not contemplated by the second category of
information. Item 19 is merely a matter of speculation and does not disclose
that falls within the second category of information.
[61] Item 20 is paragraph 6(i) of Mr Boys’ confidential third affidavit.
It is of like nature to subparagraph (g) in that
it is a matter of speculation
that builds on the publicly available information referred to in subparagraph
(e). It therefore does
not fall within the second category of information.
[62] Item 21 is paragraph 6(k) of Mr Boys’ confidential third affidavit.
It is also a matter of speculation that builds on
the publicly available
information reflected in subparagraph (e). It is not material falling within
the second category of information.
[63] Item 24 comprises paragraph 10(d) of Mr Boys’ confidential third
affidavit and sets out one of the reasons for delay in
the preparation and
delivery of Mr Whimp’s confidential affidavit. (Mr Whimp is a chartered
accountant who was the accountant
for Mr Wallin and the QCoal Group.)
Subparagraph (d) refers to the information that Mr Whimp analysed and reviewed
in order to form
his opinion. One document is identified in describing that
information by referring to the document with the descriptor of the name
party (other than the QCoal Group). The document is identified without
providing any detail about its date, terms or effect.
BMA conceded the document
itself was confidential and does not challenge the primary judge’s
inclusion of other material where
reference is made to the same document in the
second category of information, but submits that the mere reference to it
without disclosing
any details does not make paragraph 10(d) commercially
sensitive or confidential. Cherwell Creek asserts that item 24 should be
treated consistently with other material in which reference is made to the same
document where BMA has not challenged that material
as falling within the second
category of information.
[64] Paragraph 10(d) is in the most general terms, having regard to its purpose
in dealing with the delay associated with Mr Whimp’s
confidential
affidavit, and does not reveal the nature of the opinion formed by Mr Whimp. It
is apparent that the reference to the
document in item 24 is benign in contrast
to the references to the document in the other material relied on by Cherwell
the purpose of this argument. The primary judge therefore erred in
characterising item 24 as falling within the second category
of information.
[65] Even though the conclusion has been reached that the disputed items were
incorrectly categorised by the primary judge as falling
within the second
category information and the disputed items were not confidential, it remains to
be considered as to whether it
is appropriate to allow the appeal in relation to
the imposition of the confidentiality regime on the disputed items which was a
matter of practice and procedure. The vice that was emphasised by senior
counsel for BMA is the difficult position that BMA and
its lawyers would be
placed in by inadvertent reference to the disputed items that remain the subject
of a confidentiality order
which are described as “a disparate and
fragmentary collection of references and passages” with the potential for
in contempt of court in relation to any reference to them such as in open
court. Cherwell Creek points out that BMA did not adduce
evidence of any actual
difficulties arising from the confidentiality orders which had been in place
since August 2016 and that the
risk of contempt was not one on which any real
weight should be placed. BMA also submits that the primary judge made an error
principle in the concluding sentence of [28] of the confidentiality judgment
which offends the principle that litigation is conducted
in public, relying on
Hogan v Australian Crime Commission
[2010] HCA 21
(2010) 240 CLR 651
statement in
J v L & A Services Pty Ltd (No 2)
[1995] 2 Qd R 10
that “... information may not be withheld from the public merely to save a
party or witness from loss of privacy, embarrassment,
distress, financial harm
or other ‘collateral disadvantage’ ... ”.
[66] Having regard to the nature and content of the disputed items that are
small passages of transcript, subparagraphs from paragraph
6 of Mr Boys’
confidential third affidavit where the other subparagraphs are disclosed and one
subparagraph from paragraph
10 of the same affidavit, the likelihood of
inadvertent reference in the future may not be significant, but the consequences
of inadvertent
reference that would amount to contempt in respect of the
confidentiality order could be significant. The concern for BMA’s
in making inadvertent reference to them is therefore a relevant consideration.
It is also relevant that there is no justification
for keeping confidential
material that is disclosed in public litigation which is not truly confidential.
The fact the disputed items
are not confidential on the test formulated by the
primary judge which was not the subject of challenge by either party is
a much more relevant consideration to the outcome of the appeal. The
appeal is not in respect of the exercise of a discretion, but
in respect of an
error of fact in the categorisation of the disputed items as confidential, when
they are not. Despite the caution
that is appropriately exercised in
considering an appeal from an interlocutory decision on a matter of practice and
procedure, the
balance of the competing considerations favours allowing
BMA’s appeal in respect of the disputed items.
BMA’s appeal against exclusion of BMA personnel from confidentiality
[67] BMA’s complaint is that the order prevents any person from within BMA
seeing the relevant information in the rail agreements,
particularly when the
interim confidentiality regime put in place by the primary judge’s order
of 16 November 2018 permitted
the in-house counsel employed by BMA to see the
take or pay clauses of the rail agreements as well as another employee of BMA,
Garner, subject to Mr Garner filing with the court an undertaking in the form
set out in annexure A to the order with any disclosure
to him not to take place
after his position and duties were no longer as deposed to in the second
affidavit of Mr Hurford sworn 30
July 2018. The undertaking was to the effect
that Mr Garner would not use the confidential material, other than for the
of providing instructions to the lawyers engaged on behalf of BMA in the
subject proceeding and only pursuant to the terms of the
undertaking which dealt
with matters such as copying and the security of the confidential material.
[68] There are two grounds of appeal. The first is that the primary judge erred
by finding as fact that BMA would suffer “no
prejudice ... if disclosure
is further restricted to exclude in-house counsel and Mr Garner” in the
absence of evidence demonstrating
that fact. The second is the primary judge
erred by denying BMA procedural fairness where the form of the confidentiality
was largely agreed between the parties and did not exclude BMA’s
in-house counsel and Mr Garner from the persons to whom disclosure
made, Cherwell Creek did not seek such a regime at or consequent upon the
hearing on 26 November 2018 and BMA was denied
an opportunity to lead evidence
addressing the potential prejudice arising from such a restricted regime or make
submissions regarding
the form of any such restricted regime.
[69] Although Mr Hurford’s second affidavit was before the primary judge
in relation to the application to set aside the restrictions
in respect of the
materials relating to the security for costs application heard on 3 August 2016,
its contents were also relevant
to the confidentiality regime for the category
27 documents. Mr Hurford deposed to his firm’s receiving instructions
the legal and commercial units of BMA. He further deposed that Mr Garner
is the person within BMA’s commercial unit who provides
the instructions
in respect of the proceeding and that neither the in-house counsel nor Mr Garner
is involved in the setting of prices
for any coal mined by BMA or any
decision-making by BMA relating to port and rail access.
[70] BMA relies on the fact that there was only limited evidence about the
commercial sensitivity of the relevant parts of the rail
agreements before the
primary judge that was set out in paragraph 18 of the affidavit of Mr Boys sworn
on 16 November 2018 to the
effect that the clauses in the rail agreements
relating to “the profile of the amount of tonnes of coal being
and “the terms of pricing for railing of coal” which
“would provide a large amount of information, which would
be of value to a
competitor, such as BMA, regarding transportation costs associated with
QCoal’s Drake Mine”. BMA submits
that there was no explanation in
the confidentiality judgment or evidence of any mechanism by which information
in the rail agreements,
if disclosed to the in-house counsel or Mr Garner, could
be inadvertently disclosed and there was no proper basis for the conclusion
BMA would suffer no prejudice, if information in the rail agreements relating to
the take or pay obligations (which the primary
judge had determined was relevant
and ordered to be disclosed) could not be shown to anyone within BMA to obtain
instructions. BMA
also submits that on the material there was no reason to
conclude that the existing confidentiality regime was not appropriate.
[71] BMA also notes that by paragraph 6 of Cherwell Creek’s written
submissions (made around the time the interim confidentiality
order was imposed
on 16 November 2018) for the purpose of the hearing on 26 November 2018,
Cherwell Creek did not oppose the confidentiality
regime continuing, if the rail
agreements were ordered to be disclosed in the unredacted form:
“As to the four documents comprising the rail agreements
that were disclosed with particular details redacted, Aurizon has expressed
concern about confidentiality and commercial sensitivity in those documents, so
they ought to be the subject of a confidentiality
regime. QCoal’s
position is that, as redacted, the implied undertaking of confidentiality is
sufficient for those rail agreements.
However, if BMA were to contend (and the
Court was to order) that un-redacted versions of those documents should be
produced, un-redacted
versions ought be subject to the more strict
confidentiality regime for which Cherwell contends above. The redacted details
rail agreement are both confidential and highly commercially sensitive.
The information would be of value to a competitor of QCoal,
such as BMA. The
information is squarely of the kind that confidentiality orders ought to
protect.” (
footnotes omitted
[72] Cherwell Creek made the point that paragraph 6 of the written submissions
was made at the time when the rail agreements for
the mines had been disclosed
revealing only those clauses which related to the deferral of the take or pay
obligations in those agreements
(and without disclosing any price or other
commercially sensitive information). When BMA’s solicitors by their
letter dated
22 November 2018 pressed Cherwell Creek’s solicitors to
disclose the take or pay element of the rail agreements as per order
on 7 November 2018, Cherwell Creek re-disclosed the rail agreements with the
relevant parts of the take or pay commitments
and the relevant parts of the
definitions referred to in those clauses unredacted, except for the price
sensitive information and
the terms on which access had been granted, including
the particular rail tonnages for the mines and the Byerwen mine, the cost of
rail and the dates for which access had been secured. In anticipation of making
that re-disclosure, on 24 November 2018 BMA’s
solicitors requested
confirmation from BMA that the interim confidentiality regime would apply to the
further unredacted information
which confirmation was then given by BMA’s
solicitors. Although paragraph 6 of the written submissions of Cherwell Creek
to order 5 made on 7 November 2018 was therefore not made strictly in
respect of the documents that were re-disclosed subsequently,
Cherwell Creek was
satisfied with the interim confidentiality regime applying to those documents
and did not demur otherwise from
paragraph 6 of the written submissions at the
hearing on 26 November 2018. Cherwell Creek therefore contemplated that if the
commercially
sensitive material was unredacted by order of the primary judge,
the confidentiality regime proposed by BMA was acceptable.
[73] In relation to the alternative ground, BMA submits that it was deprived of
the opportunity to lead evidence or make submissions
the critical findings set out in the confidentiality judgment that resulted in
the making of order 4.
In particular, BMA asserts it was given no opportunity
to lead evidence or make submissions about prejudice it may suffer, if the
lawyers were unable to take instructions in any form from the in-house counsel
and Mr Garner in relation to the take or pay clauses,
and the steps which the
in-house counsel and Mr Garner could and would take to keep the information
secure which would have a bearing
on the possibility of an inadvertent
dissemination of the information. BMA therefore seeks an order setting aside
order 4 made on
14 December 2018 in respect of the disclosure application and
either an order from this court that accords with the interim confidentiality
regime reflected in the order of 16 November 2018 or an order remitting the
matter to the primary judge for further consideration.
[74] Cherwell Creek seeks to uphold the confined confidentiality regime for the
rail agreements on the basis that paragraph (c) of
order 4 permits the
disclosure of the relevant parts of the rail agreements to “any other
person as determined by the Court
or as agreed by [Cherwell Creek]” in
addition to the external lawyers acting on behalf of BMA and their secretaries
or administrative
assistants. It is therefore submitted that there is a
two-step process that BMA would have to follow, if it were necessary for the
lawyers to obtain instructions from BMA in respect of any of the disclosed
confidential parts of the railway agreements and that
process could be used by
BMA to obtain access for its in-house counsel and Mr Garner to those documents.
Cherwell Creek concedes
that the limitation in order 4 was not expressly raised
by either party in the written or oral submissions, but submits that is of
little consequence, when the order that was made did not exclude absolutely the
ability of BMA to obtain the further access to those
documents that they seek on
this appeal. It is therefore submitted that no error has been demonstrated in
the approach of the primary
judge that gives rise to sufficient prejudice that
would warrant the court intervening in relation to interlocutory orders which
relate to matters of practice and procedure.
[75] Cherwell Creek’s submissions recognised that the two step process for
BMA to endeavour to obtain consent from Cherwell
Creek or an order from the
court to disclose the information in the category 27 documents either to the
in-house counsel or Mr Garner
is inferior to the interim confidentiality regime
that was acceptable to Cherwell Creek, although asserting it could possibly lead
to the same outcome. It is patent that the inability of the BMA lawyers to be
able to seek instructions from either the in-house
counsel for BMA or Mr Garner
without first obtaining the agreement of Cherwell Creek to that course or, in
the absence of agreement,
applying to court, when Cherwell Creek was satisfied
with the interim confidentiality regime is substantial prejudice to BMA. Even
though this aspect of the appeal is in respect of a matter of practice or
procedure, because of the obvious prejudice to BMA, it
must succeed in its
appeal on the ground of being denied the opportunity to make submissions to the
primary judge on the issue of
whether a more restricted confidentiality regime
than contemplated by both parties was warranted.
[76] The issue arises whether this court should impose the confidentiality
regime that BMA seeks or remit the matter to the primary
judge. It is most
relevant that BMA had expressly sought before the primary judge that the
existing confidentiality regime apply
to the relevant clauses of the category 27
documents in unredacted form and Cherwell Creek did not contend for a contrary
confidentiality
regime, if it were unsuccessful in maintaining the redactions to
the price and commercially sensitive material. On the hearing of
the appeal,
Cherwell Creek did not submit that the matter should be remitted to the primary
judge, if BMA succeeded on this aspect
of the appeal. Although the appeal is
being allowed on the basis the primary judge did not give BMA the opportunity to
before making order 4 on 14 December 2018 in respect of the disclosure
application, the fact that Cherwell Creek did not seek the
more restricted
confidentiality regime ordered by the primary judge suggests that a further
hearing on this issue before the primary
judge is unnecessary. In those
circumstances, it is appropriate to impose the confidentiality regime that BMA
sought before the
primary judge that was not the subject of any contrary
submissions made by Cherwell Creek.
[77] In its amended notice of appeal, BMA sought an order reflecting a
confidentiality regime for the rail agreements disclosed by
Cherwell Creek
pursuant to order 1(c) made on 7 November 2018 in terms that included paragraphs
(c) and (d) of the order made on
16 November 2018. In order to avoid requiring
further submissions on the form of the orders that should be made in respect of
appeal or a further hearing for that purpose, it is proposed to vary order
4 made on 14 December 2018 by the primary judge in the
manner sought in
BMA’s amended notice of appeal. In case there has been any change in
in-house counsel or the employee performing
Mr Garner’s role, it is
appropriate to give BMA liberty to apply to amend the order to reflect the names
of the current personnel.
[78] In relation to the three appeals brought by Cherwell Creek and the one
appeal by BMA, BMA has been successful and costs would
usually follow the event.
It is therefore proposed that the costs order for each of these four appeals be
in those terms, unless
either party applies for a different order in submissions
that are filed within 14 days of the publication of these reasons.
[79] The following orders (in which the parties are referred to by their
respective roles in each appeal) should be made:
either party applies for a different order for costs in submissions filed within
14 days of the publication of these reasons,
the appellant must pay the
respondents’ costs of the appeal.
In appeal LAC007-18:
either party applies for a different order for costs in submissions filed within
14 days of the publication of these reasons,
the appellant must pay the
respondents’ costs of the appeal.
In appeal LAC001-19:
either party applies for a different order for costs in submissions filed within
14 days of the publication of these reasons,
the appellant must pay the
respondents’ costs of the appeal.
In appeal LAC002-19:
items 8, 14, 15, 19, 20, 21, 24 and 31 from order 1 made on 14 December 2018 by
President Kingham regarding the appellant’s
application filed on 25 June
order 4 made on 14 December 2018 by President Kingham regarding the
appellant’s amended application filed on 3 October
(a) substituting “(e)” for “(c)”;
(b) inserting after paragraph (b):
“(c) Ms Jenny McCabe and any Legal Practitioner (with a current
practicing certificate issued in Australia) who takes over Ms
responsibility for the respondents in respect of these proceedings;
(d) Mr Brett Garner subject to the terms of the undertaking signed by Mr
Garner on 20 November 2018 and with any disclosure to him
to not take place
after his position and duties are no longer as deposed to in the Second
Affidavit of Stephen James Hurford sworn
30 July 2018; and”
to the appellant to apply on two days’ notice to the respondents, if Ms
McCabe and/or Mr Garner no longer hold the positions
they held when the appeal
either party applies for a different costs order in submissions filed within 14
days of the publication of these reasons, the
respondents must pay the
appellant’s costs of the appeal.
MEMBER OF THE LAND COURT
MEMBER OF THE LAND COURT
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (272 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter