URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2025/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Charters Towers Operations Pty Ltd v Charters Towers Regional Council [2025] QPEC 12 (11 June 2025)
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT COURT OF
Charters Towers Operations Pty Ltd v Charters Towers Regional
[2025] QPEC 12.
Charters Towers Operations Pty Ltd
ACN 655 026 305
(Appellant)
Charters Towers Regional Council
(Respondent)
2544 of 2023
Planning and Environment
PROCEEDING:
Appeal against refusal.
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning and Environment Court, Brisbane.
DELIVERED ON:
11 June 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
18 – 21 June 2024. Written submissions received 9 July 2024 and 17
March 2025.
Byrne KC DCJ
The appeal is adjourned to a date to be determined on the delivery of
these reasons, for further review, in light of these reasons.
CATCHWORDS:
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING – PLANNING – PLANNING CONTROLS –
QUEENSLAND – LOCAL PLANNNG INSTRUMENT – where
an appeal lies against
the refusal by the respondent of an application for a material change of use
– where the application
sought approval to construct and operate a
non-resident workforce accommodation facility in the rural residential zone as
in the Charter Towers Town Plan, version 2 – where the
application is impact assessable.
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING – PLANNING – PLANNING CONTROLS –
QUEENSLAND – LOCAL PLANNNG INSTRUMENT – where
the planning
instrument requires that non-resident workforce accommodation be a temporary use
strictly limited to the construction
phases of the major project – meaning
of temporary - whether the planning instrument requires that the applicant can
that the facility will supply accommodation to one or more specific
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING – PLANNING – PLANNING CONTROLS
– QUEENSLAND – LOCAL PLANNNG INSTRUMENT – whether
the planning
instrument allows a non-resident workforce accommodation facility in the rural
residential zone – where issues
of social planning, economic need and
character and visual amenity are raised by the issues in dispute where some
aspects of the
application are in conflict with provisions in the planning
instrument - whether the application warrants acceptance, in whole or
and with or without conditions, as an exercise of discretion.
LEGISLATION:
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Planning Act,
ss. 45, 60, 65.
Planning and Environment Court Act
Planning and Environment Court Rules 2018
Planning Regulations 2017,
rr. 30, 31.
AB v Independent Broad-based Anti-Corruption Commission
[2024] HCA 10
Abeleda v Brisbane City Council and Anor
[2020] QCA 257
(2020) 6 QR 441.
Acland Pastoral Co Pty Ltd v Rosalie Shire Council
[2007] QPEC 112
[2008] QPELR
Arksmead Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[2001] 1 Qd R
Ausco Modular Pty Ltd v Western Downs Regional Council and Anor
[2017] QPEC 58
[2018] QPELR 80.
Bell v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[2022] QPELR 289.
Broad v Brisbane City Council & the Baptist Union of Queensland
[1986] 2 Qd R 317.
Clarry & Anor v Brisbane City Council
[2024] QCA 39.
Development Watch Inc v Sunshine Coast Regional Council & Anor
[2022] QCA 6.
Harris v Scenic Rim Regional Council
[2014] QPEC 16.
Isgro v Gold Coast City Council & Anor
[2003] QPEC 2
[2003] QPELR 414.
Lennium Group Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[2019] QPEC
Metroplex Management Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[2010] QCA 333.
Murphy v Moreton Bay Regional Council
[2019] QPELR 417.
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
Ramsay Health Care Australia Pty Limited v Brisbane City Council &
[2024] QPEC 49.
Room2Move.com Pty Ltd v Western Downs Regional Council
[2019] QPEC
Stevens v Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty Ltd
(1986) 160 CLR 16.
The Queen v A2
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507.
WBQH Development Pty Ltd v Gold Coast City Council
[2009] QPEC
Woodlands Enterprises Pty Ltd v Sunshine Coast Regional Council
[2020] QPEC 67.
Zappala Family Co Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council
[2014] QPELR 686
[2014] QCA 147.
Mr. M. Batty and Ms. J. Bowness for the appellants.
Mr. E Morzone KC and Mr. N. Batty for the respondents.
SOLICITORS:
McCullough Robertson for the appellants.
McDonnells Law for the respondents.
Table of Contents
Introduction
October 2023, the Queensland Government committed to commencing construction on
the CopperString 2032 project (“
the CopperString project
announcing the provision of a substantial funding package. Other subsequently
issued documentation confirms that the project
will proceed. The CopperString
project entails the provision of an approximately 840 kilometre high-voltage
electricity transmission
line from south of Townsville to Mount Isa. The object
of the project is to connect the Queensland North West Minerals Province to
national electricity grid. That involves three stages of electricity
transmission, each carrying different voltage of electrical
transmission line.
The overall construction was to commence in mid-2024, around the time the appeal
was heard, and is slated to be
completed in
It is, self-evidently, a
large-scale construction project.
[2] Also, at
relevant times, the construction of a 10,000 megalitre weir on the Burdekin
Rover at Big Rocks, about 25 kilometres north
of Charters Towers (“
Big Rocks project
”) had been proposed. Associated documentation
suggested a start date for construction in 2026, with 172 full-time construction
jobs expected to be created.
[3] On or about
6 May 2022 the appellant lodged a Development Application for the construction
of a 404-bed non-resident workforce
accommodation facility (“
proposed development
”) on land commonly referred to as 82-92 Deanes
Road, Millchester (“
”), a locality of Charters
Towers. The Development Application was impact assessable, assessable against
the Town Plan and there
were no referral agencies. Ninety-four public
submissions were received, all of which opposed the application.
[4] After the
issuing of, and response to, two information requests and the receipt of public
submissions, the respondent, on 23 August
2023, issued a decision notice
refusing the Development Application. The appellant has appealed that
The issues on the
[5] On 23 April
2024, this Court was satisfied that a proposed change in the development
application constituted a minor change, and
ordered that the appeal proceed on
the basis of the changed development application. That minor change included
amendments to the
previously proposed landscaping, fencing and acoustic
[6] Subsequently,
the issues in dispute in the appeal were identified, again by order of this
Court, by reference to the appellant’s
Reasons for Approval and the
respondent’s Amended Reasons for Refusal. In essence, the issues raised
a) the proposed land use’s compliance with the planning scheme and its
intent, and any restrictions imposed (town planning
b) whether there is a demonstrable need for the proposed development (need
c) the impact that the proposed development will have on the character and
visual amenity of the existing locality (character and
amenity issues);
d) whether the social impacts of the proposed development on workers, their
families or Charters Towers residents were such that
the application should be
approved (social planning issues); and
e) other relevant matters raised, including touching on the properly made
submissions and the appropriateness of the proposed conditions.
[7] The minor
change approval negated the need to consider the distinct issues of traffic
(although this is still relevant to the
assessment of amenity issues) and
planning scheme provisions that were put directly in issue, after the approval
of the minor change, some other provisions
of the planning scheme that were
raised in the course of the hearing and the associated definitions have been
extracted in
to these reasons. Although not strictly accurate,
for ease of reference I will refer to these provisions as though they were
of a statute.
[9] In essence,
the appellant contends that the proposed development complies with applicable
provisions of the planning scheme, that
any non-compliance is such that the
application does not warrant refusal and that there are relevant matters,
including significant
need, that weigh in favour of an approval. It is contended
that the proposed development should be approved, subject to appropriate
conditions.
respondent contends that the appeal should be refused. It argues that the
development application does not comply with the
planning scheme in material and
significant ways, that there is no actual need for the proposal and that
character and amenity impacts
rise to a level that justifies refusal. It argues
that these issues cannot be cured by the imposition of conditions.
The statutory assessment framework
[11] Under the
Planning and Environment Court Act
appeal is to be conducted by way of a hearing
and this Court will make a
decision on the appeal as if it were the assessment manager for the development
application.
The appellant bears
the onus of establishing that the appeal should be
must make one of the orders set out in
of PECA in disposing of the
[12] As the
development application is impact assessable, my assessment must be carried out
against the assessment benchmarks in the
planning scheme, having regard to the
matters prescribed by regulation, and may be carried out against, or having
regard to any other
relevant matter, other than a person’s personal
circumstances.
It is sufficient for
present purposes to simply note that regs. 30 and 31 of the
Regulations 2017
list the matters prescribed by regulation
latter regulation brings into consideration the common material.
invested with broad powers in determining the appeal under s. 60(3) of the PA,
including approving the application as a
whole or in part, with or without
conditions.
The power to approve
the application in part is not constrained by considerations of whether the
approved part amounts only to a
minor change to the whole application. Although
Metroplex Management Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council &
was decided under different
legislation, I cannot detect any reason why the same outcome should not result
under the PA.
exercising any of those powers, the observations of Mullins JA (as her Honour
then was) in
Abeleda v Brisbane City Council and
are apposite. In
particular, non-compliance with an assessment benchmark is likely, in most
instances, to attract significant weight
because the planning scheme is taken to
embody the public interest in matters of this nature. However, non-compliance is
of many relevant features that must be assessed and weighed in reaching
the appropriate conclusion in the circumstances of the individual
assessment.
[15] The same
principles which apply to statutory construction apply to the construction of
planning documents. Observations in
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
referred to in
Zappala Family Co Pty Ltd v Brisbane City
recent authorities including
The Queen v
Independent Broad-based Anti-Corruption
also provide
assistance. The construction task must also be conducted bearing in mind the
hierarchy of the assessment
benchmarks,
and the methods
prescribed for determining compliance with the assessment benchmarks for
assessable development under the planning
[16] As observed
by Mullins P in
Clarry & Anor v Brisbane City
the nature of
planning instruments is a relevant consideration in their construction, as there
can be multiple provisions that are
applicable to the same site. They must be
read as a whole and in a practical manner, intending to achieve a balance
between the outcomes.
[17] Although
the present application is impact assessable, its determination in part raises
satisfaction of code requirements. That
assessment is to be undertaken as though
that part of the application is code
assessable.
Compliance with the
code will be achieved if the proposed development complies with either the
purpose and overall outcomes of the
code, or the performance and acceptable
site, the surrounding areas and the proposed development.
[18] The site is
located within the rural residential zone (“
designated by the
Charters Towers Regional Town Plan
, version 2
the planning scheme
”) which was in force when the
development application was lodged, and remains in force. More broadly, the
Charters Towers LGA
is a large geographical area; the planning scheme asserts it
is larger than Tasmania. Unsurprisingly for an LGA of that size, it
comprises a
diverse array of land features and uses.
assisted in understanding the evidence in this hearing by viewing the site. It
is an irregularly shaped block of land of
4.104 hectares, and which is
surrounded by five roads, of varying quality. In that sense, it has been
described accurately as an
island, because there is no common boundary to any
neighbouring property.
[20] The site
has a frontage of about 128 metres to Deanes Road, which is a bitumen sealed
road that has no footpaths, kerbing or
channelling and runs roughly
north-north-east from its T-junction intersection with Phillipson Road. It
borders the whole of the
eastern boundary of the site. At the northern most end
of Deanes Road is its intersection with Millchester Road, a designated arterial
road. Although it is not precisely stated in the evidence, the length of Deanes
Road appears to be in the order of 700 metres. It
is proposed that the driveway
access to the proposed development be placed at the far northern end of the
eastern boundary, and then
for it to run adjacent to the northern boundary,
ultimately to the carpark at the far western end.
[21] Phillipson
Road is also a bitumen sealed road that has no footpaths, kerbing or
channelling. It runs essentially west from the
T-junction with Deanes Road,
although it turns to the southwest just before its four-way intersection with
Nagle Street. the site
has a frontage of about 206 metres to Phillipson Road. It
borders the whole of the southern boundary of the site.
Street runs essentially north-west from its intersection with Phillipson Road.
It is an unsealed road and would, in layman’s
terms, be referred to as a
dirt road although, in this part, it is roughly of the same width as the
aforementioned sealed roads.
Again, there are no footpaths, kerbing or
channelling. Measured to its four-way intersection with Creek Street, it
provides a frontage
for the site of about 184 metres. It provides the boundary
to the whole of the western side of the site.
Street runs essentially north-east and provides a frontage of about 109 metres
for the site. It is described as an unmade
road reserve, and intersects with
Richard Road. I will refer to this frontage as the north-western boundary.
[24] Richard
Road is angular, initially running roughly south-south-east from its
intersection with Creek Street and then essentially
west until it forms a
T-junction with Deanes Road. It provides the site with a total frontage of about
291 meters. For reasons of
convenience, I will refer to this as the northern
border of the site. It too is described as an unmade road reserve. Both it and
Creek Street would, in layman’s terms, be referred to as undefined scrub
[25] The site
has a relatively gentle slope dropping between five metres and nine metres from
south to north, depending on the starting
reference point. It is mostly grassed.
There is some sparse vegetation, although nothing of environmental
significance.
[26] The site
currently contains a lowset dwelling house on its southern border, a domed
fabrication workshop near the south-west
corner and a handful of seemingly
disused sheds. These structures (“
the existing structures
will all be retained if the proposed development is
There are also a
number of demountable buildings that were previously used for non-resident
workforce accommodation for the Survivor
television series on a site near the
airport, and which are temporarily housed on this site. They will not be
retained if the proposed
development is
[27] Historically
the site had been used for light/medium impact industrial activities, in the
nature of metal fabrication.
is unclear when it was last used for those activities. The rates notices are
still issued under that
uncontroversial that the site is now zoned as rural residential.
[28] Millchester
is a suburb to the south-east of the Charters Towers town centre. According to
the 2021 census, the Millchester suburb
and localities had a population of 543
persons, while the Charters Towers Local Government Area had a population of
11,794 persons.
[29] The site
sits within an area that presents as a low density rural residential setting.
The area to the north-west of the site,
also in the RR zone, is essentially an
open area, with no dwellings for some distance.
[30] To the
south and directly opposite the site, there are four single storey detached
houses with sheds on rural residential lots
of about 5000m
dwellings are set back from Phillipson Road, and each have fences, of varying
heights and styles, fronting the roadway. Further
east along Phillipson Road,
and east of the intersection of Phillipson and Deanes Roads, is a fifth
similarly described dwelling.
Further east again is the field and clubhouse of
the local rugby union club and the local netball club courts, of which there are
seven. These grounds are a short walkable distance of a few hundred metres from
the south-east corner of the site.
[31] Directly
across from the site’s western boundary is the Millchester State School,
which has a student population of only
The main entrance to
the school is on part of Phillipson Road that extends past the intersection with
Nagle Street, and continues
to an intersection with Bluff Road, an arterial
road. The school playgrounds are the aspect of the school that is closest to the
site. The school buildings tend to be clustered further away, and mostly near
the corner of Bluff Road and Phillipson Road. The closest
school building is in
the order of 150 metres from the Nagle Street frontage of the site, part of
which will, if allowed, involve
a 1.8 metre acoustic barrier on one side of the
carpark which directly faces the school grounds, and about 267 metres from the
building in the proposed development. Nonetheless, there is a clear line
of sight from the school buildings to the site.
[32] On the
northern boundary of the site, north of Richard Street, is a roughly four
hectare rural residential property, improved
by a detached dwelling and
ancillary outbuildings. They are clustered relatively close together near that
property’s frontage
to Deanes Road, and also close to the notional
northern most edge of Richard Street.
proposed development is intended to be delivered in seven
comprises 44 rooms, two separate laundry facilities, a kitchen/mess hall,
first aid room and temporary reception area, water storage,
sewer pump station,
stormwater treatment areas, and a vegetation buffer on the eastern and southern
boundaries.
comprises 60 rooms.
comprises 76 rooms and a further laundry.
comprises 100 rooms, a further laundry, the main reception/office area, an
additional first aid area and a vegetation buffer on the
western boundary.
comprises 40 rooms and an additional laundry.
comprises 40 rooms and an additional laundry.
comprises 44 rooms.
driveway and the associated carparks for stages 1 and 2 are aligned along the
northern boundary. The initial buildings will
occupy the north-eastern corner of
the site. The buildings for stage 2 will reach towards the southern boundary,
meaning the whole
of the eastern boundary will effectively have buildings all
along it. Subsequent stages will then extend the buildings further west,
further along the northern end of the driveway/carparks than along the southern
boundary. Open space is maintained in the south-west
corner, but that space is
encroached upon by a gravel overflow carpark.
proposed that a total of 320 carparks be provided during stages 1, 2, 3, 4 and
6. Those for stages 1, 2 and some for stage
3 are to be directly adjacent to the
driveway, By the time stage 3 is completed they will be adjacent to almost the
whole length
of the longer part of Richard Street. The rest of those for stage 3
and all for stage 4 occupy all of the odd shape of the site created
shorter angled length of Richard Street, the north-west frontage and part of the
Nagle Street frontage. Stage 6 will provide
a gravel overflow carpark to the
southeast of that carpark, thereby fronting part of Nagle Street. No landscaping
or fencing is proposed
adjacent to the overflow carpark. All other carparks are
sealed. Bus bays and turning areas are provided for in the different stages.
Landscaping and fencing is planned for all other carparks.
accommodation rooms are to be housed within demountable buildings; 4 rooms per
demountable. Each room is intended to accommodate
an individual non-resident
worker, and not families. The demountable buildings are to be placed 2.5 metres
apart on their long sides
and 3 metres apart on their short sides. The buildings
will sit above ground level and will connect with each other by decked walkways.
It is unclear to me if the walkways are to be covered or not. This is of no
buildings will be set back between 10 and 40 metres from the southern boundary,
the carparks are much closer),
between 30 and 35 metres from the northern boundary (although a 2.5 metre high
acoustic barrier is
closer) and between 7.97 and 20 metres on the eastern
[38] The built
form will occupy about 2.9 hectares of the site. The balance includes the
overflow carpark,
and the rest
will remain as is, inclusive of the existing structures, which will be used for
storage and maintenance purposes.
anticipated that the proposed development will provide employment for 20
appellant proposed that certain conditions should attach to the approval. Those
which remain contentious, or are otherwise
Temporary use
The development is to operate for a maximum of 15 years from commencement
of the use (Stage 1).
At all times
Construction phase workers
The use is only to accommodate workers employed for the construction phase
of a project. Accommodation is not to be offered or provided
to any workers who
are employed for the ongoing operational phase of a project.
At all times
a) An online booking system must be maintained through RMS Cloud (or an
equivalent platform) for the purposes of recording the details
of workers who
are accommodated at the site.
b) The details recorded in the online booking system must include the name
of the project in relation to which the worker is employed,
and whether that
project is in a construction or operational phase.
At all times
Council is to be provided with ongoing access to the online booking system,
including access to a record of the booking details for
all workers accommodated
at the site.
[Note: The Appellant is willing to agree to an additional condition
requiring periodic reports to be provided to Council setting out
the details of
the workers accommodated at the site, if necessary]
At all times
Landscaping
The site is to be landscaped generally in accordance with the Landscape
plans relied on at the
[Note: The Appellant is willing to amend the Landscape Plans to include
the planting of street trees, if necessary]
Operating procedures
The use is to be operated generally in accordance with the Accommodation
and Social Integration Plan prepared by TAP Consulting (Issue
A dated 9 February
At all times
proposed conditions have not been reproduced. As the appeal progressed, the
appellant accepted that some of these conditions
could properly be amended; for
example, that the maximum period of operation could be limited to eight years
from the commencement
of stage 1.
hazard and bush fire hazard overlays affect the site in minor respects. They
have not featured in the issues in dispute,
and have not attracted
consideration.
Major construction
projects relevant to the application
[43] As earlier
noted, at the relevant time there were two major construction projects proposed
to be undertaken in the Charters Towers
CopperString
[44] One is the
CopperString project. It is intended that, overall, there be a number of
non-resident workforce accommodation facilities
at six different places along
the length of the construction project, the first at Hughenden. One of the last
such places is intended
to be in the Charters Towers area, with construction of
the proposed accommodation expected to commence in mid to late 2025, subject
This is consistent
with an earlier published Information Sheet, in March 2024, indicating that the
construction of the eastern link
of the electricity transmission line is
expected to begin in 2026.
Overall the project is expected to be completed by
[45] The final
Environmental Impact Study (“
”), approved by the
Australian Government in November 2022, referred to a “work camp” at
Charters Towers for between
128 and 350 beds, and which was required for a three
year period (then, indicatively stated to be
2024-2028).
The EIS included a
camp site plan for a 128-bed facility on a privately owned site 17 kilometres
outside of Charters Towers on the
Gregory Development
Part of a revised Project
Description, dated January 2022 (and so prior to the approved EIS), noted the
ability to use existing worker’s
accommodation facilities, where they
[46] Recent
correspondence from the Coordinator General suggests that the construction of
this “work camp” is to be undertaken
by Powerlink, the operator of
the project, and will be the subject of a Ministerial Infrastructure Designation
application.
[47] However,
the Coordinator-General’s Change Report no. 1 - Hughenden workers
accommodation camp, dated May 2024, contained
amendments to the commitment given
by Powerlink for the conduct of the
Despite the
respondent’s submissions to the contrary, I consider that they are
properly understood as being amendments for
the whole of the project, not just
for the Hughenden stage of it. Among them was a recognition of the ability to
gain approval for
a works camp, including by a material change of use
application, where it needed to be progressed in isolation from electricity
infrastructure
and where it cannot be approved under the MID process.
Big Rocks Project
[48] The other
is the Big Rocks project. The Initial Advice Statement for the project, dated
January 2021 anticipated that the majority
of the construction workforce would
be sourced from the surrounding region, in addition to fly-in fly-out workers
and drive-in drive-out
workers. The non-local workforce was expected to be
catered for by local accommodation, such as hotels and motels. No temporary
camps were proposed, although a draft EIS noted that an accommodation
camp and associated facilities is currently provided on-site.
It was expected
that the project would be completed within the dry season of one
recently, the respondent, as the proponent of the project, placed all work on
indefinite hold, due to financing issues.
There are no current plans by the
respondent to progress the project, and steps have been taken to hand the
project back to the relevant
State Government
department.
[50] Any of the
other major projects in the area, either underway or expected to commence, are
too far away to be realistically considered
for the purposes of this
application. Of these two, Mr Czislowski, the sole director and shareholder of
the appellant, considers
that the most significant client of the proposed
development would be the CopperString
expert opinions
[51] As there is
considerable debate about the compliance, or otherwise, with the planning
scheme, I will outline these issues first.
However, the determination of those
issues will, in part, rely on the determination of other issues such as social
planning, character
and visual amenity (as impacted by traffic issues) and need,
and the experts in town panning rely, in part, on the opinions of the
those other fields of expertise.
Town planning issues
[52] Ms Morrissy
was engaged by the appellant and Mr Buckley by the respondent. Mr Buckley is
very experienced and heavily credentialed
in this area, but Ms Morrissy is also
very experienced. It suffices to note that both are well qualified to provide
expert opinion
evidence in this area.
[53] They both
contributed to the joint report, and each provided separate reports. Their
separate reports each touched, in part,
on the approved minor change. Nothing of
note was raised by them in respect of that. Each were cross-examined at the
[54] There was
extensive disagreement between the two, particularly but not only in relation to
whether the planning scheme required
a link between the proposed facility and a
specific major project, whether the proposed development is temporary or not,
there was compliance with considerations of character and whether there
was compliance with the planning scheme. Their opinions were
considered in the
joint report under five broad topic headings, which related to the
respondent’s Reasons for Refusal. Although
divided under these topics,
their considerations and opinions overlap considerably. The following summaries
include each witness’
additional observations in their respective separate
The proposed
development’s relationship to major projects
[55] Ms Morrissy
considered that the proposed development was sufficiently connected to two
proposed major projects to mean that the
proposed development achieved
satisfaction of the requirements in s. 3.4.1.2(11), which she considered was not
limited to tying the
proposed development to one specific project. She
considered that the provision did not preclude one facility servicing multiple
projects. In reaching this conclusion she also had regard to the opinions of Mr
[56] Ms Morrissy
considered that the planning scheme, in its policy intent, was informed by
growth generation rather than growth management.
She considered that the lack of
locational requirement in s. 3.4.1.2(11), as compared with 3.4.1.2(12), confirms
that a flexible
approach to the location of the proposed development should be
taken. She did not agree with Mr Buckley’s observation that
Towers was a typical small to mid-sized town community given, in part, aspects
of the planning scheme refer to the area
being a major inter-regional education
and healthcare hub with large areas of largely unconstrained rural land that can
support major
economic activities, and which has a strong rural economy that
services local, state, national and global markets.
[57] Further,
concepts of facilitating economic growth are inconsistent with requiring the
development to be tied to one major project
in order to ensure that the
development is temporary in nature.
[58] Mr Buckley,
as an overarching observation, considered that the proposed use is atypical in
any urban environment, given the scale
and intensity of the proposed use. They
are atypical because they are “one-off” in their physical and
operational nature
and by their inherent connection to major projects. While the
planning scheme recognises the importance of economic growth, the Strategic
Framework strongly acknowledges the importance of character and lifestyle to its
communities and residents.
considered that the distinctions between the strategic outcomes in ss.
3.4.1.2(11) and 3.4.1.2(12) illustrate the point that
a construction-phases
accommodation facility will operate separately to accommodation for operational
workers and, while close to
the project, remote from existing communities. He
considered that there is a strong nexus between the planning purpose of the key
planning provisions and the proposed developments’ relationship to major
projects. That is, it is the requirement that the
proposed development be tied
to the major project that suggests that it should be close to it. Similarly, a
link to a possible major
project would defeat the strategic outcome. In his
view, there is no encouragement for the proposed development to be within or
to an established community.
[60] Further, in
his opinion, a facility which ties itself to potential timeframes of projects
not yet committed has a degree of permanency
not envisaged by the Strategic
[61] In the
terms of the planning scheme, reliance on probable and possible projects
somewhere in the region and a suggestion that
15 years is a temporary use cannot
be justified. Mr Buckley considers that the intent and planning purpose of s.
3.4.1.2(11) is to
require special attention to the needs and location of
individual projects, which is required in the case of this atypical proposal.
[62] To approve
what would be considered a “square peg in a round hole” in the hope
of providing accommodation for workers
for major projects, which may provide its
own accommodation in any event, would be a poor planning outcome, especially
proposed time limitation is not truly temporary.
[63] Importantly,
both experts agree that, despite their differences of opinion, each application
must be assessed on a site-by-site
basis, both in terms of the consideration of
this assessment benchmark, and
Whether the proposal is
temporary in nature
[64] Applying
the administrative use definition of the term “temporary” under the
planning scheme, Ms Morrissy considered
that the proposed development was
temporary because the use was to be carried out for a limited period of time
(which length can
be conditioned), that the improvements to the site are
non-permanent, that the nature of the use is to accommodate construction workers
of a major project that will have an end date and the decommissioning of the
facility can be conditioned.
[65] Further,
the proposed development would only delay bringing on eight rural residential
lots, given the required minimum size
of housing lots in the RR zone, there are
other substantial areas in the RR zone that can deliver additional rural
residential lots
should the need arise and there are several large parcels of
land already zoned General Residential and Emerging Community that can
accommodate infill development. Hence, the approval of the application will not
stifle development of residential projects.
[66] Mr Buckley
on the other hand considered that, notwithstanding the administrative definition
in the planning scheme, a 15 year
period was not temporary. He considered that
resort to the administrative definition is missing the point of the planning
in issue. A 15 year period was a “
seriously long time
in planning terms and would represent a constraint to planning for the area,
which will limit options for planning and growth
in the area, and in the wider
community. He considered that the indicators in s. 3.4.1.2(11), namely limiting
to the period of construction
and to decommissioning when construction finishes,
would not have contemplated a 15 year construction
Compliance with the planning
scheme more generally
[67] Ms Morrissy
considered that there was compliance with the strategic outcome in s.
3.4.1.2(11). She considered that it did not
specify where non-resident workforce
accommodation facilities for construction workers were to be located, and so it
was open to
locate them in the RR zone, if the specific locational attributes
were assessed as being suitable, on a case-by-case basis. She considered
the development still retained the notion of a “
”, as required by s. 3.2.2 – Rural Residential, and that it
fell within the RR zone code
purposes at s.
6.2.7.4.2(2)(b). Notably, the region is said to be “
adaptable, flexible
” in order to adapt to changing economic circumstances,
which demonstrates the region’s level of resilience to accommodate
population and economic growth.
The requirement for temporary use, she again considered, can be enforced through
conditions.
observed that, in her opinion, the central divergence between her opinion and Mr
Buckley’s was the degree of guidance
given by ss. 3.4.1.2(11) and
3.4.1.2(12) as to where developments such as the present should be located. Mr
Buckley considered that
it gave considerable guidance, whereas she considered
that it came back to the locational attributes of the subject
accepted that the proposed development did not satisfy s. 6.2.7.4.3 AO3, but she
considered that that there was the required
compatibility with PO3. However, she
accepted that the proposed development was more intense than the nearby school,
which she considered
to be the most intense of character in the existing area.
application of town planning first principles, for reasons outlined, supported
the approval of the application. In reaching
that conclusion she drew support
from aspects of Mr Duane’s opinions and also those of Mr Butcher.
[71] She took
issue with Ms Bennett’s observations about the “walkability”
issues concerning the site and the town
centre. While accepting that the
distance was not readily walkable, she noted that it was not an issue
specifically raised by the
planning scheme, and that the short distance involved
meant that the town was readily accessible by car, shuttle bus or coach.
[72] Ms Morrissy
considered that there was compliance with s. 3.2.1(12) as the proposed
development will not, in her opinion, have
a significant adverse effect on the
character of the Charters Towers region. She also relied on aspects of Ms
Ashford’s opinion,
particularly concerning the benefits to the local
[73] She also
considered that the application is compliant with ss. 3.2.2(1), 3.2.2(2)(b) and
3.2.2(3)(b) as it reflects the prosperity
in the region by facilitating the
provision of new infrastructure projects and economic development, that Charters
Towers is well
suited to supporting a non-resident workforce and that the
locational attributes and site characteristics are suitable for accommodating
the proposed development. In this respect, she also drew on aspects of the
social planning JER, and in particular Ms Ashford’s
conclusions in
[74] As earlier
noted, Ms Morrissy considered that the proposed development was partially
compliant with the strategic intent in s.
3.2.3 - Rural Residential. She
acknowledged that the proposed development had an intensity that was
inconsistent with a typical rural
residential environment. However, she
considered that the locational and site characteristics, the ameliorative
aspects of the design,
that the limited number of neighbours meant that any
impact would be minimised and the fact that the use would be temporary meant
that the proposed development meant that the proposed development would only
have a minor and temporary impact on the rural residential
area surrounding the
site. She considered the proposed development would be compatible with its
[75] In the JER,
she also considered that the proposed development is compliant with the RRZC
outcome at s. 6.2.7.4.2(2)(a), although
the reasons provided indicate that she
in fact may be referring to the RRZC outcome at s. 6.2.7.4.2(2)(b). She notes
that the positioning,
including the setbacks, the fencing and landscaping and
the use of the topography of the land all assist in reducing the visibility
the built form. She also adopts the opinions of Mr Butcher to reach her
conclusion.
[76] Referring
to the appellant’s reasons for approval, she considered that each of ss.
3.2.2(8) and 3.2.2(9) were complied
with, as was the strategic outcome at s.
3.4.1.2(2).
[77] Mr Buckley
did not agree that the proposed development aligned with the planning scheme,
a) The combined intent for the RR zone benchmarks and the key provisions of the
Strategic Framework anticipate that a non-resident
workers accommodation
facility will be located other than in an area planned for houses on large lots.
In particular, the strategic
outcome at s. 3.4.1.2(2) must be read in light of
s. 3.4.1.2(1). They do not mean that the RR zone is a zone of wide housing
opportunity.
b) The combined reading ss. 3.4.1.2(11) and (12) demonstrates different outcomes
for worker’s accommodation as between the
construction and operational
phases of major projects. Once it is accepted that the facility must be tied to
a particular project,
the inference is that it will draw the facility away from
the communities and closer to the project itself. If the planning scheme
intended to house construction workers in the townships, it could have easily
c) Reliance on the strategic intent at s. 3.2.2(9) is drawing a long bow. The
provision is a statement of context rather than a policy
statement. The
Strategic Framework supports economic growth but also gives guidance as to how
that support might be achieved for
uses like the proposed development. For
similar reasons, reliance on ss. 3.2.2.8 and 3.3.1(1) is also misplaced. The way
the non-resident workforce accommodation is provided is an important
part of the strategic intent as part of the policy to support
the delivery of
major infrastructure projects.
d) While there is an ability to apply for non-resident workforce facilities in
most zones, that does not represent a positive representation
of a planning
intent. Consideration as to acceptability must be made on a case-by-case basis.
The fact that the use is impact assessable
in every zone of the local government
area does not necessarily represent a strategic intent to have non-resident
workforce facilities
everywhere throughout the LGA.
e) The proposal to monitor occupancy is prone to uncertainty. While the use of
it was lawful, it would represent an enforcement burden
on the respondent.
f) The “guise” of the use being temporary does not diminish the
degree of non-compliance.
cross-examination, he accepted there were various features of the proposed
development that were consistent with the planning
scheme’s requirements
for approval in the RR zone, but he considered them to be second tier issues,
and that they did not detract
from the atypical nature of the intended use in
the RR zone. Further, he considered that the asserted economic and social
would be affected by the fact that short-term workers are less likely
to do what long term residents would do if they lived in the
Consideration of character
[79] Both Ms
Morrissy and Mr Buckley largely agreed with and adopted the observations and
opinions of Mr Butcher and Mr Curtis, respectively.
[80] Ms Morrissy
considered that, from a town planning perspective, it was relevant to note:
a) The mixed-use existing character of the immediate locality;
b) The lack of consistency, in her opinion, of the existing built form setting,
design, age and style;
c) Many of the buildings in the area are low-rise and single storey, as is the
proposed development; and
d) As the use would be temporary in nature, any change to the existing and
intended character would be temporary.
considered that the strategic intent at s. 3.2.2(3)(a) was not applicable as the
provision appears to be focussed on a regional
basis. She considered that the
proposed development complied with the overall outcome at s. 6.2.7.4.2(2)(b) as
it will, in her opinion,
provide a high level of amenity and character
appropriate for its immediate context.
Buckley agreed with, and adopted, Mr Curtis’ conclusions and opinions, he
does not accept that the proposed development
is appropriate bearing in mind the
existing and intended character of the immediate area. He considered that the
clustering of 100
buildings in a very grid-like fashion on the site is something
that’s just really quite incongruent with the area
[83] Further, he
did not agree that the locality was properly described as being “mixed
use”. While there were other uses
adjacent to the RR zone and within the
immediate area, such as the school and the playing fields, they were uses that
are part of
the fabric of those areas, and that mix is part of the life of the
relevant matters
[84] In relation
to specific matters raised by the parties, Ms Morrissy:
a) Agreed with the matters raised by the appellant in its Reasons for
b) In relation to the matters raised by the respondent:
(i) she deferred to relevant experts;
(ii) she disagreed that the planning scheme nominated specific locations for
this style of development; and
(iii) considered that the proposed development has been designed to encourage
non-resident workers to use town facilities.
[85] Mr Buckley
considered that the cumulative weight of:
a) the material misalignment with the planning scheme and the purpose of certain
key provisions;
b) the considerable uncertainty about how the use will function when it proposes
a currency period that is far from temporary, and
a system of monitoring
occupancy that will be a challenge to enforce;
c) the incongruence of the proposal within the rural-residential setting of the
d) any need for accommodation of this type can be met by individual project
proponents; and
e) the expected visual and social impacts of the proposal
tips the balance in favour of a refusal.
Social planning issues
appellant engaged Ms Thao Ashford and the respondent engaged Ms Vanessa Bennett
to give opinions as to social planning issues.
Of the two, Ms Bennett is the
more experienced, but both are suitably qualified and experienced.
[87] The JER
recognised that, of the potentially many large-scale projects operating or
mooted to commence in the broader area, only
two – the CopperString
project and the Big Rocks project – were sufficiently proximate to
Charters Towers to mean that
they were relevant to the current appeal. They
noted that the Coordinator General’s Initial Advice Statement indicated
no temporary workforce camps “
were proposed or considered to be
” for the Big Rocks
[88] It also
recognised that extraneous materials for the CopperString project indicated a
likely duration for the non-resident worker’s
accommodation as being 18
months to 32 months, including commissioning and
decommissioning.
[89] Ms Ashford
considered that, while there are issues with integration of non-resident workers
into the community, they could enhance
the local community, through social and
financial contributions, facilitated by the implementation of an Accommodation
Integration Plan (“
”). She considered the
proposed ASIP to be a flexible document which could be modified to deal with
changing conditions. Included
in that flexibility was the notion of a 9.00pm
curfew for a shuttle bus, which would conduct hourly services to the town
rather than a curfew on the facility itself. She understood the curfew
was proposed as a means of dealing with possible noise issues,
and which could
be modified as needed. She considered the proposed development’s operating
hours as an operational management
[90] Ms Ashford
considered that the near-town location of the proposed development provided
tangible opportunities for non-resident
workers to participate with the
community in town, bolstered by the availability of the shuttle bus. She also
considered that the
ASIP, including the provision of an on-site lifestyle
coordinator, and the Workforce Management Plan to be implemented by
CopperString,
in combination, catered adequately for issues of personal health
and wellbeing of the non-resident workers.
opinions were based on the anticipated involvement of workers from both the
CopperString project and the Big Rocks project,
as she had not been apprised of
more recent material put before the Court about the latter project. In any
event, she considered
the plans were appropriate for non-resident workers,
regardless of what project they were attached to.
[92] Ms Ashford
acknowledged that the local community would have safety concerns following an
influx of a non-resident workforce,
but considered that the fears were largely
unfounded and could, in any event, be adequately managed through fencing and
landscaping
of the site, the use of CCTV at the site, the enforcement of a Code
of Conduct, regular meetings with police and neighbourhood watch
integration of the workforce into the community through the ASIP.
[93] Ms Bennett
on the other hand considered that this style of development has the potential to
cause considerable social impacts,
both on the existing communities and the
workers. In her opinion, these facilities should only be employed in response to
a legitimate
and demonstrated need, where they are well located and not at odds
with the scales and values of the existing community, and only
for a short
considered that given the likely differences in the expectations of and
commitment to the Millchester area as between the
non-resident workers and the
resident population, the non-residents were unlikely to assimilate into the
community. She accepted
in cross-examination that her assessment was made on the
basis of the immediate Millchester area, rather than considered on the larger
scale Charter Towers LGA. In her view the ASIP did not particularly assist as it
was a passive document that provided means for workers
to create contacts in the
community, but did not actually create them. Given the differing expectations,
she thought it likely that
few workers would in fact take up the opportunities,
which would in any event likely be limited because they would leave the area
their days off, and the opportunities when working long days, involving
strenuous work, were limited.
[95] Further,
she considered that the three-kilometre distance from the proposed site to town
to be a distance that was unlikely to
be walked often, thereby relying on the
shuttle bus, which had its scheduling limitations.
[96] She also
considered that a sudden influx of non-resident workers in the Millchester area,
which at full capacity would greatly
increase the existing
population,
would likely create
perceived safety concerns, no doubt unintended, which would in turn tend to
inhibit the integration of the workforce
into the local community. She
considered the proposed development would be better placed away from rural
residential environments,
especially from other uses that involve vulnerable
persons, such as children at schools.
considered that the lack of recreation, sport and entertainment facilities
on-site, excluding the grassed area, and the fact
that the township is not a
readily walkable distance meant that worker wellbeing would not be promoted, and
was contrary to assessment
benchmark 3.5.1.3(1), from a social planning
perspective.
[98] She also
considered that if the use of the proposed development was limited to 15 years,
there would be significant and likely
permanent changes to the existing sense of
community, and community values, in Millchester. This period was at odds with
her expectations
that such a development would only be for a short/temporary
period. Her opinion was not sought as to her view should the lifetime
proposed development be limited to eight years, as suggested in closing
submissions.
[99] A joint
expert report on traffic issues was prepared by Mr Douglas, retained by the
appellant, and Mr Holland, retained by the
respondent. In it, they were agreed
that the proposed development can be accommodated in the existing road network
and intersections
without the need for any works, apart from, essentially,
certain line markings, that extra provision of parking spaces were required
that all this could be dealt with by way of conditions on an approval of the
application. These matters were dealt with by the
minor change approval. It was
expressly stated that there were no points of disagreement between them.
[100] On the
basis of various assumptions being made, including that workers would use
58-seater coaches to travel to and from the
work site and that all workers
arrive and leave from the site at the same time on their respective three-week
rosters (which seems
unlikely), there would be a maximum traffic generation of
174 vehicles per day. The typical day would generate 26 vehicles per day,
12 vehicles per hour in the typical
Mr Holland considered this
to be the lowest traffic generation figures, given the assumptions used.
[101] Mr Holland
subsequently issued a separate report which dealt with some aspects of the
approved minor change and also further
explained his calculations used in the
JER with respect to changes in traffic volumes if the proposed development was
with the CopperString project and, alternatively, if associated with
the Big Rocks project. In the latter respect, he provided documents
used in the
JER. He stated he had been asked to do so for the purposes of the character and
amenity experts’ opinions.
[102] Although
the appellant noted that the ability to provide the report was
no objection was taken
to its admissibility. Evidence in chief touching on the newly raised issues was
permitted from Mr Douglas,
and both experts were cross examined.
[103] The JER
reflected the agreed position that, based on traffic projections to 2034
(allowing for a 3% year-on-year increase) and
drawing assumptions from known
traffic flows at a worker’s camp at Blackwater and other assumptions as to
how the rooms would
likely be utilised only by one worker, even when on days
off, the relevant intersections near the site have sufficient capacity to
the projected traffic flows. It was also assumed that the routes travelled would
differ depending on which location was associated
with the proposed development,
given their differing locations in relation to the site. In Mr Holland’s
separate report, he
in essence preferred not to rely on some of the assumptions
made in the JER, and calculated a higher rate of traffic flow.
[104] For the
purposes of his oral testimony, Mr Douglas converted the respective vehicles per
hour calculations to a vehicle per
day calculation. Mr Holland’s
calculations resulted in a range roughly 10% to 50% higher than Mr
Douglas’ from the JER.
Douglas doubted some of the assumptions made by Mr Holland but, regardless,
opined that, even working with the higher figures,
they fell well under the
expected threshold for the environmental capacity for any of the relevant
The environmental
capacity differs from the actual capacity of a road to physically handle the
traffic using it, and refers to people’s
expectations in terms of
Mr Holland did not
consider there was an issue with the application in so far as the environmental
capacity was concerned.
precisely, it was calculated that, if the proposed development were associated
with the CopperString project, the current
peak hour usage of 50 vehicles per
hour would increase to a range of 160 – 270 on Phillipson Road, and if the
proposed development
were associated with the Big Rocks project, the current
peak hour usage of 80 vehicles per hour would increase to a range of 130
240 on Deanes Road.
[106] In Mr
Holland’s separate report, he preferred not to rely on the assumptions
adopted in the JER, and calculated a range
of potential traffic generation if
the proposed development were associated with the CopperString project of 80 to
190 vehicles per
hour, in the peak hour. If the proposed development were
associated with the Big Rocks project, he calculated a range of potential
traffic generation of 80 to 190 vehicles per hour, in the peak hour. He assumed
that the routes travelled would differ for the two
projects given their
differing locations in relation to the
Noise Issues
[107] The noise
issues joint expert report made certain recommendations as to further
conditions. They considered that were these
steps taken, the proposed
development could operate without adversely impacting on the amenity of nearby
users. Those further conditions
were either incorporated into the approved minor
change or appear in the list of proposed conditions at paragraph 40 herein.
amenity experts raised no further issues concerning noise in their reports and,
as the issue was not specifically raised
in the issues on the hearing, no
further specific consideration is needed in respect of this
Character and Visual Amenity
[109] Mr Butcher
was engaged by the appellant, and Mr Curtis by the respondent. Each are
appropriately qualified to give expert opinion
evidence on this topic, and each
have considerable experience in the area. Their reports were directly concerned
with ss. 3.2.2(3)(a)
and 6.2.7.4.2(2)(b) and 6.2.7.4.3 PO3 of the planning
scheme. The joint report was prepared before the approval of the minor change,
and each provided a separate report after that occurred.
Butcher’s ultimate opinion can be distilled into a few relatively concise
propositions. Due primarily to topographic
and floral features, the subject site
is presently of low visibility. The existing character of the local area
comprises a range
of different elements. The proposed development would not
substantially alter the existing character of its immediate surrounds,
locality. This is due in part because of the combination of the natural slope of
the land, the earthworks to be undertaken,
the proposed setbacks of the
structures on the site, the use of and type of fencing and acoustic barriers
used and the landscaping
to be applied, the internal structures of the proposed
development will largely not be visible from any of the surrounding roads
lots. Similarly, while the proposed development will represent a different
density to the surrounding area, that is unlikely to
have a significant impact
on the character of the local area due to the relative lack of visibility.
[111] While the
adjacent rural lots along Phillipson Road do not have solid boundary fences
similar to the proposed development, the
staggered design of the proposed fence
along that boundary, with pockets of landscaping at different parts, will break
up the horizontal
appearance of the fence, and create points of interest. For
that reason, it could contribute to the local character.
cross-examination, Mr Butcher considered that the broader local context
comprised a combination of lower intensity uses as
well as some slightly higher
intensity uses but accepted that, overall, there was a low intensity feel to the
locality of the proposed
development. He also accepted that the built form was
characterised by detached residential dwellings on large lots, school buildings,
rural sheds and sporting facilities. While the proposed development was
comparable with other built form in the immediate area in
terms of height, he
accepted that the number of units and the coverage of the land they would occupy
was unique to that area.
[113] In terms
of the locality more immediate to the site, he considered that parts of it were
more open, but also considered that
as one moved north along Deanes Road,
towards Millchester Road, there became a more traditional residential character
to the area.
[114] In terms
of the vegetation, while the broader area had a more enclosed tropical
character, he accepted that not all of the more
immediate area had that same
character, and that the immediate area was more open.
[115] Mr Butcher
did not accept that the combination of fencing and vegetation created a
continuous barrier. He considered that, bearing
in mind the species used in the
landscaping, it provided amenity to the edge of the units. Further, there were
breaks in the fencing
along Phillipson Road, and there would be no fencing in
front of the existing structures. He considered it to be more of a buffer
between two uses, but accepted that some parts would be impermeable due to the
landscaping. However, he considered there were other
parts where it was open. He
considered that the bult form would be visible from Deanes Road looking along
the driveway, that there
may be areas along Phillipson Road where the built form
may be visible, but in the context of vegetation, and similarly from Nagle
Street. He accepted that the acoustic barrier along the Richards Street frontage
was 2.5 metres high, and was unaware of any other
development in the locality
having a barrier of that height.
accepted that the landscaping plan provided for the large trees to be of
different species, creating maximum heights of between
10 and 35 metres. He
considered that meant that an observer of the proposed development would not be
faced with a “wall of
trees”, because the canopy would be well above
the development. Further, he considered that the local area had aspects where
similar species could be located. While there would be nowhere else in the
locality that shows a similar visual outcome, that did
not, in his opinion, make
it unusual in its appearance.
following passage is a good summary of his overall evidence on the issue of
density of the proposed development from a visual
perspective:
“I acknowledge that the intensity or the density
of the development is higher than others in the locality. Yes. But as I said
before, as far as visual amenity is concerned, that density comes with
considerations around what its appearance is; what its visibility
is. So from a
pure planning metric, if you like, and looking from the air, you’d say yes
it’s – I acknowledge that
it has a higher density. But I think that
it’s the appearance from the street. And when you consider things from a
visual amenity
point of view, it’s not always the case if you’ve got
screening, if you’ve got
will be visible. Yes. I don’t think that it will be highly visible. I
don’t think it’ll be highly prominent
because of the – the
scale of the fencing, which is relatively low. The vegetation will be visible.
Yes. But I don’t
think it’ll be a very prominent element within the
context because of surrounding vegetation
[119] He did not
accept that the proposed development was inconsistent with the character of the
immediate setting, for the reasons
earlier outlined.
[120] In terms
of increased traffic flow, he considered that there would be additional visual
impacts, but he could not assess the
[121] Mr Curtis
held contrary opinions. He did not agree that the site currently had low
visibility. He considered the location to
be highly visible from both Phillipson
and Deanes Roads. As such, he considered that persons passing the site while
to and from the school, and the sports facilities at the end of
Phillipson Road have a clear view of the site and its relationship
to the local
[122] Mr Curtis
acknowledged the different types of structures in the local area, but considered
that all are consistent in their
built form and open landscape space with the
intended character in the RR zone. Notwithstanding the differences, there was a
of permeability to the structures to allow views into the properties.
This created an “
open visual setting
” which contributed to
the character and amenity of the streetscape as a public place.
[123] On the
other hand, the proposed buildings represent an intense cluster of built form,
with repetitive appearance and limited
separation, with a risk that at least
part of the built form would be visible from the adjacent areas, even with
fencing and landscaping.
The carpark at the western end contributes to the
intensity of the development. The fencing and acoustic barriers will create a
visual barrier along the site’s frontages, which in turn
precludes the proposed development from having a positive engagement
streetscape. Even allowing for the fencing and landscaping, the site will appear
as something of a fenced compound isolated
from the streetscape.
[124] While the
continuous unarticulated appearance of the fence may be softened by the
staggered design and pockets of landscaping,
that will not alter its function as
a visual barrier that isolates the site from its surroundings. Further, the
dense landscaping,
while partially screening the visibility of the built form,
will accentuate the site’s isolation from the local area. He also
considered that the viability of the landscaping is questionable without
mandated maintenance.
[125] In his
separate report, Mr Curtis referred to the JER traffic report and noted that
expected traffic increases along both Deanes
Road and Phillipson Road could be
in the order of a doubling to trebling the peak traffic volumes. He considered
that, while the
traffic experts concluded that the road system is able to
accommodate the increase, it will diminish the setting of the residential
cross-examination, Mr Curtis accepted that the local context is comprised of
both existing development and vacant properties
within the RR zone, the
community facility zone and the recreation and open space zone, and that there
is a variety of built form
intensities, built form visual appearance and uses
within those zones. He accepted that the outcome achieved for the proposed
development
was, at worst, filtered views of the accommodation from the public
realm because of the landscaping and fencing. He also accepted
that just because
something is visible doesn’t necessarily mean it’s not
acceptable.
accepted that, while he had doubts about aspects of the onsite amenity of the
proposed development, the greater focus is
on the visual impacts of the proposed
development from the public realm. Nonetheless, he considered that when a
planning scheme refers
to residential amenity, an aspect of that is residential
amenity within the site. He considered that what should be in a worker’s
camp should be of a higher standard than what is provided for in the proposed
development.
[128] He agreed
with Mr Butcher that from parts of the public realm there would be filtered
views of the built form. He agreed that
the school forms part of the relevant
locality, and that it would retain the highest visibility in the area. He also
agreed that
there is a variety of fencing employed in the area, but said that
the majority of it is at least semi-permeable. He also agreed that
there is at
least one example where vegetation sits in front of the fencing.
[129] He agreed
with Mr Butcher’s definition of the relevant locality as shown in exhibit
36, but he would give greater weight
to certain elements within that locality,
depending on how close the element is to the site.
considered that if the landscaping plan was amended to allow more permeability,
that would add more variety to the visual
amenity, but it would also mean that
the character of the built form would be more visible to the street and, in his
opinion, that
character is contrary to what is intended for that residential
area and the intensity of it.
Even if it were assumed that the planning scheme allowed for that type of
development in that area, the residential amenity issues
mean that it is a poor
example of this style of
development.
experts engaged in this area were Mr Duane by the appellant and Mr Musk by the
respondent. Each are appropriately qualified
in the area of economic need and
impact assessment, although Mr Duane is the more, and extensively, experienced.
It was apparent
in the course of their testimony that each are well qualified to
testify in this area. Each contributed to the JER, albeit with significant
differences of opinions, and each provided separate reports updating the
material they relied on the JER, amongst other things.
[132] The JER
identified a number of relevant economic factors affecting the Charters Towers
area. They included an expected small
drop in the population between 2021 and
2031, that there were, on average, 19 new residential building approvals per
annum, that
there is a very low residential vacancy rate of 0.3%, and that the
vacancy rate has been very low for a number of years. Also, unemployment
Charters Towers LGA and locality has been trending downwards since 2020, and now
sits generally in-line with Queensland and
Australian averages.
[133] There were
13 hotel/motel facilities in the Charters Towers township, with a combined
capacity of about 250 rooms. There were
also 3 caravan/park sites, each with
between 15 and 25 cabins and between 50 and 80
[134] For the
purposes of the JER, Mr Musk designed a self-reporting survey of the hotels and
motels in the town.
six replies. Broadly speaking, the responses showed that those establishments
cater, to varying degrees, for construction
workers. These accounted for between
10% and 70% of their room usage, although the number of rooms at the different
establishments
varied. Overall average occupancy rates varied, depending on the
time of year, from between 10% to almost 100%. There was universal
expressed by the six responses about the effect on their businesses should the
application be granted.
essence, Mr Duane considered that there was a clear need and demand for the
proposed development because of:
a) the existence of a number of major projects;
b) the location of the proposed development in relation to the town centre,
thereby increasing social integration with the community
and providing economic
benefits. The opportunities for these benefits are substantially enhanced given
the location of the site,
as opposed to the proposed development being 20-30
kilometres out of town;
c) the proposed development would provide a buffer in the supply of non-resident
accommodation, providing flexibility to cater for
changes in demand for major
resource projects and the like, at short notice. Further, the existing hotels
and motels do not have
sufficient capacity to cater for the expected demand from
workers, particularly during the peak accommodation period between May
d) the reducing unemployment rate since 2021 makes it likely that a higher
proportion of the expected 172 workers for the Big Rocks
project would require
accommodation, than when initially considered;
e) the scarcity of available housing means that construction projects will
exacerbate the issue. The provision of the non-resident
workforce accommodation
will free up existing accommodation both for investor and personal home buyers
and for tourists;
f) the 15 year approval, which would create efficiencies in the ability to use
existing infrastructure, thereby enhancing economic
efficiencies and further
alleviating the project operators of the need to administer and construct
non-core functions, reduce the
effect of the boom/bust housing and rental cycle
and ensure that other accommodation facilities are available for tourists,
during peak periods; and
g) the overall need for the proposed development to cater for major growth
projects and the peak periods that they experience and
which are difficult to
predict. At present there is very little ability to handle further increases in
demand from new projects.
[136] In his
oral testimony, Mr Duane considered that the CopperString project was, as far as
anyone can say, definitely going ahead.
For that reason, there is a definite
need for a non-resident workforce accommodation facility at Charters Towers. In
his opinion,
the maximum benefits accrue by being at the proposed site rather
than 10 kilometres out of town. Further, he could not see any evidence
site on the Gregory Development Road had been progressed.
proposed site, if approved, would in his opinion be likely to be taken up
because the major proponents of these sorts of
projects don’t want to
build their own accommodation facilities, and would most likely use one already
approved in the township.
He however acknowledged that the representatives of
CopperString know of the proposed development and have not made any commitment
towards using it.
[138] Mr Duane
accepted that there was some uncertainty about the Big Rocks project, although
he understood that funding had been
allocated from the State and Federal
Governments across 2024/25 and so, while the return of the project to the State
may delay things,
he considered that there was some certainty to the project
proceeding.
He gained some
support for that opinion from the fact the project is still mentioned on the
“state development infrastructure
website”, but he also accepted
that can change.
He qualified
his opinion in that he considered it would progress at some time in the future,
but he could not say when that would
accepted that if the proposed development were approved, there would likely be
some downturn in the accommodation of construction
workers in the local hotels
and motels, but that would allow them to cater to tourists. However, he noted
that there are no major
construction projects currently operating in the area,
and so any construction workers would be unlikely to be able to access the
proposed development anyway.
[140] Mr Musk
held the contrary overall opinion, essentially because:
a) of the two projects that might be linked to the proposed development, it was
not clear that either required the proposed development.
There is no clear
evidence that the proposed development will be specifically linked to a major
project in the region as required
by the strategic outcome at s.3.4.1.2(11);
b) the proposed condition that the proposed development operate for 15 years is
inconsistent with the requirement that it be temporary.
The planning scheme
intends that operational workers be housed within the local community –
see the strategic outcome at s.
3.4.1.2(12);
c) it had not been shown that there was an urgent or pressing need for the
proposed development;
d) while the housing market has been experiencing increasing prices and low
rental vacancy rates, there is nothing to show this is
attributable to the
non-resident construction workforce population;
e) any flow on economic benefits are limited by the fact that meals are provided
on-site and would be dependent on the workers themselves
deciding to go to town;
f) issues concerning the desirability of a buffer of supply of accommodation are
largely irrelevant given the current application
is concerned only with workers
participating in the construction phase, and not operational workers; and
g) it is anticipated that, if approved, the viability of some hotels and motels
in the town would be threatened due to the removal
of that component from their
businesses.
cross-examination, Mr Musk accepted there is a need for a non-resident workforce
accommodation facility in or near Charters
Towers if the CopperString project
proceeds. He does not disagree that up to 350 beds would be required.
[142] Mr Musk
agreed that the State was likely to have a greater financial capability to carry
out the Big Rocks project than a regional
local council, but also considered
that the planned start date of 2026 was likely to be delayed given the recent
developments.
Mr Paul Czislowski
[143] As earlier
noted, Mr Czislowski is the sole director and shareholder of the respondent.
There are some further aspects of his
lay witness statements that deserve
mention. He was not required for cross-examination.
[144] Although
not referred to by Ms Ashford or Ms Bennett, it appears that at least one of the
local hotels also operates a courtesy
Presumably, that could be
accessed by any residents at the proposed development.
Czislowski stated that CopperString project tender documents from May 2023
referred to the Council Airport site as the indicative
site for the Charters
Towers non-resident workforce accommodation facility
He is unaware of a
finalised decision having been made as to a site for the workforce
accommodation.
Czislowski also indicated a willingness to
developing a rural
residential offering on the site at the end of the period of operation of the
proposed development, and that he
to developing the land for
permanent residential uses after the period of
[147] He also
referred to other non-resident workforce accommodation facilities, both within
and outside the Charters Towers LGA which
were not ties to a specific project
when approved.
Thompson is the Executive Manager, Community Building for the respondent
Council. She provided a lay
which explained that
part of her role is to keep “
an ear to the ground
existing and potential development projects within the Charters Towers LGA. This
suggests that some of her knowledge may
be based on hearsay accounts. The
statement listed those major projects, and her understanding of their progress.
In particular she
referred to the CopperString project and an awareness that the
seek to utilise the site referred to by Mr Czislowski as the
airport site. She was not required for cross-examination, however more
material tendered at the hearing indicated that the respondent is unaware of any
actual proposal to use that
material – properly made public submissions
[149] As earlier
noted, 94 public submissions were received, all of which opposed the
application. The respondent’s Amended
Reasons for Refusal, and some
experts’ reports refer to 95 public submissions having been made, all but
one of which were opposed
to the application. A CEO certificate was tendered at
the hearing referring to, and exhibiting, 94 submissions in
opposition,
ninety of which were
made on behalf of opponents by a firm of town planning consultants. The
difference in the figures was never
explained at the hearing, and the appellant
did not pursue the possible issue of a submission in support. I proceed on the
of the material tendered under the CEO certificate.
Overall Consideration
[150] In each of
the topics upon which experts testified, I do not accept wholly the opinion of
any expert. That is, I accept some
of their respective opinions, and reject
others. My reasons in each case depend largely on issues of construction of the
scheme, and the impression gained of the proposed development in the
case of their fields of expertise. In the course of my consideration
issues, I intend to explain my findings, which will necessarily mean the
rejection of some of the expert opinions, without
necessarily itemising what
parts of the opinions I accept and what I
Town planning
Does the planning scheme guide the location of
a non-resident workforce accommodation facility?
[151] There is
no provision in the planning scheme that expressly permits, or prohibits, a
non-resident workforce accommodation facility
in the RR zone, or any other zone.
However, the planning scheme does recognise that the region has vast areas of
rural land that
can support major economic activities and uses that cannot be
appropriately accommodated within urban and township areas because
It can therefore be
seen that the appropriateness of the location of the use is expressly recognised
as an issue in the scheme. In
that sense, I agree with Ms Morrissy’s
opinion that the lack of an express locational requirement in s. 3.4.1.2(11)
a flexible approach can be adopted to the location of the proposed
development but, as observed below, it does not mean that non-resident
accommodation facilities can be approved in an unfettered manner; they are
subject to impact assessment under the planning
[152] Express
mention is made of non-resident workforce accommodation in s. 3.4.1.2(11). In my
view some guidance as to the permitted
location of this style of accommodation
can be gleaned from the construction of this provision, and its companion
provision at s.
3.4.1.2(12).
[153] The two
provisions deal with accommodating employees for “
any mining or major
economic projects
relevant projects
former provision during the construction phases and the latter during the
operational phases. The planning scheme expressly
does not support non-resident
workforce accommodation for operational employees at all; s. 3.4.1.2(12)
mandates that those employees
must be accommodated in the urban or township
communities where necessary services, facilities and infrastructure are already
There is no such mandate, or even guidance, in s. 3.4.1.2(11) for
construction workers in non-resident workforce accommodation. The
two provisions
are complementary, and the absence of any guidance in the former provision, but
the presence of guidance in the latter
suggests that the planning scheme creates
no express or implicit expectation as to where such a facility will necessarily
be located.
Its permitted location will be the result of impact assessment by
the assessment manager.
[154] Having
said that, I accept that the proposed development is inconsistent with the
intent for rural residential accommodation,
as evidenced by s. 3.2.3 - Rural
Residential. Indeed, I accept Mr Buckley’s description of it being
incongruent
” and Mr Curtis’ descriptions referring to
a lack of permeability and likening the proposal to being like a compound in
appearance. I will explain my reasons in that regard in more detail when
explaining my conclusions on the character and visual
amenity evidence.
[155] While it
is a residential development, it cannot be said to be consistent with being on a
large lifestyle lot, which term is
further explained by the reference to the
keeping of small numbers of working and companion animals. While the provision
specifically exclude the proposed development from the RR zone, there
is an inconsistency between the proposed development and the
stated intent
of how land use and development is acknowledged and anticipated across
the region within
” the RR zone. Ms Morrissy’s view that the
proposed development did “
technically
” fit within the
description of a residential development on large lifestyle lots was, with
respect, unconvincing.
[156] Although
the respondent has raised s. 3.2.3 Urban – Neighbourhoods in its Amended
Reasons for Refusal, it was only used
as a comparison with the intent evidenced
in s. 3.2.3 - Rural Residential, and it was not actively pursued in submissions.
consideration of that provision is required.
[157] The issues
in dispute in the appeal, in terms of the planning intent, also raise ss.
3.2.1(12), 3.2.2(1), 3.2.2(2)(b), 3.2.2(3)(a),
3.2.2(3)(b). Ms Morrissy also
raised ss. 3.2.2(8) and 3.2.2(9), and Mr Buckley commented upon their
application. In my view, these
provisions are of varying assistance to the
resolution of discerning whether the planning scheme intended that the proposed
development
be located in the RR zone.
[158] Notably,
s. 3.2.1(12) is part of the overview of the strategic intent, and relates
directly to the Urban area and surrounding
townships and localities. Accepting
that the site falls within that broad geographical description, the provision is
so generalised
and aspirational to be of no real assistance, in isolation.
provisions in Part 3.2.2 of the planning scheme are all concerned with the
future vision of Charters Towers, looking towards
2038. They need to be read in
light of the overview provisions, such as s. 3.2.1(12). Sections 3.2.2(1) and
3.2.2(2)(b) are concerned
with the Charters Towers region as a whole and are
generalised, aspirational statements, which are of no real assistance for
determining
the present issue of location. They were not particularly pressed by
the respondent in closing submissions. What can be said is that
they do not
directly dictate where the proposed development must be situated, in light of
that forward focus. Further, while it cannot
be said that the proposed
development is shown to positively advance those aspirational statements for the
whole of the region, that
does not necessarily mean that approval of the
application is in conflict with the planning
[160] Sections
3.2.2(8) and 3.2.2(9) are also focused on the whole region, rather than a
specific community or zone. However, I accept,
to an extent, Ms Morrissy’s
opinion in her separate report that the planning scheme is concerned with growth
generation. The
concept of population and economic growth is expressly mentioned
in s. 3.2.2(9). These provisions, together, recognise the intents
adaptability, flexibility and nimbleness in, relevantly, providing services such
as construction, to support economic opportunities
across the region’s
urban areas and townships. That intended adaptability, etc is a relevant factor
in the exercise of the
discretion in determining this appeal in favour of the
[161] For those
reasons, I cannot accept Mr Buckley’s observation that s. 3.2.2(9) is more
an expression of context than an
expression of policy. I do however accept that
the manner in which the accommodation is to be provided is an important aspect
the strategic intent. I accept that it cannot be delivered in an unfettered
manner, but delivery will not be unfettered as it is
subject to impact
assessment, and the competing considerations involved in that process. As he and
Ms Morrissy agreed, it will be
considered on a case-by-case basis.
[162] Sections
3.2.2(3)(a) and 3.2.2(3)(b) are focused on the intended composition of the
communities within the region, and so have
a narrower focus than the
aforementioned provisions. They draw on the issues attaching to social planning
and character and amenity
respectively, and I will consider them when
considering the opinions in those areas of expertise.
[163] I turn
then to the strategic outcomes in ss. 3.4.1.2(1)(a) and 3.4.1.2(8). The former
provision refers to, in essence, the requirement
for a mix of accommodation
It does not refer to
rural residential areas. It suggests an outcome where the
majority, not all, housing options in the urban areas are represented by
of styles. It therefore has no real bearing on whether the proposed development
is appropriately located in the RR zone.
[164] The latter
provision is concerned with limiting rural residential housing to the RR zone,
rather than in other zones. It is
not concerned with limiting the type of
accommodation that can be developed in the RR zone. That construction is
supported by the
following provision, s. 3.4.1.2(9). The provisions do not
assist with understanding the planning scheme’s intention as to the
location of the proposed development.
[165] The issues
in dispute on the appeal also raise consideration, for the purposes of assessing
the appropriateness of the land
use, aspects of the RRZC, namely ss.
6.2.7.4.2(1) and (2)(a) and Table 6.2.7.4.3 PO3 and AO3. I consider s.
6.2.7.4.2(2)(b) to also
be relevant.
[166] In my
view, the proposed development satisfies the purpose of the RRZC at s.
6.2.7.4.2(1); it is a residential use on a large
lot. However, it does not
satisfy the overall outcomes for the RRZC when considered against ss.
6.2.7.4.2(2)(a) and (b). The proposed
development does not fall within the use
definition of “
dwelling house
”, a term used in the former
provision. Further, for reasons to be later explained, it does not, in its
current form, provide
a high level of residential amenity and character
appropriate for the particular locality in the RR zone, as required by the
of those provisions. While I acknowledge that provision refers generally
to the RR zone, in my view attention to the particular site
remains a relevant
consideration so as to give context to the assessment of that provision.
[167] Turning
then to the Performance Outcomes and the Acceptable Outcomes in Table 6.2.7.4.3,
Ms Morrissy candidly, and correctly,
accepted that the proposed development does
not meet AO3. Indeed, the appellant at no stage suggested it was met. In those
circumstances,
it is necessary to assess compliance with the associated
Performance Outcome. The appellant argues there has been compliance, essentially
because the existing locality does not have a very low intensity, and the
proposed development is consistent with the existing intensity
requires that the residential density reflect “
the very low intensity
character of the locality
”. The appellant accepts that the term
” indicates a sense of sameness, but argues that the
provision does not require the residential density of the proposed development
to reflect only the residential intensity of the locality; it is the overall
intensity of the locality that is the focus. It is submitted
that the locality
includes uses broader than the residential use in the RR zone, and includes
sporting fields and clubs,
a cemetery and
differing landscape, vegetation and built form features which must be taken into
This broader
consideration is said to be consistent with authority of this
It is argued that it is
the impact and the intensity that as associated with the density of the proposed
development that is the
key consideration in comparison with the locality, and
not just the area adjacent to the
While the appellant
accepts that the proposed development will cause some change to the character of
the locality, it is submitted
that the impact is acceptable in all of the
circumstances.
respondent emphasises that the JER refers to the site being found in a low
density, rural residential context together with
other recreational and
community activities. It is argued that the considerable scale and the
fenced compound
” character of the proposed development is
inconsistent with the existing context, and is unsuited for the site. It is
argued that the inconsistency between the proposed development and the
land use strategy in the planning scheme is also reflected
in the character and
visual amenity and social impacts. Accordingly, it is said, the proposed
development does not satisfy PO3.
[170] Mr Curtis
took issue with the extent of the locality, as suggested by Mr Butcher and
portrayed by him in exhibit 36. He would
have limited it. While acknowledging
that the ascertainment of the locality depends on a number of features,
including zoning and
geography, he considered that, for present purposes it
would be better described as the streetscapes that adjoin and just extend
the site. On that basis it would be a more limited area than that proposed by Mr
Butcher in exhibit 36.
[171] I need not
resolve that dispute between Mr Curtis and Mr Butcher as, on either approach, I
consider that the proposed development
does not satisfy PO3.
[172] Before
explaining why, it is convenient to note that the application therefore fails to
satisfy both PO3 and AO3 of s. 6.2.7.4.3,
and I have earlier found that it does
not satisfy both the purpose and the overall outcomes of the
The proposed development
therefore fails to satisfy the code assessment.
[173] Turning
now to the reasons for that finding, I accept that there are different
intensities of uses within the locality, however
understood. It can also be
accepted that the schools, and in particular the one adjacent to the site, have
aspects of density and
intensity that are not, in themselves, of an open
character. I also accept Mr Butcher’s opinion that they are also pleasant
and contribute to the character of the
It is consistent with Mr
Buckley’s observation as to them adding to the fabric of the
[174] There is
no evidence as to the frequency of use of the rugby union fields, or the netball
courts, and their respective clubhouses.
However, it can be safely assumed that
rugby union will be played predominantly in winter, as it is in the rest of the
country, especially
given the climate in north Queensland. There is simply no
evidence about the usage of the netball courts.
[175] Although
the Goldfield Ashes are promoted as a large-scale cricket carnival held each
year in Charters Towers, it is well-known
that it is only held over a three-day
period once a year. There is no evidence as to the intensity of the usage of the
cricket grounds
otherwise, although it can again be assumed to be a seasonal
sport, as it is in the rest of the country. In any event, the cricket
not in the immediate area of the site, although some are in the Goldfields
Sporting Complex, which is in the broader
[176] In the
absence of evidence, it cannot be assumed that the sporting uses included in the
locality are necessarily intensive.
Similarly, there is no evidence as to the
intensity of the use of the cemetery, and it cannot be assumed to be of a high
locality includes particularly open-style uses, such as open rural residential
areas, and creek environs that are both open
and heavily vegetated. It can be
seen from the aerial maps that there is much sparsely occupied land immediately
adjacent to the
there are areas of densely occupied residential areas included in the locality
as determined by Mr Butcher, these tend for
the most part to be more distant
from the site, and mostly to the north and west. Importantly, Mr Butcher
accepted that the proposed
development has a higher intensity or density than
other uses in the locality. He however considered that the facility would not
so visible as to warrant refusal. For reasons to be explained, I disagree.
[178] For those
reasons, I find that, overall, the locality has an openness to it justifying a
description of having a “
very low intensity character
if it does not justify the “very low” description, the proposed
development does not reflect the same low
intensity of the locality.
[179] I accept
that the proposed development, in its current form, is incongruous with the
character of the locality. I also accept
the description of it presenting as a
fenced compound and, to that extent, I accept the opinions of both Mr Curtis and
Mr Buckley.
recognise that the south-west corner of the site will retain an openness, due to
the lack of development in that corner, but
the same cannot be said for the rest
of the site, of which the proposed development’s built form occupies all
but about 1.2
hectares of the total land area of about 4.104 hectares, and, on
occasion, part of that 1.2 hectares will have cars parked on
landscaping and style of some of the fencing, together with the natural slope of
the land, will tend to ameliorate the density
of the proposed development to
some degree, but it remains markedly more dense and intense than the rest of the
locality, and I accept
that it remains relevantly visible from the streetscape.
I also accept that some of the harshness of the appearance of a fenced compound
isolated from the streetscape could be alleviated by creating more
“permeability” into the development, but that would
in itself expose
the dense bulk of the built form, the very thing the fencing and landscaping is
intended to alleviate.
[182] While the
school adjacent to the site will retain the highest visibility in the locality,
it lacks, in my view, the same imposing
character as the proposed development
due to its density. The school, as earlier noted, in fact contributes to the
character of the
area. The same cannot be said for the proposed development
which, given the number of anticipated tenants, will necessarily be intense
its use, particularly at certain times of the day and night.
applications for approval of non-resident workforce accommodation facilities, in
any zone, are impact assessable under the
planning scheme, so what must be
assessed is the impact of the particular proposed development at the particular
site. Both Ms Morrissy
and Mr Buckley agree with that proposition. While some of
Mr Buckley’s statements may, in isolation, be taken to convey that
facility should never be permitted in the RR zone, they should be understood to
be expressions of the weight that should be
given to aspects of the application
which, in his opinion, detract from the appropriateness of the proposed
development on that site
in the RR zone.
[184] One such
example is that facilities of this nature are atypical in any urban environment
and are one-off in their physical and
operational nature. I agree that they are
atypical and one-off in the sense used, however the determination of their
location is
dependent on the impact assessment in light of all
circumstances.
[185] I accept
that the planning scheme does not necessarily preclude the proposed development
in the RR zone, and I also accept that
there are indicators that the proposed
development is contrary to aspects of the planning scheme. The failure to align
assessment benchmarks in the planning scheme is an important
consideration, but it is not necessarily dominant or overwhelming in
exercise of my discretion. As noted by Kefford DCJ in
Murphy v Moreton Bay
Regional Council,
outcome will turn on the facts and circumstances overall. The issue is whether
the impact assessment means that this particular
proposed development is
appropriate for approval on the particular
Does the planning scheme
require a facility to be “tied” to a particular project for a
temporary period of time?
[186] Resolution
of this issue again requires consideration of s. 3.4.1.2(11) and its companion
provision at s. 3.4.1.2(12). It is
notable that their interpretation was the
point at which the two expert witnesses diverged in their opinions on this
topic, while
acknowledging that the interpretation of the provisions was a
matter for this Court. The interpretation is an important consideration
assessment of each expert witness’ opinion, and in the resolution of the
appeal. As it happens, I do not completely
agree with either of their
constructions of these provisions.
[187] Section
3.4.1.2(11) includes the use defined term “
non-resident workforce
accommodation
”. In so far as there is an apparent conflict between
this use definition and the administrative definition of “
non-resident
” for the purposes of the present appeal, it is of no moment
given the administrative definition does not have meaning in relation
Ultimately, the parties
were agreed on this point. Section 3.4.1.2(11) also equates the non-resident
workforce accommodation facility
to that of a “
construction
”. That term is not expressly defined in the planning scheme, but
it is not suggested that it should take a meaning other than
the commonly
understood one. Nor is it argued that the proposed development is not a
construction camp. Section 3.4.1.2(11) clearly
applies to the proposed
development.
provision not only limits, but “
strictly limits
” the lifespan
of the facility to the construction phases of relevant projects. The strictness
of the limitation is reinforced
by the express requirement that the facility
decommissioned
” once the construction phase is
finished. These aspects of the provision give particular emphasis to the
temporary nature of
any such facility. Mr Buckley, a very experienced town
planner, referred to the requirement to decommission as being “
unusual – in planning terms ... for a use to be terminated that
That opinion was
not challenged. In my view, such an express and particular requirement is both
consistent with a recognition of
the atypical and one-off nature of such a
residential use and strongly emphasises the requirement that the facility
operates as a
temporary use only.
[189] Adherence
to that requirement will necessarily mean that the facility will constitute a
temporary use, and the period of that
temporary use will be determined by the
length of time of the construction phases that are undertaken. Considerable
weight attaches
to compliance with the provision.
[190] I accept
that, depending on the scale and extent of the relevant project, such a
construction might mean that an approval will
result in the facility operating
for a considerable period of time. While that would not necessarily accord with
the usual understanding
of the term “
”, it would
accord with the administrative term definition of “
” in the planning scheme. Accordingly, I cannot accept Mr
Buckley’s opinion that a period of 15 years is not, in the terms
planning scheme, a temporary period. It may be, depending on the reasonably
anticipated length of the construction phases
of a relevant project. Also, I do
not accept Ms Morrissy’s opinion that the 15 year period attaching to this
proposed development
is a temporary use, given my later findings as to being
satisfied that the application is tied to the CopperString project.
expected length of time a facility will operate is relevant in considering the
broader issues of impact assessment, including
town planning compliance, social
impacts, character and visual amenity and economic need. An incursion by a
non-compliant facility
into a particular locality may be more acceptable for a
shorter period than for a longer one. On my preferred construction, the expected
period of operation is therefore a relevant consideration overall.
[192] Whether it
is desirable to impose a condition nominating the actual end date of the
approval will be influenced by many factors,
including the overall assessed
impact of the facility and its operation, and the precision with which the
construction phases of
any relevant project are identified at the time the
application. The imposition of a condition setting a precise lifespan of the
will alleviate concerns about any uncertainty that might arise was to when the
construction phases
” of the relevant project finish and will
also provide certainty to the surrounding community about when the facility will
to operate.
respondent’s case is that, in order to succeed, an application must
identify one, and only one, particular project
that the facility will service.
In argument on the issue, it was referred to as the application being
” to a particular
relevant project, as a convenient shorthand expression of the requirement in
contest. I do not accept that
submission, although I accept that it must
identify, and be tied to, at least one relevant project which is identifiable at
the application is made.
[194] Section
3.4.1.2(11) refers to “
”. The use of the plural also appears elsewhere in
the provision. In any event, as the planning scheme is to be interpreted
according to principles of statutory construction, if the word
” can be understood as referring to only one relevant
project (which I do not accept it is), the use of words in the singular
the use of the plural.
[195] Applications
for facilities of this nature are always impact assessable under this planning
scheme. By requiring that the proposed
development be tied to one or more
relevant projects, the assessment manager can assess the impact of the proposed
development through
the prism of the expected duration of the construction
phases of the particular project or projects. It also allows assessment of
appropriate scale, bulk and density of the proposed facility or facilities. If
not tied to one or more relevant projects, the
assessment of these issues
becomes speculative, which is inconsistent with the restrictive features of the
planning scheme concerning
this style of accommodation, including at
3.4.1.2(11).
[196] There is
nothing inconsistent with that reasoning in recognising that the application may
be tied to more than one relevant
project, each of which are identifiable at the
time the application is made. The ability to assess the relevant impact can be
regardless of how many relevant projects are involved, and the
appropriate lifespan for the facility can be determined based on the
before the assessment manager.
[197] It follows
that there must be sufficient material before the assessment manager to provide
an appropriate level of assurance
that the proposed facility will, in fact,
service the nominated relevant project or projects. An application cannot be
relevant project unless that assurance exists.
[198] That is
not to suggest that complete assurance must be established. Given the well-known
lumpy and uncertain nature of the commencement
of major projects, complete
assurance would often be an impossible standard to achieve. What is required is
comfortable satisfaction
that the proposed facility will service the
construction workers from the nominated relevant project or projects.
[199] It will be
insufficient for an applicant to nominate one relevant project but expect that
the application, and hence the lifespan
of the facility, will ultimately be
limited by a yet to be identified relevant project, in the hope one eventuates.
That approach
would not be “
” limiting the approval
to the construction phases of the relevant project or projects. If another
relevant project does happen
to come along, further approval can be sought
[200] That other
facilities have previously been approved and constructed in other local
government areas without precise identification
of the projects that they will
service is not to the point. There is nothing before me to show that the
planning instruments applying
to those developments had the unusual and
restrictive requirements that presently apply.
[201] Similarly,
it is also not to the point that a non-resident workforce accommodation facility
has previously been approved in
the Charters Towers LGA without tying the
application to relevant
The approval for the
particular facility in the Charters Towers LGA that is referred to is dated 10
December 2019, and so prior to
the commencement of the current planning scheme.
The terms of the prior planning scheme have not been put before me. The point
to be raised vaguely on the basis of some unstated principle of fairness.
It has not been established, in respect of any of those
facilities, that the
respective planning schemes contained a requirement analogous to the requirement
in the present planning scheme.
[202] Accordingly,
I find that, given the terms of this particular planning scheme, the applicant
must establish to the assessment
manager’s comfortable satisfaction that
the proposed development will service one or more identified relevant
[203] In my
view, by requiring that the proposed development be tied to one or more relevant
projects, and by further strictly limiting
the accommodation to workers during
the construction phases of those projects, the planning scheme intends that only
those workers
be accommodated at such a facility. It would be illogical to
require an applicant to satisfy the strict criteria in s. 3.4.1.2(11),
permit any person, including those not engaged in the construction phases of the
relevant project, to access the accommodation
facilities while the project is,
or projects are, in construction phases. Such an approach would create an
undesirable disjunction
between the rationale for approval and the basis of the
actual use thereafter.
[204] In my
view, the temporary nature of the proposed use and the associated tying of the
application to a relevant project, as revealed
by s. 3.4.1.2(11), are matters of
considerable weight in the impact assessment.
Has the appellant established that
the proposed development is “tied” to one or more relevant
[205] As will be
seen below, Ms Anderson, Ms Bennett, Mr Duane and Mr Musk, all considered the
availability of a number of relevant
projects in the greater region. The
desirability of being within a half hour’s drive from the project was a
weighty consideration
in their opinions. All agreed that the only two projects
of relevance to this proposed development were the Big Rocks project and
CopperString project, essentially because all other projects were too distant
from the site to be safely accessed from the proposed
development. Ms Morrissy
and Mr Buckley also concentrated on those two projects for the purposes of their
opinions. I accept the
enquiry should be limited to those two projects.
[206] The ground
shifted in the course of the hearing, in terms of the likelihood that either or
both proposed developments would
accommodate workers during the construction
phase of each project, but particularly in respect of the Big Ricks
[207] It will be
recalled that, in the course of the hearing, it was revealed that the respondent
had recently taken steps to relieve
itself of its responsibility as the
proponent of the Big Rocks project, due to financial reasons. It intended to
return the project
to the State Government, although that had not then occurred.
In any event, the respondent had no plans to progress the
[208] It will
also be recalled that both Mr
considered the likelihood
of the project proceeding in light of those recent events. Ms Bennett’s
and Ms Anderson’s opinions
were premised on the assumption the Big Rocks
project would proceed, as initially planned.
appellant has failed to satisfy me that the Big Rocks project is likely to
proceed, either ever or within a timeframe by
which it can be said to be
relevantly tied to the proposed development. I accept that there is a genuine
desire for it to proceed,
but history is littered with unfulfilled desires.
[210] I accept
that the Big Rocks project is likely to be handed back to the State. The
uncertainty that creates as to the continuation
of the project is illustrated by
the respondent CEO’s
expectation,
on which he was not
required for cross-examination. Any time frame as to when it will proceed, if at
all, is presently elusive.
[211] The State
obviously has “deeper pockets” than a regional council, but the very
reason that these major projects
are taken on by regional councils is, in part,
the lack of desire, or perhaps ability, of the State to take on every one of
It is likely that an alternative proponent will need to be appointed
before the project can progress, and the estimated offset costs
of $110 million
to $310 million, payable by the proponent, are not an obvious incentive to
accept appointment. In all the circumstances,
I accept the respondent’s
submission that the status of the Big Rocks project is tenuous at best, for
present purposes.
[212] Further,
there is some doubt that many construction workers from the Big Rocks project
would utilise the proposed development,
although I do accept that the current
low rental vacancy rate in Charters Towers and relatively low unemployment rate
the Initial Advice Statement’s expectations that the majority
of workers would be locally based may now be seen as being overly
optimistic. In
any event, Mr Czislowski’s own expectations were that the majority of
clients would come from the CopperString
project, and so a demonstrated need
relating to the Big Rocks project is tenuous on that basis also.
[213] On the
other hand, I accept that the CopperString project is proceeding. There has been
a substantial commitment to start the
project, further funding allocations in
both State and Federal budgets for 2024-25, and there is no reason to suspect
that it will
divert from its intended course close to Charters Towers. Mr Musk,
called by the respondent, accepted that if the CopperString project
there was a need for a non-resident workforce accommodation facility, and
accepted that up to 350 beds would be required.
I agree. On the presently
available material, that need will be from 2026 for a period of about 3 years.
The current low vacancy
rental market and tight housing sales market means that
such a demand is unable to be accommodated by the existing housing stock.
short-term accommodation market also does not have the vacancy capacity to
suitably house that number of construction workers,
even if it legally could do
so under the planning scheme.
[214] However,
the issue, more precisely, is not only whether there is a need for some form of
accommodation, it is whether the appellant
has established that the proposed
development is likely to provide services for the construction workers for the
CopperString project.
In the short-hand terminology used in submissions, is the
proposed development tied to that project?
[215] Although
not clear cut, I am satisfied that the proposed development is sufficiently
“tied” to the CopperString
project. That is, I am comfortably
satisfied that workers on the construction phases of the CopperString project
are likely to access
the proposed development for accommodation, if approved. I
accept that there is no assurance that will occur, but complete assurance
[216] As is
apparent from the Coordinator-General’s Change Report – no
the so called worker’s
camp can be approved via a material change of use application, and separate to
the MID processes. I
accept Mr Duane’s
that, if constructed,
the proposed development is likely to be utilised, given the project owner is
likely to prefer to use another
entity’s facilities rather than have to
construct and manage their own. It seems to me that this is consistent with
business practices of leveraging off facilities operated by another so as
to avoid the cost and trouble of operating a facility.
[217] Notably,
there is no evidence of a pending application for any other site for these
purposes, including the Gregory Development
Road site referred to in the EIS, or
the airport site mentioned by Mr Czislowski and Ms Thompson. That must be seen
in the context
of an expected commencement of the construction phases on the
project commencing in 2026, and therefore expected construction of
worker’s camp, wherever it might be located, in mid to late 2025.
[218] Theoretically,
consideration of another site may have already been commenced under the MID
process without the respondent being
notified, but there simply is no evidence
of that, and it is speculative. In any event, given I have formed the view that
the proposed
development cannot be approved, partly because of the scale, bulk
and density sought, and given my view is that a facility of less
maximum proposed size of 350 beds could, subject to other conditions, be
approved, any further facility, if required, can
be catered for by the MID
process, or by a material change of use
application.
Impacts on rural
residential character and amenity.
[219] It is
observed by the Court of Appeal in
Arksmead Pty Ltd v Council of the City of
” refers to “
that element in the appearance
and layout of town and country which makes for a comfortable and pleasant life
rather than a mere existence
”. The Court also noted that the concept
of amenity is wide and flexible, and intangible factors and subjective
considerations
may be relevant to a decision about the amenity of the area
affected by a use.
[220] It is also
Acland Pastoral Co Pty Ltd
v Rosalie Shire Council
where his Honour observed:
Proposed development will often
affect existing amenity. What is unacceptable is a detrimental effect to an
unreasonable extent according
to the reasonable expectation of other landholders
in the vicinity given the sorts of uses permitted under current town planning
[221] In this
case, the experts are in considerable disagreement on the joint issue of
character and amenity. I am not bound to accept
expert evidence, particularly
where it conflicts with other expert evidence, or where I consider it is not
supported by foundational
evidence that I accept. It falls to me to make an
assessment, guided by some of the criteria used by the experts and by my own
of the evidence to determine the issue, bearing those earlier
mentioned principles in mind.
[222] There is
agreement between Mr Butcher and Mr Curtis that the proposed development is
intense, and that its density is higher
than in the rest of the locality,
although the school may retain the highest visibility. What is put in issue is
the extent of the
visibility of that density and intensity, and its impact on
the visual amenity and existing character of the locality, and the more
immediate area around it.
[223] I earlier
made some observations about the impact of the proposed development, on existing
character and on visual amenity.
Those observations were the result of my weighing the evidence. The observations
concerning s. 6.2.7.4.3 PO3 and what I consider
to be the incongruous nature of
the proposed development in the locality are obviously applicable to the
consideration of the character
and amenity issues more broadly. In effect, I
have accepted the opinions of both Mr Curtis and Mr Buckley in this respect. It
I have not accepted Mr Butcher’s and Ms Morrissy’s contrary
starting proposition, I do not accept Mr Butcher’s assessment that the
site currently has low visibility, although
I do accept that its visibility is
lessened by the topography of the area and by some vegetation features. I accept
opinion in this respect, which is supported by a consideration
of a number of the photos of the area in exhibit 7, as understood
by my view of
the site. It is sufficiently visible that any improvements on the site will
themselves become visible.
demountable accommodation buildings, including the other buildings used for
administrative and other non-accommodation purposes,
are placed closely
together, and have generally similar appearance. As a collection, they are an
imposing and unattractive bulk.
They are accurately described as an intense
cluster of built form. Although there is no evidence as to the precise area the
will cover without the carpark, it appears to be at least half the
[226] In this
instance, the impact of the built form is sought to be ameliorated by the
fencing, acoustic barriers and landscaping.
It is common ground that there will
be some areas where the built form will be partially viewable from some
perspectives, but the
fencing and landscaping will achieve its purpose, for the
most part. It has been specifically designed to inhibit views of the built
[227] However,
the consequence of that is that the fencing, acoustic barriers and landscaping
will, itself, be highly visible from
all perspectives, notwithstanding the
amelioration effected by the slope of the land and the existing structures and
vegetation.
Further, it inhibits any engagement with the streetscape from within
the development. For those reasons, terms such as being like
a fenced compound
and having a lack of permeability are justified. It is apparent from those
findings that I have preferred the opinions
of Mr Curtis over those of Mr
Butcher, where they are in conflict.
[228] Notwithstanding
the mixed uses in the locality resulting in differing densities and intensities
of use, the otherwise open visual
setting of the locality is in stark contrast
to the intense cluster of built form, surrounded by fencing, acoustic barriers
and vegetation
which, in my view, results in the appearance of a fenced
compound. While the built form of the proposed development is limited to
level, and so is consistent with the surrounding residential buildings, it is
not the height of the proposed development that
results in that conclusion. The
proposed development does not satisfy s. 6.2.7.4.3 PO3; it does not reflect, or
have a sameness as,
the very low intensity character of the locality. In fact,
it is significantly at odds with it.
[229] Additionally,
ss. 3.2.2(3)(a) and 6.2.7.4.2(2)(b) arise for consideration. The former
provision requires a focus on the assessment
of the community in which the
proposed development is located, rather on the immediate vicinity of the
proposed development. Nonetheless,
the contribution of the proposed development
to the more immediate area remains a relevant consideration. The latter
provision requires
focus on the RR zone, as well as the more immediate
[230] In my
view, the proposed development, in its current form, is inconsistent with the
open character of the immediate area and,
as identified above, with the broader
locality. The visual impact, even allowing for the partial amelioration by the
topographical
features of the site and by the proposed fencing and landscaping,
is significantly inconsistent with the existing nature and character
proposed fencing and landscaping will result in observers of the development,
depending on their perspective, being faced
with a combination of fencing or
acoustic barriers, combined with landscaping which may, at maturity, reach as
high as 35 metres
tall. There is little permeability through this barrier like
construction, and it is inconsistent with the open nature of the surrounding
[232] While the
landscaping makes the visual appearance more acceptable than viewing the bare
fencing and acoustic barriers, and while
the vegetation to be deployed is
consistent with some vegetation in the broader area, the overall effect it is
not consistent with
its locality. It cannot be said that it would contribute to
a community that has a high level of
or that it provides a
high level of residential amenity and character appropriate for the RR
It is the scale, bulk and
density of the proposed development, and the marked inconsistency with the
locality and the surrounding
areas which means it departs from those
requirements. In my view it is clearly inconsistent with those parts of the
planning scheme.
[233] In so far
as ss. 3.2.3(3)(a) and 6.2.7.4.2(2)(b) touch upon issues of on-site amenity of
the proposed development from the perspective
of the tenants, I accept that
there is a lack of meaningful on-site amenity, with a lack of recreational
facilities other than the
dining room/mess hall and some open areas. However,
that must be seen in light of its relatively close proximity to the town centre,
and the amenities available there.
[234] Further,
the fenced compound effect of the proposed development means that there is
relatively little opportunity for the tenants
to connect visually with the
surrounding community. That is, once inside the tenants are effectively isolated
from the outside world.
However, that must be seen in light of the expectation
that the workers will often work through most of the daylight hours, will
[235] In the
circumstances, neither of those factors tells strongly against the approval of
the proposed development.
[236] Evidence
was also received as to how increased traffic flow may affect the character and
amenity of the area. Both Mr Holland
and Mr Douglas considered that the
increased traffic flow, regardless of which calculations were relied upon, fell
below the acceptable
levels found in guidelines. Further, I accept Mr
Holland’s unchallenged opinion that the increased traffic flows are well
the environmental capacity of the roads.
[237] There will
obviously be increased traffic flow in the immediate area of the proposed
development, if approved, but I need not
make any findings as to the precise
extent of it. I note that, as is often the case when assumptions are relied on,
that there is
room to doubt some that have been used but, again, I need not
dwell on that.
[238] The fact
that there will be increased traffic flows, to some extent, is a matter to be
taken into account in the overall consideration
of the application, but it is
not to an unacceptable level, however measured. That is especially so given my
finding that the planning
scheme would only permit the proposed development to
house workers during the construction phase of the CopperString project. While
note Mr Curtis’ opinion that the increased traffic will diminish the
setting of the residential community around the site,
I am satisfied that it is
not to an unreasonable
Social planning
[239] Consideration
of social impact issues raises consideration of ss. 3.2.1(12), 3.2.2(2)(b),
3.2.2(3)(a), 3.2.2(3)(b), 3.4.1.2(11)
and 3.5.1.3(1) of the planning
[240] From a
social planning perspective, I accept that there are some positive aspects to
the proposed development, and some negative.
[241] I accept
that an influx of non-resident workers into what is a relatively quiet rural
residential area is likely to be confronting
for the residents, even though it
would be staged. At full occupancy, the proposed development substantially
increases the existing
population of the Millchester area; it will represent an
increase of about 74% based on 2021 census figures. I also accept that there
likely to be perceived fears about personal and community safety from members of
the community. These issues will not assist
with social integration and
acceptance into the community. That is consistent with common experience and is
not in dispute as between
Ms Anderson and Ms Bennett. While from the broader
perspective of the very large Charters Towers LGA they are simply another
in a large geographical region and thereby unlikely to have any
particular adverse effects on that larger region, the impact of the
development on the more immediate community cannot be ignored. That is
particularly so where the region is approximated
to be the size of
impact must also be assessed against the proposal that the development operates
for 15 years. As Mr Buckley observed, that
is a very long time in town planning
terms, and I consider that it is a relevant consideration in terms of social
impacts, as did
Ms Bennett. The reality is that over such a long period there
will be a high turnover of different workers coming and going from
the facility,
compounding the issues raised by social integration and community fears and
expectations. It cannot be said that the
proposed development would be a
relatively transient imposition on the community.
Anderson and Ms Bennett agreed that a social integration plan is a helpful tool,
but disagree as to the effectiveness of
the one proposed for use here.
[244] I accept
that the proposed ASIP has its limitations because of its passive nature, and
the limited opportunity for many of the
non-resident workers to integrate into
the community, if they wanted to in the first place. However, it is important
that non-resident
workers be aware of facilities and services that can be
accessed, should they wish to do so. Workers cannot be forced to integrate,
so even a more dynamic style of plan has that essentially limiting feature.
provision of an on-site lifestyle co-ordinator is also positive, but it is
difficult to assess just how much impact it would
have at a practical level.
Likewise, the provision of the shuttle bus is a positive step, although there is
much uncertainty about
just how that would operate. Indeed, there is much
uncertainty about the effective reach of the ASIP, which makes it difficult to
assess just how effective it would be in its current terms. However, it is
intended to be a dynamic document capable of amendment
as the circumstances
[246] Ms Bennett
was particularly critical of the distance of the proposed development from the
township in terms of social integration;
a distance of about three kilometres.
While I accept the tenor of her criticisms, I cannot accept the extent of them.
[247] Given the
nature of the work performed by these workers, it can be assumed that they will
be capable of walking that distance,
both ways, even if fatigued. While I accept
that a three-kilometre distance will not always want to be walked by all
workers, it
is not so long as to preclude it being undertaken at all. Also,
there would be an option to use the shuttle bus, or courtesy bus
from one of the
hotels, on one or both legs of the trip. In any event, given their expected
working hours and the fact that they
will presumably leave Charters Towers on
their days off, the access to the town’s facilities appears to me to be of
less importance,
in a practical sense.
[248] Further,
Ms Bennett accepted in cross-examination that the non-resident workforce
facility operated for the Survivor television
series was a success, although she
qualified that by noting it was a different “
make up of a work
”. It was a further distance from the town’s facilities than
the proposed development, although Mr Czislowski deposes
that it was only 800
metres further away.
Regardless,
it suggests that particularly close proximity to the town centre is of less
importance than Ms Bennett suggested in her
evidence. Further, the establishment
of a facility on the current site is more likely to promote community
integration, for the benefit
of both the community and the workers themselves,
than if it were located adjacent to the construction worksite, many kilometres
out of town.
[249] From the
perspective of compliance with the planning scheme, and in terms of ss.
3.2.1(12) and 3.2.2(2)(b), I consider that
there are likely impacts on community
wellbeing given the scale of the proposed development and the proposal that it
operate for
15 years. On the other hand, it would help promote regional
identity, which is underpinned by, in part, infrastructure
[250] Section
3.2.2(3)(b), although perhaps not actively supporting the proposed development
on the site, does not disqualify it either.
The extent of compliance depends
upon the efficiency and effectiveness of the ASIP, which is difficult to assess.
[251] In terms
of s. 3.5.1.3(1), the proposed development itself has little by way of
recreational facilities contained within it,
although there is some open space
in the south-west corner. However, there is access to those facilities in the
town centre. The
promotion of community interaction and a healthy lifestyle is
again largely dependent on the effectiveness of the ASIP. This provision
not suggest that the location of the proposed development is inappropriate, even
if it does not fully embrace
Need issues for the proposed
development.
[252] One of the
fundamental propositions on which need is identified by the appellant is to
provide a buffer of accommodation to
cater for future demand created by other
projects, and to avoid the difficulties encountered in identifying the extent of
Given the construction I have favoured of s. 3.4.1.2(11), requiring a
facility to be tied to one or more particular relevant projects
at the time of
the application, concepts of future need and providing an accommodation supply
buffer for this style of accommodation
are not relevant considerations under
this planning scheme. While there will often be some obvious desirability to
plan for the future
in appropriate cases, as explained by Williamson KC DCJ in
Room2Move.com Pty Ltd v Western Downs Regional
it is not for
this Court to go behind the deliberate strategic outcomes adopted by the
respondent in this particular planning scheme.
They are taken to represent the
collective wishes of the community. Need for this facility cannot be justified
on the basis of future
need (other than in relation to the CopperString
project), and the desirability of creating a buffer of suitable non-resident
accommodation in Charters Towers is not justified.
[253] As earlier
identified, I consider that the proposed development is sufficiently tied to the
CopperString project to be satisfied
of compliance with s. 3.4.1.2(11). The
evidence establishes that construction of such a facility would be anticipated
to commence
in mid to late 2025, so as to accommodate construction workers for
the powerline from 2026 until 2029.
[254] There is a
very low rental vacancy rate and a tight housing sales market in the area and
the planning scheme does not permit
non-resident workers to occupy hotels, and
short-term accommodation,
although in reality they may tend to do so if faced with no option. In any
event, there simply is not enough appropriate short-term
accommodation
availability in the town to cater for the whole of the expected construction
workforce of between 128 and 350 workers
requiring accommodation.
[255] I do not
accept that there is an unacceptable risk that, if approved, the proposed
development will threaten the viability of
some or all of the hotels and motels
in Charters Towers.
[256] I have
already expressed my view that only workers on the construction phases of the
relevant projects that are tied to the
proposed development can be accommodated
at the facility under the planning
Putting aside any
criticisms of the manner in which the survey was undertaken and the reliability
of some responses, some of the
survey replies suggest a concern that all workers
will stop using the existing accommodation, if the proposed development is
Those fears are unfounded, provided appropriate controls are put in
place monitoring the employment status of workers using the facility.
[257] There is
no evidence to suggest that there is any relevant project currently underway. It
can therefore be deduced that none
of the existing tenants of the hotels and
short-term accommodation providers would qualify for residency at the proposed
development
on the basis of their current employment. Therefore, approval of the
proposed development is unlikely to affect the viability of
any existing
accommodation provider in Charters Towers. It also follows that there is no
justifiable concern about the loss of employment
and income arising from a
detrimental impact on existing short-tern accommodation providers, providing the
appropriate checks are
[258] As earlier
observed, there is no evidence to suggest any other application for a facility
of this nature has been made, or approved,
nor that the approval of such a
facility has been considered under the MID process. I have earlier accepted that
the operator of
the CopperString project is likely to take advantage of any
facility already in existence, or approved.
[259] Accordingly,
I accept that there is an unsatisfied
for a non-resident
workforce accommodation facility in the Charters Towers area to cater for the
CopperString project.
relevant matters
Common material – properly made
submissions.
[260] In respect
of the 90 objections lodged by the town planning firm, the appellant has
correctly submitted that some of them do
not comply with the definition of
properly made submissions
” at Schedule 2 of the
, predominantly because of the failure to fully state the name or
names of the objectors and/or to expressly state the residential
or business
address of the submitters. While it is arguable that some of the addresses
provided in the impugned submissions clearly
enough imply the address, that is
an issue I need not determine.
[261] Although I
have not counted the precise number of submissions to which objection is taken,
and the number was not quantified
in submissions, it appears to be a small
minority of the 90 lodged.
[262] Further,
the appellant correctly notes that all 94 objections were made before the
approval of the minor change. However, that
does not, in my view deprive them of
some remaining utility in the hearing.
[263] First, it
should be noted that the “objection” from the Department of
Education is not so much an objection to the
proposed development, as a concern
that the proposed conditions be enforced, and not relaxed. On that basis it can
be put to one
[264] Of the
remaining 93 objections, if the complaints the subject of the minor change were
removed from them, they still raise issues
of amenity, economic need and
compliance with the planning scheme.
[265] On that
basis, and allowing for the fact that some of the objections are not properly
made, it can be seen that a sizable majority
of the submissions are properly
made and are opposed to the proposed development, in its current form, on bases
that remain in issue
in this hearing. The planning scheme informs the
community’s reasonable expectations as to the development that may occur
the land. These objections are a credible source of evidence as to the
expectations of the local
[266] The weight
to be attributed to the properly made submissions, given the above observations,
is a matter that must be determined
in light of all other relevant
considerations, including the fact that the planning scheme itself is said to
represent the expectations
The currently proposed
[267] It follows
from my earlier findings and observations that some of the proposed conditions
reproduced at paragraph 40 herein
do not serve to make the proposed development
in its current form compliant with the planning scheme, nor sufficiently
to warrant allowing the appeal.
particular condition 4, limiting operation of the facility to a 15-year period
is unsustainable. In oral submissions, the
appellant accepted that the life of
the facility may be limited to 2032, presumably in deference to the renaming of
the project as
CopperString 2032. That too would be non-compliant, in terms of
the planning scheme. It is unclear what the use of “2032”
project name is intended to represent, as the evidence establishes that
construction is expected to be completed in 2029.
Perhaps it is envisaged that
the project will not become fully operational for three years after construction
is completed in the
Charters Towers area. In any event, it does not matter.
Hinging the length of the proposed development’s operations to the
the project, where the reason for the name is obscure, does not satisify the
strictness required by the assessment benchmark.
appropriate condition might require, for example, decommissioning on the
completion of the construction phases of the project
in the Charters Towers
area, but no later than 30 June 2030, to allow for the project running over
time. If a time extension was
perceived to be necessary due to the late
completion of the construction phases, the appropriate application could be
[270] Consistent
with my construction of s. 3.4.1.2(11), and to better reflect the precise
wording of that provision, the proposed
condition 5 would need to include the
mining or major economic
” before the word
” where it twice appears. The same can be said for
condition 6(b) where the word “
[271] I accept
the respondent’s submissions to the effect that the monitoring and
enforcement of condition 6 in its current
form is unenforceable, at a practical
level. While it can be presumed that the appellant will abide by any imposed
conditions,
the issue is the
practical ability to enforce the conditions. In most jurisdictions there are
many authorities about the inappropriateness
of imposing a condition that cannot
be complied with, or enforced. One such authority in this jurisdiction is
Harris v Scenic Rim Regional
respondent also relies on the observations of Williamson KC DCJ in
Enterprises Pty Ltd v Sunshine Coast Regional
observations are of obvious assistance as statements of principle, they must be
seen in the context in which they were
made. The conditions the subject of that
appeal were unenforceable because the respondent could not, in a practical
sense, ensure
adherence, regardless of how they were drafted. Although the
condition as presently drafted is not realistically enforceable, no
condition could be formulated, that is.
currently proposed conditions rely on the honesty of the worker in declaring
what type of work he or she is undertaking
and on which project. I assume that,
if not input into a cloud-based booking system by the worker, that would be
faithfully recorded
by the appellant’s staff, or agent. Under the
currently proposed conditions, there is no requirement for independent proof
the project at which the worker is employed, nor the style of work being
undertaken. Further, there is no ability to mandate verification
details. While the appellant’s further written submissions on conditions
refer to the powers provided by the legislation,
I cannot identify any that
allow for mandatory verification of the employment details provided. Proposed
condition 7 would facilitate
the respondent obtaining access to the records that
were no doubt faithfully recorded by the appellant’s staff or agents, but
that does not assist with ascertaining the veracity of that information. The
fact that these systems are commonly used at other accommodation
sites does not
deal with the issues raised by this specific planning scheme.
[274] Although I
do not presently purport to rule on the propriety of any amended condition, it
seems to me that it is not difficult
to craft a condition that requires, for
example, an intended tenant of the facility to upload into the online booking
system a copy
of some form of letter of engagement or other proof of engagement,
or to provide a hard copy to the appellant’s staff or agent
if booking in
manually. In either instance, the condition could require that the appellant,
through its staff or agent, be satisfied
that the intended tenant is in fact
engaged in the construction phases of the CopperString project before accepting
the booking.
If thought desirable, the details could be required to be updated
at regular stated intervals. The uploading of documents into an
online platform
is quite nowadays commonplace, commonly by taking a photograph of the document
on a phone and uploading it that way.
It would not be overly onerous.
emphasise that I am not indicating the type of condition that would be
appropriate. I merely postulate that to demonstrate
that there are means by
which the appellant can remain responsible for checking the veracity of the
information provided, and thereby
facilitating enforcement, if necessary.
respondent also complains that it would be unable to verify if a tenant of the
proposed development were an employee at
the relevant project, or a contractor.
In my view, the concern is misplaced.
[277] None of
the terms “
” are expressly defined for the purposes of the
planning scheme. Section 3.4.2.1(12) refers to “
operational
”, and sits in a complementary fashion with s. 3.4.2.1(11),
thereby suggesting the use of the term “
3.4.2.1(11) encompasses an “
”. It would be an odd
result if contractors could be accommodated at the facility, but actual
employees could not.
[278] Regardless,
I do not accept that the planning scheme intended to differentiate between
employees and contractors, in the sense
the common law has
recognised.
The object of the
provisions is to regulate the types of accommodation that those working on the
construction phases of the relevant
projects are housed, not the terms of
engagement by which they are engaged on the project.
[279] It is also
telling that the use definition of the term “
non-resident workers
accommodation
” includes, as an approved use, a
contractor’s camp
”, suggesting an interchangeability
between the two, and that the planning scheme envisages contractors being housed
in non-resident
workforce accommodation. The terms should understood in this
planning scheme without consideration of the legal differences recognised
common law. Both contractors and employees working on the construction phases of
the relevant project are “workers”
for the purposes of s.
3.4.1.2(11).
[280] The impost
on the respondent in checking compliance is a relevant consideration, as
observed in
Woodlands Enterprises Pty Ltd v Sunshine Coast Regional
but I cannot imagine that there would realistically be a need to
check all tenancies every time there was a turnover of even one
worker at the
facility, as suggested in cross-examination. Notwithstanding the
respondent’s submission to the
understand Ms Morrissy to be saying in her testimony that it would be necessary
to do that.
acknowledged there was a level of risk, I understood her evidence to be that she
didn’t think that level of checking
would be necessary to ensure
compliance. I agree.
[281] Also, it
is not to the point that workers may have moved on by the time any
non-compliance is discovered. If liability can be
established, proceedings can
be commenced against the appellant, or a tenant, regardless of whether they
maintain a physical connection
with Charters Towers or not.
[282] Lastly,
proposed condition 12 refers to the use of the ASIP. While I accept that it is a
living document that is designed to
be amended as the proposed development
changes, it is difficult to assess its utility. The condition appears to be
appropriate, but
that is not to suggest the parties should not consider further
refinement.
Conclusions
[283] The appeal
cannot be allowed on the basis of the application in its current terms,
including the currently proposed conditions.
[284] As can be
seen from the above analysis, the proposed development is clearly inconsistent a
number of assessment benchmarks,
namely the mandated requirement that it be a
temporary use as required by s. 3.4.1.2(11), with the strategic intent at
3.2.2(2)(b)
– Rural Residential, and with the RRZC
at ss. 6.2.7.4.2(2)(a), 6.2.7.4.2(2)(b) and 6.2.7.4.3 at both PO3 and AO3.
[285] The length
of time the facility can operate can be the subject of conditions, but
non-compliance with the other assessment benchmarks
attracts significant weight
in the balancing exercise, but is not an overwhelming feature. The extent of
inconsistency with the mandated
requirement of being a temporary use is
self-evident once these reasons are considered, but the extent of other
inconsistency is,
in large part, determined by the scale, bulk and density of
the built form, including the proposed fencing and landscaping.
[286] It is that
aspect of the proposed development which features highly in the overall impact
assessment, and the corresponding
exercise of discretion as the assessment
manager. In its current form, it is unacceptably incongruent with both the
locality and
the immediate surrounds, thereby affecting the visual amenity and
character of the locality to an unacceptable level, even if the
use were limited
to the eight years currently proposed.
description of the site as being something of an island because it is surrounded
by roads, is accurate in the sense that
there is no common boundary to any other
property. However, bearing in mind that I have described both Creek Street and
Richard Road
as unmade road reserves and, colloquially, as undefined scrub
tracks, the property is not in reality physically isolated from its
on those frontages, although they are not the most utilised perspectives of
[288] The built
form of the proposed development in its current form occupies much of the
roughly three-quarters of the four hectare
site. This is notably different to
most of the locality, and all of the immediate surrounding area within the RR
zone. While the
setbacks are acceptable in terms of the planning scheme’s
requirements, the scale and bulk of the proposed development creates
an imposing
impression on the area to an unacceptable level, notwithstanding the partly
ameliorative effect of the fencing and landscaping,
and the slope of the
[289] Further, I
accept that the proposed development in its current form would disrupt the
existing cohesion of the community in
which it is proposed to be situated. The
extent of this disruption is again largely related to the scale of the proposed
development
and the number of workers that it proposes to accommodate, even when
introduced in stages, and the time frame over which it is proposed
facility would operate. A reduction in both the bulk and scale of the facility
and limiting the period over which it can
operate will not eliminate this
disruption, but it will ameliorate it considerably and, depending on the extent
of the reduction,
to an acceptable level.
[290] On the
other hand, there are features which support aspects of the proposed
development.
[291] First, I
accept there is a need for a non-resident workforce facility in the Charters
Towers area given the foreseeable arrival
of the CopperString project, for the
reasons earlier given.
[292] Second,
the position of the site does bring with it some advantages, notwithstanding its
impact on the cohesion of the existing
community. It is relatively close to the
town centre and so is likely to provide some economic benefits to the businesses
town centre, even though meals are provided on-site and the
workers’ hours are long. It is far more likely than if the site
positioned many kilometres out of town. The provision of a shuttle bus, through
the adoption of an ASIP, will help facilitate
that outcome. While it may not
provide the whole answer to the issue, it does assist.
[293] While I
doubt that there will be comprehensive social integration of the workers into
the fabric of the Charters Towers community
given the expected hours they will
work and the presumption they will leave town when rostered off, the ASIP
provides a means to
facilitate that, to some degree. Again, the location of the
site will make that more likely than if it were located many kilometres
[294] While I am
satisfied that the current proposed conditions make policing of the bookings
unfeasible, thereby making the enforcement
of those aspects of the planning
scheme unworkable, for the reasons set out earlier, that is a matter that should
be able to be resolved
through the imposition of appropriate conditions.
[295] Balancing
all of those matters, and subject to the consideration of further submissions, I
consider that a smaller version of
the proposed development may represent an
acceptable impact and justify approval, notwithstanding its departure from the
of the planning scheme.
[296] Subject to
those further submissions, the minimum reduction from the current proposal which
would warrant granting the application
in part, in the overall exercise of
discretion, may be, by reference to the layout plan in Exhibit 2 page 1, to
approve the accommodation
buildings in stages 2, 3 and 4 to the extent they
extend south only so far as the same line as the currently proposed far
end of the accommodation buildings in stages 5, 6 and 7 in the current
proposal, and to not approve the accommodation buildings in
stage 7. Those
changes would have the effect of reducing the accommodation capacity to 240
beds; a decrease of about 41% on the current
proposal. In that event, the
various fencing, acoustic barriers and landscaping would then need to be moved
so as to remain immediately
adjacent to the remaining built form, as is
currently proposed.
[297] From a
character and visual amenity perspective, the facility would retain the
appearance of an impermeable fenced compound,
but would be notably less
intrusive because of its reduced bulk and scale. Its intrusion would be
acceptable, particularly in light
of the reduced time period it would be
permitted to operate. Those changes would result in a lesser societal impact
from the facility,
although it may not eliminate it, and a lesser traffic impact
on the community.
[298] From the
perspective of Phillipson Road, the further setback achieved by reducing the
reach of stages 2, 3 and 4 to the south
means it would be notably less obvious
because of the natural slope of the land away to the north. The removal of the
proposed stage
7 will have little impact from this perspective as visually much
of it is already impacted by the presence of the existing structures.
[299] From the
perspective of Nagle Street and the school, the reduction in size of stages 2, 3
and 4 will have little effect, but
the removal of the proposed stage 7 will add
to the open space in the south-west corner of the site, and the existing
will provide some visual cover for the remainder of the built form
and fencing, etc. Additionally, it may be that the reduction in
the scale of the
proposed development will mean that the overflow carpark is not required, or
being reduced in size. If that were
to occur, that would add to the open space
appearance from this perspective, but I consider the removal of stage 7 would
necessary regardless.
[300] From the
perspective of Deanes Road, the facility would still be obvious, but the
reduction of stages 2, 3 and 4 means that
area fronting that road will be removed, thereby reducing the visual impact and
the impact on
the existing character of the area.
[301] I accept
that the reduction in scale will be unlikely to noticeably change the appearance
and visual amenity of the facility
from the Creek Street and Richard Road
perspectives, but these perspectives are not likely to be often used to observe
the proposed
development, the facility will be limited in its operation to a
relatively short timeframe, and conditions could be considered concerning
removal of all built form and fencing and acoustic barriers as part of the
conditions of being decommissioned. I note that the
appellant has already
undertaken to give consideration to similar action on cessation of the approval,
and conceded that such a condition
is lawful, and properly able to be
minimum reduction in its scale and bulk may make it less obviously incongruous
with the locality, and result in a lesser
impact on the existing character of
the area. That, together with the more limited timeframe under which it would
operate, would
still result in some impact on the character and amenity of the
locality, but it may be within the bounds of a reasonable impact
together with the imposition of appropriate conditions, warrant approval in the
balancing exercise required to be undertaken.
changes would also address, to some degree, the concerns expressed in the
properly made submissions.
acknowledge that a development of this scale would not cater to the upper range
of the estimated need for non-resident accommodation
beds. However, I consider
that, were the facility any bigger than that suggested, it would likely create
an unacceptable impact overall.
If further accommodation is required than any
part approval of the proposed development delivered, the operator of the
CopperString
project has its remedies through the MID process, or by making its
own material change of use application.
approved development would need to address, at least, the issues with the
proposed conditions identified in these
[306] The appeal
is adjourned to a date to be determined on the delivery of these reasons, for
further review, in light of these reasons.
Annexure A - Relevant Town Planning Scheme Provisions.
1.5 Hierarchy of assessment benchmarks
(1) Where there is inconsistency between provisions in the Town plan, the
following rules apply:
(a) the strategic framework prevails over all other components to the extent of
the inconsistency for impact assessment;
(b) relevant codes as specified in schedules 6 and 10 of the Regulation prevail
over all other components to the extent of the inconsistency;
(c) overlays prevail over all other components (other than the matters mentioned
in (a) and (b)) to the extent of the inconsistency;
(d) zone codes prevail over use codes and other development codes to the extent
of the inconsistency;
(e) provisions of
(Other plans) may override any of the above.
Strategic framework
3.2 Strategic intent
3.2.1 Overview
(12) The Charters Towers urban area and its surrounding townships and
localities are renown for a relaxed county lifestyle and rural
character, ideal
for the lifestyle needs of families and retirees. There is a range of community,
recreation and entertainment facilities
that promote community wellbeing. This
is symbolised through events such as the Goldfield Ashes which is the largest
amateur cricket
carnival in the southern hemisphere.
3.2.2 The New World in 2038
Whilst Charters Towers was often referred to as 'The World' at the height of
the gold rush in the late nineteenth century, changes
in economic conditions and
technology in recent times has seen the region become more adaptable and
progressive in the face of changing
circumstances. The Town plan describes these
characteristics as part of what is named, 'The New World' which looks towards
of Charters Towers in 2038 and beyond.
(1) The New World of Charters Towers is made up of a prosperous and engaged
regional community driven by traditional industries in
the gold mining and rural
sectors, new economic development, innovation opportunities and tourism. This
regional mosaic is underpinned
by infrastructure, services and sustainable
development practices.
(2) The New World of the Charters Towers region has the following building
(b) a network of strategically connected communities of different sizes that
promote community wellbeing and regional identity;
(3) Communities are made up of distinct and compact urban areas and
townships that:
(a) are functional, well balanced, liveable and have a high level of
(b) support community interaction and active lifestyles for all age groups;
(8) The Charters Towers region is adaptable, flexible and nimble in providing
materials, services, energy and data networks to support
new technologies,
research, innovation and emerging economic opportunities.
(9) This ability to adapt in changing economic circumstances demonstrates the
region's level of resilience to accommodate population
and economic growth in
its urban areas and townships.
3.2.3 Places in the New World of the Charters Towers Region
Charters Towers is a large and diverse region which contains many distinct
places that are all important in creating a vibrant and
prosperous region. The
Charters Towers places model is a visual summary of how land use and development
is acknowledged and anticipated
across the region within these distinct places,
as illustrated in the model below:
Description
Location in the region
Rural Residential
Rural residential places provide for residential development on large
lifestyle lots in a rural setting. The keeping of small numbers
of working and
companion animals and hobby farming is expected in these areas along with some
small-scale tourism uses in Hervey
Rural residential zoned land in the Charters Towers fringe and environs
areas and also Hervey Range.
Urban – Neighbourhoods
Urban neighbourhoods accommodate the region’s urban residential areas
with a wide range of housing options such as houses, units
and retirement
facilities that cater for all lifecycle needs. Many houses display historical
design features which reflect the heritage
and character of these
neighbourhoods. Within these areas there is sufficient capacity to accommodate
the future urban growth of
the region. Neighbourhoods are fully serviced to an
urban standard and include some non-residential uses (community facilities, open
space and sport and recreation).
General residential zoned areas within the Charters Towers urban
World for economic development and tourism
3.3.1 Strategic
region for major economic activities, uses and
opportunities
(1) The region has vast areas of largely
unconstrained rural land that can support major economic activities and uses
that cannot
be appropriately accommodated within urban and township areas
because of adverse impacts. The region has unique locational and transport
characteristics with multi modal networks (major road and rail and a rural
airport) converging in Charters Towers along with proximity
to the Port of
Townsville. In addition to other land consumptive uses, these characteristics
are suitable for the establishment of
a large scale freight and logistics supply
hub for north Queensland.
World for living, growing and aging in our communities.
3.4.1 Strategic
3.4.1.2 Providing housing choice and diversity
across the lifecycle.
(1) Existing urban areas within Charters Towers are the focus for the
majority of housing growth through a mix of:
(a) infill development in the form of Dwelling houses, Dual occupancy, Multiple
dwellings, community residence, residential care
and retirement facilities in
the General residential zone; and
(2) In addition to this, there are also housing options in the Rural
residential zone surrounding the Charters Towers urban area.
(8) Rural residential housing is limited to the Rural residential zone on
lot sizes that can accommodate onsite treatment of effluent
and provide
transition to rural areas from urban areas. The extent of the Rural residential
zone surrounding the Charters Towers
urban area is a reflection of historical
subdivision patterns that resulted in a mix of highly fragmented land and the
genuine rural activities in these areas. This consists of an inner
ring of Rural residential parcels which have some level of water
servicing and
an outer ring known as the Environs precinct that accommodates larger Rural
residential parcels with very limited servicing.
(9) No further Rural residential development is supported outside of land in
the Rural residential zone surrounding the Charters Towers
urban area and in
Hervey Range
(11) Any non-resident workers accommodation is strictly limited to the
construction phases of any mining or major economic projects.
These temporary
uses are construction camps which exist only during the construction phase of
such developments and are decommissioned
once construction is finished.
(12) The housing of operational employees of mining or major economic
projects must be accommodated within the region's urban or
township communities
where the necessary services, facilities and infrastructure are already provided
or can be augmented. Non-resident
workforce accommodation servicing operational
employees is not supported anywhere throughout region.
3.5 A New World of sustainable infrastructure & services for our
communities
3.5.1 Strategic outcomes
3.5.1.3 Social, open space and recreational infrastructure that supports
community health and wellbeing
(1) Residents and visitors have access to a network of well-located social
infrastructure, open space and recreational facilities
that meet community needs
and promotes community interaction and a healthy lifestyle.
5.3 Categories
of development and assessment
5.3.3 Determining
the requirements for accepted development and assessment benchmarks and other
matters for assessable development
(3) The following rules apply
in determining assessment benchmarks for each category of development and
assessment.
(4) Code assessable development:
(a) is to be assessed against all the assessment benchmarks identified in the
Assessment benchmarks for assessable development and
requirements for accepted
development column;
(b) that occurs as a result of development becoming code assessable pursuant to
sub-section 5.3.3(2), must:
(i) be assessed against the assessment benchmarks for the development
application, limited to the subject matter of the required
acceptable outcomes
that were not complied with or were not capable of being complied with under
sub-section 5.3.3(2);
(ii) comply with all required acceptable outcomes identified in sub-section
5.3.3(1) other than those mentioned in sub-section 5.3.3(2);
(c) that complies with:
(i) the purpose and overall outcomes of the code complies with the code;
(ii) the performance or acceptable outcomes complies with the purpose and
overall outcomes of the code;
(d) is to be assessed against any assessment benchmarks for the development
identified in
of the Regulation.
Editor's note-Section 27 of the Regulation also identifies the matters that
code assessment must have regard to.
(5) Impact assessable development:
(a) is to be assessed against the identified assessment benchmarks in the
Assessment benchmarks for assessable development and requirements
for accepted
development column (where relevant);
(b) assessment is to have regard to the whole of the Town plan, to the extent
(c) is to be assessed against any assessment benchmarks for the development
identified in
of the Regulation.
Note-The first row of each table of assessment is to be checked to confirm if
there are assessment benchmarks that commonly apply
to general scenarios in the
zone, local plan or overlay.
Editor's note-Section 31 of the Regulation identifies the matters that impact
assessment must have regard to.
6.1 Preliminary
(1) Zones organise the Town plan area in a way that facilitates the location
of preferred or acceptable land uses.
(2) Zones are mapped and included in Schedule 2 (Mapping).
(3) The categories of development and assessment for development in a zone
Tables of Assessment.
(4) Assessment benchmarks for zones are contained in a zone code.
(5) A precinct may be identified for part of a zone.
(6) Precinct provisions are contained in the zone code.
(7) Each zone code identifies the following:
(a) the purpose of the code;
(b) the overall outcomes that achieve the purpose of the code;
(c) the performance outcomes that achieve the overall outcomes and the purpose
of the code;
(d) the acceptable outcomes that achieve the performance and overall outcomes
and the purpose of the code; and
(e) the performance and acceptable outcomes for the precinct.
6.2.7.4 Rural residential zone code
6.2.7.4.2 Purpose
(1) The purpose of the Rural residential zone is to provide for residential
uses and activities on large lots, including lots for
which the local government
has not provided infrastructure and services.
(2) The purpose of the zone will be achieved through the following overall
(a) development of large rural residential lots with Dwelling houses where
there is limited provision of infrastructure;
(b) development provides a high level of residential amenity and character
appropriate for the Rural residential zone;
6.2.7.4.3 Specific benchmarks for assessment
Table 6.2.7.4.3 - Accepted development subject to requirements and
assessable development
Performance Outcomes
Acceptable Outcomes
Residential density
Residential density reflects the very low intensity character of the
Residential is limited to 1 Dwelling house per allotment including a
Secondary dwelling
Any Secondary dwelling is:
(a) a maximum of 80m
gross floor area; and
(b) within 25m of the main building.
Schedule 1 Definitions
SC 1.1 Use definitions
(1) Use definitions have a particular meaning for the purpose of the Town
(2) Any use not listed in Table SC1.1.2 (Use definitions) column 1 is an
undefined use.
Note - Development comprising a combination of defined uses is not considered to
be an undefined use.
(3) A use listed in Table SC1.1.2 (Use definitions) column 1 has the meaning
set out beside that term in column 2.
(4) The use definitions listed here are the definitions used in this Town
(5) Column 3 of SC1.1.2 (Use definitions) identifies examples of the types of
activities that are consistent with the use identified
in column 1.
(6) Column 4 of Table SC1.1.2 (Use definitions) identifies examples of
activities that are not consistent with the use identified
in column 1.
(7) Columns 3 and 4 of Table SC1.1.2 (Use definitions) are not exhaustive
(8) Uses listed in Table SC1.1.2 (Use definitions) columns 3 and 4 that are
not listed in column 1, do not form part of the definition.
SC 1.1.2 - Use definitions
Examples Include
Does not include the following examples
Dwelling house
A residential use of premises involving –
(a) 1 dwelling for a single household and any domestic outbuildings associated
with the dwelling; or
(b) 1 dwelling for a single household, a Secondary dwelling, and any domestic
outbuildings associated with wither dwelling.
Caretaker’s accommodation, Dual occupancy, Rooming accommodation,
Short-term accommodation, student accommodation, Multiple
(a) The use of premises for-
(i) selling liquor for consumption on the premises; or
(ii) a dining or entertainment activity, or providing
accommodation to tourists or travellers, if the use is ancillary to the use in
subparagraph (i); but
(b) does not include a bar.
Pub, tavern
Bar, nightclub entertainment facility
Non-resident workforce accommodation
The use of premises for –
(a) accommodation for non-resident workers; or
(b) recreation and entertainment facilities for persons residing at the premises
and their visitors, if the use is ancillary to the
use in paragraph (a).
Contractor’s camp, construction camp, single person’s quarters,
temporary workers’ accommodation
Relocatable home park, Short-term accommodation, Tourist park.
Short-term accommodation
(a) The use of premises for
(i) Providing accommodation of less than 3 consecutive months to tourists or
travellers; or
(ii) a manager's residence, office, or recreation facilities for the exclusive
use of guests, if the use is ancillary to the use
in subparagraph (i); but
(b) does not include a hotel, nature-based tourism, resort complex or Tourist
Motel, backpackers
accommodation, cabins, serviced apartments, hotel, farm stay
Hostel, Rooming accommodation, Tourist park
SC 1.2 Administrative terms
(1) Administrative terms and definitions assist with the interpretation of
the Town plan but do not have a meaning in relation to
a use term.
(2) An administrative term listed in Table SC 1.2.2 - Administrative terms
and definitions as per the regulated requirements column
1 has the meaning set
out beside that administrative term in column 2 under the heading.
(3) The administrative terms and definitions listed here are the terms and
definitions for the purpose of the Town plan.
SC 1.2.2 - Administrative terms and definitions as per the regulated
requirements
Administrative term
Non-resident worker
Non-resident worker
means a person who –
(a) Performs work as part of –
(i) a resource extraction project; or
(ii) a project identified in a Town Plan as a major industry or infrastructure
project; or
(iii) a rural use; and
(b) lives, for extended periods, in the locality of the project, but has a
permanent residence elsewhere.
Example of a non-resident worker – a person engaged in fly-in/fly-out,
or drive in/drive out, working arrangements
Temporary use
temporary use
means a use that-
(a) is carried out on a non-permanent basis; and
(b) does not involve the construction of, or significant changes to, permanent
buildings or structures.
Exhibit 31;
Coordinator-General’s Change Report – no. 1 Hughenden workers
accommodation camp.
12; JER Need, page 23.
Section 46(2)
Section 45(5)
Planning Act 2016
Sections 65
[2010] QCA 333
[2020] QCA 257
(2020) 6 QR
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[69]-[71], [78].
[2014] QCA 147
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507
[2024] HCA 10
(2024) 278 CLR
Section. 1.5 of
the planning scheme.
Sections. 5.3.3(3), (4) and (5).
[2024] QCA 39
Lennium Group Pty Ltd v
Brisbane City Council & Ors
[2019] QPEC 17
Bell v Brisbane
City Council & Ors
[2022] QPELR 289
5.3.3(4)(c).
Exhibit 18;
Statement of Paul Czislowski, paragraph
Exhibit 19; Statement
of Paul Czislowski, paragraphs 10 and
Exhibit 7, Visual
Amenity and Landscaping JER page 23.
Exhibit 18; Statement of
Paul Czislowski, paragraphs 72 and 73 and page
Exhibit 9; Social
Planning JER page 13.
Exhibit 9; Social Planning JER page
Exhibit 19, page
Ts 2-67, ll
This is a paraphrasing
of the actual condition in Exhibit 19.
Exhibit 30, document 2;
Letter from the Assistant Coordinator General to the CEO of Charters Towers
Regional Council dated 13 June
Exhibit 21; Separate Report
by Mr Musk, page 11.
Exhibit 21; Separate Report
by Mr Musk, page 17.
Exhibit 12; Need JER page
Exhibit 12; Need JER page
24 and appendix 3.
Exhibit 21; Separate Report
of Mr Musk, page 30.
Exhibit 30, document 2;
Letter from the Assistant Coordinator General to the CEO of Charters Towers
Regional Council dated 13 June
Exhibit 31;
Coordinator-General’s Change Report – no. 1 Hughenden workers
accommodation camp, pages 10 and
Exhibit 12; Need JER
page 23. Exhibit 21; Separate Report by Mr Musk, pages 5 and
Exhibit 18; Statement
of Paul Czislowski, paragraph
Sections 3.2.2(8)
Ts 2-31, ll
Ts 1-69, ll
Exhibit 9; Social
Planning JER page 26.
Exhibit 9; Social Planning JER page
As earlier observed, it
in fact represents an increase of about 74% based on 2021 census
Exhibit 16;
Traffic JER paragraph 32.
Planning and Environment Court Rules
Ts 3-16, ll 21-27;
3-18, ll 18-26.
Ts 3-16, ll
Ts 3-28, l 12.
Although Mr Butcher was not
taken to the matter, I note that the area at the intersection of Deanes and
Millchester Roads is zoned
general residential – Exhibit 2, page 20.
Ts 3-44, ll
Ts 3-46, ll
Ts 3-65, ll
Exhibit 12; Need
JER, paragraphs 81 and 82.
Exhibit 12; Need JER page 30 and Appendix
Ts 3-70, ll
Ts 3-73, ll
Ts 3-73, ll
Ts 3-87, ll
Exhibit 18; Statement of
Paul Czislowski, paragraph 88.
A copy of those tender
documents were not tendered.
Exhibit 18; Statement of
Paul Czislowski, paragraphs 107 and 108.
Exhibit 25.
Exhibit 18; Statement of
Paul Czislowski, paragraphs 98 and 99. Exhibit 14; Town Planning JER, pages 66
3.3.1.1(1).
Ts 2-21, l 38
to 2-23, l 10.
Modular Pty Ltd v Western Downs Regional Council and Anor
[2017] QPEC 58
[2018] QPELR 80
There is a second,
seemingly smaller school – the School of Distance Education, which
apparently has some day students - included
in the area that Mr Butcher
considered to reflect the locality, as illustrated in Exhibit 36.
The detailed list of
submitted features is in the appellant’s written submissions – Part
B, paragraph 83.
WBQH Development Pty Ltd
v Gold Coast City Council
[2009] QPEC 54
Ts 1-30, ll
See paragraph 166
Ts 3-42, ll
See paragraph 83
Exhibit 2, pages 17 and
Ts 2-66, l 46 to 2-67,
[2019] QPELR 417
Section 1.2(1)
planning scheme.
Acts Interpretation Act
Exhibit 18;
Statement of Paul Czislowski, paragraph 21 and Attachment
See paragraph 138
See paragraph 142
See exhibit
Exhibit 31, pages 10
Ts 3-70, ll
[2001] 1 Qd R 285
In that latter respect see
Broad v Brisbane City Council & The Baptist Union of Queensland
[1986] 2 Qd R 317
[2007] QPEC 112
[2008] QPELR 342
See paragraph 154 herein.
See Exhibit 7, pages 11 – 15
3.2.2(3)(a)
6.2.7.4.2(2)(b)
18; Statement of Paul Czislowski, Attachment
[2019] QPEC 34
See the use definitions
for these terms, which preclude accommodating persons other than tourists or
travellers.
paragraph 203 herein.
Respondent’s written submissions – part B, paragraph
Isgro v Gold
Coast City Council & Anor
[2003] QPEC 2
[2003] QPELR 414
, [20]-[26].
Ramsay Health Care
Australia Pty Limited v Brisbane City Council & Anor
[2024] QPEC 49
[46] citing
Development Watch Inc v Sunshine Coast Regional Council &
[2022] QCA 6
Harris v Scenic
Rim Regional Council
[2014] QPEC 16
[2020] QPEC 67
Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty Ltd
(1986) 160 CLR
Respondent’s
written submissions – part B at paragraph
Ts 2-32, ll
See paragraph 146
herein; Ts 4-39, l 39.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.18 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter