URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2002/34.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:48:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Feeney, Terence & Sally v National Asset Planning Coproration Pty Ltd & Stockwell, Shane & Chapman, Anthony & Others [2002] QPAMDT 34 (27 June 2002)
PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR DEALERS TRIBUNAL
[2002] QPAMDT 34
27 JUNE 2002
APPLICATION NO:
FEENEY TERRENCE JOHN & SALLY ANNE
FIRST RESPONDENT:
NATIONAL ASSET PLANNING CORPORATION PTY LTD
SECOND RESPONDENT:
STOCKWELL SHANE
THIRD RESPONDENT:
CHAPMAN ANTHONY
FOURTH RESPONDENT:
BRIDGEFERN PTY LTD
FIFTH RESPONDENT:
BILBOROUGH CHRISTOPHER R
DATE OF HEARING:
16 APRIL 2002
[2002] QPAMDT 34
REASONS FOR
1. This is an
application by Terrence John & Sally Anne (“The Feeneys”) under
section 119 of the
Auctioneers and Agents Act
1971 ("the repealed Act")
claiming against the former fund on the basis of an alleged contravention of the
repealed Act by the respondents
listed above.
2. The claim arises in
relation to a residential unit known as Lot 80,“Acacia Grove” Ancona
Street, Carrara, Queensland,
(“The Unit”) which Mr and Mrs Feeney
purchased from the Auspac Group of Companies Pty Ltd (“the
through NAPC by a contract signed on 2 December 1997. The
purchase price was $154,900. The Feeney’s claim that the unit was
the NAPC at an overvalue and that they only purchased the unit due to false and
misleading misrepresentations made by NAPC
and its agents upon whom they relied.
The claimants alleges that at all
material times:
The first respondent, NAPC, carried on
business as property marketers and provided a complete investment services to
investors in
residential and commercial real estate and in particular, assessing
the requirements of individual investors, identifying the most
appropriate
properties for their specific gearing qualities and providing sound financial
analysis to make informed decisions
NAPC was a Real Estate Agent for the
purposes of s 119 of the Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971 and pursuant to s 2 of
The second respondent Stockwell was the
servant or agent of the [first] respondent authorised by the [first] respondent
manner referred to in the evidence
The third respondent Chapman was the
servant or agent of NAPC authorised by NAPC to act in the manner referred to in
the evidence
Chapman was a real estate person
pursuant to s 2 of the Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971
NAPC and Chapman were prescribed persons
within the meaning of the Auctioneers and Agents Act
4. The fifth respondent Bilborough was the sole
director of the first respondent at the relevant time and was joined as a
by the Tribunal at a directions hearing on 8 October 2001.
5. Mr and Mrs Feeney claim, in their final amended claim dated 16 April
2002, the sum of $42,400.00 as their loss based on the difference
between the actual price paid and the valuation of the property and further sums
by way of interest, fees and costs making
a total claim of $112,583.00 from the
fund arising from the alleged breach of the repealed Act by the
respondents.
The transfer of the claim to the
6. The claim has become a claim against the claim fund
Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act
Act”) by virtue of section 604 of the Act which provides:
The rights and liabilities of the former fund are
taken to be the rights and liabilities of the claim fund.
that has been made against the former fund, and not finished before the
commencement, continues as if it were a claim against
7. The application was transferred to this Tribunal, from the
Auctioneers and Agents Committee by the Chief Executive under section
Act. The claim had not been finished by 30 June 2001, when the Committee ceased
to exist. In this regard the Tribunal
was satisfied that sections 474 and 475
of the Act had been satisfied.
8. Mr Bilborough is a party to the
application by virtue of sub-section 475(3) of the Act. Neither he nor NAPC
were parties before
the claim was transferred to the tribunal and for that
reason the tribunal forwarded them copies of all of the material transferred
the tribunal by the Chief Executive.
Some Preliminary Matters
9. The claim was made under the repealed Act on or about 11 June
1999 and was investigated by the then Office of Consumer Affairs.
this process a Claim Inquiry Report, dated 14 April 2000, was prepared. This
Report and its nine attachments were transferred
to the tribunal after 1 July
The Tribunal conducted a series of
directions hearings. The Tribunal directed that:
The first direction on 23 July 2001
required the claimant to file a revised claim in compliance with s 473 of the
PAMD Act 2000
On 8 October 2001, the Tribunal
directed that the Chief Executive be removed as a party and that Mr Bilborough
be joined as a respondent
by virtue of s 475(3) of the PAMD Act
At a directions hearing on 4
February 2002, the Tribunal, in order to ensure that the Respondents were clear
that they were now Respondents
to these claims and, to clarify the exact claims
being made against them, ordered that the Claimant file with the Chief Executive
a Revised Claim. It further ordered the matter be set down for hearing at 9.30
am 16 April 2002
A further amended claim was received by
the Tribunal on 28 March 2002
12. Prior to the hearing, the Tribunal members had read
the claim, including the material transferred to the Tribunal, and the evidence
filed by the parties.
13. At the hearing on 16 April, the
claimants were represented by Ms Skennar of counsel. There was no appearance by
or on behalf of
the first respondent, NAPC. NAPC’s liquidator, Mr M
Sheehy, had advised the Chief Executive by letter dated 27 September 2001
NAPC “was placed in a member’s voluntary liquidation on 23 December
1999, effectively with no assets and no liabilities”.
Mr Sheehy referred
the Chief Executives correspondence to Mr Bilborough who he was aware was
involved with this matter. Mr Sheehy
subsequently confirmed to the Tribunal, at
the directions hearing on 8 October 2001, that he did not intend to participate
litigation.
The second respondent appeared for
himself. Ms Skennar on behalf of the claimants advised the Tribunal at the
hearing that the claimants
were withdrawing their claim against the second
respondent, Mr Stockwell. Mr Bradley for the fifth respondent had no objection
this course and, their being no appearances on behalf of the third or fourth
respondents, the Tribunal ordered that the claim against
Mr Stockwell be
At the hearing Ms Skennar sought to
amend the claim under s 486 PAMD Act 2000 which provides as follows:
486 Amendment of claim
The tribunal may
at any stage of the proceeding amend the particulars of the claim in the way it
considers appropriate—
(a) on application, if the tribunal is satisfied
the amendment is of a formal or minor nature and no party is unfairly prejudiced
by the amendment; or
(b) on its own initiative, if all the parties
The amended claim is taken to be the claim.
amendment was not opposed by Mr Bradley for the fifth respondent and a further
amended revised claim dated 16 April 2002 was
accepted by the Tribunal.
Ms Skennar presented amended statements
by the each of the claimants, dated 16 April 2002 and a bundle of paginated
documents in a
blue folder which comprised the material upon which the claimants
rely in support of their claim. Mr Bradley had no objection to
the Tribunal
accepting this material and the Tribunal did so.
Mr Bradley tendered a supplementary
statement of the fifth respondent, Mr Bilborough which was dated 16 April 2002
and was prepared
in response to the further amended revised claim. This material
was also accepted by the Tribunal.
No evidence or submissions were
presented by or on behalf of the third and fourth respondents.
20. Counsel for the parties did not require any witnesses
for cross-examination but requested an opportunity to file and serve submissions
which the Tribunal granted. All parties agreed to the Tribunal closing the
hearing and considering the case on the material before
The Feeneys claim that:
NAPC engaged in false and misleading
conduct in contravention of s 72 of the Repealed Act
NAPC made representations as to the
availability of finance in contravention of the requirements of s 73 of the
Repealed Act
NAPC and/or Chapman sold land in
which they had an interest in option to purchase the land , in contravention of
s 70 of the Repealed
NAPC and/or Chapman sold land in
which they had a beneficial interest, in contravention of s 69 of the Repealed
22. The process for
deciding a claim against the fund is set-out in section 488 of the Act which
provides as follows:
Deciding claims other than minor
The tribunal may allow the claim, wholly or partly,
or reject the claim.
However, the tribunal may allow the claim
only if satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that—
(a) an event
mentioned in section 470(1) happened; and
(b) the claimant suffered financial
loss because of the happening of the event.
If the tribunal allows
the claim, wholly or partly, the tribunal must—
(a) take into account
any amount the claimant might reasonably have received or recovered if not for
the claimant’s neglect
or default;
(b) decide the amount of the
claimant’s financial loss; and
(c) name the person who is liable for
the claimant’s financial loss.
23. Because this is a claim against
the former fund, sub-section 119(1) of the repealed Act rather than sub-section
470(1) of the
Act applies. The relevant provisions of Section 119 are set-out
Application of fund
A&A Act 119.(1)
to this Act, the fund shall be held and applied for the purpose of reimbursing
persons who may suffer pecuniary loss because
(a) the contravention
of any provision of section ... 69, 70, 72, 73 ... by a prescribed person;
“prescribed person”
means a licensee, the
licensee’s partner, employee, agent or any person having the apparent
charge or control for the time being
of the office or business of the
licensee.(s.119)
For the purposes of this section
and sections 120, 121 and 123 to 126
person who carries on the business of an ... a real estate agent, ... and is not
the holder of a licence.
24. The relevant sub-section of section 69
is subsection (2) which provided as follows:
Restriction on agents
purchasing or selling property
estate agent, ... or an employee of any such person, who has for sale any
property that is owned by such person or in which
such person is beneficially
interested shall, before making any agreement in respect of the sale of the
property, notify the prospective
purchaser in the approved form of the interest
in the property and obtain
from the purchaser an acknowledgement of receipt
of the notice.
25. The relevant parts of section 70 provided as
When agent prohibited from having interest in option to
purchase land
An ... real estate agent shall not, in
respect of land had by the ... real estate agent for sale, obtain or be in any
way concerned
in obtaining from the seller an option to purchase in which that
... real estate agent is beneficially interested.
Maximum penalty—100
penalty units.
... a real estate agent shall not as such sell land
at any time when, in respect of that land, there is subsisting an option to
in which that ... real estate agent is beneficially
interested.
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units.
purposes of this section—
(a) an option to purchase includes any
transaction granting or purporting to grant a right not immediately exercisable
to purchase
or to be given an option to purchase;
, in relation to ... a real estate agent acting as
such, means sell, agree to sell, attempt to sell, have for sale, negotiate for
sale, or be in any way concerned in selling.
Where an offence
against subsection (1) or (2) has been committed, the ... real estate agent
shall, upon conviction, and in addition
to any other penalty the court may
impose, be ordered by the court to pay over to the convicted person’s
principal such amount
in respect of profits resulting from the person obtaining
the option in respect of which the
offence was committed as is determined by
Where a court makes a determination under subsection
(4), it may order that the person convicted pay such costs of and incidental
the making of the determination as it thinks fit.
For the purposes
of making a determination and enforcing an order under subsection (4) or (5),
section 69(4), (5) and (8) to (10)
shall apply with all necessary
modifications.
Where a court makes or refuses to make an order
under subsection (4), an appeal shall lie in all respects and in the same manner
if the court had imposed a penalty or a punishment.
26. Section 71
provided a definition of “beneficial interest” for the purposes of
sections 69 and 70 as follows:
Beneficial interest
For the purposes of—
(a) section 69—... a
real estate agent ... is taken to be beneficially interested in the purchase or
sale of property; and
(b) section 70—... real estate agent is taken to
be beneficially interested in an option to purchase land;
if the purchase or
sale is made or the option is obtained, as the case may be, on behalf
(d) if the ..., real estate agent ... is a
corporation—
(i) the corporation or an executive officer or a
prescribed relative of an executive officer of the corporation; or
the corporation has not more than 100 members, any member or a prescribed
relative of a member of that corporation; or
(iii) another corporation that
has at least 1 executive officer in common with the corporation; or
another corporation, having not more than 100 members, of which the corporation
is a member or having at least 1 member in common
with the corporation;
(e) if the ..., real estate agent ... carries on business as a member
of a firm or partnership—a person who is a member of the
partnership or a prescribed relative of a member; or
(f) a person carrying on
for profit or gain a business if the ..., real estate agent ..., or a prescribed
relative of the ..., real
estate agent ..., has, directly or indirectly, a right
to participate in the income or profits of the business of the
To allay any doubt it is declared that any
reference in—
(a) section 69 and this section to ..., real estate agent
(b) section 70 to ... real estate agent;
includes reference to a
corporation that acts as or carries on the business of
an ..., real estate
agent ..., as the case may be.
Sections 72 and 73 provided as
False representations as to
No ... real estate agent, ... or employee of ...
a real estate agent, ...shall make to any purchaser or prospective purchaser or
publish or cause to be published any
statement or representation that is
false or misleading (whether to the person’s knowledge or not) concerning
any real or personal
property which the person, or as the case may be, the
person’s employer, has for sale ... as a real estate agent ....
penalty—100 penalty units.
Without limiting
the generality of subsection (1) or (2), a statement or representation shall,
for the purposes of that subsection,
be deemed to be false or misleading if it
is of such a nature that it would reasonably tend to lead to a belief in the
of a state of affairs that does not in fact exist, whether or not the
statement or representation indicates that that state of affairs
A statement shall be deemed to be published within the
meaning of this section if it is—
(a) inserted in any newspaper
(including any periodical) or any other publication circulated in Queensland;
(b) publicly exhibited—
(i) in, on, over, or under any building,
vehicle, or place (whether or not a public place and whether on land or water);
(ii) in the air in view of persons being or passing in or on any street or
public place; or
(c) contained in any document gratuitously sent or delivered
to any person or thrown or left upon premises in the occupation of any
(d) broadcast by wireless transmission or television.
person is charged with an offence against subsection (1) or (2)—
shall be a sufficient defence if the person charged proves that, in relation to
a false statement or representation, the person
had reasonable grounds for
believing and did in fact believe that the statement or representation was true,
or that, in relation
misleading statement or representation, that the
person had reasonable grounds for believing and did in fact believe that the
or representation was not misleading; and
(b) it shall not be a
defence to prove that the sale to the purchaser was rescinded or that the
prospective purchaser did not buy
or, in the case of an offence against
subsection (2), that the property was not let because of the statement or
representation.
Despite any proceedings against any person for an
offence against this section (whether resulting in a conviction or otherwise)
person shall remain liable in all civil proceedings in like manner as if
the proceedings for an offence had not been taken.
This section
shall be read and construed as in aid of and not in derogation from any other
Act or law relating to false or misleading
advertisements or other
statements.
Representations as to availability of
... a real estate agent who as such or as a
principal sells any land, whether improved or unimproved, shall give to the
a statement in writing in compliance in every respect with the
requirements of this section.
A statement in writing under this
section shall—
(a) clearly identify the land to which the statement
relates; and
(b) state the names and addresses respectively of the seller and
purchaser; and
(c) state clearly whether or not the ... real estate agent has
(by the ... real estate agent or by an employee) made or offered to
purchaser any representation, promise or term with respect to the availability
of finance for defraying wholly or in part the
purchase price; and
such representation, promise, or term has been so made or offered, in addition
to stating clearly that fact, state clearly
the particulars of that
representation, promise or term; and
(e) state the date on which the
statement is given; and
(f) be signed by the ... real estate agent or by a
person authorised in writing (prior notice of which, accompanied by a copy of
authority, has been delivered to the registrar) by the ...real estate
and shall not contain any other written, typewritten, or printed
matter except the letterhead (if any) of the ... real estate agent.
A statement in writing under this section shall be given by the ... real
estate agent to the purchaser before the purchaser signs
any contract,
agreement, or document legally binding or intended to bind the purchaser legally
in respect of the sale.
If, in respect of the sale of any land,
whether improved or unimproved—
(b) by a real estate agent
whether as such or as a principal;
finance for defraying in whole or in part
the purchase price, or any amount or instalment of that finance, is not made
available to
the purchaser in compliance in every respect with any
representation, promise, or term made or offered to the purchaser by, or by
employee of, that ... real estate agent, then, if the purchaser has been
materially affected, the purchaser may at the purchaser’s
option avoid the
contract made by the
purchaser in respect of the sale by notice in writing
given either to the seller or to the auctioneer or real estate agent concerned
at any time before the time at which the purchaser is required by the contract
to pay all of the outstanding purchase price or immediately
Upon the avoidance (whether by the purchaser under this
section or by the seller for that the purchaser has failed to pay in terms
the contract the purchase price or any amount of the purchase price) of a
contract to which subsection (4) applies, the seller
and the ... real estate
agent concerned shall be liable at law, jointly and severally, for the repayment
to the purchaser of all
money paid by the purchaser under the contract
such money shall be recoverable, by action as for a debt, by the
purchaser accordingly.
Judgment recovered against either person
liable under subsection (5) in respect of money repayable under that subsection
be a bar to an action against the other person so liable, but if
separate actions are brought against those persons the sums recoverable
the judgments given in those actions shall not in the aggregate exceed the
amount of money repayable to the purchaser concerned
and in the one of those
actions in which judgment is secondly given the plaintiff shall not be entitled
unless the court is of opinion that there was reasonable ground for
bringing the action.
Where a representation, promise, or term to
which this section applies shall have been given, made or offered without the
connivance, or consent of the seller, the seller may recover from the
... real estate agent concerned any money paid under the contract
received by the seller which the seller has repaid to the purchaser, and
additionally any damage suffered by the seller consequent
on the voidance by
purchaser of the contract.
Any covenant, agreement, or
condition expressed or implied in any contract, agreement, or document legally
binding, or intended legally
to bind, the purchaser in respect of the sale to
the purchaser of any land, or in a separate document, under which it is agreed
the seller or the ... real estate agent concerned of the one part and
the purchaser of the other part that any representation, promise,
or term made
or offered to the purchaser for which the seller or the ... real estate agent is
legally liable under this section,
shall not be legally binding as against that
seller and auctioneer or real estate agent, or either of them, shall be
absolutely void
and of no legal effect.
An auctioneer or a real
estate agent who—
(a) being required by subsection (1) fails to give to
a purchaser of land a statement in writing in compliance in every respect with
the requirements of subsections (2) and (3); or
(b) being liable at law under
this section for repayment to a purchaser of land of any money paid by that
purchaser under the contract
entered into by the purchaser, fails to make such
repayment in full within 14 days after becoming so liable;
shall be guilty of
an offence against this Act
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units or 12
months imprisonment.
Liability to punishment under this section
shall be in addition to other liabilities at law imposed by this section, and
that ... a real estate agent has not been prosecuted or, if prosecuted,
has or has not been convicted for an offence against this
section shall not bar
or prejudice any proceedings for enforcing against the auctioneer or real
agent any such other liability.
Subject to subsection
(4), this section applies so as not to render illegal or void any contract or to
empower any party to void the
In any civil proceedings
arising out of or connected with a contract or agreement or document to which
this section relates the onus
of proving that the statement referred to in
subsection (2) was duly given shall lie upon the party so alleging.
In this section—
(a) a promise that a seller of land will transfer
the land to the purchaser conditionally upon the purchaser at the same time
a proper mortgage in favour of the seller to receive payment of all or
any part of the money payable or that would afterwards but
for the execution of
the mortgage become payable by the purchase under the contract of sale;
(b) a promise that the terms of the sale will be or will include a
provision that the purchase price or any part shall be or may be
instalments;
shall not be taken to be a representation, promise or term as
respects the availability of finance for defraying wholly or in part
purchase price.
28. The orders the Tribunal may make on a claim hearing
are set out in section 530 of the Act which provides as
Orders tribunal may make on claim hearing
The tribunal may make the following orders in relation to a claim against
(a) an order allowing the claim, wholly or partly, or
rejecting the claim;
(b) an order stating that a named person is liable for a
claimant’s financial loss and the amount of the loss;
(c) an order
(d) an order that
no amount is recoverable in relation to a claim.
29. Section 530 of the
Act is a departure from the procedures under the repealed Act, in that it
provides for the Tribunal to make
an order stating that a named person is liable
for a claimant’s financial loss and the amount of the loss and an order
recovery of an amount payable in relation to a claim. Under the repealed
Act an amount payable from the former fund was recovered
from the licensee found
to have been guilty of a breach of the repealed Act in an independent recovery
proceeding which followed
the decision about the claim on the
30. Section 125 of the Repealed Act will be relevant to Mr
Bilborough if NAPC is ordered to compensate the fund in respect of any
the Tribunal may order to be made from the fund to the Feeneys. It provided as
Directors to compensate fund
payment is made out of the fund in settlement in whole or in part of any claim
relating to the business of ... a real estate
agent, ...carried on by a
corporation, the
directors of the corporation, at the time when the act or
omission (that gave rise to the claim) occurred, shall be jointly and severally
liable to compensate the fund in respect of that payment.
person occupying or acting in the position of director of the corporation, by
whatever name called and whether or not validly
appointed to occupy or duly
authorised to act in the position; and
(b) any person in accordance with
whose directions or instructions the directors of the corporation are accustomed
The evidence
31. Both Mr and Mrs Feeney
filed statements dated 18 October 2001. To both of the Feeneys statements was
attached a copy of a valuation
of the unit signed by Taylor Byrne, a licensed
valuer. As noted earlier, further statements and supporting material was put
the Tribunal at the hearing.
32. Mr Bilborough filed a
supplementary witness statement dated 15 April 2002 and a further submission
dated 16 April 2002.
33. In addition, the Tribunal had before it the
material transferred to it by the Chief Executive referred to above.
The Events giving rise to the claim
34. The events giving rise to the claim are summarised as
In August 1997, the claimants
received an unsolicited phone call from an employee of NAPC with an invitation
to attend an investment
seminar at a hotel in their town, Townsville.
The claimants attend the seminar and
the second respondent Shane Stockwell arranges to attend their home to provide
further information
on the benefits of negative gearing, including information
on capital growth on the Gold Coast. Mr Stockwell arranged for the claimants
travel to the Gold Coast to inspect properties.
On 16 February 1998 the claimants
travelled to Brisbane and were met and chauffeured to the Gold Coast where they
met at Mr Chapman
of NAPC, the third respondent. Mr Chapman took them to the
offices of Investlend where they had an appointment with Mr Stephen
At the offices of Investlend, the
claimants met Mr Quinlivan who analysed their financial position and provided a
presentation on
their ability to afford investment in particular properties.
This involved reviewing their financial assets, liabilities, incomes
expenses and preparing property investment analysis spreadsheets on a property
development known as Acacia Grove. Mr Chapman
was present throughout this
session, except for a short period when he left to get lunch for everyone. He
participated in choosing
an appropriate property to put forward to the claimants
and nodded approvingly when Mr Quinlivan made comments about how positive
investment would be for the claimants.
The claimants were advised, inter
alia, of the benefits of acquiring a property in this location, that they should
take an interest
only loan as the capital growth would increase the equity they
had in the property; that the interest only loan was cheaper and would
them $34 a week.
Chapman took the claimants to visit
three properties, including Acacia Grove and told them that they had to move
fast because there
were only a couple of units left in that stage of the
development and they would miss the opportunity.
Chapman advised the claimants that
the unit in Acacia Grove was good value for money, that it was valued at
$154,900, it was a ‘good
deal’; that units in the development were
renting for $180 a week and that several units purchased in the early stages had
sold at a twenty per cent capital gain in twelve months. Based on these
representations, the claimants agreed to by the unit.
Mr Chapman took the claimants back
to Mr Quinlivan who arranged to shop for the best financial deal for them.
Finance was subsequently
arranged through the Bank of Melbourne.
Although the claimants stated that
they wanted to use their solicitor in Townsville, it was strongly recommended
that they use Michael
Yarwood of Bells solicitors as the contracts could then be
completed in a day. They were then taken to see Mr Yarwood for the purpose
executing a contract of sale for the property. Mr Chapman was present throughout
this meeting.
The claimants requested that Yarwood
obtain and independent valuation of the property. Both Yarwood and Chapman
advised that this
would not be necessary as no finance company would provide
finance without conducting a property valuation. Claimants were subsequently
advised by the financier, Bank of Melbourne, that they had not conducted a
valuation of the property.
Finance was arranged and the
contract settled on 2 December 1997. In April 1999 Mr Feeney read a newspaper
article about property
scams on the Gold Coast. As a result, he contacted
valuers and was advised that his property was worth between $110,000 and
The claimants lodged their claim
against the fund in June 1999
35. The first ground
of the claim alleges that NAPC was engaged in false and misleading conduct in
contravention of s 72 of the repealed
36. Section 2 of the
Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971
defines “real estate agent” as
“real estate agent”
means any person who, as
an agent for others, and
whether on commission or for or in expectation of
any fee, gain, or
reward, and either alone or in connection with any other
business, and
either generally or in respect of any 1 transaction, exercises
on or advertises or notifies or states that the person exercises
on or that the person is willing to exercise or carry on or in any
holds the person out as ready to undertake the business of
selling, exchanging, or letting houses, land, or estates, or
negotiating
for such buying, selling, exchanging, or letting, or buying,
exchanging, or letting hotel businesses, residential
businesses,
boarding house businesses, storekeeping businesses,
manufacturing
businesses, or businesses of any kind, or any interest in any
businesses, or buying, selling, or exchanging livestock but, does
include a person who—
(a) undertakes any such function as a
representative of Her Majesty;
(b) is employed merely as a clerk or
servant; or
(c) is a registered life assurance company or friendly society,
financial institution or trustee company.
37. According to Mr
Bilborough, NAPC was “arranging telemarketing and in-home consultations
with prospective purchasers of real
estate properties”.
The contract between the vendors and the
Feeneys refers to NAPC as the vendor’s agent and Mr Bilborough refers to
this agency
arrangement in paragraph 4 of his statement dated 27 November 2001.
Clearly this “agency arrangement” related to a “real
agency” although NAPC was not licensed for this purpose.
39. The Tribunal finds that NAPC was acting as a real estate
agent in relation to the sale of the town house to the Feeneys. (See
Pty Ltd v Peter David Jenkins
[1999] QCA 452)
40. Sub-section 119(7)
provides that
For the purposes of section 119 and sections 120, 121 and
includes a person who carries on
the business of an ... a real estate agent, ... and is not the holder of a
41. The tribunal finds that by virtue of sub-section 119(7) NAPC
was a “prescribed person” under sub-sections 119(1) and
Repealed Act.
42. In the material relied upon by the Feeneys was a copy
of a Joint Venture for Development and Marketing agreement between Coral
Group Pty Ltd (Coral Reef) and Auspac Group of Companies Pty Ltd which is
referred to in the agreement as “the Developer”
which, in part,
includes a reference to the town house subsequently sold to the Feeneys.
43. By virtue of that joint venture agreement, Auspac appointed Mr
Bilborough as its attorney for the purpose of the appointment of
a real estate
agent. While there was no evidence on the point, it appears that this was how
NAPC may have been appointed as the
agent for the vendor. However, nothing
turns on this appointment.
44. According to paragraph 3 of Mr
Bilborough’s supplementary statement, as a result of the marketing and
sales assistance by
Coral Reef Group Pty Ltd to the joint venture, Coral Reef
expected to receive fees of on average between $20,000 and $30,000 for
sold in the Acacia Grove complex. The settlement statement (exhibit H to Mr
Feeney’s statement) shows an amount
of $32,900 payable to Coral Reef upon
settlement and it appears on the evidence that this amount was paid. It was not
the evidence what the contribution of Coral Reef was to this joint
venture in relation to the sale to the Feeneys.
45. The Feeneys dealt
firstly with NAPC, then with Anthony Chapman (Mr Chapman), who the Tribunal
accepts was an agent of NAPC. Then
Chapman introduced them to Mr Stephen
Quinlivan (Mr Quinlivan) who referred them to Mr Michael Yarwood of Bells
Solicitors (Mr Yarwood).
If they dealt with anyone acting on behalf of Coral
Reef, from their evidence, they do not appear to have been aware of this.
46. According to Mr Bilborough NAPC was “arranging telemarketing
and in-home consultations with prospective purchasers of real
properties” and was “receiving their monies from real estate
developers”. How much and from whom NAPC specifically
received monies in
relation to the sale to the Feeneys is not clear on the
47. From the statement of Mr Bilborough it is clear that NAPC
referred the Feeneys to Mr Quinlivan of Markfair Pty Ltd which was
Investlend (Aust.) (Investlend) who initially provided the Feeneys with
investment advice prior to them purchasing the
unit. On the basis of the
Feeneys evidence, the Tribunal finds that Investlend, in providing the Feeneys
with investment advice,
was acting as an agent for NAPC in relation to the sale
and/or marketing of the subject property.
48. In this regard the
Tribunal accepts the evidence of the Feeneys, which is not denied by Mr
Bilborough, that NAPC arranged for
the Feeneys to bring financial documents with
them for the purpose of providing these to Investlend for investment advice.
The Tribunal
accepts the evidence of the Feeneys, that Mr Quinlivan of
Investlend was the only person who NAPC arranged to assess their financial
position and provide advice on their ability to afford the purchase of an
investment property prior to their inspection and subsequent
purchase of a
49. According to Mr Feeney’s statement, the Feeneys arranged
for Investlend to organise finance on their behalf to enable the
purchase a unit. The Tribunal finds that this arrangement between the Feeneys
and Investlend did not alter the fact that
Investlend was acting as an agent of
NAPC at the time it gave the Feeneys investment advice.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Mr Feeney, that he asked Mr Yarwood and Mr
Chapman for a valuation of the property as “
in previous dealings with
finance for our home the financiers had always obtained a valuation and I wanted
my own independent valuation
as I thought it would be a prudent thing to
do.” The Tribunal also accepts the Feeneys evidence that Mr Yarwood and Mr
advised them separately that it would not be necessary to obtain a
further valuation as no finance companies would provide finance
without first
conducting a valuation of the property.
51. The Tribunal finds that the
statement of Mr Chapman “that no finance company would provide finance
without a valuation”
was false and misleading concerning the unit.
52. It is a known fact that a bank will lend an amount for the purchase
of a property, without a valuation of that property, if they
are given other
property as security for the loan. In this regard, the Tribunal notes that the
Contract has a Special Condition in
relation to Finance in which the
Feeney’s property at 7 March Street, Heatley, is referred to under Item 4
(ADDITIONAL SECURITY,
IT (sic) ANY). In addition, the loan agreement (Exhibit E
to Mr Feeney’s statement) shows that the Bank of Melbourne took a
mortgage over both the unit at Acacia Grove and the property at Marsh St,
53. Whether or not Chapman knew that the Bank of Melbourne
would advance the amount of the loan sought by the Feeneys without obtaining
valuation of the town house is irrelevant.
54. Likewise whether or not
Chapman knew that the representation “that no bank would lend an amount
greater than the property
value” was false and misleading is irrelevant
because that is not a requirement of sub-section 72(1) of the Repealed
55. The representation was false and misleading and, therefore, NAPC
through its agent Chapman, is in contravention of sub-section
72(1) of the
Repealed Act.
56. Ms Skennar, on behalf of the Feeneys, submits that
NAPC also made a false and misleading representation that sale price of $154,900
represented the market value of the town house. She submits that the
representations, inter alia, that at the sale price of $154,900
the unit was
‘a good deal’ and that it was good value for money would reasonably
tend to a belief that the price being
paid was market value. Further, the
failure of NAPC, or its agents, to advise the Feeneys that Coral Reef Group was
to receive a
fee of $32,900 upon the sale also constituted a false and
misleading representation.
57. This matter was considered by the Full Court of the Federal Court
(Davies, Heerey and Whitlam JJ) in
John G. Glass Real Estate Pty Limited v.
Constructions Pty Limited; Bonefind Pty
Limited; Gymea Developments Pty Limited and Albert Edward John Davey
[1993] FCA 295
ATPR 41-265
(1993) ATPR 41-249
where after citing what was said by Mason ACJ,
Wilson, Deane and Dawson
Yorke v Lucas
[1985] HCA 65
(1985) 158 CLR 661
666 they said:
17. In our opinion an estate agent which holds itself out as, amongst
other things, "consultants to institutional investors and
to developers of major
properties" would not be regarded by potential purchasers of properties as
merely passing on information about
the property "for what it is worth and
without any belief in its truth or falsity".
18.... a purchaser like
would ordinarily expect ... that the agent had no reason to doubt
the completeness or accuracy of the information provided.
19. ...There was
certainly no express disclaimer of the appellant's belief in the truth of the
information in the brochure –
indeed there was an express assertion of
such belief. As part of its ordinary business the agent was providing
information in a
persuasive form with a view to achieving a sale of its
principal's property and of course earning commission. It was this conduct
which the learned trial judge, correctly in our opinion, held to be misleading
and deceptive. Once the falsity of the figure was
demonstrated, it seems to us
that no other conclusion could follow.
58. The Tribunal accepts that NAPC
would not be regarded by potential purchasers of properties, such as the
Feeneys, as merely passing
on the price information about the property "for what
it is worth and without any belief in its truth or falsity". The Tribunal
accepts that the structure of NAPC’s marketing program conducted with the
Feeneys was designed to give the Feeneys the
impression that NAPC, with whom
they were dealing, were professional real estate agents and were intending to
sell them an investment
property which would be beneficial to them.
59. The Tribunal further accepts that the list price of $154,900 was
substantially higher than the market value of between $110,000
and $115,000 as
given in the valuation by Herriott’s Valuers. Accordingly, the Tribunal
finds that by both its statements and
its silence, NAPC was representing that
the list price was the market value of the town house and that the
representation was false
and misleading.
60. It is now necessary to
examine the claim of a breach of section 73 of the repealed Act. Section 73
requires a real estate agent
who as such sells any land, whether improved or
unimproved, to give to the purchaser a statement in writing in compliance in
respect with the requirements of the section before the purchaser signs
any contract, agreement or document legally binding in respect
61. The Tribunal accepts on the evidence of the Feeneys that
they were not provided with any such written statement by NAPC or its
prior to signing the contract. Mr Bradley, in his submission concedes that on
the basis of the claimants’ evidence, it
is open to the Tribunal to find
NAPC in breach of section 73 and the Tribunal so finds.
Alleged Breaches of Sections 69 and 70 (the Beneficial interest
provisions)
62. The Feeneys claim that
the NAPC or its servants or agents were in breach of the beneficial interest
provisions of the repealed
act, namely sections 69 and 70.
63. Dealing
firstly with the claim of beneficial interest under section 69, subsection (2)
provided that:
An auctioneer, a real estate agent, motor dealer or an
employee of any such person, who has for sale any property that is owned by
such person or in which such person is beneficially interested shall, before any
agreement in respect of the sale of the property
notify the prospective
purchaser in the approved form of the interest on the property and obtain from
the purchaser an acknowledgment
of receipt of the notice.
64. Section 71
of the repealed act defines beneficial interest for the purposes of section 69
in the following terms:
(2)... a real estate agent ... is taken to be
beneficially interested in the purchase or sale of property.....if the purchase
is made ...... on behalf of—
(d) if the ..., real estate
agent ... is a corporation—
(i) the corporation or an executive officer
or a prescribed relative of an executive officer of the corporation; or
if the corporation has not more than 100 members, any member or a prescribed
relative of a member of that corporation; or
(iii) another corporation that
has at least 1 executive officer in common with the corporation; or
another corporation, having not more than 100 members, of which the corporation
is a member or having at least 1 member in common
with the corporation;
65. Although Ms Skennar did not specify the particular part of the
beneficial interest definition she relies upon, the Tribunal assumes
claim is based upon a beneficial interest in the terms of s 71(2)(d)(iii).
66. The evidence shows that
NAPC was a real estate agent and a
corporation who were making a sale on behalf of Coral Reef Group Pty Ltd. Coral
Reef Pty Ltd had
entered into a joint venture agreement with the developers
Auspac and they were to appoint an agent for the sale. The evidence also
that Mr Bilborough was a director of both NAPC and of Coral Reef Group Pty Ltd.
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the sale
by NAPC was made on behalf of a
corporation (Coral Reef Group Pty Ltd) that has at least 1 executive member in
common with the corporation
(NAPC) and therefore NAPC had a beneficial interest
in the sale.
67. Section 69 requires a real estate agent of an
employee of such a person who has for sale any property in which that person is
beneficially interested to notify the prospective purchaser of the interest in
the property (in the approved form) and obtain from
the purchaser an
acknowledgement of receipt of the notice. The Tribunal is satisfied on the
evidence that neither NAPC, nor its agent
Chapman, notified the Feeneys of the
beneficial interest and were in breach of s 69 of the repealed
68. Dealing finally with the claim under s 70, Ms Skennar relies in
her submissions upon evidence that “the joint venture agreement
an option to purchase (clause 8) in favour of Coral Reef “ and submits
that “ by reason of s 71 of the (repealed
act), NAPC was beneficially
interested in the property”. The Tribunal does not accept Ms
Skennar’s submission because
the joint venture agreement included in the
claimants’ evidence has clause 8 clearly ruled out and initialled by all
showing that no option forms part of the agreement. Accordingly, the
Tribunal finds that no evidence of a breach of section 70 has
been presented.
Other Matters
69. As the Tribunal noted in
Gordon, this Tribunal notes that it is clear from the evidence that NAPC and
Coral Reef were part of
an elaborate marketing network which included
Investlend, Mr Yarwood, Bells Solicitors and possibly the Bank of Melbourne
where lucrative
undisclosed commissions were being obtained by the marketeers at
the expense of people such as the Feeneys.
70. Mr Bilborough, as a
director of both NAPC and Coral Reef, was part of this network and should have
known what was happening.
71. The Tribunal accepts the Feeneys evidence
that they would not have signed the contract if they had been made aware that a
in the sum of $32,900 was to be paid to Coral Reef in the event that they
purchased the unit being marketed by NAPC.
Has a breach of the
repealed Act been committed?
72. The Tribunal is satisfied on
the balance of probabilities, for the reasons set out above, that NAPC or its
agent failed to provide
the written notice required under section 73 and
therefore was in breach of section 73 of the repealed Act.
Tribunal is also satisfied that false and misleading representations were made
by NAPC and that, as a result, NAPC was in
breach of section 72 of the repealed
74. The Tribunal is also satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that, for the reasons set out above, NAPC had a beneficial interest
property the subject of the sale and was in breach of section 69 of the repealed
The amount of the financial loss
75. The claim
fund established under both the Act and the repealed Act provides compensation
for loss arising from false and misleading
representations by prescribed
persons. The measure of damages for deceit or misleading and deceptive conduct,
in the opinion of
the Tribunal, is the appropriate measure to be applied to
calculating loss under these Acts. (See Gould v Vaggelas
(1984) 58 ALJR 560
Gibbs CJ at 561).
76. The claimants are claiming the sum of $112, 583
based on the report by Geoffrey Gunn and Co and comprised of:
$42,400 in capital losses
$9,439 in incidental costs
$55,981 in losses relating to
$4, 763 in total future disposal
77. Ms Skennar submitted that in addition to the
capital losses (on authority of
Gould v Vaggelas
(1983) 157 CLR 220
claimants are entitled to claim their holding costs to date as determined in the
report by Geoffrey Gunn and Co (excluding
the claim for interest in the sum of
$14,743, which they concede they cannot recover).
78. The capital
losses were calculated as the difference between the price paid and the market
value at the time at the time of purchase.
The Tribunal finds that the
claimants suffered a capital loss of $42,400 being the difference between the
purchase price of $154,900
and the valuation of $112,500 provided by Taylor
Byrne Valuers and being the mid range of the valuation provided by Heriots
- $115,000).
79. Incidental costs include the differences
between what was paid and what should have been paid in the fees paid to
solicitors,
brokers and valuers and fees paid for items such as stamp duty.
80. Income losses were determined by taking the income received and
adjusted expenses claimed since the purchase of the properties.
This amount was
adjusted to take account of some taxation benefits to the claimants for each
financial year.
81. Total future disposal costs were calculated by
estimating the real estate agent’s commission payable upon sale and the
anticipated
advertising, auction and legal costs.
82. The claimants rely
on the High Court decision in
Henville v Walker
[2001] HCA 52
(2001) 182 ALR 37
support their claim for losses beyond the capital losses. That case involved
section 82 of the Trade Practices Act which provides
as follows:
Actions for damages
(1) A person who suffers loss or damage by
conduct of another person that was done in contravention of a provision of
Part IV, IVB
section 51AC
may recover the amount of the loss or damage by action against that other person
or against any person involved
in the contravention.
(2) An action under
subsection (1) may be commenced at any time within 3 years after the date
on which the cause of action accrued.
83. McHugh J said that section 82
should be construed in a manner that promotes competition and fair trading and
protects consumers.
His Honour said at p 68:
‘In this case the
most appropriate approach is to identify what Mr Henville has suffered by way of
prejudice of disadvantage
in consequence of altering his position by reason of
the breach of the Act.
84. His Honour went on to say at p
‘ Mr Henville’s loss was not confined to the difference
between what was represented as the selling prices of the units
and their sale
price. Mr Walker’s contravention of the Act induced Mr Henville to enter
upon a course of conduct that resulted
in a greater loss than that difference.
To fail to compensate him for that loss does not accord with the purposes of the
85. The court in that cases held that the measure of loss was the
entire cost of the purchase of the land, the acquisition costs,
the development
costs, interest less the amount achieved on the sale of the unit.
Skennar submits on behalf of the claimants that the same principles should apply
under the repealed Act , other than the claim
for interest.
Bradley made no submissions in relation to the amount of the pecuniary loss.
88. The Act and the repealed Act entitle the claimants to recover the
amount of any pecuniary loss from the fund. The New Zealand
Court of Criminal
Florence v New Zealand Law Society
(1989) 1 NZLR 132
considered the meaning of “pecuniary loss” in s 169 of the Law
Practitioners Act 1982 which provided:-
"(1) ... the fund shall be
held and applied for the purpose of reimbursing
persons who may suffer
pecuniary loss by reason of the theft by a solicitor
to whom this Part
applies, or by his employee or agent, of any money or
other valuable
property entrusted to him, or to his employee or agent, in
the course of
his practice as a solicitor, including any money or other
property entrusted to him as a solicitor-trustee.
89. Cooke P, at page
" In the end one has to come back to the words of the
New Zealand section,
considered in their context in the light of the
purpose of the Part of the
Act. The crucial words are 'for the purpose
of reimbursing persons who may
suffer pecuniary loss by reason of the
theft by a solicitor ... of any money
... entrusted to him ... in the
course of his practice as a solicitor'. ....... In
the natural and
ordinary meaning of the words the right of reimbursement
anything which may fairly be described as pecuniary loss suffered
reason of theft of money entrusted to a solicitor in the course of his
practice. Claims for mental distress and the like are clearly excluded, but
once a pecuniary loss is established and a real or substantial causal
connection with the theft, there is nothing in the language of the section
or the public safeguard aim of the statute which seems to me adequate to cut
down what is in effect a statutory indemnity."
90. In light of
the above, the Tribunal is satisfied that the amounts claimed as capital losses,
incidental costs and losses relating
to income, as calculated by the Geoffrey
Gunn Report, are pecuniary losses which have a real or substantial causal
connection with
the fraudulent misrepresentations and therefore the claimants
are entitled to be reimbursed from the fund for those losses. As noted
the claim for interest was withdrawn.
91. The Tribunal does not accept
that future disposal costs are claimable from the fund. Future disposal costs
are anticipatory and
do not represent part of the “holding costs to
date” as claimed.
92. Accordingly, the Tribunal assesses the
amount of the claimants’ pecuniary loss as $ 107,820 (being $112,583 less
93. The Tribunal agrees with Ms
Skennar’s submission that this is an appropriate case for costs as the
matter was a complex
one involving difficult legal issues and a significant sum
of money and in which the claimants have incurred substantial costs.
Furthermore,
the claimants have been successful in their claim because of the
established contraventions of the Act.
94. Accordingly the Tribunal
awards costs under section 537 of the Act. Due to the fact that the claim
exceeds $50,000, the Tribunal
considers that the amount should be the costs
allowed in the District Court where the amount recovered exceeds $50,000. The
does not have before it evidence of the actual amount of these costs as
determined by the certification of a qualified cost assessor.
Accordingly, the
claimants are requested to provide that certification to the Tribunal and to the
Chief Executive to establish the
actual amount payable under this
First Order
95. On the basis of the
evidence, the Tribunal orders that the Chief Executive of the Department of
Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading
pay from the claim fund to the applicant the
sum of $107,820 and the amount of costs to be determined in accordance with
91 by the certification of a qualified cost assessor.
Reimbursement of the Fund
96. The Tribunal finds
that the first respondent NAPC, through its agent Chapman, was responsible for
the Feeney’s financial
respect to the fifth respondent, the Tribunal must consider section 125 of the
repealed Act (the full text of which is reproduced
earlier in this decision). Mr
Bradley for the fifth respondent has argued that section 125 of the repealed Act
is not applicable
to the current case. He argued that section 125 applies where
payment was made out of the Former Fund in settlement of any claim
relating to
the real estate business. If the claim is allowed, the claimants will be
compensated out of the claim fund and not the
former fund as it has ceased to
exist. Accordingly, he argues section 604(5) does not apply and so the saving
provision in section
604(5) does not preserve any part of the repealed Act (such
as section 125) to apply to the recovery of any amount paid out of the
fund to compensate the claimants.
98. The Tribunal rejects Mr
Bradley’s submissions on this point. Section 604 is set out in full
604 Former fund
The rights and liabilities of
the former fund are taken to be the rights
and liabilities of the claim
A claim that has been made against the former fund, and not
before the commencement, continues as if it were a claim against the
If, before the commencement, a person could have
made a claim
against the former fund but did not make the claim, the person
the claim against the claim fund.
If, before the
commencement, the committee had started a
proceeding to recover an amount
paid out of the former fund, the
proceeding is taken to have been started by
the chief executive as if the
amount had been paid out of the claim
If, had the repealed Act not been repealed, the committee
could start
a proceeding to recover an amount paid out of the former fund,
executive may start the proceeding as if the amount had been paid
the claim fund.
The repealed Act applies to a proceeding
under subsection (4) or (5),
with necessary changes, as if the repealed Act
had not been repealed.
99. The relevant section of section 604 is
subsection (1) which provides that the rights and liabilities of the former fund
to be the rights and liabilities of the claim fund. Just as the
liability to reimburse the Feeneys becomes a liability of the claim
fund, so too
does the right to recover from Mr Bilborough under section 125 of the repealed
Act become a right of the claim fund.
100. Accordingly, the Tribunal
finds that Mr Bilborough, as a director of NAPC, is liable to compensate the
fund in respect of the
payment to the Feeneys.
101. On the basis of
the evidence, and applying section125 of the repealed Act, the Tribunal finds
that the first and fifth respondents
are jointly and severally liable to
compensate the claim fund in the amount of $107,820 and the amount of costs to
be determined
in accordance with paragraph 91 by the certification of a
qualified cost assessor.
Second Order
Tribunal orders that the Respondents reimburse the claim fund in the amount of
$107,820 plus the amount of costs to be determined
in accordance with paragraph
91 by the certification of a qualified cost assessor, in accordance with
sections 490 and 491 of the
......................................................
B COTTERELL - CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents and Motor Dealers
Sue Johnson Molly Robson Brett
Member Member Member
mE:\Case Management Files\2001\W-
Claim\W002-01\Decision\W002-01D27-06-02.DOC
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (260 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter