URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2024/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Namrog Investments Pty Ltd v Pembroke Olive Downs Pty Ltd [2024] QLAC 2 (2 August 2024)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Namrog Investments Pty Ltd v Pembroke Olive Downs Pty Ltd
NAMROG INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
ACN 120 177
(appellant)
PEMBROKE OLIVE DOWNS PTY
ACN 611 674 376
(respondent)
Land Appeal Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
Appeal from the Land Court of Queensland
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
2 August 2024
DELIVERED AT:
Rockhampton
HEARING DATE:
13 June 2024
Clarke DCJ, Acting Member of the Land
WA Isdale, Member of the Land Court
LAC003-23 is allowed.
respondent is to pay the appellant’s costs of and incidental to this
appeal to be assessed on the standard basis.
the purpose of
Mineral and Energy Resources (Common Provisions)
words “an area used for ... [the purpose of a] dam” in
68(1)(b)(i)(A)
dam wall and the necessary works required to support the dam wall.
area of land over which water is impounded by the dam wall when the dam is at
maximum capacity.
water impounded by the dam.
do not include:
area of land over the surface of which water flows and supplies water to a dam;
watercourse along which water flows and supplies water to a dam;
LAC001-24 is allowed.
Costs in the hearing in the Land
Court to be the parties’ costs in the cause.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL – ERROR OF LAW
INTERPRETATION – GENERAL MATTERS – whether the court erred in
defining the word “dam” in
s 68(1)(b)(i)(A)
Mineral and
Energy Resources (Common Provisions) Act 2014
Mineral and Energy Resources (Common Provisions) Act 2014
Water Act 2000
(Qld), Sch 4
AB (a pseudonym) v Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption
[2024] HCA 10
Queensland Bulk Water Supply Authority t/as
Seqwater v Rodriguez & Sons Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWCA 206
Minister Administering the Water Management Act
[2014] NSWLEC 170
APPEARANCES:
Mr G A Thompson KC with Mr D Quayle (instructed by McCullough Robertson
Lawyers) for the appellant
Mr S Holt KC with Ms K McAuliffe-Lake (instructed by Allens) for the
appeal raises the question of the proper interpretation of s 68(1)(b)(i)(A) of
Mineral and Energy Resources (Common Provisions) Act 2014
’) which attempts to provide a measure of
to landowners by
including in the definition of “restricted land” land within 50m
laterally of an area used for the purposes
of an artesian well, bore, dam or
water storage facility.
Mineral and Energy Resources (Common Provisions) Act 2014
68 What is restricted land
Restricted land
, for a production resource authority or
exploration resource authority, means—
(a) land within 200m laterally of any of the following—
(i) a permanent building used for any of the following purposes—
(A) a residence;
(B) a childcare centre, hospital or library;
(C) a community, sporting or recreational purpose or as a place of
(D) a business;
(ii) an area used for any of the following purposes—
(A) a school;
(B) a prescribed ERA, under the Environmental Protection Act, that is
aquaculture, intensive animal feedlotting, pig keeping or poultry
(iii) an area, building or structure prescribed by regulation; or
(b) land within 50m laterally of any of the following—
(i) an area used for any of the following purposes—
(A) an artesian well, bore, dam or water storage facility;
(B) a principal stockyard;
(C) a cemetery or burial place;
(ii) an area, building or structure prescribed by regulation.
Restricted land
, for a resource authority other than a
production resource authority or exploration resource authority, means land
within 50m laterally
of any area, building or structure mentioned in subsection
(3) However, despite subsection (1), land is only restricted land for a
production resource authority if the use of the area, building
or structure
mentioned in the subsection started before the application for the resource
authority was made.
(4) In this section—
exploration resource authority
means a resource authority that
(a) an exploration permit or mineral development licence under the Mineral
Resources Act; or
(b) an authority to prospect under the P&G Act; or
(c) an authority to prospect under the 1923 Act; or
(d) a geothermal exploration permit under the Geothermal Act; or
(e) a GHG exploration permit under the Greenhouse Gas Act.
place of worship
means a place used for the public religious
activities of a religious association, including, for example, the charitable,
educational
and social activities of the association.
production resource authority
means a resource authority that
(a) any of the following under the Mineral Resources Act—
a mining lease;
(b) any of the following under the P&G Act—
a petroleum
a petroleum
facility licence; or
(c) a lease under the 1923 Act; or
(d) a geothermal production lease under the Geothermal Act; or
(e) a GHG injection and storage lease under the Greenhouse Gas Act.
water storage facility
(a) means an artificially constructed water storage facility that is connected
to a water supply; and
(b) does not include an interconnecting water pipeline.”
[3] The area of
restricted land that is 50m laterally from an artesian well, bore, or water
storage facility is a matter which is,
ordinarily, easily determined as the area
of the well, bore or water storage facility is easily determined. The same
cannot be said
with respect to the word “dam”. The primary judge was
right to accept the submission of the parties that in order to
determine what
the area used for the purposes of a dam consisted of, it was necessary to
provide a definition of the word “dam”.
Water Act 2000
, does not include a definition of the word
“dam”. The primary judge was asked to decide whether
s 68(1)(b)(i)(A)
meant only the physical barrier
constructed to impound the water or the barrier and area of water so impounded.
[4] Orders 3 and
4 of her Honour’s orders need to be considered. They
“3. For the purpose of
Resources (Common Provisions) Act
(Qld), a 'dam' is the
artificially constructed wall or barrier built to obstruct the flow of, and
impound, water.
the purpose of section 68 (1) of the
Mineral Resources (Common Provisions)
2014 (Qld):
a) the words “an area used for ... [the purpose of a] dam” in
section 68(1)(b)(i)(A)
not include:
area of land over the surface of which water flows and supplies water to a dam;
watercourse along which water flows and supplies water to a dam;
do include:
dam wall and the necessary works required to support the dam
[5] As may be
observed from orders 3 and 4, the primary judge construed a “dam” as
the artificially constructed wall or
barrier built to obstruct the flow of or
impound water, but excluded the area of land over the surface of which water
flows and supplies
water to a dam, or a watercourse along which water flows and
supplies water to a dam.
[6] The primary
judge concluded
that the proper
interpretation of the word “dam” in s 68(1)(b)(i)(A) of the
was that it is “the artificially constructed wall or barrier
built to obstruct the flow of and impound water” rather
than that physical
barrier and the water that it contains.
[7] The primary
judge was attracted to the former definition for three reasons. Firstly, the
uncertainty argument. That is the
needs specific metes and bounds
to operate effectively and the definition of a dam with reference to the dam
wall provides that certainty
as opposed to the inclusion of the area of water of
the dam which may fluctuate considerably depending on seasonal rainfall.
the infrastructure argument, namely that the text of s 68 is
directed towards infrastructure and the dam wall is infrastructure as
the area of pondage of the dam. Thirdly, the statutory construction argument,
that the construction of s 68 is directed
towards the integrity of the
infrastructure, not the use of the infrastructure. The third argument is that
the buffer areas of 50m
laterally in respect of s 68(1)(b) and 200m laterally in
respect of s 68(1)(a) suggests that it was Parliament’s intention
preserve the integrity of the infrastructure itself as opposed to its use; the
example that was provided was that an open cut
coal mine can be constructed up
to 50m laterally from a principal stock yard, thus isolating the principal stock
yard and rendering
its use otiose, thus while the integrity of that asset itself
is not to be compromised it may be rendered useless.
[8] The most
persuasive of the primary judge’s reasoning is the uncertainty argument.
The primary judge’s interpretation
solves that by restricting the
definition of dam to the “artificially constructed wall or barrier built
to obstruct the flow
of and impound water”. While it may be accepted that
the narrow definition of the word “dam” is a convenient construction
as it avoids the uncertainty problem, it would seem that such reasoning ought
not to be accepted. Just because the expansive definition
may create a difficult
factual question as to the proper dimensions of a dam, that is not sufficient
reason to prefer a highly restrictive
definition of the word “dam”
which is significantly prejudicial to the rights of a landowner.
[9] In terms of
the infrastructure argument that was considered by the primary judge as
persuasive, it would seem that all of the
earthworks utilised in the
construction of a dam, accepting there are many types of dams, can properly be
considered to be infrastructure.
This includes not only the dam wall but the
floor of the dam which may be constructed by heavy plant, such as a scraper.
[10] As to the
third argument, namely that s 68 is directed towards integrity of the
infrastructure, not its use, it appears that
the answer is that the
is directed to regulation of rights of landowners to many
different types of resource activities. Accordingly, a construction based
on a postulated scenario asset isolated as a result of an open cut coal mine as
being persuasive, ought not to be accepted.
A purpose of the
is to provide a
common process to resolve the rights of landowners and resource operators in
respect of many different types of resource
operation, i.e. underground coal,
gas, petroleum or exploration, which may not create asset isolation.
[11] Despite the
primary judge’s reasoning in accepting the narrow definition of the word
“dam”, there are three
reasons why the preferable definition of the
word “dam” is the broader definition, that is, a dam is the barrier
the area of the land storing the water contained by the barrier (and
therefore the water contained in the area of land).
[12] The first
point in aid of this interpretation is that the definition and use of restricted
land as defined in s 68 is a provision
inserted by Parliament to provide
some small degree of protection for the rights of a landowner; it is a classical
remedial provision
and therefore ought to be construed beneficially, that is, in
the interests of the landowner.
[13] The second
point is that the ordinary use of the word “dam” includes not only
the infrastructure or embankment creating
the pondage but the area of pondage
created by the wall. Thus, as submitted by senior counsel for the appellant, it
is an ordinary
and natural use of the meaning of the word “dam” to
“go fishing, swimming or boating in a dam” and the artificial
structure or embankment holding the water is ordinarily referred to as the dam
[14] The third
point is that Parliament has acknowledged that there are differences in meaning
between the words “artesian well”,
“dam”, or “water storage facility” and Parliament has
deliberately not included other
as levy banks in the definition in
s 68(1)(b).
Reading the Act as
Parliament has
acknowledged the difference between a “dam” and a “water
storage facility” which supports
a broader and not a narrow interpretation
of the word “dam”.
consequence of accepting a broader definition of a “dam”, is that
the uncertainty argument is not definitively
resolved. The appellants accept
that the watercourses which deliver water flow to a dam ought not be considered
part of a dam which
creates the uncertainty point, that is, where a watercourse
ceases and where a dam commences. That is a question of fact, which may
uncertainty in the case of any particular dam, however that ought not be a
reason for preference of a construction of the
word “dam” which does
not follow its ordinary natural meaning. The facts in the present appeal show
that there are many
fact as to the extent of the dam and therefore area of land used for
purposes of a dam may, for example, in the case of a turkey’s nest dam, be
quite a simple matter.
[16] There are
other types of dams, for example, where a large creek or watercourse is dammed
which may create some factual uncertainty
as to the parameters of the dam. That
factual uncertainty is, however, not a sufficient reason to adopt an
artificially narrow construction
of the word “dam” in circumstances
where s 68 is remedial and protective of the rights of the landowner. As a
ordinarily fed by the operation of gravity upon water, the height of the
lowest point of any dam wall will determine the volumetric
capacity and surface
area of the dam; dams are ordinarily described by reference to their surface
area and volumetric capacity.
Accordingly, in terms of s 68(1)(b)(i)(A) of the
, which emphasises
the “use” of an area of land for the purposes of a
“dam”, the area of land used for the
purpose of a dam is the area of
land over which the water is impounded by the dam wall when the dam is at
maximum capacity. This
may be determined by survey evidence or other evidence
and will be a question of fact to be determined in each case.
[17] In our
view, it is unnecessary in the present appeal to provide any guidelines for the
resolution of any factual question of
what the parameters of any particular dam
are other than to say it is a question of fact to be decided upon the evidence
application.
[18] The appeal
ought to be allowed and the appellant ought to have its costs of the appeal and
hearing below. The appropriate orders
LAC003-23 is allowed.
respondent is to pay the appellant’s costs of and incidental to this
appeal to be assessed on the standard basis.
the purpose of
Mineral and Energy Resources (Common Provisions)
words “an area used for ... [the purpose of a] dam” in
68(1)(b)(i)(A)
dam wall and the necessary works required to support the dam wall.
area of land over which water is impounded by the dam wall when the dam is at
maximum capacity.
water impounded by the dam.
do not include:
area of land over the surface of which water flows and supplies water to a dam;
watercourse along which water flows and supplies water to a dam;
LAC001-24 is allowed.
Costs in the hearing in the
Land Court to be the parties’ costs in the cause.
Mineral and Energy
Resources (Common Provisions) Act 2014
Pearce Statutory
Interpretation 9
Ed paragraph 9.2.
This can be compared to the
Schedule 4 definition of a “dam” in the
Water Act 2000
specifically excludes “a levee”.
AB (a pseudonym) v
Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission
[2024] HCA 10
Zizza v Minister
Administering the Water Management Act
[2014] NSWLEC 170, (Pain
Queensland Bulk Water Supply Authority t/as Seqwater v Rodriguez & Sons
[2021] NSWCA 206
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (208 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter