URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/65.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
B33 and A Magistrates Court of Queensland [2025] QICmr 65 (8 October 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
B33 and A Magistrates Court of Queensland
[2025] QICmr 65 (8
October 2025)
Application Number:
Respondent:
A Magistrates Court of Queensland
Decision Date:
8 October 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS -
DOCUMENTS NONEXISTENT OR UNLOCATABLE - application for CCTV recordings
access may be refused on the basis the recordings are nonexistent or unlocatable
section 67(1)
Information Privacy Act 2009
Right to Information Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied under the
Information Privacy Act 2009
) to access two closed circuit television recordings depicting the
applicant at the Atherton Courthouse on 28 May 2024 and 21 June
) and a body worn camera recording of the applicant at a
particular police station on 27 March 2024 (
the applicant sought documents held by separate agencies, the Magistrates Court
) dealt only with the part of the access application which sought
the CCTV Recordings.
Court decided,
under section 52 of
the IP Act, that the part of the access application which requested CCTV
Recordings fell outside the scope of
the IP Act, as the CCTV Recordings related
to the judicial functions of the Court.
applicant applied
to the Office of
the Information Commissioner (
) for external review of the
Court’s decision about the CCTV
Recordings.
The Department of
) provided submissions on behalf of the Court during
the review.
the reasons set out below, I vary the decision under review and find that access
to the CCTV Recordings may be refused on the
basis they do not
8 July 2024, the applicant provided a written request to the Court, seeking
access the CCTV Recordings (
Initial Request
after receiving the Initial Request, the Court notified the applicant that the
CCTV Recordings did not include sound and asked
whether the applicant wished to
proceed with the Initial Request.
The applicant confirmed that they did wish to proceed.
to that confirmation, the applicant was informed that certain approval was
required in respect of the Initial Request.
applicant sought updates from the Court about the progress of the Initial
Request and, on 13 December 2024, the Court notified
the applicant that the CCTV
Recordings were no longer available to be retrieved from the server.
applicant was dissatisfied with the manner in which the Initial Request had been
dealt with and subsequently lodged the formal
access application.
Reviewable decision
decision under review is the Court’s decision dated 13 June 2025.
Evidence considered
evidence, submissions, legislation and other material I have considered in
reaching my decision are set out in these reasons.
have also had regard to the
Human Rights Act 2019
), particularly the right to seek and receive
information.
I consider a
decision-maker will be ‘
respecting and acting compatibly
’ that right and others prescribed in the HR Act, when applying
the law prescribed in the RTI Act.
I have acted in this way in making this decision, in accordance with section
58(1) of the HR Act.
applicant provided a number of submissions to OIC. I have summarised and
addressed the applicant’s submissions below, to
the extent they are
relevant to the issue for determination.
respect of the submissions that are not relevant to the issue for determination,
these generally relate to concerns the applicant
has about the manner in which
the Initial Request was dealt
While I acknowledge the
applicant’s disappointment with not being able to obtain the CCTV
Recordings via the Initial Request
(that is, outside the IP Act formal
access process), the formal access application (not the Initial Request) is the
subject of the
decision under review. OIC’s jurisdiction under the IP Act
relates only to decisions made about access to
held by government
agencies and does not extend to any consideration of the applicant’s
concerns about the separate process
associated with the Initial Request.
Accordingly, in this decision, I have not addressed the applicant’s
submissions which
are not relevant to the issue for determination.
Issue for determination
external review, the Department maintained that the application for the CCTV
Recordings fell outside the scope of the IP Act, as
the recordings related to
the judicial functions of the
However, the Department
also confirmed that, in any event, the CCTV Recordings were no longer in
existence, having been overwritten
prior to the Court’s receipt of the
access application.
issue for determination is therefore whether access to the CCTV Recordings may
be refused under the IP Act, on the basis they
do not exist or cannot be
Relevant law
the IP Act, an individual has a right to be given access to documents of a
Queensland government agency, to the extent they
contain the individual’s
personal information.
access right is subject to limitations, including the grounds on which access to
information may be refused.
may be refused to a document where the document is nonexistent or
unlocatable.
be satisfied that a document does not exist, the Information Commissioner has
previously identified key factors to consider, which
administrative arrangements of government
agency’s structure
agency’s functions and
responsibilities
agency’s practices and procedures (including but not exclusive to its
information management approach); and
other factors
reasonably inferred from information supplied by the applicant including the
nature and age of the requested document/s
and the nature of the government
activity to which the request relates.
may not be necessary for searches to be conducted when proper consideration is
given to relevant factors. Rather, it is sufficient
that the relevant
circumstances to account for the nonexistent document are adequately explained
by the agency.
exist—if searches are relied on
to justify a decision that the documents
do not exist, all reasonable steps must be taken to locate the
What constitutes
reasonable steps will vary from case to
assessing an agency’s searches, the Information Commissioner has confirmed
the relevant question is whether the agency has
steps to identify and locate documents, as opposed to all
determine whether a document exists, but is unlocatable, requires consideration
of whether there are reasonable grounds to be satisfied
that the requested
document has been or should be in the agency’s possession; and whether the
agency has taken all reasonable
steps to find
In answering these
questions, regard should again be had to the circumstances of the case and the
key factors set out above.
section 137(2) of the IP Act, the Information Commissioner’s external
review functions include investigating and reviewing
whether agencies have taken
reasonable steps to identify and locate documents applied for by
applicants.
QCAT has confirmed
that the equivalent provision in the RTI Act ‘
does not contemplate that
[the Information Commissioner]
will in some way check an agency’s
records for relevant documents
’ and that, ultimately, the Information
Commissioner is dependent on the agency’s officers to do the actual
for relevant
the agency that made the decision under review has the onus of establishing that
the decision was justified or that the
Information Commissioner should give a
decision adverse to the
However, where an
external review involves the issue of missing documents and the decision under
review indicates the conducted
the requested documents would likely be
there is a practical
onus placed on the applicant to establish reasonable grounds to believe that the
agency has not discharged its
obligation to locate all relevant documents.
Suspicion and mere assertion will not satisfy this
the Court confirmed to the applicant on 10 July 2024 that the CCTV Recordings
did not have sound, I consider it is reasonable
to conclude that they existed on
on external review, the Department has confirmed that:
it has a routine
overwrite process in place for CCTV footage after 30 days
Recordings were not extracted at the time of the Initial Request; and
the Court had
notified the applicant, prior to her lodgement of the formal access application,
that the CCTV Recordings were no longer
able to be retrieved from the
Court’s server.
the review, a search was conducted of the Court’s registry drive, where
the CCTV Recordings would, if they existed, be
stored. The CCTV Recordings were
not located by this search, which was conducted by a senior officer within
Information Technology
Services division of the
Department.
There is nothing
before me which calls into question the efficacy of this conducted search.
considered the information before me, including the parties’ submissions,
I am satisfied that all reasonable steps have
been taken to locate the CCTV
Recordings and access to them may be
on the basis they do
the reasons set out above, I vary the reviewable
and find that access to
the CCTV Recordings may be refused on the basis they do not
have made this decision as a delegate of the Information Commissioner, under
section 139 of the IP Act
Principal Review Officer
Date: 8 October 2025
Access application dated 9 May 2025. On
1 July 2025, key parts of the
Information Privacy and Other
Legislation Act 2023
) came into force, effecting
changes to the IP Act and
Right to Information Act 2009
). As the applicant’s access application was made before this
change, the IP Act and RTI Act
as in force prior to 1 July 2025
remain applicable to it. This is in accordance with transitional provisions in
Chapter 7, Part 9 of the RTI Act, which require that
applications on foot before
1 July 2025 are to be dealt with as if the IPOLA Act had not been
enacted. Accordingly, references to
the IP Act and RTI Act in this decision are
to those Acts
as in force prior to 1 July 2025
Decision dated
13 June 2025, which was
issued by the
Assistant Director-General/Principal Registrar of the Magistrates Court Service.
10 July 2025.
Accordingly, this decision does not deal with the applicant’s request for
the BWC footage.
Under section
67(1) of the IP Act and sections 47(3)(e) and 52(1) of the RTI Act.
The applicant submitted this
notification from the Court was received on 10 July 2024.
Section 21 of the HR Act.
XYZ v Victoria Police
[2010] VCAT 255
(16 March 2010) (
) at [573];
v Department of Justice (General)
[2012] VCAT 241
(2 March 2012) at [111].
This approach, in the context of the IP Act and RTI Act, was endorsed by
Judicial Member DJ McGill SC in
Lawrence v Queensland Police Service
[2022] QCATA 134
, observing that the Information Commissioner
was conscious
[of the right to seek and receive information]
and considered that the application of the Act gave effect to the
requirements of the
Human Rights Act
. I see no reason to differ from that
the following observations made by Bell J in
at [573], on the
interaction between equivalent pieces of Victorian legislation (namely, the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Vic) and the
Charter of Human Rights
and Responsibilities Act 2006
it is perfectly compatible
with the scope of that positive right in the Charter for it to be observed by
reference to the scheme of,
and principles in, the
Freedom of Information
example, the applicant’s email dated 9 September 2025 requested
research...the veracity of
’ statements made by
Court staff concerning the approvals required in respect of the Initial Request.
And, where relevant,
amendment of documents.
Under section 52 of the IP Act, an agency may decide that an application is
outside the scope of the Act if it is made to an entity
that is not an agency of
the purpose of Chater 3 of the IP Act. By virtue of other legislative
provisions (that is, section 17 of
the IP Act, sections 14 and 17 of the
RTI Act and schedule 2, part 2, items 1 and 2 of the RTI Act), an application
made to the following
entities will fall outside of the IP Act:
• a court or the holder of a judicial office or other office connected
with a court, in relation to the court’s judicial
functions; and
• a registry or other office of a court, or the staff of a registry or
other office of a court in relation to their official
capacity, so far as its or
their functions relate to the court’s judicial functions.
Given the findings I have
made about this issue, it has not been necessary to also address whether the
CCTV Recordings, or any of
them, fall outside the scope of the IP Act.
Section 40 of the IP Act.
The grounds on which access
can be refused are set out in section 47 of the RTI Act. Section 67(1) of the
IP Act provides that access
may be refused to information in the same way
and to the same extent as information may be refused under the RTI Act.
Sections 47(3)(e) and 52(1)
of the RTI Act. A document is unlocatable if it has been or should be in the
agency’s possession
and all reasonable steps have been taken to find the
document but it cannot be found—section 52(1)(b) of the RTI Act. A
is nonexistent if there are reasonable grounds to be satisfied the
document does not exist—section 52(1)(a) of the RTI Act.
These factors are
identified in
Pryor and Logan City Council
(Unreported, Queensland
Information Commissioner, 8 July 2010) (
) at [19], which
adopted the Information Commissioner’s comments in
PDE and the
University of Queensland
(Unreported, Queensland Information Commissioner, 9
February 2009) at [37]-[38] (
). These factors were more
recently considered in
Van Veenendaal and Queensland Police Service
[2017] QICmr 36
(28 August 2017)
at [23]-[25] and
Queensland Corrective Services
[2020] QICmr 68
(17 November 2020) at
Particularly
with respect to the legislation for which it has administrative responsibility
and the other legal obligations that
fall to it.
For example, where a
particular document was not created because the agency’s processes do not
involve creating that specific
document. In such instances, it is not necessary
for the agency to search for the document.
As set out in
As the search and
enquiry process an agency will be required to undertake will depend on which of
the key factors are most relevant
in the particular circumstances.
S55 and Queensland
Police Service
[2023] QICmr 3
(30 January 2023) at [23], cited with approval
W55 and Brisbane City Council
[2024] QICmr 13
(17 April 2024) at [19].
Section 52(1)(b) of the RTI
The Information Commissioner also has power under section 115 of the IP Act to
require additional searches to be conducted during
an external review.
Webb v Information
Commissioner
[2021] QCATA 116
Section 100(1) of the IP
In reviewing such
information, the Information Commissioner (or delegate) may form a view that an
agency has taken reasonable steps
to identify and locate requested documents.
Parnell and Queensland
Police Service
[2017] QICmr 8
(7 March 2017) at [23];
Rockhampton Regional Council
[2017] QICmr 49
(6 October 2017) at [36];
Y44 and T99 and Office of the Public Guardian
[2019] QICmr 62
December 2019) at [38].
division forms part of the Department’s Corporate Services unit.
Under section 67(1) of the
IP Act and sections 47(3)(e) and 52(1) of the RTI Act.
Under section 123(1)(c) of
the IP Act.
Under section
67(1) of the IP Act and sections 47(3)(e) and 52(1) of the RTI Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (356 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter