URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRVT/2002/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Glanville, Reginald v Australian Retirement Homes Ltd [2002] QRVT 2 (13 August 2002)
RETIREMENT VILLAGES TRIBUNAL
[2002] QRVT 2
13 AUGUST 2002
APPLICATION NO:
GLANVILLE, REGINALD A
RESPONDENT:
AUSTRALIAN RETIREMENT HOMES LTD
DATE OF HEARING:
24 JULY 2002
[2002] QRVT 2
REASON FOR DECISION:
This is an application by Reginald A
Glanville, (Mr Glanville)
against Australian Retirement Homes Ltd ("AHR")
section 167
Retirement Villages Act 1999
which he seeks that ARH comply with
section 10.1
of the Public Information
Document (PID) and compensation of $10,000 for ARH’s “prolonged,
unprofessional and cruel handling
of this case by virtue of their not promptly
utilizing lease remedies”.
$5,000 was claimed as compensation for
Mrs Glanville, who was not an applicant in the proceedings, and the other $5,000
was claimed
as compensation for Mr Glanville.
The issue arose because of the parking by
the resident in unit 4 of his second vehicle in one of two car parks immediately
of Mr Glanville’s unit (No 3). Mr Glanville submitted that the two
car parks were visitor’s car parks and, as such, should
only be used by
visitors for short term parking and not by residents for permanent parking.
Mr Glanville submitted that the parking
of the vehicle in the car park on a permanent basis was interfering with his
ability to easily
reverse out of his garage and that it made it more unsafe and
hazardous. Secondly, he said that its presence spoiled his “panoramic
garden view”.
The matter came before this Tribunal for
determination on the papers by consent because neither party wished to
cross-examine any
of the other party’s witnesses.
The substantive issue in dispute, being
the use of the car park on a permanent basis by the resident of unit 4, had been
to mediation
arranged by the Tribunal and, due to the resident of unit 4
voluntarily participating in that mediation although not a party to this
application, had been resolved by agreement prior to the hearing.
The parties consented to the agreement
being made an order of the Tribunal but, as the resident of unit 4 was not a
party to this
application and because the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to
resolve disputes between residents of retirement villages, the Tribunal
make an order which binds the resident of unit 4. The Tribunal will discuss this
further later in these reasons.
This left Mr Glanville’s claim for
compensation, which had not been resolved at mediation, to be referred to the
Tribunal as
an outstanding matter under
section 167
Mr Glanville’s claim for
compensation was made under
section 191
which provides as
The tribunal may make the orders the
tribunal considers to be just to
resolve a retirement village
Without limiting subsection (1) or
sections 192
the tribunal
may make any 1 or more of the following orders—
order for a party to the issue to do, or not to do, anything
“enforcement order”
(b) an order requiring a party to
the issue to pay an amount
(including an amount of compensation) to a
specified person
“payment order”
(c) an order that
a party to the issue is not required to pay an amount
to a specified
(d) if the issue is a retirement village dispute—
order setting aside the mediation agreement between the
parties to the
dispute; or
(ii) an order giving effect to a settlement agreed on by
parties to the dispute.
An order may specify a time for
compliance with it.
If the person against whom the order is made
is not present when the
order is made, the chief executive must serve a copy
of the order on the
person as soon as practicable after it is made.
section 191(2)(b)
specifically refers
to compensation, the Tribunal determined that it had power to make the requested
order if it considered compensation
to be appropriate under the
circumstances.
Mr Glanville leased unit 3 in October/
November 1996 and the resident of unit 4 leased his unit at the same time.
According to Mr
Glanville the resident of unit 4 immediately started to park his
second vehicle in the relevant car park, which Mr Glanville refers
visitors’ parking space.
ARH took over the village as scheme
operator on 1 January 1998.
On 30 November 1998, Mr Glanville first
wrote to the village manager complaining about the use of the car park. For some
reason, which
is not explained on the material, the village manager failed to
respond to Mr Glanville’s letter of 30 November
On 18 March 1999, Mr Glanville wrote
to the General Manager of ARH. ARH responded on 9 April 1999 and followed up
with a more significant
response on 21 June 1999 which
“We have now reviewed the documentation for
the village, in particular clause 6.31 of the Lease. We are of the opinion that
the visitor car parking spaces are to be used only be visitors of residents on a
temporary basis and not long term. Mr Peter Skorupanovic
(the Village Manager)
has been advised of our opinion in this matter and will be contacting the
residents involved requesting that
they refrain from parking their vehicles in
the visitor car parking spaces.
Peter will also make mention of the use of
visitor car parking spaces in the next issue of the village newsletter.
The Tribunal has reviewed the sections
of the lease documentation and of the PID provided to us. The Tribunal is of the
opinion from
these documents that the relevant car parks were not designated for
exclusive use of visitors. In this regard the Tribunal notes
that the resident
of unit 4 submitted that he was orally told by the previous scheme operator that
he could use one of these parks
for his second vehicle. Other residents in the
near vicinity support the resident of unit 4 in this regard.
However, acting on Mr Glanville’s
complaint, ARH decided that the relevant car parks should be used only be
visitors of residents
on a temporary basis and not for long term resident
While the Tribunal accepts the rational
basis of this decision the Tribunal is not aware of any clause in the lease or
PID which would
empower ARH to enforce its decision. At that time it could only
act with the good will of the residents.
From Mr Glanville’s letter of 8
March 2000, it is clear that ARH tried to arrange a meeting between its
Operations Manager,
Mr Glanville and that the resident of unit 4 on 4 October
1999 but this was not convenient to Mr Glanville who did not attend because
prior commitment.
Mr Glanville first referred to the
question of damages in his letter to the Managing Director of Forrester Kurts
Properties dated
21 January 2000. He sent a follow-up letter to Forrester Kurts
Properties on 25 February 2000. Forrester Kurts Properties, although
scheme operator, responded to Mr Glanville by letter dated 1 March 2000 and
referred to his being contacted by both ARH’s
General Manager and
Operations Manager.
Forrester Kurts Properties stated that
ARH’s Operations Manager was to set up meeting with Mr Glanville and Mr
Glanville’s
neighbour (the resident of unit 4) and urged Mr Glanville
“to attend the meeting if at all possible so that a resolution may
reached to everyone’s satisfaction”.
It appears that the ARH’s General
Manager wrote to Mr Glanville on 28 February 2000 although the Tribunal was not
given a copy
of this letter but we were given Mr Glanville’s reply of 8
March 2000.
ARH’s Village Manager also wrote
to Mr Glanville about 10 April 2000, although the Tribunal was not given a copy
of this letter
but we were given Mr Glanville’s reply of 12 April 2000. By
this letter it appears that ARH’s Village Manager sought
to arrange a
meeting between ARH, Mr Glanville and the resident of unit 4. Mr Glanville
seems to have been opposed to such a meeting
and it does not appear to have
eventuated.
The Tribunal notes that Mr Glanville was
upset in his letter to Forrester Kurts Properties of 25 February 2000 about what
he referred
to as the breach of his lease agreement by the resident of unit 4.
Without making a final determination on this question, because
it was not before
the Tribunal for decision, from the documentation supplied to the Tribunal by
the parties in relation to Mr Glanville’s
lease this would not appear to
be the case because the relevant car parks were not designated for exclusive use
of visitors.
The resident of unit 4 failed to comply
with ARH’s “decision” about the use of these car parks and
after further
complaints by Mr Glanville, on 5 June 2000 the Village Manager
issued a Notice to the relevant residents that “the use of this
space be for visitors parking only.”
It is of relevance to note that the
commenced on 1 July 2000.
In his letter of 17 July 2000 to ARH, Mr
Glanville “as an interim measure, and until this matter is finalized to my
satisfaction
it was decided (presumably by Mr Glanville) that an amount of $20
per week will be withheld from our maintenance levy for every week
of the misuse
and from your takeover date of 1.7.98.”
On 1 September 2000, Mr Glanville again
wrote to Forrester Kurts Properties and not ARH who was the scheme operator and
person to whom he should have been sending his complaints. Forrester
Kurts Properties had no legal obligation to Mr Glanville whereas
Mr Glanville in his letter to Forrester
Kurts Properties of 1 September 2000, accused ARH of breaching its obligations
to him under
the lease and of aggravating the frustration and annoyance
resulting from the misuse of the car park. He also accused ARH of failing
its remedy of lease termination and “call the offender’s
bluff”. He then suggested that ARH “found
cause to fabricate a
dispute between the offender and myself”.
The Tribunal notes the letter from ARH
of 21 September 2000 which confirms that the resident of unit 4 failed to comply
“decision” but that ARH’s Village Manager had
followed the matter up with him and that he had “agreed to
vehicle in the street outside the village”.
However, it is clear from Mr
Glanville’s letter of 6 October 2000, that the resident of unit 4
continued to breach the agreement
with ARH’s Village
ARH’s Operation’s Manager
then had a meeting on 25 October 2000 with the resident of unit 4 who again
agreed to obey the
conditions with regard to the car park.
It is clear from Mr Glanville’s
letters of 28 February 2001, 4 April 2001 and 1 May 2001, that the resident of
unit 4 continued
to breach the agreement with ARH’s Village
On 18 May 2001, ARH’s
Operation’s Manager again wrote to Mr Glanville and advised him that the
resident of unit 4 was
contending that he had been told by the previous scheme
operator that he could park in the car park and that he was supported by
other residents who had taken up a petition to request that ARH stop the
pressure being applied to the resident of unit 4. He
requested a response from
Mr Glanville.
Mr Glanville responded on 30 May
On 7 June 2001, ARH’s
Operation’s Manager again wrote to Mr Glanville and advised him that ARH
“was reluctant to
remove a resident in their late eighties (the resident
of unit 4) for parking in an area where he was told he could
Mr Glanville responded on 11 July 2001
and sent a further letter seeking a response to his letter of 11 July 2001 on 15
August 2001.
On 20 August 2001, ARH’s
Operation’s Manager again wrote to Mr Glanville and advised him that, as
Mr Glanville had said
that he was going to the Tribunal, ARH were awaiting
directions from the Tribunal.
Mr Glanville filed this application in
the Tribunal on 16 November 2001. It was referred to mediation on 19 November
2001, and an
agreement was reached in relation to the car park on 6 December
On 26 September 2001, Mr Glanville again
wrote to Forrester Kurts Properties but, somewhat understandably, there is no
evidence that
Forrester Kurts Properties replied on this
The Tribunal finds on the basis of the
evidence that ARH did not breach its obligations to Mr Glanville under the lease
but that it
sought to comply with his requests by determining that relevant car
parks should be used only by visitors of residents on a temporary
basis and not
The Tribunal finds that ARH had no legal
basis to enforce this decision that the car parks only be for the use of
visitors of residents
on a temporary basis and not long term. This decision,
therefore, was subject to challenge unless ARH could obtain the agreement
relevant residents.
The Tribunal further finds that ARH
adopted a reasonable approach in endeavouring to arrange meetings between ARH,
Mr Glanville and
the resident of unit 4 for the purpose of reaching a negotiated
settlement of the dispute.
ARH could have attempted to rely upon
the “agreement” which it obtained from the resident of unit 4 and
referred to in
ARH’s letter of 20 September 2000. However it appears that
ARH did not obtain this agreement in writing and that there was
no consideration
paid for it. Therefore, the tribunal finds that ARH’s right to enforce
this “agreement” is doubtful.
The Tribunal further finds that Mr
Glanville’s incorrect assessment of his rights under the lease and his
failure to attend
a meeting contributed to the delay and to his frustration in
resolving this dispute.
Likewise the tribunal finds that Mr
Glanville’s communicating with Forrester Kurts Properties instead with
ARH, the scheme operator,
was inappropriate and his actions resulted in the
number of persons who responded to his numerous letters of complaint.
the tribunal finds that he was the author of some of the complaints
which he relies upon for his compensation claim.
For these reasons the Tribunal considers
that Mr Glanville’s claim for compensation should be
Mrs Glanville is not an applicant and
the Tribunal received no material from Mr Glanville which would justify her
claim for compensation
which should be dismissed.
The Tribunal considers that the
mediation agreement entered into by the parties and by ARH and the resident of
unit 4 provide a satisfactory
resolution of the dispute and that the Tribunal
should make an order on the basis of that agreement for the on-going enforcement
of Mr Glanville’s rights as they now exist.
This negotiated settlement will enable
ARH to enforce its decision in relation to the car park being for visitors
After considering all of the evidence
and for the reasons set-out above, the Tribunal makes the following
That ARH take whatever steps are
necessary, as soon as reasonably possible in all instances, to protect Mr
Glanville’s rights
section 6.3
of the lease by enforcing clause 6.31
in terms of the mediation agreement dated 6 December 2001 which ARH entered into
with Mr Glanville
and the resident of unit
That the application for compensation on
behalf of both Mr and Mrs Glanville is
That these Orders and these
....................................................
B A COTTERELL - CHAIRPERSON
for the RETIREMENT VILLAGES
Barry Cotterell Marcia Wilson Peter
Chairperson Member Member
GJU:E:\Decision\2001-dec\Retirement
Villages\V011-02D13-08-02.rtf
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (49.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter