URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2016/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Schloss v Bell; Bell v Schloss [2016] ICQ 17 (7 September 2016)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Schloss v Bell; Bell v Schloss
[2016] ICQ 017
Schloss, Dennis William
(Appellant)
Stewart Lynn Bell, Commissioner under the
Petroleum and Gas
(Production and Safety) Act
(Respondent)
Stewart Lynn Bell, Commissioner under the
Petroleum and Gas
(Production and Safety) Act
Schloss, Dennis William
(Appellant)
PROCEEDING:
An appeal against decision of Industrial Magistrate - Costs
DELIVERED ON:
7 September 2016
HEARING DATE:
7 June 2016
Deputy President O'Connor
The parties are invited to submit orders on the appeal and the costs of
the hearing below.
CATCHWORDS:
PROCEDURE - COSTS - Power to award costs in Industrial Magistrates Court
proceedings - Whether costs must be determined at the time
of the dismissal of a
complaint - Where the Industrial Court has power to award costs exercising its
appellate jurisdiction - Power
of the Industrial Court to amend order dismissing
complaint - Power under the "slip rule" to correct an error or oversight to
the real intention of the Court - Quantum of costs - Whether costs
should be awarded on an indemnity basis - Whether the matter
was of "special
difficulty, complexity or importance" - Whether the cross-appeal was made
vexatiously or without reasonable cause".
Industrial Relations Act
1999, ss 329, 335, 341
Justices Act
Justices Regulation 2004
Schedule 2, reg 18
Industrial Relations (Tribunals) Rules
Petroleum and Gas (Production Safety) Act
2004 (Qld) ss 670,
APPEARANCES:
Bell v Carter; Ex Parte Bell
[1992] QCA 245
Morley v Senewirantne & Anor
[2008] QDC 296
Gibson v Canniffe; Kidd v Baragan; Slabon v Moore
Harrison v President of the Industrial Court of Queensland & Ors
[2016] QCA 89
Storey & Keers Pty Ltd v Johnstone
(1987) 9 NSWLR 446
Hatton v Harris
[1892] UKLawRpAC 30
[1892] AC 547
Elyard Corporation Pty Ltd v DDB Needham Sydney Pty Ltd
Ray and Sue Boundy Pty Ltd v Daniel Paul Gwydir
[1999] QIC 55
(1999) 162 QGIG
Raybos Australia Pty Ltd v Tectran Corporation Pty Ltd
[1988] HCA 2
(1988) 77 ALR
L Shaddock & Associates Pty Ltd v Parramatta City Council
[1982] HCA 59
(1982) 151 CLR 590
Wentworth v Woollahra Municipal Council
(1982) 149 CLR 256
Gould v Vaggelas
(1985) 157 CLR 215
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
MacPherson v Commissioner of Taxation
[1998] QCA 396
Murray v Radford
[2003] QCA 91
Cullinane v McCahon
[2014] QDC 120
Senior Constable Sheehan v Leo
[2016] QDC 131
Whitby v Stockair Pty Ltd & Anor
[2015] QDC 79
Interclean Industrial Services Ltd v Auckland Regional Council
[2000] 3 NZLR 489
Bell and Gordon v Uniman Australia Pty Ltd (No. 4)
Morley v Senewiratne & Anor
[2008] QDC 296
Washbourne v State Energy Commission of Western Australia
Hickey v Crime and Misconduct Commission
[2008] QDC 340
Bell v Schloss
[2014] QMC 23
MIM Holdings Ltd v AMWU
[2000] QIC 38
(2000) 164 QGIG 370.
Newport Pajingo Pty Ltd v Tomac Enterprises Pty Ltd
[2005] QIC 30
179 QGIG 145
Bow Park Pty Ltd v Williams
[2003] QIC 175
(2003) 175 QGIG 18
Mr P.J. Roney QC, Counsel instructed by Ashurst Australia for the appellant
and cross-respondent.
Mr M.D. Nicolson, Counsel instructed by Crown Law for the respondent and
cross-appellant.
[1] On 12 September 2014, the appellant was found guilty of an offence under s
Petroleum and Gas (Production Safety) Act
2004 (Qld) in that
he had failed to comply with safety procedures and obligations under the Safety
Management Plan (SMP) for an operating
plant to the extent the procedures and
obligations applied to him.
[2] On 24 December 2015 the Court allowed the appeal against his conviction,
setting aside the guilty verdict and dismissing the
complaint in matter
C/2014/43. The respondent's cross-appeal in matter C/2014/44 was also
[3] The appellant having succeeded on the appeal seeks costs of both the
proceedings in the Industrial Magistrates Court and in this
Court on the
cross-appeal.
The Legislation
Industrial Relations Act
1999 (the "IR Act") is a grant of power
to the Court to award costs on an appeal. Section 335 of the IR Act provides as
335 General power to award costs
(1) The court or commission may order a party to an application to pay costs,
including witness expenses and other expenses, incurred
by another party only if
satisfied -
(a) the party made the application vexatiously or without reasonable cause; or
(b) for an application for reinstatement - the party caused costs, including
witness expenses and other expenses, to be incurred
by the other party because
of an unreasonable act or omission connected with the conduct of the
proceedings.
(2) In making an order, the court or commission may order a party to pay another
party an amount reasonably payable to a person,
who is not a lawyer, for
representing the other party."
[5] The relevant statutory provisions dealing with costs under the
are set out below:
"158 Costs on dismissal
(1) When justices instead of convicting or making an order dismiss the
complaint, they may by their order of dismissal order that
the complainant shall
pay to the defendant such costs as to them seem just and reasonable.
(2) When a complaint is before a Magistrates Court which the court has no
the complaint to be
struck out for want of jurisdiction and may order that the complainant pay to
the defendant such costs as to
the court seem just and
reasonable.
158A Exercise of discretion in relation to an award of costs
(1) Despite
section 158(1)
, justices who dismiss a complaint may make an
order for costs in favour of a defendant against a complainant who is a police
or public officer only if the justices are satisfied that it is proper
that the order for costs should be made.
(2) In deciding whether it is proper to make the order for costs, the
justices must take into account all relevant circumstances,
including, for
(a) whether the proceeding was brought and continued in good faith; and
(b) whether there was a failure to take appropriate steps to investigate a
matter coming to, or within, the knowledge of a person
responsible for bringing
or continuing the proceeding; and
(c) whether the investigation into the offence was conducted in an
appropriate way; and
(d) whether the order of dismissal was made on technical grounds and not on a
finding that there was insufficient evidence to convict
or make an order against
the defendant; and
(e) whether the defendant brought suspicion on himself or herself by conduct
engaged in after the events constituting the commission
of the offence; and
(f) whether the defendant unreasonably declined an opportunity before a
charge was laid -
to explain the defendant's version of the events; or
to produce evidence likely to exonerate the defendant;
and the explanation or evidence could have avoided a prosecution; and
(g) whether there was a failure to comply with a direction given under
section 83A
(h) whether the defendant conducted the defence in a way that prolonged the
proceeding unreasonably; and
(i) whether the defendant was acquitted on a charge, but convicted on
158B Costs for division
(1) In deciding the costs that are just and reasonable for this division, the
justices may award costs only -
(a) for an item allowed for this division under a scale of costs prescribed
under a regulation; and
(b) up to the amount allowed for the item under the scale.
(2) However, the justices may allow a
higher amount for costs if the
justices are satisfied that the higher amount is just and reasonable having
regard to the special difficulty,
complexity or importance of the case.
(emphasis added)
159 The sum allowed for costs to be specified in
the conviction or order
sum so allowed for costs shall in all cases be specified in the conviction or
order or order of dismissal, or order striking out
a complaint for want of
Power to award costs in the Industrial Magistrates
[6] The respondent contends that under s 335(1)(a) of the IR Act the Court may,
on appeal, only order a party to pay costs incurred
by another party if
satisfied that the party made the application vexatiously or without reasonable
cause. As a consequence, the
appellant does not have an entitlement to costs
below under s 335(1)(a) of the IR Act.
[7] It is submitted by the respondent that any power to grant costs in the
Industrial Magistrates Court proceedings must therefore
be derived from
Justices Act
[8] The respondent argues that the costs to be awarded to a defendant under
Justices Act
should be determined at the time of the
dismissal of the complaint. Therefore, the Court having ordered the dismissal
of the complaint
by its written decision on 24 December 2015 and entry onto the
court record is now beyond power and unable to make an order for costs
Industrial Magistrates Court pursuant to
Justices Act
. The respondent relies on
Bell v Carter; Ex Parte
") to support their argument.
Bell v Carter
involved the respondent executing a deed which
precluded him from seeking a costs order upon the dismissal of the charges
him. The magistrate dismissed the charge against the respondent and he
subsequently sought a costs order. The magistrate endorsed
the bench charge
sheet dismissing the charge and adjourned costs or the quantum of costs to a
later date. McPherson, Davies JJA
and Thomas J in a joint judgment
"If an order for costs is to be made in relation to a dismissal, it is
necessary that the formal dismissal be deferred until the court
is in a position
to make its final determination on the question of costs."
[10] It would appear that the only decision which has followed
is a decision of Robin QC DCJ in
Morley v Senewirantne &
"The main issue in this appeal brought by the complainant under
Justices Act 1886
arises from the failure of another Magistrate and some
(if not all) counsel to have in mind
Bell v Carter
at the vital moment in
the Magistrates Court at
Holland Park on 20 September 2007,
notwithstanding that they were aware of the
case from previous
experience. The Magistrate here, when counsel for the parties
going to have to pay costs took the point, accepted that he had made an
error and that he was
functus officio
, without any jurisdiction to
make an order
Honour stated that the
matter would have to be rectified on appeal."
Gibson v Canniffe; Kidd v Baragan; Slabon v
Devereaux SC ADCJ
24 December 2008 took a different approach to the effect of
Justices Act
when he wrote:
"...one may argue that the chief purpose of
is to obtain the certainty
brought about by costs being specified and that the emphasis placed by the court
on the coincidence of
the order for costs and the order, say, of dismissal, was
misplaced. The remaining words of the section merely refer back to the
that the costs be ordered "by" the conviction or order or "by"
the order of dismissal. A better view of the practical effect of
that while a court is entertaining an application for costs the "formal
dismissal" is thereby deferred and the order is yet
imperfect."
[12] It was submitted by the appellant that the power under the
and the decision of
Bell v Carter
relate to the power of
justices and not the power of this Court on upholding an appeal and determining
what should occur to the costs
[13] The jurisdiction and powers of the Industrial Court are conferred by
Division 3 of
of Chapter 8 of the IR Act. Section 248 relevantly
248 Court’s jurisdiction
(1) The court may -
(a) perform all functions and exercise all powers prescribed by the court by
this or another Act; and
(e) if the court is constituted by the president, exercise the jurisdiction
and powers of the Supreme Court to ensure, by prerogative
order or other
appropriate process—
(i) the ... magistrates exercise their jurisdictions according to law;
(ii) the ... magistrates do not exceed their jurisdictions.
(2) In proceedings, the court may -
(a) make the decisions it considers appropriate, irrespective of specific
relief sought by a party; and
(b) give directions about the hearing of a matter ..."
[14] The appeal to the Industrial Court from the orders of the Industrial
Magistrate was brought under s 341 of the IR Act. Section
341 relevantly
341 Appeal from commission, magistrate or registrar
(2) A person may appeal to the court if dissatisfied with a decision of a
magistrate in relation to a matter for which the magistrate
has jurisdiction.
(3) The court may -
(a) dismiss the appeal; or
(b) allow the appeal, set aside the decision and substitute another decision;
(c) allow the appeal and amend the decision; or
(d) allow the appeal, suspend the operation of the decision and remit the
industrial cause, with or without directions, to the commission,
an Industrial
Magistrates Court or the registrar to act according to law."
Harrison v President of the Industrial Court of Queensland &
Justices Act 1886ckson J
(with whom McMurdo P and Morrison JA agreed) held:
"A critical consideration is that the Industrial Court exercising appellate
of the Industrial
Magistrate. On appeal, the statute conferring the right of appeal gives the
Industrial Court power to decide whether
the Industrial Magistrate was right or
wrong and to make orders accordingly...
If the Industrial Court had decided that the Industrial Magistrate had made
an error ... it would have proceeded to consider for itself
the consequences of
that error in terms of the orders it should make under s 341(3)(b) and (d) of
Industrial Relations Act
1999 (Qld), still exercising the appellate
At no point would the Industrial Court have exercised the original
Power to amend order dismissing complaint
[16] Even accepting the submission of the respondent as the effect of the
decision in
Bell v Carter
, the Court has a power under s 329(e) of the IR
Act to "correct, amend or waive an error, defect or irregularity in the
proceedings,
whether substantive or formal." This provision is otherwise known
as the "slip rule".
[17] The power to amend under s 329(e) of the IR Act was discussed by Hall P in
Ray and Sue Boundy Pty Ltd v Daniel Paul
Ray and Sue Boundy Pty Ltd v Daniel Paul Gwydir
involved an appeal
from the dismissal by the Industrial Magistrate at Townsville of two complaints
brought by an Industrial Inspector
pursuant to s. 423 of the
Relations Act
1997. The then President of the Industrial Court dismissed
the appeal and the respondent sought an order that the appellant pay
respondent’s costs of and incidental to the appeals. His Honour’s
judgment is entirely silent on the matter of costs.
The ordinary practice at
the time, in conformity with the decision in
Toowoomba City Council v.
was that costs should follow the event. Hall P concluded that if
his Honour had directed his mind to the question of costs, he would
have awarded
costs against the appellant Industrial Inspector. He wrote:
'In jurisdictions with a "slip-rule" incidental matters such as costs which
can accidentally be overlooked are commonly revisited,
Keers Pty Ltd v. Johnstone
(1987) 9 NSWLR 446
at 452. The courts have long
since moved from correcting Ministerial errors or errors in expressing the real
intention of the Court
to corrections intended to express an intention which the
Court would certainly have had if eg it adverted to the matter, compare
Phillips v. Phillips
[1966] QWN 19.
There is no “slip-rule”
Industrial Court Rules
1997. However, s. 344(e) of the
Workplace Relations Act
1997 authorises the Industrial Court to correct,
amend or waive an error, defect or irregularity in the proceeding, whether
substantive
or formal. Section 329(e) of the
Industrial Relations Act
1999 is in the same terms. In my view s. 344(e) vested and s. 329(e) vests
ample power to make the correction now sought.'"
[18] In addition, r 95 of the
Industrial Relations (Tribunals) Rules
provides that:
"(1) The court, commission or registrar may correct an error in an industrial
instrument, order or direction."
[19] "Error" is defined to mean "a clerical mistake, misnomer, inaccurate
description, omission or other manifest defect or
irregularity."
Storey & Keers Pty Ltd v
McHugh JA adopted
the following passage from the speech of Lord Herschell in
concerning the test to
be satisfied when making an order under the slip rule:
"I cannot doubt that the correction would at once have been made if the
matter had been drawn to the attention of the judge who made
the decree."
[21] A similar approach was adopted by Lockhart J (with whom Black CJ agreed) in
Elyard Corporation Pty Ltd v DDB Needham Sydney Pty
"An exercise of the power of the court under the slip rule is ultimately to
avoid injustice. This obvious purpose of the slip rule
underlies a number of
decisions of judges of this court and of other courts."
Raybos Australia Pty Ltd v Tectran Corporation Pty
"In many cases the slip rule or its equivalent is invoked when, through error
or oversight, a judgment or order fails to express correctly
the intention of
the court at the time when the judgment or order was announced. But it is clear
that this power of correction extends
to cases where a matter, through
inadvertence, was not dealt with at the hearing. In that case the purpose of
correction is not to
give expression to the intention of the court at the time
the judgment or order was pronounced."
[23] Had the effect of
Bell v Carter
been adverted to in this Court in
the written or oral submissions I am satisfied the orders given would have been
expressed in such
a way so as to avoid the consequences which may flow by virtue
Justices Act
L Shaddock & Associates Pty Ltd v Parramatta City Council
an application was made under
O. 29, r. 11 of the High Court Rules. The High Court Rules provided that: "A
clerical mistake in a
judgment or order, or an error arising in a judgment or
order from an accidental slip or omission, may at any time be corrected by
Court or a Justice on motion or summons." Neither the notice of appeal to the
Court of Appeal nor the notice of appeal to the
High Court sought an order
providing for the payment of interest, in the event the appeal was upheld. The
matter was not adverted
to in argument on the appeal to the High Court nor in
the reasons for judgment published by the justices who comprised the Court.
the joint judgment of Mason ACJ, Wilson and Deane JJ the court
"We have no doubt that, if the matter had been adverted to in this Court and
this Court possessed power to make such an award of interest,
it would have made
[25] It is clear from the written decision that it was the intention of the
Court to hear submissions from the parties with respect
to the costs of the
proceedings in the Industrial Magistrates Court.
[26] The Court has a power to set aside an order, although I acknowledge that
such a power should be exercised
[27] In my view, and out of an abundance of caution, I think this is an
appropriate occasion upon which the Court should exercise
its power under s
329(e) of the IR Act to set aside the order for dismissal made on 24 December
2015. Justice requires that the
judgment be amended accordingly so as to
properly reflect the intent of the Court.
Costs in the Industrial Magistrates Court
[28] The power to award costs in respect of a summary hearing in the Industrial
Magistrates Court are found in
Justices Act
Latoudis v Casey
Mason CJ, McHugh and Toohey JJ wrote:
"...there will be cases in which, when regard is had to the particular
circumstances, it would not be just and reasonable to order
costs against the
prosecutor or to order payment of all the defendant's costs. If, for example,
the defendant, by his or her conduct
after the events constituting the
commission of the alleged offence, brought the prosecution upon himself or
herself, then it would
not be just and reasonable to award costs against the
prosecutor."
[30] In response to
Latoudis v Casey
Justices Act
amended to insert
which placed a fetter on
[31] McPherson JA in
MacPherson v Commissioner of
in dealing with
"In making his determination as to costs, the magistrate applied
Justices Act
(the Queensland Act). That section was enacted shortly
after the decision of the High Court in
Latoudis v. Casey
[1990] HCA 59
, in which their Honours reviewed the principles governing the
discretion to award costs in respect of unsuccessful proceedings for
that was conducted summarily. On the appeal before us, s.158A was, on both
sides, accepted as being a direct and speedy
legislative response by State
Parliament to the decision of the majority of their Honours in that case. The
object evidently was
to replace the principles adopted in
Latoudis v.
with a series of statutory provisions amounting to a virtual
codification of the leading factors to be considered in deciding whether
should be awarded against a police officer or a public officer whose complaint
is dismissed by justices."
Section 158
Justices Act
(Qld) provides for the general
power to award "just and reasonable" costs in favour of a defendant when a
complaint is dismissed.
Section 158A(1)
fetters the discretion in relation to a public officer such
that a costs order may be made "only if the justices are satisfied that
proper that the order for costs should be made". In determining whether it is
proper to make the costs order,
provides that the trial magistrate
"must" take into account "all the relevant circumstances".
[34] Davies JA spoke similarly about the limitation on the discretion in
Murray v Radford
his Honour said:
"There is no doubt that
applied to this case because the complainant
was a police officer. Under that section despite
the magistrate may
make a costs order such as the applicant says should have been made only if he
is satisfied that it is proper
that such an order should be made; and in so
deciding he is obliged to take into account all relevant circumstances including
not limited to those enumerated in subsection (2).
Section 158A
plainly, a limitation on the discretion which
permits to order costs
against a complainant."
[35] The respondent submits that the prosecution in the Industrial Magistrates
Court could not be characterised as difficult, complex
or important in the
relevant sense in order to justify an uplift of costs pursuant to
Justices Act
. I disagree.
[36] In supporting the contention that the case was of "special difficulty,
complexity or importance", the appellant made the following
submissions:
The prosecution
was brought under
Petroleum and Gas (Production and Safety)
. The legislation presents its own challenges, a fact which is not
in dispute between the parties.
The prosecution
before the learned magistrate was conducted over five days (apart from the date
of the delivery of reasons) and there
were multiple amendments to the
particulars both before and during the trial to address a number of identified
deficiencies.
I accept the
appellant's submission that the prosecution involved some legal importance in
that it involved the prosecution of a person
for non-compliance with a privately
created SMP.
The prosecution
was of a type not ordinarily encountered in the Industrial Magistrates Court.
The complaint alleged the failure to
comply with obligations under an SMP. As
was submitted by the appellant, "it was an exceptional case in that it involved
a prosecution
relating to non-compliance not with a statute but with a
non-statutory safety regime, for which there is no precedent; ie this is
first such case to come before the courts".
I also accept
that this was a unique case in that it was the first prosecution of this kind
and therefore was without precedent.
The prosecution
was factually dense and the evidence before the magistrate was
submissions were prepared for the learned Magistrate by the defence to
demonstrate, for example, that the petroleum lease
could not be an operating
plant for the purposes of
Petroleum and Gas (Production and
Safety) Act
, contrary to the prosecution case and to demonstrate why
the task of undertaking an isolation procedure on a mobile gas separator
low risk task.
[37] Farr SC DCJ wrote in
Cullinane v
"That submission ignores the actual words used in
Justices Act
, namely "just and reasonable having regard to the special
difficulty, complexity or importance of the case". The adjective "special"
not apply to, or restrict, the words "just and reasonable". They apply to
"difficulty, complexity or importance". Properly construed,
the discretion to
award a higher amount for costs as provided for in the statutory provisions, is
enlivened where: (a) special difficulty,
complexity or importance exists; and
(b) it is just and reasonable to make a higher award having regard to the
identified special
difficulty, complexity or importance."
Senior Constable Sheehan v
Robertson DCJ found a
matter must be more than "unique":
"Although her Honour’s reasons referred to above are somewhat equivocal
the appellant that in
stating that the
issue takes “it somewhat out of the realm of
the ordinary”, her Honour misdirected herself as to the threshold that was
required by reference to authority. It may be unusual for a
defence to be
raised in the Magistrates Court, but, in this case the issue was greatly
simplified by the approach of the parties.
The trial lasted less than a day. The
prosecution evidence took 9 minutes. Dr Georgious gave evidence for 59 minutes
most of which
was in cross-examination. There were no objectively especially
difficult aspects of the case. "Unusual" is not synonymous with "difficulty"
and, in any event, this was not a case that involved special difficulty,
including having regard to the reversal of onus issue that
does arise from time
to time ..."
[39] It was submitted by the appellant that the consequences for the appellant
were significant in that a conviction for non-compliance
with work safety
obligations in the Petroleum and Gas industry was likely to destroy or
significantly affect the appellant's ability
to hold or obtain future employment
in the industry.
Whitby v Stockair Pty Ltd &
Farr SC DCJ had to
consider a conclusion by the Magistrate that the case against each defendant was
of special importance because
the defendants' reputations "were on the line" and
"at stake" and that a finding of guilt would have caused "immeasurable damage"
to their reputations. Farr SC DCJ affirmed his earlier decision in
where he said:
"... I accept that this case was
important to the appellant, as no doubt every criminal case is to every
defendant. To invoke special
importance however, the case must involve more than
the charge merely relating to a defendant in his/her professional capacity.
importance' is clearly a reference to the importance of the case
generally, in terms of questions of law or public interest (this
list is not
exhaustive) and is not intended to refer to the subjective assessment of a
defendant as to whether the case is important
to him or her."
[41] To assist the Court in determining the phrase "special difficulty,
complexity or importance", the Court was referred to the
often cited case of
Interclean Industrial Services Ltd v Auckland Regional
"). In that matter, the Auckland Regional Council sought
higher costs after Interclean Industrial Services Ltd pleaded guilty to
criminal charges under the
Resource Management Act
1991. As with the
present case, an award of costs in excess of scale was sought on the basis of
"special difficulty, complexity
or importance". On appeal, the High Court held
that there was no special difficulty or complexity in the case, the defendant
pleaded guilty and the issues raised by both the prosecution and defence did
not go significantly beyond those raised in prosecutions
generally. Randerson J
"As observed by Tipping J in
T v Collector of Customs
(High Court,
Christchurch, AP 167/94, 28 February 1995) at p2:
'The use of the word "special" when applied to the concepts of difficulty,
complexity and importance means that it is not enough simply
to say that the
case was difficult, complex or important. The necessary difficulty, complexity
or importance must be such that it
can be said to be significantly greater than
is ordinarily encountered. Similarly the focus on the case itself means that it
enough for the applicant to be able to say that by dint of its features
the case had special importance to him.'"
[42] I am therefore satisfied that in terms of
, the matter involved special difficulty, complexity or importance
having regard to the facts, the particular factual and legal issues
the complexities of the legislation.
[43] In considering the matters under
Justices Act
the only provisions which have relevance to the current matter and which the
appellant relies are subparagraphs (b) and (c) of
[44] In regard to subparagraphs (b) and (c) of
, the appellant submits
"(a) for a period going back for well over a year before the trial, the
defence had struggled to have the Prosecution articulate and
explain precisely
what complaint they were bringing pursuant to the breach of what provisions;
(e) the Prosecution had many opportunities pre-trial to properly investigate
precisely what obligations arise in what documentation
against this Defendant.
In essence, it did this on the run during the trial ... All of this meant that a
substantial amount of time
in the trial was spent on matters that the
Prosecution ought have sorted out long before the trial even started;
"It emerged during the trial that there were a number of significant matters
of which the Prosecution, had it properly investigated
the matter, did or ought
always have known and what was critical to the prospects of success of the
[45] Counsel for the respondent accepted during argument that it was appropriate
that an award of costs in accordance with the Magistrates
Court Scale be
[46] For the reasons outlined above, I accept that the matter had "special
difficulty, complexity or importance".
Quantum of Costs
[47] The appellant seeks an award of costs on a non-scale basis in the sum of
$596,980.93, submitting that the complexities of the
matter justify that
reasonable actual costs be allowed.
[48] In the alternative, adopting the approach taken in
Bell and Gordon v
Uniman Australia Pty Ltd (No.
the appellant submits
that costs in the sum of $395,770.90 be awarded. The figure is made up of
$23,625, being three times the scale,
plus senior and junior counsel fees of
$350,212.50 and outlays of $21,933.40.
[49] It was further submitted, in the alternative, that if the Court did not
accept the submission that the appellant should recover
their "reasonable actual
costs" then they ought recover their costs calculated in accordance with
Schedule 2 of the
Justices Regulation
[50] Regulation 18 of the
Justices Regulation
2004 provides that the
scale of costs for Part 6, Division 8 and Part 9, Division 1 of the Act is
contained in Schedule 2.
[51] Schedule 2 relevantly provides:
Scale sets out amounts up to which costs may be allowed
This scale sets out -
(a) the only items for which costs may be allowed for part 6, division 8 and
part 9, division 1 of the Act; and
(b) the amount up to which costs may be allowed for each item.
A higher amount for costs may be allowed under section 158B(2) or 232A(2) of
of costs covers all legal professional work
An item in part 2
covers all legal professional work, even if the work is done by more than 1
necessary or proper costs may be allowed
A cost is to be
allowed only to the extent to which -
(a) incurring the cost was necessary or proper to achieve justice or to defend
the rights of the party; or
(b) the cost was not incurred by over-caution, negligence, mistake or merely at
the wish of the party.
to District Court judge - professional costs are 20% higher than for complaint
For an appeal to a District Court judge under part 9, division
1 of the Act, the amount up to which costs may be allowed for legal
professional
work is the amount that may be allowed under part 2, as if the work were for a
complaint, increased by 20%.
Part 2 Amounts up to which costs may be allowed for legal professional
Work for hearing of complaint up to and including day 1
Instructions
and preparation for the hearing,
including attendance on day 1 of
the hearing up to $1500.00
After day 1
each day of the hearing after day 1 up to $875.00
Other court
attendances
attendance, other than on the hearing
of the complaint up to
Disbursements,
other than to witness for attending
Court fees and other fees
and payments (other than allowances to witnesses to attend proceedings)
including allowances to interpreters,
and travelling, accommodation and other
expenses of a lawyer acting as advocate, may be allowed to the extent they have
been reasonably
incurred and are paid or payable."
[52] The appellant's primary submission seeks an order for costs on an indemnity
(solicitor and client) basis. However, I do not
consider it appropriate on this
occasion to award costs on that basis.
Morley v Senewiratne &
Robin QC DCJ
"The appellant, as prosecutor, cannot expect anything like a costs indemnity.
Traditional practice precluded costs orders for or against
the prosecution. The
statutory in-roads are on the basis of a modest scale which imposes a cap. The
discretion the court has to exceed
that cap must still have regard to it as the
starting point. In other words, I think the question comes down to one of by how
should the cap amounts be increased. If distinctions are to be drawn
between prosecution and defence, I would expect the court to
parsimonious in awarding costs in favour of the prosecutor, at least where he or
she is or represents a public authority,
such as a local government, which bears
the responsibility of enforcing State and local laws."
[54] If a court is contemplating the awarding of costs over and above the
Magistrates Court Scale then, in determining what is just
and reasonable, the
scale must be used as a guide in the calculation of the quantum of costs above
Washbourne v State Energy Commission of Western
"The starting point is that the amount of the costs are to be in accordance
with the scale prescribed. If however the special difficulty,
complexity, or
importance of the case leads the court to order higher costs than those laid
down in the scale, the court is empowered
to order costs in excess of the amount
for scale items; nevertheless, the scale items are to be the basic guidelines in
determining
the amount of costs to be ordered.
The amounts reflected in the scale are substantially lower than the costs set
out in the Supreme Court Costs scale. Plainly, the intention
of the legislature
is that the costs awarded under the
Official Prosecutions (Defendant's Costs)
are to be lower, generally, than the costs awarded in a Supreme Court
action. The court, in ordering costs under s 5(5) therefore
does not have a
discretion limited only by considerations of reasonableness. Even if costs are
awarded in excess of the scale, regard
must be had to the scale as a
guideline."
[56] The exercise of the discretion in
Justices Act
clearly fettered. First, by the words "just and reasonable" in
secondly, by the requirement in
that in awarding costs against a public
officer the justices must be satisfied that it is "proper" that an award for
costs be made;
and thirdly, in
costs in excess of scale can only be
awarded in cases of "special difficulty, complexity or
importance".
[57] In calculating the quantum of the costs, I have had particular reference to
the affidavit of Brett Stephen Elgar.
[58] In determining the quantum of the costs of the prosecution, I have
considered the approach adopted by Shanahan SC DCJ in
Hickey v Crime and
Misconduct Commission
Honour wrote:
"The respondent submits that the scale should be used as a guide in arriving
at a quantum above the scale (
Washburn v State Energy Commission (WA)
1992 8 WAR 188
at 193, 194;
Durrant v Gardner
[2000] QDC 198
, McGill DCJ,
23 June 2000 at [46]). It is submitted that the amount awarded should be a small
multiple of that scale.
To my mind, it is clear that the legislature has limited the discretion to
award costs to successful defendants in criminal prosecutions
as a matter of
policy. That policy is based on the public interest of ensuring that the
bringing of proper prosecutions is not fettered
by the prospects of extensive
costs orders being made in the event of unsuccessful prosecutions. Any award of
costs above the scale
must be made with that principle in mind. No authorities
have been placed before me where solicitor/client costs or indemnity costs
been awarded in these circumstances.
The costs to be awarded must be “just” in relation to the appeal
and “just and reasonable” in relation to
the summary trial. The
amounts to be awarded must be made bearing in mind the policy of the
legislation. The scale in the regulation
is a clear indication of that policy as
it bears little relation to present day economics. However, to my mind, the
legislative intent
[59] Shanahan SC DCJ concluded that it was just and reasonable to award costs
based on the daily rate for senior counsel as provided
by the Federal Court of
Australia's
National Guide to Counsel
but also to award costs
for the solicitor’s preparation as a function of the scale set by the
Justices Regulation
2004. In doing so, his Honour concluded that a
multiple of three times that scale would be appropriate.
[60] I accept, having regard to the nature and complexity of the summary trial
that it was appropriate to brief senior counsel.
The respondent was equally
represented by senior counsel.
[61] I also accept it is common practice when determining costs in the
Magistrates Court to adopt an approach of a multiple of three
times scale for a
solicitor's preparation plus the costs of senior counsel and any allowed
[62] I respectfully adopt the reasoning and approach of Shanahan SC DCJ and
conclude that it would be just and reasonable to award
costs on the rate for
senior counsel as provided for in the Federal Court of Australia's
Guide to Counsel Fees
. I also consider it appropriate to award costs of the
solicitor's preparation under the scale set by the
Justices Regulation
2004 but on a multiple of three times the scale.
[63] The respondent made no submissions in relation to the disbursements of
$21,933.40. I am satisfied that they have been reasonably
[64] I propose making a lump sum award. The calculation of the costs of the
prosecution to achieve a just and reasonable lump sum
attendances other than $2,000.00
on trial of the complaint.
Instructions
and preparation $12,150.00
for hearing including first day
and including fee for senior counsel
($4,500 plus $7,650)
day of hearing including $9,025.00
for senior counsel
($2,625 plus $6,400)
day of hearing including $9,025.00
for senior counsel
($2,625 plus $6,400)
day of hearing including $9,025.00
for senior counsel
($2,625 plus $6,400)
day of hearing including $9,025.00
for senior counsel
($2,625 plus $6,400)
day of hearing including $9,025.00
for senior counsel
($2,625 plus $6,400)
Outlays $21,933.40
Costs of the Cross Appeal
[65] The appellant seeks the costs of successfully defending the
cross-appeal.
[66] The ground of appeal for the cross appeal was that the learned Industrial
Magistrate erred in her determination that the Defendant's
Petroleum and Gas (Production and Safety) Act
did not cause
bodily harm to Gavin James Vieritz.
[67] The omission said to constitute the offence was the failure of Mr Schloss
to ensure that Mr Vieritz considered and conducted
a Job Hazard Analysis (JHA).
It was, on the cross-appellant's case, not necessary that the omission be the
sole cause of the injury
but rather the question is whether the omission was a
"substantial or significant cause" viewed in a common-sense and practical way.
The omission, it was argued, resulted in an increased risk of injury and that
risk eventuated with the cross-respondent's conducted
said to have materially
contributed to the injury that was suffered.
[68] The cross-respondent argued that the test of causation is not whether there
is an increased risk of injury being caused, but
rather, whether it was so
[69] It is not contended that the cross-appeal was made vexatiously. Rather, it
is the contention of the cross-respondent that the
cross-appeal was made
"without reasonable cause".
[70] Her Honour concluded that:
"As a result of Mr Vieritz's evidence, his experience, and the actions he
took on the day of the incident to isolate the separator,
I am not satisfied
that the bodily injury sustained by Mr Vieritz was caused by the 'act or
omission that constitutes the offence'.
I therefore find that the prosecution
has not proved the aggravating circumstances provided by Section 732(3)(d) of
the Act to the
required standard and the increase in the maximum penalty is not
activated."
[71] Having considered the evidence, it was open for her Honour to come to the
conclusion that she did. It is not the submission
of the cross-appellant that
there was insufficient or no evidence to support the conclusion reached by her
Honour. Rather, that
the cross-appellant points to other evidence which might
support a different conclusion. No appellable error has been
MIM Holdings Ltd v
his Honour President
"As a matter of first impression, the purpose of s335 seems to be to spare
parties the rule of having to pay the costs of an opposing
party whilst
providing a measure of protection to parties defending proceedings which have
been instituted vexatiously or without
cause...I am reluctant to construe the
provisions in such a way that a successful appellant (respondent) would always,
the (proper) exercise of discretion, recover costs of the appeal and
the application whilst a successful appellant (applicant) would
never do so. It
seems to me to be more likely that s335 (1) (a) is aimed at the case which was
objectively recognisable as one which
could not succeed at the time when the
application was made."
[73] The circumstance that an appeal is wholly unsuccessful does not in itself
demonstrate that it was launched without "reasonable
cause". An appeal should
not be characterised as an appeal having no objective prospect of success
unless, at the time when the
appeal was commenced, it was readily recognisable
as doomed to
Bow Park Pty Ltd v
"The case made was that the appeal was brought "without reasonable cause"
because it had no objective prospect of success. With respect,
there is too much
of the clarity of vision which flows from the advantage of hindsight in that
submission. Whilst the appeal was
entirely unsuccessful and the appellant's
arguments were wholly demolished, the demolition required significant argument
by the respondent
and mature consideration by the Court. The appellant's case
was not one immediately recognisable as doomed to failure. That is sufficient
determine the application for costs."
[75] I am not satisfied that the respondent has acted "vexatiously or without
reasonable cause" in bringing the cross-appeal. In
those circumstances, the
power to award costs in favour of the appellant has not been
[76] I invite the parties to make submissions as to the appropriate orders which
should be made.
[2008] QDC 296
[2008] QDC 319
[2016] QCA 89
[1999] QIC 55
(1999) 162 QGIG
(1987) 9 NSWLR 446
[1892] UKLawRpAC 30
[1892] AC 547
(1995) 133 ALR 206
[1988] HCA 2
(1988) 77 ALR
[1982] HCA 59
(1982) 151 CLR 590
Wentworth v
Woollahra Municipal Council
(1982) 149 CLR 256
, 265 per Brennan, Dawson,
Toohey and Gaudron JJ.
Gould v Vaggelas
(1985) 157 CLR 215
, 275 per Gibbs
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
[2014] QDC 120
[2015] QDC 79
[2000] 3 NZLR 489
submissions for the Applicant/Cross Respondent
[2008] QDC 296
(1992) 8 WAR 188
Guide to Counsel Fees
(28 June 2013) Federal Court of Australia
http://www.fedcourt.gov.au/forms-andl-fees/legal-costs/national-guide-counsel-fees
Hickey v Crime and Misconduct Commission
Bell and Anor v Uniman
Australia Pty Ltd
[2013] QMC 3
Durrant v Gardner
Affidavit of Brett
Stephen Elgar.
[2014] QMC 23
[2000] QIC 38
(2000) 164 QGIG
Newport Pajingo Pty
Ltd v Tomac Enterprises Pty Ltd
[2005] QIC 30
(2005) 179 QGIG
[2003] QIC 175
(2003) 175 QGIG 18.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (370 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter