URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2018/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:47:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Donohue, Re [2018] QMHC 8 (10 August 2018)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of Anthony O’Donohue
[2018] QMHC 8
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
10 August 2018
DELIVERED AT:
Brisbane (ex tempore)
HEARING DATES:
9 and 10 August 2018
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr FT Varghese and
Dr EN McVie
JD Briggs for Mr O’Donohue
SJ Hamlyn-Harris for the Chief Psychiatrist
Fuller QC with D Balic for the Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for Mr O’Donohue
Crown Law for the Chief Psychiatrist
The Director
of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
HER HONOUR: This is a reference in relation to Anthony Mark
O’Donohue, born 28 February 1968. Mr O’Donohue faces a
murder and 14 charges of attempted murder, as well as a charge of arson.
On 28 October 2016 at 9 o’clock in the morning, he boarded a
Brisbane City Council bus at a stop on Beaudesert Road, Moorooka.
backpack containing an accelerant. He lit it, and he placed it on the bus
driver. The driver was Manmeet Sharma, aged
29 years. He was killed by Mr
O’Donohue’s actions. The doors to the bus were closed at the time
this happened and were,
at first, unable to be opened. Flames and smoke filled
the bus, and the charges of attempted murder relate to those people who were
trapped inside. There were 14 passengers.
I would normally name such
people as a mark of respect to them to show that I have considered them as
individuals. In this case,
many have asked not to be named, and I think, when I
consider the evidence about how dangerous the defendant is, I understand why
they do not want to be named. However, among the passengers were Carolyn Ann
Wilson, Norman Ross Passfield, Lille Mina Gill and
Cecil George Cox. I will
also add there were three very little children amongst those
passengers.
A taxi driver who happened to be at the bus stop at the time
assisted by breaking entry into the bus, allowing all 14 passengers to
His actions were very brave and I think he saved the lives of those 14
passengers. The passengers were terrified at the
time and I understand they
have been adversely affected into the future because of what they
experienced.
The defendant O’Donohue did not leave the scene. He
was arrested by police, having been identified by some of the passengers
escaped from the bus and other passers-by. He has also been identified as the
person responsible by the closed-circuit television.
He refused to be
interviewed by police. He was assessed by psychiatrists on the day of the
offending. Two or three days later
on 31 October 2016, he was admitted to The
Park High Secure Program under the care of Dr Angela Voita.
At the time
of the offending, Mr O’Donohue was a 48 year old single man living alone
in public housing at Moorooka. I will
say something about his early life
because I think it is important to contrast that to the man as he was at the
time he committed
these acts. He had an unremarkable childhood in rural
Queensland. He had a good family who cared for him. He did well at school
he was popular at school. He was sent to a private boarding school for high
school. He socialised well there. He was good
at sport, and he was good at
school. He went to university and has two university degrees. He had a good
work history, although
I notice from the beginning he never stayed long in any
By 2003, the defendant was working as an accountant for New
South Wales Rail. He says at first his work was recognised as being of
standard, and this might be right. At some point, he began to have difficulties
his employer. In all likelihood, those difficulties were caused by the
onset of his delusional disorder. But because he could not
recognise that he
was ill, he attributed the difficulties to interference from his workmates. He
complained about that, and there
was an investigation. He became convinced he
was being persecuted and intimidated. He left his job and stayed home from work
renovate his house. Within six weeks of that, his girlfriend left him.
He travelled to Queensland and began to work for Queensland Rail. Once
again, he perceived he was being intimidated and persecuted
in his workplace.
He decided he would not work again, and became preoccupied with perceived
injustices that had happened in his
workplaces. His delusions began to expand.
He began to believe that trade unions were persecuting him. He even believed
became part of the movement that would persecute him. He travelled
overseas, and even when he was overseas, he thought that the
people who were
persecuting him had followed him and were persecuting him overseas.
recognised that his life was spiralling downhill, but he could not understand
why. He was unemployed. He lost his house. He
lived in public housing. Then
he lost his place in public housing. He made a serious suicide attempt and was
treated for psychosis
in the public hospital system. He lived in a share house
and began to think the people he shared with were persecuting him. They
jobs, and he did not have a job. He realised that that was because they were
being rewarded for their efforts in persecuting
He eventually
ended up at an organisation called Ozcare. That is an organisation which
provides hostel care for people who are essentially
believe that the other residents of Ozcare were trying to kill him. He left
Ozcare and slept in the
streets. He was unemployed, and because he did not
apply for jobs, his unemployment benefit was terminated. He saw this as part
the vendetta to destroy him. He broke off contact with his family and became
obsessed with fantasies of revenge against those
who he believed had destroyed
In 2010, when he tried to kill himself, he was diagnosed as
psychotic by mental health services. He said he tried to suicide because
could not stand the continual persecution. He was subject to psychiatric
treatment after this. To say he did not co-operate
with this treatment is an
understatement. He did not believe he had an illness, and he actively tried to
avoid treatment.
In 2011, five years before the events I am concerned
with, he took a tyre lever to a police station and he asked the police to lock
him up because he believed he would kill someone. Police took him to mental
health services and he was made an involuntary patient.
He remained under
involuntary treatment until December 2014. He was treated with depot
antipsychotic drugs. This involves putting
a deposit of medicine, which will
last perhaps a month, under the person’s skin by an injection.
In 2014, he travelled overseas and his drug regime was changed. Because
he could not receive depot injections overseas, he was put
onto oral medication
– tablets that
he swallowed. The difficulty with this was he did not
believe he had a mental illness and did not want to take drugs. I think it
likely that he was never fully compliant with his prescribed medication after
Dr Voita described in her evidence that he lied to his
treating psychiatrists, pretending that he was taking the tablets. Even though
he didn’t take the tablets, he would go to the chemist and pay for the
prescription to be filled in case anybody checked.
He seemed to understand that
the doctors might test his blood to see if he was taking the tablets, and
sometimes took some tablets
before he was due to be reviewed at the hospital in
case that happened.
Even though the depot antipsychotic treatment did
not make him much better, it is clear that once he stopped it, he became much
He began to believe his food was being tampered with. He said he could
hear voices coming from his computer and thought that he
was under constant
surveillance in his unit through the computer and the telephone. He began
writing notes that he left out in his
unit so that the people keeping
surveillance on him could read the notes. He thought he received messages from
the television, the
radio and the internet. He thought there were messages in
newspapers, in the advertisements at the supermarkets, on people’s
T-shirts, on the sales dockets that he received from shops.
the hospital in August 2016 for chest pain, and he believed that doctors put
technology into his body so they could keep
an eye on him. He thought that his
persecutors were causing him to experience electric shocks in his arms and legs.
In August 2016,
he went to a union building at South Brisbane. He was
threatening, abusive and ranting, demanding to see a union boss. He spoke
wanting retribution against the union.
Immediately after the acts I am
concerned about, the defendant told police of these long-term persecutory
delusions. He mentioned
his previous employment in the railway, and he
mentioned his family were involved in it. When he was taken to The Park, that
virtually all he would speak about to Dr Voita.
So far as the
offending is concerned, he told Dr Voita that he targeted the bus because it was
“the first bus that came along”.
I know it’s a terrible thing, but I feel justified. He was part of
that group that had been torturing me. I just knew he knew
who I was and what
my situation was. In those last couple of seconds, I felt some kind of
acknowledgement. I felt there was a recognition.
He recognised me, even though
I didn’t recognise him.
Mr O’Donohue said:
I saw the bus driver’s facial expression and the way he looked at
me. If that was different, then maybe the whole thing would
As to the motivation for the attack, he said:
I just need to show there would be consequences if they screwed me over.
They destroyed my life.
I have suffered a lot of deliberate abuse for more than a decade. Lots of
malicious bullying. Some people do it willingly; others
more reluctantly.
It’s like a club. They profit from it.
He said he purchased petrol about a month before the commission of the
acts I am concerned with. He mixed petrol with diesel because
he knew it would
be more explosive. He kept the mixture in his apartment for more than a month.
He told Dr van de Hoef it was like
a loaded gun, there for the people who were
surveilling him to see. He wanted those people to see it, know he was serious
stop persecuting him.
On the day of the offending, he put the
accelerant mixture in a backpack and put a piece of cloth into the top of the
bottle, making
a Molotov cocktail. He said he thought the people who were
persecuting him would stop him as he walked to the bus stop, but nobody
a way which is contradictory to this, he said he thought the SAS or [a
well-known Australian entrepreneur –ed.] would
come and rescue him and
take him to Western Australia. He had packed a bag to take with him when they
arrived. A third thing he
said, which I accept is logically inconsistent with
the first two, is that he thought as he walked to the bus stop he would receive
a sign that the persecution would stop. None of these things are logical. They
are un-understandable.
There is good evidence about his trip to the bus
stop. Some workers had arrived in the bottom of his housing building at about 9
o’clock that morning. They remembered the time they arrived and they
remembered that, very soon after, he walked past them
and was very rude to them.
The police have another statement from a lady who was waiting at the bus
stop. Because she was catching a bus, she was very aware
of the time she
arrived at the stop and the time the bus was expected. She thought she got to
the bus stop at 8.55 and she sat down
and waited. She noticed the defendant
arrive, and she noticed his behaviour was very strange. She noticed he had a
backpack and
he held it in an unusual way, with his right hand hidden inside the
backpack. She said he looked stressed. She said he paced up
and down. She
said he appeared to annoy people by talking to them and they did not speak back
to him. I think this evidence shows
that the defendant O’Donohue did go
straight from his home to the bus stop, and then he attacked the first bus that
There is also evidence about how Mr Sharma, the bus driver,
was behaving. The police took several statements, and I will read from
them. One man said:
I recall the driver was very polite, friendly and relaxed.
Another witness said:
I smiled at the driver and said hello. The driver smiled back and said
hello. I remember he had happy eyes and a nice smile.
Another witness said:
As we got on the bus, the driver said hello. He was lovely.
And in the victim impact statement that Ms Gill has filed in the court,
she says this:
The memory of Manmeet’s bright and vibrant smile as I boarded the
bus that day became one I am grateful for. In our brief greeting,
we had both
been open and sincere, smiling at a brand new day, the kindness of strangers,
and I think just at that uplifting feeling
you get on a sunny spring morning.
It’s not often you get such a greeting from a city bus driver, and I liked
him instantly.
The evidence is that Mr O’Donohue waited till all the other
passengers got on the bus, and then he got on last. When he got
on, I think
that the bus driver probably smiled at him too. But when Mr O’Donohue
looked at the bus driver, he thought the
bus driver was smirking at him. He
said it was obvious the bus driver recognised him, and this meant that the bus
driver was part
of the conspiracy. This meant that the conspiracy had not
stopped, so he stepped onto the bus, lit the bag, and lifted it onto the
Mr O’Donohue got out of the bus then. His own trouser leg had caught
fire. He waited for police because he knew he
would be arrested for what he had
There is no suggestion that he was intoxicated with alcohol or
Mr O’Donohue has said that he regrets Mr Sharma’s
death, but he has always added that he thought it was necessary to achieve
aims and that his actions were justified.
I turn to the medical evidence.
Dr Voita gave a report dated 27 September 2017. She is a very experienced
psychiatrist and is the
director of the High Secure Service for the Criminally
Insane. By the time of Dr Voita’s report, she had seen Mr O’Donohue
over 50 times, and by the time she gave evidence in this Court, she had seen him
many, many more times. Before writing her report,
she also conducted an
interview with Mr O’Donohue’s brother and his mother.
have a report from Dr van de Hoef dated 8 June 2018. She saw Mr O’Donohue
in May this year. I have a report from Dr Scott
dated 13 March 2018. Before
giving evidence in the Court, he saw Mr O’Donohue again, and, in fact, he
saw him only two days
ago. I have a report from Dr Beech dated 25 July 2018.
I have a report from Dr Schramm.
All the doctors except Dr Scott
thought that the diagnosis was paranoid schizophrenia. Dr Scott thought the
diagnosis was delusional
disorder. For legal purposes, it does not matter who
is right. All the doctors thought that Mr O’Donohue suffered his illness
for a long time, probably since 2003, when his difficulties in New South Wales
Rail began. All the doctors thought that at the time
of the offending, the
defendant was deprived of the capacity to know he ought not do the acts involved
in the offences.
In some respects, this is an unusual case so far as this
capacity is concerned, because the defendant did know that the acts he was
were against the law. In the vast majority of cases where a defendant knows
that, he is not deprived of the capacity to know
he ought not do the acts. But
the Court does recognise this category of case. I refer to the case of
(1952) 86 CLR 375:
In cases of serious crime, the fact that it is punishable by law is enough
to show the prisoner that it is something which he ought
not do ... but in
certain cases where the insane motives of the accused arise from a complete
incapacity to reason as to what is
right or wrong (his insane judgment even
treating the act as one of inexorable obligation or inescapable necessity)
he may yet have at the back of his mind an awareness that the act he
proposes to do is punishable by law.
[discussion with interpreter omitted]
The words of that case
written in 1952 are very apt to describe this defendant’s insane motive
which made his actions, in his
mind, actions of inescapable necessity.
I make the finding that Mr O’Donohue was deprived of the capacity
to know he ought not do the acts in relation to all the charges
I turn to the future. Treatment so far has produced some
improvement in Mr O’Donohue overall, but he still will not give up
delusional beliefs. In particular, the evidence of Dr van de Hoef and Dr Scott,
who saw him only two days ago, was very emphatic
that he still remains severely
delusional. It is clear that a forensic order must be made. The advice of my
assisting psychiatrists
is that he should be confined to the High Secure area at
There is a question about whether I should make an order that
the forensic order not be revoked. This power has never been exercised.
reasons for making a non-revocation order cannot be punishment or denunciation.
They must be the safety of the community.
This is clear from the second reading
speeches in Parliament and from the objects of the
Mental Health Act 2016
Generally, the Court would not interfere by making such an order.
Generally, the Court would leave these things to the discretion
psychiatrists who treat a forensic patient. Speculation about the future is
always difficult, and the assumption is that
there will be competent people
doctors – in charge of the forensic patient and that
they will make rational decisions as the future treatment progresses.
Under our system, it can never be the choice of one psychiatrist to
revoke a forensic order. Any such decision has to be reviewed
up a hierarchy of
more senior psychiatrists within Queensland Health. Many psychiatrists would
have to agree, so the chances of
a mistake being made are reduced. Even then,
the psychiatrists do not have power to revoke the forensic order. That must be
by the Mental Health Review Tribunal. At the Tribunal hearing, the
Attorney-General is represented and can advocate for the safety
It is truly extraordinary, then, in this case, that the four
very experienced psychiatrists who gave evidence and the two assisting
psychiatrists to the Court all recommend a non-revocation order.
make such an order, and I will make it for the maximum time I can, 10 years.
The reasons are that the defendant is very ill
and is very dangerous. He has a
very poor prognosis. He deliberately set out to fool psychiatrists in the past
and managed to do
Can I turn to one last matter, and it is this.
The family of Mr Manmeet Sharma have asked questions about whether this attack
racially motivated. They are sensible questions, and I think they deserve
to be taken very seriously. Two statements were given
by bus drivers, who both
said that Mr O’Donohue made racist statements in their buses. I have them
here. I am not going to
read them, because they are offensive. I notice that
one bus driver said that while he was talking like this, the person complained
lot about Queensland Rail. We know that Mr O’Donohue complained a lot
that he complained about
immigrants taking jobs. We know Mr O’Donohue complained a lot about not
having a job, and that other
people had them, and he was envious. I think these
things make it likely that the bus drivers’ recollections were correct.
Mr O’Donohue denies that it was him who made the statements. It is not my
legal job to decide who is right and who is wrong
that Mr O’Donohue did make those statements.
I still do not think
that the attack on Mr Sharma was a racist attack. There are two reasons. The
first is what I have already described,
that we have witnesses that showed he
went straight from his house and got on the first bus that arrived. He could
not know what
race the driver would be.
The second reason is that the
defendant talks and talks and talks about the things that agitate him. Dr Voita
said this, and Dr van
de Hoef said the same thing. She said for three hours he
spoke at her very, very rapidly about all his delusions. As well, the
has written I think literally hundreds of pages about the things that agitate
him. There are no racist themes in all that
material. The defendant is not
inhibited about making very unattractive statements when he talks about his
delusions. He is not
inhibited in saying that he thinks what he did was
justified. I think if he had racist motives, he would not be inhibited from
I do think that an attack on a bus driver was
something that fitted in well with the defendant’s delusions. The
delusions began
when Mr O’Donohue worked for New South Wales Rail and they
continued when he worked for Queensland Rail. I think it is fair
to say that
there was a transport theme to his delusions, involving the Transport Workers
Union. He came to believe that all government
agencies were against him. He
saw the city council buses in that context, as part of a government agency. He
thought there were
messages for him in the advertisements on the side of buses.
He thought bus drivers beeped their horns to draw his attention to
messages. He had no car and he spent a lot of time on buses. He thought that
bus drivers and bus passengers gave him messages.
None of this makes sense in
an ordinary way. I do think, though, that so far as we can analyse the
defendant’s thinking,
there is a connection between his delusions and the
attack on a bus driver.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (203 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter