URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCATA/2025/97.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Electrical Licensing Committee v Shi [2025] QCATA 97 (23 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Electrical Licensing Committee v Shi
[2025] QCATA 97
ELECTRICAL LICENSING COMMITTEE
(applicant/appellant)
HONGWEI SHI
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
ORIGINATING APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
DELIVERED ON:
23 October 2025
HEARING DATE:
22 April 2025
DECISION OF:
Senior Member Brown
appeal is allowed.
decision in proceeding OCR331-21 dated 15 September 2023 is set aside.
matter is remitted for reconsideration according to law and in accordance with
these reasons with such additional evidence as
the Tribunal may consider
appropriate.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES –
RIGHT OF APPEAL – WHEN APPEAL LIES – ERROR OF LAW
– GENERALLY – where the appellant contended errors of law occurred
in the conduct of the proceeding –
where parties had not prepared to
discuss grounds of disciplinary action and member rejected application to
adjourn to prepare submissions
– where member failed to consider whether
respondent should be disqualified from being a qualified technical person
where member failed to make necessary order cancelling the
respondent’s licence before ordering the respondent’s
disqualification
– where member took irrelevant matter into account in
determining sanction – appeal allowed
Electrical Safety Act
Electrical Safety Regulation 2013
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Cachia v Grech
[2009] NSWCA
Ericson v Queensland Building Services Authority
Glenwood Properties Pty Ltd v Delmoss Pty Ltd
[1986] 2 Qd R
McIver Bulk Liquid Haulage Pty Ltd v Fruehauf Australia Pty Ltd
[1989] 2 Qd R 577
Queensland Building & Construction Commission v
[2018] QCATA 38
QUYD Pty Ltd v Marvass Pty Ltd
[2008] QCA 257
[2009] 1 Qd
Wilkie v Councillor Conduct Tribunal
[2022] QCAT 79
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
Mr B McMillan instructed by Office of Industrial Relations
Respondent:
Self-represented
REASONS FOR DECISION
What is this appeal
[1] Mr Shi was
the holder of an electrical work licence and an electrical contractor licence.
Mr Shi undertook electrical work at
two residential properties. The Electrical
Licensing Committee (‘ELC’) carried out an investigation and decided
Mr Shi’s work was defective and constituted grounds for taking
disciplinary action against Mr Shi. The ELC also made decisions:
(a) Cancelling Mr Shi’s electrical worker licence, disqualifying him from
holding an electrical work licence for 5 years, and
disqualifying him from being
a Qualified Technical Person (‘QTP’) for 5 years; and
(b) Cancelling Mr Shi’s electrical contractor licence, disqualifying him
from holding an electrical contractor licence for
5 years, and imposing a
penalty of $2,000 to be paid within 3 months.
applied to have the Tribunal review the decisions. The Tribunal set aside the
decisions, with the exception of the imposition
of the monetary penalty, and
imposed different sanctions.
[3] The ELC
appeals the Tribunal decision.
Appeals to the Appeal
[4] A party to a
proceeding may appeal to the appeal tribunal against a decision of the tribunal
in the proceeding.
required if the appeal involves a question of fact or mixed law and
The principles to be applied
in considering whether leave to appeal should be granted are:
(a) Is there a reasonably arguable case of error in the primary
(b) Is there a reasonable prospect that the applicant will obtain substantive
(c) Is leave necessary to correct a substantial injustice to the applicant
caused by some error?
(d) Is there a question of general importance upon which further argument, and a
decision of the appellate court or tribunal, would
be to the public
[5] If leave to
appeal is granted, in deciding the appeal on a question of law the Appeal
Tribunal may confirm or amend the decision,
set aside the decision and
substitute its own decision or set aside the decision and remit the matter to
the tribunal for reconsideration.
The Appeal Tribunal may set aside the decision and substitute its own decision
only if this results in the disposition of the appeal
entirely in the
appellant’s favour.
on a question of fact or mixed law and fact must be conducted by way of
The Appeal Tribunal may
confirm or amend the decision, set aside the decision and substitute its own
decision or set aside the decision
and remit the matter to the tribunal for
reconsideration.
Electrical Safety Act
appropriate to start with a consideration of the relevant provisions of the
Electrical Safety Act
(‘ES Act’).
[7] The purpose
of the ES Act is found at s 4(1). The ES Act is directed at eliminating the
human cost to individuals, families and
the community of death, injury and
destruction that can be caused by electricity.
[8] Section 5 of
the ES Act sets out how the purpose of the Act is to be achieved including by
providing for protection for consumers
against failures of persons who perform
electrical work
and establishing
the Electrical Safety Board and its committees to participate in developing
requirements for the licensing and discipline
of persons who perform electrical
[9] Part 4 of
the ES Act is concerned with the licensing of persons to undertake or supervise
electrical work. Part 9 of the ES Act
is concerned with disciplinary action.
Section 106 sets out the grounds for taking disciplinary action against the
holder of an electrical
work licence. Section 107 sets out the grounds for
taking disciplinary action against the holder of an electrical contractor
Section 109 sets out the disciplinary action the licensing committee
may take against the holder of an electrical licence.
[10] Section 172
of the ES Act provides that a person whose interests are affected by, inter
alia, a disciplinary decision, may apply
to QCAT to have the decision reviewed.
The grounds of appeal
appellant identifies ten grounds of appeal. The appellant conveniently groups
the grounds as follows:
(a) The proceeding miscarried – grounds 1, 2 and 3;
(b) The learned member failed to make the required decision – grounds 6
(c) The learned member misconstrued s 109 of the ES Act – grounds 4 and
(d) The learned member made a factual finding unsupported by the evidence
– ground 5;
(e) The disciplinary orders made were manifestly inadequate – grounds 8
Application to adduce fresh evidence
[12] In the
reasons for decision, the learned member stated:
Another issue which I found a little bit concerning is during the hearing, on a
number of occasions, I asked the committee whether
there were any training
courses that could be undertaken to assist Mr Shi. And Mr Sparks advised the
tribunal that the best experience
was experience on the job.
And I note from
some of the disciplinary actions and sanctions that audits were ordered and
further training.
I just say that in passing, as I would have liked to have
discussed these possibilities at length with the committee and Mr
and Mr Shi.
Mr Shi he says he is prepared to do further training, if his licences were to
– if he was to have licences
. And I believe the sanctions imposed by
the committee are harsh and not in step with some of the other sanctions that
were imposed.
I believe some leniency should have been provided to Mr Shi,
given his undertaking that his other work was good and he is prepared
undertake further training or work with an experienced electrician
(emphasis added)
additional evidence sought to be adduced by the appellant is an affidavit by
Novak, the Principal Advisor of Electrical
Licensing, a unit of the Electrical Safety Office (‘ESO’).
Relevantly, Ms Novak
attests to the following:
(a) There are four training courses which the ELC typically requires electrical
licence holders to complete following disciplinary
(b) A person in the position of Mr Shi would be unable to undertake two of the
courses as each course requires the person to be the
holder of a current
electrical work licence;
(c) In respect of the other two courses, whether a person in the position of Mr
Shi would be able to undertake the courses would
depend on whether the
Registered Training Organisation delivering the units required the person to
complete electrical work in the
workplace to gather evidence for competency.
appellant says that the further evidence is relevant if the appeal is decided by
way of rehearing.
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(‘QCAT Act’) provides that if an appeal is on a question of fact or
a question of mixed law and fact, the appeal
must be decided by way of rehearing
with or without the hearing of additional evidence as decided by the appeal
tribunal. In
Helu v Yuan
’) the Appeal Tribunal considered the issue of
admitting further evidence upon a rehearing pursuant to s 147(2) of the QCAT
Queensland Vedic Cultural Centre Pty Ltd v Lal
the QCAT Appeal Tribunal considered the meaning of ‘additional
evidence’ in the context of the appeal provisions in the
QCAT Act appeal
and stated:
[31] The reason why the Appeal Tribunal is able to admit additional evidence is
to avoid a miscarriage of justice. It is well understood
however, that if the
evidence would have been available with reasonable diligence at the time of the
hearing then there is no miscarriage
of justice for it not to be considered.
[35] It can be seen that (the QCAT Act) reopening provisions closely reflect
the common law principles which are relevant to appeals
as set out above.
Paragraph (b) of the definition of reopening ground reflects the requirement
that the evidence was not available
with reasonable diligence at the time of the
hearing and admission of the additional evidence is required to avoid a
miscarriage
of justice. Section 139(4)(b) reflect the requirement that a
reopening will ‘effectively or conveniently’ deal with the
ground. An example of where it is probably not effective or convenient to do
that is where the tribunal has made an assessment
of uncertain future events as
explained in
Mulholland v Mitchell
[36] The affinity of the appeal and reopening provisions can also be seen from
the way they interact in the QCAT legislation. An
application to reopen and an
application to appeal or for leave to appeal cannot both continue at the same
[37] It is also provided that the Appeal Tribunal can convert an application to
appeal or for leave to appeal into an application
to reopen if it discloses a
reopening ground more effectively or conveniently dealt with in this way. In
practice, appeals are often
converted to reopening applications in this way
– but inevitably some appeals which could have been converted will be
or there may be appeals like this one which include other grounds of
appeal which cannot be dealt with as an application to reopen.
[38] It is clear that for the sake of consistency, when hearing an appeal in
which there is an application to admit additional evidence,
the Appeal Tribunal
is guided by the statutory provisions applying to reopening applications.
[39] When considering whether the Appeal Tribunal can effectively or
conveniently deal with the admission of the additional evidence,
it would be
noted that the Appeal Tribunal may either hear the evidence and allow the appeal
on that basis, amending the decision
or substituting its own, or it can remit
the matter to the tribunal for consideration. In deciding what to do, the Appeal
would recognise that the appeal jurisdiction is not generally the
proper forum to receive evidence on disputed facts, so it will
often be the case
that if the additional evidence is admitted it would result in remission of the
matter back to the tribunal for
[36] I agree generally with the approach in
Queensland Vedic Cultural
Centre Pty Ltd v Lal
. While the Appeal Tribunal has an overriding discretion
to permit additional evidence in order to prevent a miscarriage of justice,
fact that the evidence may of itself have had an important impact on the result
at first instance does not mean that in every
case such evidence will be
permitted to be adduced in a rehearing. The Appeal Tribunal will consider a
range of factors including
the factors usually considered in an application to
adduce new evidence on appeal. One of these factors is whether the evidence,
with reasonable diligence, could have been obtained at the time of the original
hearing. As the Appeal Tribunal observed in
Queensland Vedic Cultural
Centre Pty Ltd v Lal
, if the evidence could have been obtained by the party
seeking to rely upon it, then it is difficult to see how not permitting the
evidence in the appeal will result in a miscarriage of justice. Parties are
responsible for the conduct of their own case and should
present it at one time
and not in a piecemeal fashion. Accordingly, unless the interests of justice
demand it, additional evidence
should not be permitted upon a rehearing.
(footnotes omitted)
correctness of the reasoning in
has not been challenged. I will
address the application to adduce further evidence later in these reasons.
Consideration of the grounds of appeal
convenient to consider the grounds of appeal as grouped by the appellant.
Grounds of appeal 1, 2 and 3
appellant sent to Mr Shi two disciplinary action notices, both dated 30 November
2021, pursuant to s 121(1)(a) and s 121(1)(b)
of the ES Act. Of particular
relevance is that each notice set out the facts established from the
and the disciplinary
hearing which had been held on 23 November 2021.
[19] Following a
compulsory conference in the proceeding below, directions were made by the
Tribunal, inter alia, that:
(a) The parties are in agreement that the grounds for disciplinary action are
established with regard to the two disciplinary action
decisions dated 30
November 2021.
(b) The Tribunal only considers on review whether the disciplinary actions taken
by the Committee were the correct and preferable
[20] At the
commencement of the hearing below counsel for the appellant drew the learned
member’s attention to the directions
and advised that the only matter to
be decided by the Tribunal was whether the disciplinary action taken by the ELC
was the correct
and preferable decision. The transcript reveals that the learned
member was concerned to understand the potential consequences of
actions which were the subject of the disciplinary complaint, and to determine
whether there remained any factual
[21] An exchange
then took place between the learned member and Mr Shi. Mr Shi advised the
learned member (through an interpreter)
that he ‘certainly
disagreed’ with the facts and circumstances set out in the disciplinary
action notices. Mr Shi was
then called to give evidence and was questioned by
the learned member. As the hearing progressed the learned member explored with
both Mr Shi and counsel for the appellant the circumstances giving rise to the
disciplinary notices. It is not controversial that
English is not Mr Shi’s
first language and that his English language proficiency is limited. Mr Shi was
assisted at the compulsory
conference by his daughter. There was no interpreter
arranged by the Tribunal present at the conference.
[22] Counsel for
the appellant proceeded to cross examine Mr Shi about the electrical work the
subject of the disciplinary findings.
When the hearing resumed after a short
adjournment counsel for the appellant applied to adjourn the hearing on the
basis that the
appellant had not prepared for a contested hearing about the
grounds for the disciplinary action in light of the directions made
Tribunal after the compulsory conference. Counsel for the appellant explained to
the learned member that the appellant had
not put on evidence to prove all of
the matters the subject of the disciplinary complaint. The learned member
invited the appellant’s
counsel to consider the matter further after Mr
Shi had completed giving his evidence. Counsel for the appellant declined this
and renewed the application to adjourn the hearing which the learned
member refused. When requested to do so the learned member gave
brief reasons
for his decision.
appellant submits that the matters outlined above amounted to a fundamental
failure of procedural fairness such that the
entire proceeding before the
Tribunal miscarried.
proceeding below was a merits review. The Tribunal was required to decide the
matter by way of a fresh hearing on the merits.
Whether the parties can agree to
confine the issues for determination in a merits review proceeding was
considered by the Appeal
Tribunal in
Queensland Building and Construction
Commission v Whalley.
involved the review of a decision by the QBCC that building work
had not been satisfactorily rectified. Following a compulsory conference,
‘list of issues and agreements’ document was prepared by the
presiding tribunal member which contained, inter alia,
agreement that the
decision was a reviewable decision and identifying seven issues to be
determined. In reaching a final determination
the tribunal at first instance
confined its consideration to the identified issues. On appeal, the Appeal
Tribunal found that the
tribunal failed to exercise its review function and
conduct a fresh hearing on the merits necessary to produce the correct and
decision, stating:
The Tribunal constituted for the review proceeding was ultimately responsible
for determining the matter. The QCAT Act mandates,
amongst other things, that
the Tribunal conduct a fresh hearing on the merits, and this may involve, in
exercising its review function,
identifying relevant issues and making findings
of fact to determine the review proceeding. The learned Member failed to conduct
a merit review required by the QCAT Act. There was in consequence an error of
law and the decision of the learned Member cannot stand.
Wilkie v Councillor Conduct
’) Judicial Member McGill SC came to a different
conclusion.
involved a review of a decision finding misconduct by
an elected local government official. Judicial Member McGill SC noted the
of giving close attention to the relevant enabling Act when
considering the scope of a merits review proceeding. Judicial Member
stated that the fact the Tribunal conducts a merits review by way of a hearing
de novo does not mean that the parties cannot
confine the issues in dispute
between them.
A footnote appears
in the reasons:
That follows from the QCAT Act s 4(b), and the general thrust of Part 6
Divisions 1A, 2, 3 and 4 of the QCAT Act. Insofar as
suggests that the parties cannot confine the issues in a review, I respectfully
, the original application to the Councillor Conduct Tribunal
(‘CCT’) involved fourteen allegations of instances of misconduct.
The CCT decided that eight of the allegations of misconduct were sustained. An
information notice given to Mr Wilkie after the decision
set out the findings of
the CCT on the fourteen allegations. Mr Wilkie applied to QCAT to review the
decision. He subsequently applied
to QCAT to amend the grounds of review to
confine the review to seven identified allegations of misconduct and the
sanction imposed.
The Independent Assessor, the second respondent in the
proceeding, objected to the application and argued that the decision under
review was the decision of the CCT as a whole, and that a review by the Tribunal
involved a hearing de novo of the entire matter
which was before the CCT.
Judicial Member McGill SC identified the crucial issue: whether the decision on
whether or not there was
misconduct is one decision in respect of all the
allegations, or at least all that have been substantiated, or whether there is a
separate decision in respect of each instance of conduct alleged to be
misconduct. Judicial Member McGill SC determined that the
relevant provisions of
Local Government Act 2009
(Qld) (‘LG Act’) contemplated
that, in a case where there was an application which covered a number of
separate instances
of conduct which were alleged to amount to misconduct, there
would be a separate decision on whether each allegation amounted to
misconduct.
Judicial Member McGill SC stated:
There is no reason why a person entitled to receive a notice under s 150AS(3)
would want to review a decision which was favourable
to that person, and when
there were a number of separate allegations advanced in one application to the
first respondent, it would
not be satisfactory if a person with a right to apply
for a review were to be exposed to having the findings on allegations which
favourable to that person also reviewed by the Tribunal, in effect as the price
for a review of any decision.
The second respondent’s submission, if correct, would mean that any review
of the decision overall of whether or not there
was misconduct would require the
Tribunal to conduct a full review of all the allegations of misconduct. Given
that the Tribunal
is expected by the legislature to deal with matters in a way
that is accessible, fair, just, economical, informal and quick,[14]
that strikes
me as an unlikely legislative intention, and one which is not supported by the
purposes of the LG Act. Indeed, if a
number of allegations of misconduct are
found against a councillor and the councillor does not wish to pursue a review
of the decision
in respect of one or some of them, the review will be conducted
even more efficiently. The fact that the Tribunal conducts a review
by a hearing
de novo does not mean that the parties cannot confine the issues in dispute
between them.
[27] Judicial
Member McGill SC stated:
In my opinion therefore the applicant is entitled to apply to the Tribunal to
review the decision of the first respondent on those
allegations of misconduct
which were decided adversely to him, or such of them as he chooses, and that
will not open up for review
those allegations of misconduct on which the
decision of the first respondent was favourable. The decision under s
150AQ(1)(b) is
clearly a separate decision, and that has been made subject to
review, which right the applicant has exercised.
[28] As may be
seen from the foregoing, the decision of Judicial Member McGill SC permitting
the applicant to confine the scope of
the review was the result of the
construction of the relevant provisions of the LG Act and the particular facts
of the case. The
comments in the footnote regarding the parties confining the
issues in dispute in a review proceeding were obiter and should be considered
this light.
[29] Division 3
of Part 9 of the ES Act sets out the procedures for taking disciplinary action
against a person. The first step involves
the committee giving a preliminary
notice to the person stating a number of things including the ground that the
committee considers
may exist for taking disciplinary action against the person
and an outline of the committee’s understanding of the facts and
circumstances forming the basis for the committee’s view that the ground
The licence holder
may give the committee information the person considers the committee should
consider before deciding whether
to hold the hearing, including information the
person considers would justify the committee in deciding not to act
The licensing committee
may hold a hearing to decide whether the ground exists for taking disciplinary
action against the person
and if the committee decides the ground exists, to
decide whether disciplinary action is to be taken, and if so, the details of the
disciplinary action.
disciplinary hearing is held as, or as a part of, a meeting of the licensing
committee. The provisions of the ES Act for the holding
of board committee
meetings apply to the meeting.
Section 118(1) sets out the requirements for the conduct of a disciplinary
hearing. The licensing committee must keep a record of
evidence given to it for
the disciplinary hearing however the committee is not required to keep a
transcript of the disciplinary
As soon as practicable
after completing the disciplinary hearing, the licensing committee must decide
whether the ground exists for
taking disciplinary action against the person, and
if the committee decides that the ground exists for taking disciplinary action
against the person it must decide whether disciplinary action is to be taken,
and if so, the details of the disciplinary action,
and it must give the person a
written notice informing the person of what the committee has
A decision by the
committee is a ‘disciplinary
A person whose
interests are affected by a disciplinary decision may apply to QCAT as provided
for under the QCAT Act, to have the
relevant provisions of the ES Act are quite different to those found in the LG
Act considered in
. The present factual situation is also quite
different to that in
. In undertaking the review proceeding below,
the Tribunal was required to hear and decide the matter by way of a fresh
the merits and to produce the correct and preferable
The Tribunal was
required to determine whether the grounds for disciplinary action were made out
and, if so, the appropriate disciplinary
action to be taken. It was open to the
parties to reach agreement on the relevant facts, including those facts that
might support
a finding that grounds existed for disciplinary action. It was
also open to the parties to agree on facts relevant to the determination
disciplinary action to be taken. Ultimately however it was a matter for the
Tribunal to decide, after conducting a fresh hearing
on the merits, if grounds
existed for taking disciplinary action and, if so, the disciplinary action to be
taken. Insofar as the
appellant submits to the contrary, I do not accept the
submission.
[31] Despite the
foregoing it was apparent to the learned member that the parties had conducted
themselves in accordance with the
directions made following the compulsory
conference and in the (mistaken) belief that the issue of whether the grounds
for disciplinary
action existed was not required to be decided by the tribunal.
The procedure at the hearing was at the discretion of the Tribunal
the Tribunal observing the matters at s 28 of the QCAT Act including observing
the rules of natural justice.
The notion of natural justice is a flexible one. It requires the Tribunal to
give a party the opportunity to present their case.
The appellant says that in
conducting the hearing it was not given the opportunity to present its case.
This is said to arise out
of, firstly, the learned member’s decision not
to confine the scope of the review in accordance with the earlier tribunal
directions,
and secondly in not allowing the appellant’s application to
adjourn the hearing after making the determination not to confine
the scope of
the review.
[32] I conclude
that there was no error by the learned member in not confining the scope of the
review. The learned member was not
only entitled, he was required, to decide the
matter after conducting a fresh hearing on the merits. In deciding the review
application,
the learned member was required to decide whether the grounds for
disciplinary action were established and if so, the disciplinary
action to be
[33] Once the
learned member advised the parties that the hearing would not be confined in
accordance with the expectation of the
parties consistent with the earlier
tribunal directions it was obvious that the appellant would be at a significant
disadvantage
if the hearing proceeded given the basis upon which the appellant
had prepared for the hearing. In light of this, the failure by
the learned
member to adjourn the hearing to allow the appellant to present its case on the
basis that the issues for determination
would not be confined in accordance with
the earlier directions was a breach of procedural fairness. This was an error of
Grounds of appeal 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9
grounds of appeal traverse a number of alleged errors by the learned member in
making the disciplinary orders. The appropriate
starting point is a
consideration of s 109 of the ES Act.
[35] Section
109(1) sets out an exhaustive list of the disciplinary action the licensing
committee may take against the holder of
an electrical licence, which
(a) cancel the licence;
(b) suspend the licence—
(i) for a period decided by the committee; or
(ii) until conditions decided by the committee are complied with;
Example of condition—
a condition that the licence holder satisfactorily finish a stated training
course or examination
(ba) if the licence is an electrical work licence, disqualify the holder from
being a qualified technical person for the holder of
an electrical contractor
(i) for a period decided by the committee; or
(ii) until conditions decided by the committee are complied with;
(bb) disqualify the holder from holding an electrical contractor licence,
electrical work licence, or both—
(i) for a period decided by the committee; or
(ii) until conditions decided by the committee are complied with;
Example of condition—
a condition that the licence holder satisfactorily finish a stated training
course or examination
(bc) include or change a condition or restriction in the licence;
(c) reprimand or caution the holder;
(d) if the electrical licence is an electrical contractor licence, require the
holder to correct a fault or defect in electrical
work within the time and in
the way stated by the committee;
(e) impose on the holder a monetary penalty.
[36] Section
109(2) provides that the licensing committee may take more than one type of
disciplinary action.
electrical licence is suspended because of disciplinary action, the licence
cannot be renewed while it is still suspended
and if it expires while it is
still suspended, cannot be reinstated while it is still
[38] In relation
to Mr Shi’s electrical work licence, the original decision of the
committee was to:
(a) Cancel the electrical work licence;
(b) Suspend the electrical work licence for a period of five years;
(c) Disqualify Mr Shi from holding an electrical work licence for a period of
five years.
[39] In relation
to Mr Shi’s electrical contractor licence, the original decision of the
committee was to disqualify Mr Shi
from being a qualified technical person for a
period of five years.
[40] In relation
to Mr Shi’s electrical contractor licence, the original decision of the
committee was to:
(a) Cancel the electrical contractor licence;
(b) Disqualify Mr Shi from holding an electrical work licence for a period of
five years;
(c) Impose a monetary penalty of $2,000.
[41] The learned
member made the following orders:
decision made by the Electrical Licensing Committee on 30 November 2021 to
disqualify Hongwei Shi from holding electrical worker
licence No 155464 for a
period of five (5) years from 30 November 2021 is set aside.
decision of the Electrical Licensing Committee made on 30 November 2021 to
suspend Hongwei Shi from holding work licence 155464
for a period of five (5)
years is amended so that the period of suspension is reduced to two (2) years
from the 21 November 2021.
decision of the Electrical Licensing Committee to disqualify Hongwei Shi from
holding electrical contractor licence number 85954
for a period of 5 years from
21 November 2021 is amended so the period of disqualification is three (3) years
from 30 November 2021.
decision of the Electrical Licensing Committee made on 30 November 2021 to
impose a penalty of $2000.00 on Hongwei Shi is confirmed.
appellant says that the learned member erred in failing to make a decision about
the following:
(a) Cancelling Mr Shi’s electrical work licence pursuant to s 109(1)(a) of
the ES Act;
(b) Disqualifying Mr Shi from being a qualified technical person pursuant to s
109(1)(ba)(i) of the ES Act;
(c) Cancelling Mr Shi’s electrical contractor licence pursuant to s
109(1)(a) of the ES Act.
[43] In the
reasons for decision the learned member referred to a number of matters in
determining the appropriate sanction:
(a) Some leniency should have been shown to Mr Shi noting that he was prepared
to undertake further training or work with an experienced
electrician;
(b) The current order suspending Mr Shi’s electrical work licence should
be substituted with an order suspending the licence
for a period of two years
with a recommendation that Mr Shi undertake further training and should work
under an experienced electrician;
(c) In ‘respect to the public interest, having a worker’s licence,
although he is able to certify electrical work, my
understanding from (counsel
for the appellant) was that there is a further certification so there is some
oversight by an electrical
contractor in the work that Mr Shi would undertake
under that worker’s licence.’ Disqualification of Mr Shi’s
contractor’s
licence was justified but not for the period of five years. A
disqualification period of three years should be substituted;
(d) The ‘fine should remain’.
[44] The learned
member set aside the decision to disqualify Mr Shi from holding an electrical
work licence and substituted a decision
that Mr Shi’s licence be suspended
for a period of two years from 21 November 2021. In these circumstances it was
unnecessary but inappropriate to order the cancellation of the licence.
If a licence is cancelled it cannot be suspended. It may
be either cancelled or
suspended. The appellant says that the orders made by the learned member
regarding Mr Shi’s electrical
work licence are apt to lead to confusion.
This submission is principally founded on the absence of an order setting aside
the decision
of the committee to cancel Mr Shi’s electrical work licence.
The appellant’s submission appears to be that in the absence
of an order
setting aside the decision to cancel the electrical work licence it is unclear
whether Mr Shi in fact still holds a licence.
For the reasons I have expressed,
the sanction imposed by the learned member is clear from the reasons and the
orders made.
appellant says that:
(a) the committee did not make any decision which was capable of being amended
on review to suspend Mr Shi’s work licence;
(b) the Tribunal could not make any decision on review to suspend Mr Shi’s
work licence because that licence had been cancelled
by the committee and that
decision was not set aside by the Tribunal – therefore there was no valid
worker licence to suspend.
difficulty with the first submission is that the committee did in fact make a
decision suspending Mr Shi’s work licence
for a period of five years. This
appears to be the genesis of the issues to which the appellant refers. The
committee decided to
both cancel and suspend Mr Shi’s work licence and
disqualify Mr Shi from holding a work licence. The appellant does not address
these apparent inconsistencies in the original decision. In ordering the reduced
period of suspension it is readily apparent that
the learned member did not
consider cancellation of the licence to be either necessary or appropriate.
While the orders might have
been expressed with greater clarity, I am not
persuaded there was error by the learned member as asserted by the appellant.
appellant says that the learned member failed to address the disqualification of
Mr Shi as a ‘qualified technical person’.
A ‘qualified
technical person’ is defined in the
Electrical Safety Regulation 2013
Electrical work performed by a licensed electrical contractor must be performed
or supervised by a qualified technical person.
The licensing committee may, if
the licence is an electrical work licence, disqualify the holder from being a
qualified technical
person for the holder of an electrical contractor licence.
It is apparent from the reasons and the orders made that the learned member
failed to consider whether Mr Shi should be disqualified from being a qualified
technical person. This was an error.
appellant says that the learned member failed to make a decision about the
cancellation of Mr Shi’s electrical contractor
licence. It is apparent
from the reasons and the orders that the learned member considered it
appropriate to disqualify Mr Shi from
holding an electrical contractor’s
licence for a period of three years. The learned member failed to address the
issue of the
cancellation of the licence. Cancellation of the licence was a
necessary order before an order could be made disqualifying Mr Shi
from holding
an electrical contractor licence. There was error by the learned member.
appellant says that the learned member erred in in finding that Mr Shi should
undertake further training and work under an
experienced electrician. The
appellant says that the finding was unsupported by the evidence.
[50] Evidence
was given at the hearing by Mr Shi about his qualifications and experience. Mr
Shi gave evidence that he had completed
the necessary training in order to
undertake the electrical work leading to the disciplinary action. Evidence was
also given in a
written statement and at the hearing by Mr Kevin Sparkes,
principal electrical safety inspector with the Electrical Safety Office.
Sparkes was questioned by the learned member about further training Mr Shi might
undertake. Mr Sparkes’s evidence was that
Mr Shi should return to a period
of apprenticeship under supervision. The evidence of Mr Sparkes was that, as the
holder of an electrical
work licence, Mr Shi would not be required to work under
supervision. The evidence of Mr Sparkes was that if Mr Shi was an apprentice
would be required to work with a licensed electrical contractor and any work
undertaken by Mr Shi would be required to be signed
off by the licensed
contractor.
apparent from the reasons that the learned member’s decision about
sanction was informed by what he considered Mr
Shi’s preparedness to
undertake further training and work under the supervision of an experienced
electrician.
appellant says that as the holder of a work licence, Mr Shi was entitled to work
independently and without supervision. Section
63 of the ES Act provides that an
electrical licence as issued, renewed or reinstated may include conditions or
restrictions the
regulator considers necessary or desirable for the proper
performance of electrical work. Section 109(1)(b)(ii) permits the licensing
committee to suspend a licence until conditions decided by the committee are
complied with. Section 109(1)(ba)(ii) and s 109(1)(bb)(ii)
permit the committee
to disqualify a person from holding an electrical work licence or an electrical
contractor licence until conditions
decided by the committee are complied with.
Section 109(1)(bc) permits the licensing committee to include or change a
condition or
restriction in an electrical licence. The learned member did not
decide to impose conditions on Mr Shi’s licences. There was
no evidence
before the learned member about whether such conditions could in fact be
imposed. Notwithstanding this, the learned member’s
approach to sanction
appears to have been informed to a not inconsiderable extent by his view that Mr
Shi was prepared to work under
supervision. In the circumstances, the learned
member’s discretion when determining the appropriate sanction miscarried
taking into consideration an irrelevant consideration. This was an error of
[53] In light of
my conclusion about it is unnecessary for me to consider further the application
by the appellant to adduce fresh
evidence. The evidence is not determinative of
the outcome of the appeal. It seems to me that the evidence may be relevant upon
however that is a matter for the Tribunal upon remittance.
[54] Finally,
the appellant says that the penalty imposed by the learned member was manifestly
inadequate. I have identified errors
by the learned member both in the conduct
of the hearing and in the final decision. These were errors of law. Unless the
of the question of law results in the disposition of the matter
entirely in the appellant’s favour, the matter must be remitted
reconsideration by the tribunal. That is the appropriate order here. It follows
that the appropriate sanction is matter to be
considered on rehearing.
[55] The appeal
should be allowed, the decision of the Tribunal below set aside and the matter
remitted for reconsideration according
to law and in accordance with these
reasons and with such additional evidence as the Tribunal may consider
appropriate. I see no
reason why the original member cannot undertake the
rehearing and this might indeed be preferable in view of the member’s
familiarity
with the matter.
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
s 142(3)(b).
QUYD Pty Ltd v Marvass Pty Ltd
[2008] QCA 257
[2009] 1 Qd R
Cachia v Grech
[2009] NSWCA 232
2009), [13].
QUYD Pty Ltd v Marvass Pty
[2008] QCA 257
[2009] 1 Qd R 41.
Glenwood Properties Pty Ltd v Delmoss Pty
[1986] 2 Qd R 388
McIver Bulk
Liquid Haulage Pty Ltd v Fruehauf Australia Pty Ltd
[1989] 2 Qd R 577
QCAT Act, s 146.
Ericson v Queensland Building Services
[2013] QCA 391.
QCAT Act, s 147(2).
QCAT Act, s 147(3).
ET Act, s 5(d).
ET Act, s 5(f)(ii).
Counsel for the appellant.
[2023] QCATA 12.
The material was contained
in a preliminary notice sent to Mr Shi and Mr Shi’s response to the
preliminary notice prior to
the disciplinary hearing.
[2018] QCATA 38.
[2022] QCAT 79.
Ibid, [15].
ES Act, s 114(1).
Ibid, s 114(1)(d).
Ibid, s 115.
Ibid, s 117.
Ibid, s 120.
Ibid, s 121(1).
Ibid, s 167.
Ibid, s 172.
QCAT Act, s 20.
QCAT Act, s 28(3)(a).
ES Act, s 109(3).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (259 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter