URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/209.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Tan [2025] QCA 209 (31 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
[2025] QCA 209
TAN, David Lee
(applicant)
CA No 257 of 2024
SC No 125 of 2024
SC No 923 of 2023
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Sentence Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane – Date of Sentence: 11 November 2024
(Williams J)
DELIVERED ON:
31 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
19 August 2025
Bond and Brown and Doyle JJA
Application for leave to appeal against sentence is refused.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE
– GROUNDS FOR INTERFERENCE – SENTENCE MANIFESTLY
EXCESSIVE OR
INADEQUATE – where the applicant pleaded guilty to charges of being an
accessory after the fact to murder and
to manslaughter – where the
applicant was sentenced to six years imprisonment on the count of accessory
after the fact to murder
and nine and a half years imprisonment on the count of
manslaughter – where the sentence was structured cumulatively and a
parole eligibility date set – where the sentencing judge found that the
applicant’s pleas of guilty were late
pleas – where the sentencing
judge had regard to those pleas as mitigating factors – where the
applicant contends by
his first ground of appeal, that a greater discount ought
to have been allowed in determining the parole eligibility date on account
the guilty plea – where the applicant submits that there would have been
an earlier parole eligibility date if the sentencing
judge had reduced the
aggregate head sentence but maintained the application of the percentages she
had provisionally identified
as appropriate to those sentences if imposed
separately – where the applicant contends, by his second ground of appeal,
the sentence was manifestly excessive in all the circumstances, having
regard to the assessment of the non-parole period –
whether the parole
eligibility date should have been advanced – whether the non-parole period
rendered the sentence imposed
manifestly excessive – whether leave to
appeal against sentence should be granted
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Kentwell v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
distinguished
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357;
(2022) 10 QR 725
R v Ungvari
Wong v The Queen
(2001) 207 CLR 584
[2001] HCA 64
E D Boddice for the applicant
C M Cook for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the applicant
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Queensland) for the respondent
: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons for judgment
of Doyle JA. I wish only to add some brief additional remarks
why I agree with his Honour that each of the suggested grounds of appeal
lacks merit, and the application for leave to
appeal should fail.
present case, it was not contentious before the sentencing judge that the
sentence should be structured by the imposition
of cumulative sentences in
respect of each of the two counts, with a moderation for totality and a single
parole eligibility date
remarked in
[2022] QCA 89
“The nature of the [sentencing] task means that –
express legislative provisions apart – there is no particular
path that a
sentencing judge must follow in order to arrive at the sentence which is just in
all the circumstances:
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357 per
Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ at [27]. It follows that there is
no single correct sentence and
that sentencing judges are to be allowed as much
flexibility in sentencing as is consonant with consistency of approach and as
with the statutory regime that applies:
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357 per Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne And Callinan JJ at
Where the sentence which is just in all the circumstances involves sentencing
an offender to a term of imprisonment, the judge is
often also called upon to
fix the date on which the offender is eligible for parole: see
, (3) or (5), and
or (3) of the
Penalties and
Sentences Act 1992
(Qld). By doing so, the judge is making a judicial
determination that the circumstances of the offending require the offender to
serve no less than the minimum term identified by the date so fixed, without
opportunity for parole:
Crump v New South Wales
[2012] HCA 20
(2012) 247 CLR 1
per French CJ and
[2021] QCA 225
per Kelly J
(with whom McMurdo and Bond JJA agreed).
The duty of a sentencing judge to take account of all the relevant factors to
arrive at a result which takes due account of them all
applies to all aspects of
the formulation of the sentence, not just to the formulation of the head
R v Eveleigh
[2002] QCA 219
[2003] 1 Qd R 398
. To adopt the language
used by Applegarth J [in his reasons in
], it applies to
the sentencing judge’s determination of both ‘the top’ and
‘the bottom’ of the sentence
which is just in all the
circumstances.”
apparent from the parts of her Honour’s sentencing remarks extracted by
Doyle JA that, having had regard to all the
appropriate relevant
considerations, her Honour considered and adjusted both the top and the bottom
of the sentence, because her
Honour considered not merely the total sentence to
be imposed but the minimum amount of time which the sentence would require the
applicant to spend in actual custody.
conceded in oral argument before this Court that ground 2 could not succeed
unless ground 1 succeeded. But, for the reasons
expressed by Doyle JA in
relation to ground 1, the criticisms of the approach taken by the
sentencing judge paid insufficient regard
to the degree of the flexibility
allocated to the sentencing judge as explained in
. Ground 1 could not succeed and on the
basis of the concession neither could ground 2. In any event, I add that I
agree with Doyle
JA’s assessment of the merits of ground 2.
I agree that for the reasons of Justice Doyle and the additional
reasons of Justice Bond. The applicant has failed to show error,
specific error or inferred error based on manifest excess, in relation to the
sentence imposed. I agree that leave to appeal
should be refused.
The applicant pleaded guilty to charges of being an accessory after the
fact to murder and to manslaughter. The primary judge sentenced
(a) On the count of manslaughter, to nine and a half years imprisonment;
(b) On the count of accessory after the fact to murder, to six years
imprisonment;
(c) The sentences of imprisonment to be cumulative;
(d) Pre-sentence custody between 14 March 2022 and 10 November 2024 of
973 days was declared as time already served; and
(e) A parole eligibility date of 14 September 2031 was set.
[8] This is an
application for leave to appeal against the sentences imposed.
[9] In my view
the application should be refused.
Summary of the Facts:
accessory after the fact to murder
[10] On or about
8 November 2021, Joshua Searston and Dewald de Klerk murdered Mr Andrew
) at the applicant’s business premises.
[11] His murder
was said to be in retaliation on the basis of a suspicion of Mr Walsh
allegedly “franking” and raping
of a female associate of another
applicant and Jessica Anne Noy were present at the time of the murder and
subsequently assisted in concealing the offence.
[13] Mr de Klerk
and the applicant were business partners. The applicant’s business
premises included a warehouse shed which
had a pit in the concrete floor
ordinarily covered by removeable metal grates.
[14] Before any
attack on Mr Walsh commenced, the applicant went upstairs and remained there
with Mr Walsh and Ms Noy. The applicant
deactivated the CCTV cameras using his
phone and told Mr Walsh to go downstairs. He refused.
[15] Mr Searston
then came and dragged Mr Walsh out of the upstairs bedroom and started violently
assaulting him.
[16] Mr Searston
repeatedly struck Mr Walsh with his fists and with weapons. Mr Walsh did
not fight back and begged Mr Searston to
stop. Mr de Klerk joined in the attack
a short time later.
applicant and Ms Noy hid in the bedroom during this time. They later went
downstairs.
[18] The attack
persisted. Mr Searston stabbed Mr Walsh numerous times in the chest and
continued to punch Mr Walsh.
[19] Mr Walsh
sustained injuries causing his death.
[20] To conceal
the murder and to enable either or both Mr Searston and Mr de Klerk to evade
punishment, the applicant, knowing that
either or both of them murdered
(a) Cleaned the crime scene at his business premises with chemicals;
(b) Assisted in disposing of and concealing Mr Walsh’s remains in an oil
pit at the scene, including by:
(i) attempting to submerge Mr Walsh’s remains in the oil pit using
star-pickets and pallets;
(ii) attempting to dissolve Mr Walsh’s remains using cleaning products and
other chemicals; and
(iii) assisting with pouring concrete on top of Mr Walsh’s body on
15 November 2021 and again on 12 February 2022;
(c) Assisted in the destruction of evidence, including burning concrete bags,
Mr Searston and Mr de Klerk’s jumpers, other
clothing and
blood-stained towels and gloves in a fire pit; and
(d) Knowingly made false representations to police in interviews, including as
to his whereabouts when Mr Walsh was murdered, his
knowledge of Mr Walsh
being buried at the shed and his involvement in the concrete pouring in November
February 2022, a crime scene warrant was executed at the applicant’s
business premises in relation to a homicide
investigation into Mr Griffiths
discussed below, during which the pit was excavated, and Mr Walsh’s
remains were located.
Dental records confirmed his identity. The exact cause
of death could not be determined.
[22] While in
custody, the applicant kept in contact with his associates via the Prisoner
Telephone System, during which he attempted
to solicit false alibis from
witnesses about his movements on the night of Mr Walsh’s
Summary of the Facts: manslaughter
[23] In the
early hours of 17 January 2022, Lachlan James Griffiths (
Mr Griffiths
was attacked at the applicant’s business premises sustaining injuries
causing his death. The principal offender of his murder
Griffiths’ remains were never located.
[24] His death
was in retaliation for a contention that Mr Griffiths had indecently dealt with
[name removed] young daughter –
a motive known to the applicant.
applicant did not know Mr Griffiths until a few days prior to his
disappearance.
[26] On 16 and
17 January 2022, Billy Bornstein and G lured Mr Griffiths to the
applicant’s business premises under the guise
of a drug deal. The
applicant was involved in facilitating this plan by allowing his van to be used
and directing Mr Bornstein to
where G was to be picked up from. The
applicant was not present at the shed when the three men first arrived.
applicant facilitated the interrogation, which he foresaw would involve violence
falling short of intending grievous bodily
harm or death, by allowing his
business premises to be used for the attack.
[28] In the
early hours of 17 January 2022, the applicant attempted to assist Francesco
Giorgi (known to him and who he knew G had
recruited to assist him with the
interrogation) to find his way to the applicant’s business premises.
Mr Griffiths was alive
when Mr Giorgi left some 47 minutes later.
[29] From after
3.03 am on 17 January 2022, G and others interrogated Mr Griffiths and
inflicted violence upon him. At one point
during the interrogation, the
applicant was present for an unknown period of time, though the Crown could not
prove that he was in
the room at the time G killed Mr Griffiths or that the
applicant was directly involved in any of the violence.
[30] However,
evidence established that the applicant was in the vicinity of the shed at his
business premises until approximately
4 pm on 17 January 2022. Mr Griffiths was
dead before the applicant departed.
[31] There were
repeated communications between the applicant and G’s phone between
midnight and 2 am. This included G asking
the applicant “to collect his
mate”. The applicant was depicted in CCTV footage driving around in his
van at 2.25 am
looking for Mr Giorgi whilst on his phone.
[32] Hoa Chanh
stayed at the shed overnight on 16 to 17 January 2022. He observed part of the
attack on Mr Griffiths. Upon waking
to the sound of loud banging, a scream and
voices coming from downstairs, Mr Chanh walked downstairs into the large meeting
for approximately one minute and observed:
(a) G assaulting Mr Griffiths;
(b) Blood on Mr Griffiths’ face and on G’s hands and clothes; and
(c) The applicant standing near Mr Griffiths while he was being attacked.
[33] Mr Chanh
further observed that the applicant “seemed angry”. The deceased
was “still breathing” when
Mr Chanh left the room.
evidence demonstrated that the applicant assisted in cleaning the crime
[35] A few days
after the unlawful killing, the applicant told Mr Chanh that G had assaulted Mr
Griffiths because “he was molesting
[a young identified woman] and
bringing other people to molest [her]”.
[36] A download
of the applicant’s Google Pixel mobile phone revealed images consistent
with Mr Griffiths’ wrapped remains,
with visible blood stains in the
background of the image and on the skirting board. The blood stains depicted in
the images were
consistent with locations wherein Mr Griffiths’ blood was
located during the crime scene examination in February and March
[37] Police
obtained a number of recorded versions of events from the applicant which
contained “self-serving lies” and
were inconsistent with other
[38] On 5 April
2022, police interviewed the applicant in relation to both homicides. During
this interview, the applicant lied to
the police concerning Mr Griffiths and his
own involvement. These lies included statements:
(a) that he did not stay at the premises on 16 January 2022 (instead going home
and returning only the next morning);
(b) that he saw Mr de Klerk and G throwing someone in the back of Mr de
Klerk’s car;
(c) that he saw Mr Griffiths in the backseat, moving and alive; and
(d) as to Mr Bornstein and G’s and his own movements on 16 and
17 January 2022 as well as his knowledge of the molestation
against Mr Griffiths.
Indictment 923 of 2023: accessory after the fact to murder
September 2023, the Crown presented Indictment 923 of 2023. The trial was then
listed for three weeks from 29 April 2024,
but it did not proceed on that
[40] On 6 March
2024, when arraigned on the indictment, the applicant pleaded not guilty to one
count of accessory after the fact
[41] On 9 April
2024, the applicant filed a Notice of Alibi, which was
Indictment 125 of 2024: the manslaughter
February 2022, the Crown presented Indictment 125 of 2024 in the Supreme
[43] In April
2024, the trial in respect of Indictment 125 of 2024 was listed for three weeks
before Williams J to commence on 28
October 2024.
[44] On 19 June
2024, the Crown provided proposed admissions, which, in relation to the
substantive admissions, the applicant rejected
(the Court being advised as such
on 25 September 2024).
[45] Following
negotiations with the Crown, Mr Bornstein and Mr Giorgi were convicted of
offences on 24 July 2024.
September 2024, the Crown provided a final list of witnesses, an exhibit list as
well as a trial plan.
October 2024, the applicant, through his solicitors, filed and served pre-trial
applications to exclude evidence from the
[48] It was only
on 22 October 2024 at 10.20 am that the applicant, through his Counsel, offered
in writing to plead guilty to the
counts on both indictments, which the Crown
accepted and responded accordingly at 1.54 pm that day.
Guilty Pleas
October 2024, the applicant pleaded guilty to one count of manslaughter on
Indictment 125 of 2024 and one count of accessory
after the fact to murder on
Indictment 923 of 2023. The sentencing hearing was adjourned to 31 October
November 2024, the applicant was sentenced in respect of both convictions. The
sentencing judge considered that his pleas
of guilty constituted late pleas:
Sentencing Transcript p 1-3 ll 47-48.
The Sentencing
[51] Her Honour
noted that at the time of the offending the applicant was a mature aged man,
being 39 years old. The applicant’s
criminal history and previous time
spent in custody were also taken into account.
[52] Her Honour
recorded that the maximum sentences for both offences was life
imprisonment.
[53] Her Honour
considered that his guilty pleas were mitigating factors to be taken into
account, reflecting “a level of cooperation
with the criminal justice
system as it avoided the need for two lengthy trials” and spared the
families of Mr Walsh and
Notwithstanding, the late timing of the pleas meant that they “had the
practical effect of saving the time and expense of
a trial but [did] not reflect
much more than that”.
[54] Her Honour
took into account the applicant’s lies to police.
[55] Her Honour
considered the victim impact statements which had been supplied observing that
they demonstrated “the undeniable
devastating impact” of the
applicant’s offending on Mr Griffiths’ and Mr Walsh’s
[56] Her Honour
identified the purposes for which she was to sentence the applicant pursuant to
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
(Qld) and noted that the
sentence was to be structured cumulatively with a moderation for totality and a
single parole eligibility
[57] In reaching
the sentence to be imposed, dealing with each consideration in the single step
sentencing process, her Honour determined:
“This is a serious
example of the offence of manslaughter, as it involved a plan to inflict
violence and use force as a means
to an end, even though you were not the one to
inflict it. The end was to obtain information about the alleged sexual assault
[name removed] young daughter...
Your actions in respect of covering up [Mr Walsh’s] senseless murder
and entombing his body in concrete are also very serious.
In respect of manslaughter, I have formed a view as to the appropriate
sentence by undertaking the required “instinctive synthesis”,
including by:
(a) taking into account all of the circumstances of the current offending,
including your guilty plea, the mitigating features, and
the basis of your
criminal liability;
(b) taking into account the matters pursuant to
Penalties and
Sentences Act
(c) considering:
total time you have already spent in custody and the time to be declared as time
served under this sentence; and
impact of the parole eligibility date, any consequences of the statutory
provisions in respect of a serious violent offence declaration
in arriving at
a just sentence and whether adequate punishment requires a longer period in
actual custody before eligibility for
parole than would otherwise be
Subject to considerations of totality to be considered
further below, a sentence of nine and a-half years’ imprisonment with
parole eligibility date at approximately 66% of the sentence would be
appropriate in respect of your conviction for manslaughter.
In respect of accessory after the fact to murder, I have formed a view as to
the appropriate sentence by undertaking the required
“instinctive
synthesis”, including by:
(a) taking into account all the circumstances of the current offending,
including your guilty plea, the mitigating features, and
the basis of your
criminal liability;
(b) taking into account the matters pursuant to
Penalties and
Sentences Act
(c) considering:
total time you have spent in custody and the time to be declared as time served
under this sentence, and
impact of the parole eligibility date and a cumulative sentence, and whether
adequate punishment requires a longer period in actual
custody before
eligibility for parole than would otherwise be required.
Subject to considerations of totality to be considered further below, a
sentence of seven years’ imprisonment with a parole
eligibility date at
50 per cent of the sentence would be appropriate in respect of your
conviction for accessory after the fact to
As part of the instinctive synthesis, I must consider the total time you will
spend in custody and moderate the sentence to ensure
that it is not crushing. In
the circumstances, considerations of totality require a moderation of the
sentence in respect of accessory
after the fact to murder to six years and the
overall parole eligibility date to approximately 60 per cent of the overall
The total effective sentence is 15 and a-half years, with parole eligibility
date set after serving nine and a-half years. This overall
sentence meets the
requirements of the
Penalties and Sentences Act
and, in the current
circumstances, punishment, deterrence, denunciation and community protection in
particular.”
The Grounds of Proposed Appeal
[58] Leave is
sought to appeal on two proposed grounds:
(a) First, that “the requirement to serve 60 percent of the head sentence
imposed for the accessory after the fact to murder
offence did not reflect the
plea of guilty or totality”; and
(b) Second, that “the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive in all the
circumstances”.
[59] The primary
judge took into account the various relevant matters required of a sentencing
The Discount for Guilty Pleas
particular her Honour had proper regard to the guilty pleas as a factor
favouring a discount in the sentence (or more relevantly
here, on the period to
the parole eligibility date). The primary judge did so repeatedly in her
sentencing remarks, and it is sufficient
to mention only a few:
(a) In the early stage of her Honour’s sentencing remarks, she observed
that “[y]our pleas of guilty to manslaughter
and accessory after the fact
to murder are mitigating factors to be taken into
(b) After discussion of the facts her Honour noted that the pleas “can
only be considered as late pleas of
which her Honour
said she then took into account.
(c) When discussing the individual sentences her Honour was considering, her
Honour explicitly mentioned the guilty pleas as relevant
[61] To the
extent the proposed grounds of appeal suggest otherwise they do not enjoy any
reasonable prospects.
gravamen of the residual complaints about the discount for the guilty pleas
appears to be that:
(a) A greater discount ought to have been allowed on account of the guilty plea
on the accessory after the fact to murder conviction;
(b) In addressing the need to take account of the cumulative sentence the
primary judge fell into error with the effect of increasing
the non-parole
period. It is submitted there would have been an earlier parole eligibility
date if the primary judge had merely
reduced the aggregate head sentence but
maintained the application of the percentages she had provisionally identified
as appropriate
to the sentences if imposed separately.
[63] As to the
first of these, the applicant has not demonstrated error. The primary judge
identified the relevant factors. That
she did not apply as a starting point a
greater discount for the guilty plea is explicable by her view as to other
relevant matters,
including the lateness of the plea, the seriousness of the
offence, the conduct of the applicant in trying to conceal his involvement
deflect the police and other matters.
sentencing judge may make an order displacing what might be called the default
position by imposing an earlier or later
eligibility date. This Court, now more than 15 years ago, suggested that
“[a]s a matter of general practice... the one-third
mark of the sentence
of imprisonment is seen as an appropriate starting point to recognise a plea of
R v Ungvari
[2010] QCA 134
. That should not, however, be elevated to be the equivalent
of a statutory rule. A timely guilty plea serves worthwhile objectives
avoiding the costs of a trial, sparing the victims or their families and other
witnesses the stress of a trial, and also, depending
on the circumstances,
manifesting acceptance of responsibility, perhaps even remorse. But in each
case the level of discount will
depend on a range of factors:
[2021] QCA 119
. That was the case here.
[65] As to the
second of these, it wrongly assumes three matters. It first reads her
Honour’s remarks, where various percentages
are referred to provisionally,
as having a mathematical precision and a finality of assessment which they
do not have.
[66] Thus, it is
urged, her Honour must have failed to take into account the combined impact of
the sentences when applying the moderating
assessment because, had she persisted
with the percentages of the head sentences considered separately which she first
articulated
but reduced the head sentence of either by one year, the non-parole
period would be less. That is because a 15.5 year head sentence
with a discount
of 40 per cent will always produce a figure larger than (a parole
eligibility date later than) the aggregate of either:
8.5 years with a discount
of 34 per cent plus 7 years with a 50 per cent discount; or 9.5 years with
a discount of 34 per cent plus
6 years with a discount of 50 per cent.
[67] But her
Honour when dealing with the appropriate head sentences and possible non-parole
periods expressed the latter as the product
of application of
approximate
percentages. So, for the manslaughter conviction she referred to a parole
eligibility date at approximately 66 per cent of the sentence.
Her Honour used
similar language in relation to the accessory after the fact to murder
conviction there referring to approximately
50 per cent.
[68] Secondly,
the complaint assumes that the process of sentencing must have or even should be
capable of calculation with mathematical
precision. However, that is not the
nature of the sentencing process: see
[2008] QCA 117
Wong v The Queen
[2001] HCA 64
(2001) 207 CLR 584
. It is unnecessary to
dwell on this.
[69] Thirdly,
and more significantly, these remarks were made in the course of, and as steps
in, her Honour’s reasoning anterior
to her final consideration of what the
cumulative head sentences and parole eligibility date should be.
[70] It is not a
fair reading of her Honour’s approach to identify either of these head
sentences or provisional percentages
as her Honour’s final settled view of
what is appropriate. Indeed, that much is obvious but all the more so because
use by her Honour of the language of approximation.
[71] In setting
out the process she adopted, the primary judge was exposing her reasoning not
defining parameters for some calculation:
Markarian v The Queen
228 CLR 357. The ultimate exercise of the sentencing discretion required
her Honour’s assessment of what was, and satisfaction
that what she
imposed was, the appropriate overall sentence. That is what her Honour
arguments fully advanced by counsel for the applicant do not support a
conclusion that, if leave to appeal was granted, the
appeal would have any
reasonable prospects of success.
[73] No issue is
taken with the cumulative head sentence of 15.5 years. The issue taken is
ultimately with the non-parole period
which was determined to be a period of
9.5 years (a parole eligibility date of 14 September 2031 was fixed). The
primary judge took
into account all relevant considerations and the challenge to
her assessment of the significance to be given to the guilty pleas,
application of the moderation required when assessing the cumulative non-parole
period, are not made out, as discussed
already. The applicant does not make out
a case of specific error by the sentencing judge. Accordingly, this is not a
this Court should, on that basis, grant leave and thereafter
undertake the task of resentencing: cf
Kentwell v The Queen
252 CLR 601 at [42]-[43].
Not Manifestly Excessive
[74] Nor is this
a case where the applicant can establish that the sentence is excessive.
Counsel for the applicant did not seek
to make out that the sentence was
excessive except by seeking to identify specific error in the assessment of the
non-parole period
in the overall sentence imposed. That approach was correctly
taken. Far from being excessive the sentence imposed including the
non-parole period is appropriate and if this Court was to approach the
sentencing afresh, in my view the result would be unlikely
to be any more
favourable to the applicant. He committed two serious offences. They took
place over a few months and were followed
by conduct that covered extended
periods (over years) of his seeking to conceal his role in them. He lied to
those investigating
the offences and sought to confect an alibi. There was no
evident remorse and the pleas of guilty were made late. These factors,
with the others mentioned by the primary judge, in my view make the resultant
sentence appropriate.
[75] The test
for whether leave should be granted for an appeal against sentence has been
stated in this Court on many occasions.
While numerous cases give guidance as
to the factors which might affect the exercise of that discretion each
recognises that the
discretion is unfettered.
[76] For the
reasons given it cannot be said that this is an application warranting the grant
[77] In my view
the appropriate order is that the application be
Sentencing Transcript p 1-2 ll
Sentencing Transcript p 1-3 ll
Sentencing Transcript p 1-16
Sentencing Transcript p 1-2 ll
Sentencing Transcript p 1-3 ll
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (225 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter