URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council (No. 2) [2025] ICQ 16 (8 September 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council (No. 2)
[2025] ICQ 016
Mutonhori, Simon
(Appellant)
Mount Isa City Council
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Application in existing proceedings
DELIVERED ON:
2 September 2025
HEARING DATE:
1 September 2025
Hartigan DP
The application for recusal filed by the Appellant on 22 July 2025 is
CATCHWORDS:
COURTS AND JUDGES – JUDGES – DISQUALIFICATION FOR INTEREST OR
BIAS – REASONABLE APPREHENSION OF BIAS GENERALLY –
appellant filed an appeal in the Industrial Court of Queensland – where
the respondent was granted leave to be legally
represented in the appeal –
where the appellant filed an appeal with the Court of Appeal of that decision
– where the
appeal with the Court of Appeal was dismissed – where
the appeal in the Industrial Court was relisted – where the appellant
filed a recusal application – where the appellant claims allegations of
actual and apprehended bias – where the respondent
objects to the
application – whether a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably
apprehend bias in the circumstances of these
proceedings – application in
existing proceedings dismissed
LEGISLATION:
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Dunstan v Orr
[2022] FCA 1006
Ebner v Official Trustee in
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Jia v Minister for Immigration &
Multicultural Affairs
[1998] FCA 768
(1998) 84 FCR 87
Michael Wilson &
Partners Ltd v Nicholls
(2011) 244 CLR 427
Mutonhori v Mount Isa
City Council (No. 2)
[2024] QIRC 240
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City
[2025] ICQ 1
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council
Parbery & Ors v QNI Metals Pty Ltd & Ors
Robertson v McDonald's Australia Limited
[2023] ICQ 27
APPEARANCES:
Mr S. Mutonhori appeared on his own behalf
Mr B. Meredith of
Preston Law on behalf of the Respondent
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
Appellant, Mr Simon Mutonhori, has filed an appeal with respect to a decision of
the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission
Commission').
course of this appeal, Mr Mutonhori has filed an application in existing
proceedings, seeking orders that I recuse myself
from these proceedings.
[3] Following
the hearing of the matter on 1 September 2025, the Court dismissed
Mutonhori's application for recusal. These are the reasons for that decision.
Relevant Background
substantive proceeding is an appeal of a general protections decision which,
, dismissed the Appellant's application for an extension of
time. The orders of the Commission were as follows:
application for an extension of time to file that part of the application that
relates to dismissal is refused.
part of the application that relates to dismissal is dismissed.
part of the application that relates to suspension from duties may proceed to
directions.
Appellant filed an appeal of the Commission's decision on 11 October 2024.
October 2024, a directions order was issued with respect to the filing of
submissions with respect to the appeal. The appeal
was subsequently listed to be
heard on 24 January 2025.
December 2024, the Respondent sought leave to be legally represented.
January 2025, this Court issued a decision granting the Respondent leave to be
legally represented.
January 2025, at the hearing, Mr Mutonhori sought an adjournment to file an
appeal of the decision granting the Respondent
leave to be legally represented
to the Court of Appeal.
adjournment was granted to permit the Appellant to file an appeal with respect
to the legal representation decision.
[11] On 8 July
2025, the Respondent's legal representative wrote to the Industrial Registry
stating that the appeal to the Court of
Appeal was dismissed and that the
Respondent sought a directions hearing to proceed with the appeal before this
[12] The appeal
proceeding was listed for a telephone mention on 18 July 2025.
[13] At the
mention, the appeal was relisted for hearing on 1 September
[14] On 22 July
2025, Mr Mutonhori filed an application in existing proceedings seeking that I
recuse myself from hearing this appeal.
[15] The Court
issued directions with respect to the filing of submissions and material in
respect of the Appellant's application
for recusal. In accordance with those
directions, the parties filed written submissions and the Appellant requested an
oral hearing
on 22 August 2025.
[16] The oral
hearing was listed for 1 September 2025.
Industrial Registry wrote to the parties on 25 August 2025 advising that:
Dear Parties,
We refer to the above matter and the Appellant's email correspondence
received at 9:57am this morning.
It is in the interest of all parties that the application for recusal be
determined this week prior to the hearing of the appeal.
However, despite the
Appellant requesting an oral hearing, he states he is unavailable prior to
Monday, 1 September 2025.
Consequently, the Court has determined to list the application for recusal at
9:00am on Monday, 1 September 2025
Please be advised that the appeal remains listed for
10:00am on Monday, 1
September 2025
and will proceed depending on the determination of the
application for recusal.
An Amended Notice of Listing will be emailed
[18] At the
outset of the hearing the parties were advised that, consistent with the
correspondence on 25 August 2025, the Court would
hear the recusal application,
and if the recusal application was allowed then the appeal would be adjourned,
however, if the recusal
application was dismissed then the appeal would proceed.
The Recusal Application
Mutonhori seeks that I recuse myself from hearing this appeal. In seeking this
application, the Appellant's grounds of the
recusal application are in the
following terms:
This application is for the Deputy President Hartigan to recuse herself from
hearing this matter on the grounds of actual and apprehended
bias as outlined
1. The Judge released her decision for leave to represent the Respondent on
the eve of a substantive hearing, 23 January 2025. The
outcome of her decision
released at 4pm the day before a critical substantive hearing the following
morning at 10am, had material
effect on the way the substantive hearing was
going to be conducted. It had the effect of allowing the legal representative to
in the hearing. The judge appeared at the substantive hearing the
following morning geared up for a hearing with the Respondent's
lawyer present,
armed with the grant of leave issued a couple of hours earlier. By proceeding
with the substantive hearing, effectively
implementing her other decision issued
a couple of hours earlier, the Deputy President did not factor in the standard
time for parties
to review her previous decision before commencement of the
substantive hearing. This was a serious oversight by the learned Judge
Deputy President's standing. It is a fundamental right of parties to be given
sufficient time to review any decision of the
Court and consider their options,
including appeal rights before that decision is implemented. This did not happen
in this case,
and it demonstrates actual bias towards the Respondent's lawyer by
the Deputy President.
2. In her decision to grant leave for legal representation, the Deputy
President made a number of sinuations with no legal foundation.
She did not
explain the basis of those unsupported statements. First, she stated in passing
that the Applicant had attempted to bring
new evidence in his substantive
application. The decision did not explain how the Deputy President came to that
conclusion ahead
of a substantive matter being heard. I contend that this
unexplained and random statement in her decision inadvertently pre-empted
Deputy President's thoughts in the future outcome of the substantive matter
which was to be heard the following morning before
the same Judge. This
statement shows prejudice over the potential outcome of my substantive matter.
Given that it was the same judge
to preside over the substantive matter, I
couldn't reasonably have trust and confidence in her impartiality.
3. In the same decision, the Deputy President made several legally
unsupported statements implying that the lawyer seeking leave did
not breach any
Court rules when he appeared in proceedings more than 6 months before his
application for leave. However, the Deputy
President went on to grant him
'another' leave despite claiming that he had been granted leave before and was
properly constitute
4. At the telephone mention conference hurriedly scheduled at the behest of
the Respondent on 18 July, the Deputy President appeared
combative, armed with
the new date of the hearing without any consultation with me. When I told her I
was busy with another matter
in the same jurisdiction and therefore I was not
able to persecute [sic] two matters at the same time in the same jurisdiction,
wouldn't listen and ordered that the hearing take place on her predetermined
date anyway.
5. The Deputy President displayed obvious irritation with me and showed
obvious bias in the way she conducted the application for
leave and the
unilateral fast-tracking the next hearing without consultation with me. For the
reasons stated above I couldn't have
trust and confidence that the Deputy
Present will handle my case with Impartiality expected of judicial officers as I
genuinely believe
I have well-founded concerns against the Deputy President
hearing my substantive matter.
[20] For the
purpose of the recusal application, Mr Mutonhori summarised his grounds into the
following categories:
(a) significant procedural unfairness in the interlocutory decision of 23
January 2025 ('ground one');
(b) highly prejudicial and legally unsupported and unsubstantiated statements in
the same decision ('ground two'); and
(c) unilateral reconvening of hearing, fixing dates without consultation with
the Appellant ('ground three').
[21] Before
addressing the grounds relied on by Mr Mutonhori, it is convenient to consider
the legislative provisions and legal principles
relevant to an application for
Relevant Legislation and Legal Principles
[22] Section 424
of the IR Act provides the power to the Industrial Court to give directions and
make decisions in the following terms:
424 Jurisdiction and powers
(1) The court may—
(a) perform all functions and exercise all powers given to the court under this
Act or another Act; and
(b) hear and decide, and give its opinion on, a matter referred to it by the
commission; and
(c) hear and decide an offence against this Act, unless this Act provides
otherwise; and
(d) hear and decide appeals from an industrial magistrate's decision in
proceedings for—
(i) an offence against this Act; or
(ii) recovery of damages, or other amounts, under this Act; and
(e) if the court is constituted by the president, exercise the jurisdiction and
powers of the Supreme Court to ensure, by prerogative
order or other appropriate
(i) the commission and magistrates exercise their jurisdictions according to
(ii) the commission and magistrates do not exceed their jurisdictions.
(2) In proceedings, the court may—
(a) make the decisions it considers appropriate, irrespective of specific relief
sought by a party; and
(b) give directions about the hearing of a matter.
(3) The court's jurisdiction is not limited, by implication, by a provision
of this Act or another Act.
(4) The jurisdiction conferred on the court by this Act or another Act is
exclusive of the jurisdiction of another court or tribunal,
unless this or the
other Act provides otherwise.
Actual Bias
determination as to actual bias in the form of prejudgment requires assessment
of the state of mind of the judge in question,
ordinarily on the basis of what
the judge had said and done.
onus of demonstrating actual bias lies upon the party asserting actual bias and
it is a heavy onus.
Dunstan v Orr,
his Honour,
Wigney J set out the principles concerning actual bias in the following terms:
bias "exists where the decision-maker has prejudged the case against the
applicant, or acted with such partisanship or hostility
as to show that the
decision-maker had a mind made up against the applicant and was not open to
persuasion in favour of the applicant".
The question is not whether a
decision-maker's mind is blank, or whether there is an "absence of any
predisposition or inclination
for or against an argument or conclusion"; rather,
the "state of mind described as bias in the form of prejudgment is one so
to a conclusion already formed as to be incapable of alteration,
whatever evidence or arguments may be presented".
bias is usually difficult to prove. It is also an allegation that "is not to be
made lightly". It requires a subjective assessment
of the state of mind of the
judge in question. A "finding of bias is a grave matter, different in kind from
a finding of mere error,
or even wrong-headedness, whether in law, logic, or
approach". Courts have rarely found actual bias to exist, principally because
reasonable apprehension of bias suffices to disqualify a judicial officer" and
where "actual bias exists, reasonable apprehension
of bias will also exist and,
consequently, courts concerned with supervising the application of the
requirements of natural justice
have not had to go so far as to find actual
Apprehended Bias
relevant legal principles with respect to apprehended bias have previously been
considered by this Court,
Robertson v McDonald's Australia
as follows:
v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
the High Court held that apprehended bias
will disqualify a judge from a case "if a fair minded lay observer might
reasonably apprehend
that the judge might not bring an impartial mind to the
resolution of the question the judge is required to decide".
[26] The test to
be applied for determining whether a judge should be disqualified for
apprehended bias, the High Court held, requires
the adoption of a two-step
"First, it requires the identification of what is said might lead a judge (or
juror) to decide a case other than on its legal and
factual merits. The second
step is no less important. There must be an articulation of the logical
connection between the matter
and the feared deviation from the course of
deciding the case on its merits."
Parbery & Ors v QNI Metals Pty Ltd & Ors
Bond J set out the
following principles relevant to the consideration of the test:
application of the test uses the touchstone of the "fair-minded lay observer"
and that person's reasonable apprehension.
The law contemplates the following in
the application of that test:
(a) The fair-minded lay observer has attributed to him or her awareness of and a
fair understanding of the nature of the decision,
the context in which it was
made, and the circumstances leading up to the decision.
(b) The fair-minded lay observer has attributed to him or her knowledge that the
judge is a professional lawyer, whose training,
tradition and oath or
affirmation require him or her to discard the irrelevant, the immaterial and the
prejudicial, with the result
that a conclusion that there is a reasonable
apprehension that the judge might be biased should not be drawn lightly. The
does not have attributed to him or her knowledge of the character or
the ability of the particular judge concerned.
(c) The fair-minded lay observer does not have attributed to him or her a
detailed knowledge of the law, but the reasonableness of
any suggested
apprehension of bias is to be considered in the context of ordinary judicial
practice, taking into account the exigencies
of modern litigation.
[32] What is
required for justice to be seen to be done is that it must be apparent to the
fair-minded lay observer that the judge
will bring to the resolution of the
issues an impartial and unprejudiced mind which will decide the issues according
to their factual
and legal merits. If such an observer might reasonably
apprehend that the judge might not do that, then a case of apprehended bias
established. But if the possibility of such a reasonable apprehension does not
exist, it will not suffice that there might be
a reasonable apprehension that
the judge will decide an issue or issues adversely to one
[33] Although
the test is expressed in terms of a reasonable apprehension that the judge might
not bring an impartial and unprejudiced
mind, it is also clear that the law
requires that proposition to be "firmly established" before the judge should
disqualify himself
or herself. In
British American Tobacco Australia Services
Ltd v Laurie
(2011) 242 CLR 283
, Gummow J14 at [71] to [72] made this
observation (footnotes omitted):
[71] To that
perception of the role of the hypothetical observer must be added the
consideration that "the ground of disqualification
is a reasonable apprehension
that the judicial officer will not decide the case impartially or without
prejudice, rather than that
he will decide the case adversely to one party". The
words are those of Mason J in Re JRL; Ex parte CJL, in a passage adopted by
Callinan J in Johnson v Johnson. Mason J also said in that passage, using words
later said by the English Court of Appeal to have
"great persuasive force", and
adopted by the New Zealand Court of Appeal:
"In cases of this kind, disqualification is only made out by showing that
there is a reasonable apprehension of bias by reason of
prejudgment and this
must be 'firmly established': R v Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission; Ex parte Angliss Group;
Watson; Re Lusink; Ex parte Shaw. Although
it is important that justice must be seen to be done, it is equally important
that judicial
officers discharge their duty to sit and do not, by acceding too
readily to suggestions of appearance of bias, encourage parties
to believe that
by seeking the disqualification of a judge, they will have their case tried by
someone thought to be more likely
to decide the case in their favour."
references in JRL to the phrase "firmly established" in the joint reasons of all
seven Justices of this Court in Angliss
and to the subsequent authorities is
important. ...
[34] The judge's
ordinary duty to sit unless convinced otherwise was also discussed in the
earlier decision of
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR
per Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ at [19] to
[19] Judges have
a duty to exercise their judicial functions when their jurisdiction is regularly
invoked and they are assigned to
cases in accordance with the practice which
prevails in the court to which they belong. They do not select the cases they
and they are not at liberty to decline to hear cases without good
cause. Judges do not choose their cases; and litigants do not choose
judges. If one party to a case objects to a particular judge sitting, or
continuing to sit, then that objection should not
prevail unless it is based
upon a substantial ground for contending that the judge is disqualified from
hearing and deciding the
[20] This is not
to say that it is improper for a judge to decline to sit unless the judge has
affirmatively concluded that he or
she is disqualified. In a case of real doubt,
it will often be prudent for a judge to decide not to sit in order to avoid the
inconvenience
that could result if an appellate court were to take a different
view on the matter of disqualification. However, if the mere making
insubstantial objection were sufficient to lead a judge to decline to hear or
decide a case, the system would soon reach a
stage where, for practical
purposes, individual parties could influence the composition of the bench. That
would be intolerable.
[21] It is not
possible to state in a categorical form the circumstances in which a judge,
although personally convinced that he or
she is not disqualified, may properly
decline to sit. Circumstances vary, and may include such factors as the stage at
which an objection
is raised, the practical possibility of arranging for another
judge to hear the case, and the public or constitutional role of the
before which the proceedings are being conducted. These problems usually arise
in a context in which a judge has no particular
personal desire to hear a case.
If a judge were anxious to sit in a particular case, and took pains to arrange
that he or she would
do so, questions of actual bias may
Mutonhori's submissions in respect of ground one are summarised as follows:
(a) that throughout the decision-making process, the Industrial Registry and the
Court did not communicate or respond to his telephone
calls and email
correspondence;
(b) that the Industrial Registry kept him in the dark until the legal
representation decision was "suddenly released late afternoon
of the day before
the substantive matter hearing";
(c) that the Court did not allow the parties the "usual entitlement to
sufficient time to review a decision outcome before it is
implemented";
(d) that the legal representation decision was "withheld from the usual
publication requirements, and no explanation was provided
to the parties";
(e) that this was a pattern of concealment of information and absence of
transparency in the decision-making process";
(f) that this is "inconsistent with the open justice principles of the justice
system which requires that all parties to a proceeding
be fully informed of the
proceedings through open sharing of all information and processes before the
(g) that in contrast to himself, the Respondent's solicitor, Mr Meredith
appeared to be well-informed with "inside information";
(h) that the Court "seems to give the Solicitor a go ahead to apply for legal
costs against [the Appellant] for the adjourned hearing.
This shows the Deputy
President's irritation of my objection to proceed with the substantive hearing
under the cloud of all that
procedural unfairness";
(i) that the legal representation decision was "littered with factual errors and
typos, citing wrong submissions and dates of submissions";
(j) that the Industrial Registry did not provide sufficient information on how
to lodge an appeal in the Court of Appeal.
Mutonhori does not engage with or make submissions with respect to the two-step
process as first stated in
Ebner v Official Trustee in
In that regard, Mr Mutonhori fails to identify what is said that might lead me
to decide the case other than on its legal and
factual merits and to articulate
the logical connection between the matter and the factual deviation from the
course of deciding
the case on its merits. On that basis alone, ground one does
not establish a basis upon which I should recuse myself.
[28] Further,
and as noted above, Mr Mutonhori filed an appeal with respect to the legal
representation decision to the Court of Appeal.
[29] In his
written submissions filed on 21 August 2025, Mr Mutonhori contends that the
Court of Appeal did not dismiss his appeal
as submitted by the Respondent, but
rather, Mr Mutonhori voluntarily discontinued it after the mention.
Mutonhori's appeal of the legal representation decision proceeded in the Court
of Appeal. On 8 May 2025, an ex tempore decision
of his Honour Bond JA was
delivered in
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City
with respect to the
Respondent's application for security for costs of the appeal in the Court of
Appeal. The application was allowed
and the following orders issued:
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
appellant provide security for costs of the appeal in the sum of $23,100 in a
form approved by the Registrar.
security be provided by 4pm on 22 May 2025.
in default of compliance with orders 1 and 2, the appeal is dismissed.
appellant pay the respondent's costs of the application on the standard
[31] The effect
of Order 3 is that if Mr Mutonhori was in default of compliance with Orders 1
and 2 then his appeal would be dismissed.
[32] The purpose
of the self-executing nature of Order 3 was referred to in his Honour's reasons
as follows:
The fourth consideration concerns the combined issues of prospects and
whether an order would stymie the appeal. Although the order
undoubtedly would
stymie the appeal, the prospects are such as to make it appropriate to make an
order. Indeed, the prospects are
so poor that I am persuaded, having regard to
the authority of
Toms v Fuller
[2010] QCA 73
, that it is appropriate to
make the self-executing order that has been
[33] During the
course of the hearing, the Respondent sought leave to file further submissions
responding to Mr Mutonhori's submissions
that he voluntarily discontinued the
appeal in the Court of Appeal.
[34] The Court
granted leave for the Respondent to read and file the further written
submissions.
[35] After leave
was granted, Mr Mutonhori stated that he objected to the Respondent being
granted leave to file the further written
submissions on the basis that they
fell outside the directions issued on 22 July 2025 regarding the filing of
written submissions
for this application.
[36] The Court
indicated that it would permit Mr Mutonhori to be heard in reply with respect to
the matters contained in the further
written submissions.
[37] In addition
to referencing the orders issued by the Court of Appeal, the further written
submissions also included a reference
to and attached correspondence from the
acting Deputy Registrar of the Court of Appeal to the parties dated 26 May 2025.
This correspondence
relevantly stated:
Good morning,
I wish to confirm that no payment has been made into the Court and the matter
will now be considered finalised.
The hearing of 02 June 2025 has been vacated.
[38] In reply,
Mr Mutonhori stated that following his appearance before the Court of Appeal, he
took steps to correspond with the
Court of Appeal to discontinue the appeal.
However, he states that a response to his correspondence was not forthcoming.
[39] Consequently,
the appeal was dismissed pursuant to Order 3. Mr Mutonhori describes that as
being a technicality in circumstances
where he had taken steps to discontinue
the appeal.
[40] In any
event, Mr Mutonhori's appeal of the legal representation decision was dismissed
pursuant to Order 3 issued on 8 May
Mutonhori raises matters in the recusal application which are more akin to
submissions appealing the legal representation
decision. This application for
recusal should not be used as a vehicle to attempt to re-litigate the appeal of
the legal representation
decision. It would be an abuse of process to permit
that to occur.
[42] As such,
those matters will not be considered further in these reasons unless they relate
to the current recusal application.
[43] In respect
to ground one, the matters raised under that ground which may be further
summarised as including an allegation with
respect to the adequacy and
appropriateness of communications between the parties and the Industrial
Registry; that Mr Mutonhori
did not have adequate time to review the legal
representation decision; that the legal representation decision was withheld
"the usual publication requirements"; and that there was collusion between
the Industrial Registry and Mr Meredith by providing advanced
notice of the
decision to the Respondent's legal representatives.
[44] It is noted
at the outset, that at the hearing on 24 January 2025, the Court heard from
Mr Mutonhori who expressed his disagreement with the legal representation
decision. During the course of the hearing, the Court adjourned
for a period to
allow Mr Mutonhori to consider whether he wished to proceed with the appeal or
to seek an adjournment in order to
appeal the legal representation decision.
returning, the Court was advised by Mr Mutonhori that he wished to seek an
adjournment in order to appeal the legal representation
decision. After hearing
submissions from the parties, the Court granted an adjournment to Mr
Mr Mutonhori was advised that the avenue of appeal was to the
Queensland Court of Appeal. If Mr Mutonhori required assistance regarding
lodgement of his appeal in the Court of Appeal, then the Court of Appeal
Registry was the appropriate registry for him to seek
assistance – not the
Industrial Registry. In any event, it appears that
Mr Mutonhori filed the
appeal in the Court of Appeal within time.
Mutonhori contends that there was inappropriate ex parte communication between
the Industrial Registry and the Respondent.
This contention is no more than an
unsupported allegation. Further, it is not the practice of this Court, nor the
Industrial Registry,
to provide one party with substantive information with
respect to a proceeding and to not provide it to the other party.
[47] The legal
representation decision was released to the parties on 23 January 2025.
Mutonhori seeks to draw a correlation between the delivery of the legal
representation decision on 23 January 2025 and the
appearance by the
Respondent's legal representative at the hearing on 24 January 2025 as being
suggestive that the Respondent's legal
representative had prior knowledge of the
legal representation decision.
Respondent responds to Mr Mutonhori's suggestion in its written submissions as
allegation that some combination of the Registry, Deputy President and the
Respondent's solicitors have been in secret communication,
such that the Court
has provided to the Respondent's solicitors advance notice of the Court's
decisions, is not supported by any
that which is asserted without evidence can be equally dismissed without
evidence, the Appellants allegation of conspiracy
ignores the simple, practical
answer to it, that the Respondent's solicitors had already booked and travelled
to Brisbane (a 2 hour
20 minute direct flight) and had done so uncertain of the
Court's decision.
such "go ahead" was provided by the Deputy President in respect to costs. Costs
was an issue raised by the Respondent's solicitor,
which the Respondent's
solicitor proposed to deal with at a later
Mutonhori's suggestion that the Respondent's solicitors had been given advanced
notice of the legal representation decision
either by the Court or the
Industrial Registry is an unfounded and scandalous allegation.
[51] Further,
the publishing of the decision on the Supreme Court Library website on a date
after 23 January 2025 is an administrative
step and does not affect the
operative date of the order. The terms and date of the order are clear and
appear on the face of the
decision which was released to the parties on 23
January 2025. The date of the publication of the decision on the Supreme Court
website is of no relevance to the current application.
purported procedural matters raised by Mr Mutonhori with respect to the legal
representation decision are isolated to that
decision. Those matters do not
require the determination of any issue that will be contested in the appeal to
be heard on 1 September
2025. The matters raised by Mr Mutonhori with respect to
ground one do not establish bias or apprehended bias as he contends.
Mutonhori makes the following submissions in support of ground two, summarised
as follows:
(a) that the decision to "grant leave for Mr Meredith based on the grounds of
complexity of the substantive matter but went out of
her way to justify
Meredith's implied leave when he appeared in the past";
(b) that the claims in the legal representation decision exposed this Court's
already formed opinion on the outcome of the substantive
(c) that the Court's reasoning at paragraphs 7, 12, 19, 20, 21, 22, 34, 35, 36,
37, 38, 39 and 41 of the legal representation decision
were "contradictory,
unqualified and highly prejudicial statements" which served "no purpose but to
expose her already formed opinion
on the outcome of the substantive hearing";
(d) that the Court's statements in the paragraphs listed at (c) above were "put
there as placeholders and precursor to her decision
in the substantive matter
(e) that the legal representation decision did not "provide legal arguments and
evidence on how leave awarded to one representative
could also be applicable to
any another lawyer"; and
(f) that the legal representation decision was based on a "narrow interpretation
of the order of grant [of leave for legal representation]
is based literally on
the wording of the order of grant read in isolation with no reference to the
details of the application itself".
[54] Again, the
extent to which Mr Mutonhori attempts to use this application as an avenue to
appeal or re-litigate the legal representation
decision is an abuse of process.
[55] Taking Mr
Mutonhori's submissions at their highest for the purpose of this application, he
argues that the legal representation
decision contained " contradictory,
unqualified and highly prejudicial statements" which served "no purpose but to
expose her already
formed opinion on the outcome of the substantive hearing". In
making this submission, Mr Mutonhori refers to a number of paragraphs
decision which will now be considered.
[56] Paragraph 7
of the legal representation decision appears under the heading "Relevant
background" and is set out as follows:
The Appellant also appears to attempt to raise further grounds in submissions
made in support of the application to appeal.
[57] Paragraph 7
of the legal representation decision relevantly follows paragraph 6 which sets
out the grounds for appeal in Mr Mutonhori's
application to appeal. Paragraph 7
records that Mr Mutonhori raises further grounds that were not included in his
original application
[58] There is no
finding or conclusion in paragraph 7 of the legal representation decision which
supports a conclusion that a prejudgment
of the issues on appeal had been made.
[59] Further
paragraphs of the reasons for the legal representation decision are described by
Mr Mutonhori as being "highly prejudicial and legally unsupported". In this
Mr Mutonhori nominates paragraphs 12, 19, 20, 21, 22, 34, 35, 36,
37, 38, 39 and 41 in support of his position. These paragraphs fall
reasons wherein the Court was considering the factors relevant to issuing the
decision for legal representation.
[60] Paragraph
12 of the legal representation decision is as follows:
It is relevant to note, as it is referred to in submissions by the parties,
that in the matter below, the Appellant filed a Form 102
on 27 May 2024
consenting to the Respondent's request to be legally represented. By email
dated, 27 May 2024 the Appellant indicated
that he had "no objection for the
Respondent to be represented" in the general protection matter and orders were
subsequently issued
[61] Paragraph
12 does no more than record that the Respondent sought to be legally represented
and that Mr Mutonhori did not object
to the Respondent being legally represented
in the proceedings below. There is no finding or conclusion in paragraph 12 of
representation decision which supports a conclusion that a prejudgment
of the issues on appeal had been made.
[62] Paragraphs
19, 20, 21 and 22 are set out as follows:
Appellant objects to the Respondent's application on,
grounds that the Respondent's legal representative is in breach of s 530 of the
IR Act by seeking to appear in the current proceedings
and appearing in the
proceedings below without express permission to do so. The Appellant contends
that granting the Respondent leave
to be legally represented would "regularise
his illegal activity."
Appellant's complaint seems to be based on an assumption that leave below was
granted for a particular legal representative
to appear for the Respondent.
Respondent deposes to the Appellant having consented to leave being granted for
the Respondent to be legally represented
in the proceedings below through filing
a Form 102 on 27 May 2024.
Appellant makes several serious allegations about the conduct of the
Respondent's legal representative in the matter below
and submits that, as a
result of this conduct, the Respondent's legal representative should not be
granted leave to represent the
Respondent in these proceedings. These
allegations arise out of the Appellant's assumption that leave was granted below
for a particular
individual to appear as the Respondent's legal
representative.
[63] Paragraphs
19 to 22 attempt to summarise each of the respective parties' positions. The
content of the paragraphs relate to material
put before the Court in the context
of the application for legal representation.
[64] There is no
finding or conclusion in paragraphs 19, 20, 21 and 22 of the legal
representation decision which supports a conclusion
that a prejudgment of the
issues on appeal had been made.
[65] Paragraphs
34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39 and 41 are set out as follows:
Appellant's contention in this regard appears to be based on the fact that Ms
Care, Solicitor, Preston Law, initially applied
on behalf of the Respondent, for
leave for the Respondent to be legally represented.
Appellant argues that the Commission's subsequent granting of leave for the
Respondent to be legally represented is limited
to representation by
[36] However,
that contention does not accord with the terms of the order granting leave.
Relevantly, the Commission's order was in
the following terms:
The Respondent has leave to be legally represented in matter number
GP/2024/20 pursuant to
s 530(1)(c)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
[37] The order
does not seek to restrict the identity of the legal representative to a
particular legal practitioner. In any event,
both Ms Care and Mr Meredith are
solicitors at Preston Law. It is apparent that Preston Law has been engaged by
the Respondent as
its legal representative, both in the matter below and in this
[38] Consequently,
there is no substance to the Appellant's submission that
Mr Meredith
"illegally" appeared in the proceedings below.
[39] In this
proceeding, I served directions at the initial appeal directions hearing on 18
December 2024 requiring the parties to
file material relevant to the
Respondent's foreshadowed application for legal representation.
[41] Accordingly,
the matters raised by the Respondent do not weigh against the exercise of the
discretion to grant leave.
[66] Paragraphs
34 to 39 and 41 address Mr Mutonhori's claim that, despite the Respondent being
granted leave to be legally represented
below, Mr Meredith's appearance was
"illegal". These paragraphs of the reasons relate to matters relevant to the
legal representation
decision only.
[67] There is no
finding or conclusion in paragraphs 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39 and 41 of the legal
representation decision which supports
a conclusion that a prejudgment of the
issues on appeal had been made.
[68] Whilst the
matters referred to above may be matters that Mr Mutonhori ultimately does not
agree with or accept regarding the
grant of leave for the Respondent to be
legally represented, for an application for recusal to be successful Mr
Mutonhori must go
further and establish that the decision was infected by actual
bias or apprehended bias.
Mutonhori has not discharged the onus placed on him to establish that actual
bias exists. Further, Mr Mutonhori has not established
or contended why the
matters he refers to in the paragraphs contained in the legal representation
decision establish apprehended
bias in accordance with the two-tier test in
[70] That is, Mr
Mutonhori has not established how it is, as he contends, that a fair-minded lay
observer might reasonably apprehend
that the judge might not bring an impartial
mind to the resolution of the question the judge is required to decide.
[71] There has
been no meaningful attempt by Mr Mutonhori to try to articulate how the matters
he refers to in the legal representation
decision connect between the matter and
his feared deviation of deciding the appeal on its merits. Consequently, ground
not support Mr Mutonhori's application.
Ground Three
Mutonhori's submissions, as summarised, in relation to ground three are as
(a) the Court listed the telephone mention on 18 July 2025 without prior
consultation with the Appellant;
(b) at the mention, the Deputy President "appeared combative and uncompromising,
armed with a new date and time of the hearing";
(c) that the Deputy President did not entertain the plea from Mr Mutonhori that
he was unable to attend the hearing because he was
"seized with another matter
in the Commission" and that he has "no capacity to run two cases at the same
(d) that the Deputy President did not listen to the Appellant, and the mention
was "abruptly adjourned" while he was speaking;
(e) that the new hearing date had "already been agreed to with the Respondent's
lawyer who seemed happy and agreeable with the Judge
since he was the instigator
of reconvening the stayed hearing";
(f) that the submission above, "points to a very bleak picture of the
impartiality of the Deputy President in this matter"; and
(g) that I am distracted by Mr Mutonhori's challenge against the legal
representation decision and, consequently, the Deputy President
"will not be
able to let go of that irritation and therefore cannot immune [sic] to inherent
bias in exercising her discretion in
her judgement in the substantive matter".
[73] Ultimately,
Mr Mutonhori submits the following:
In considering the totality of the circumstances surrounding the Deputy
President's conduct in the past proceedings and the implications
of her past
decision outcome, i.e the identified significant procedural unfairness, highly
prejudicial and legally unsubstantiated
statements and the unilateral
declaration of a hearing date without consultation, it raises real questions of
integrity in decision
making and the potential miscarriage of justice due to
actual bias or apprehended
[74] Further, Mr
Mutonhori raised several questions for the Court to answer in relation to the
legal representation decision and the
These questions are not
relevant to the recusal application and will not be addressed further below.
[75] On 8 July
2025, the Respondent's legal representative wrote to the Industrial Registry as
Dear Registrar,
The Appellant is copied to this email.
The above appeal was adjourned by Deputy President Hartigan pending the
Appellants appeal to the Supreme Court of Appeal in respect
to the decision of
the Deputy President on 23 January 2025.
That appeal has been dismissed and the Respondent now seeks a directions
hearing in respect to this matter to timetable this appeal
to a hearing.
[76] On 10 July
2025, the Industrial Registry subsequently issued a Notice of Listing for a
telephone mention of the appeal. The mention
was listed for 18 July 2025.
Appellant and the Respondent's legal representative both attended the mention by
[78] The purpose
of the telephone mention was to schedule the hearing of the adjourned appeal.
Mutonhori advised the Court that "... I'm not ready to execute this matter. When
I am, I'll contact the
transpired during the course of the mention that Mr Mutonhori had, subsequent to
filing the current appeal in this Court,
commenced a matter involving
allegations of discrimination in the Commission. Mr Mutonhori contended that he
"cannot have two cases
running parallel to each
and proposed that this
appeal not proceed until he determined a time when it would be convenient to him
for it to proceed.
Mutonhori did not provide any basis upon why the anti-discrimination matter that
he had commenced in the Commission prevented
this appeal from proceeding to
hearing other than it being his preference. Relevantly, Mr Mutonhori did not
particularise any matters
before the Court that would place him at a
disadvantage if the appeal proceeded to hearing.
[82] Further,
the Respondent wished for the appeal to proceed to hearing.
material in the substantive appeal has been filed and the appeal was otherwise
ready to be heard. Further, the appeal is
from an interlocutory decision of the
Commission in Mr Mutonhori's general protections application. That proceeding is
progress further until this appeal is determined.
[84] The Court
proposed the date for the adjourned hearing of the appeal to recommence on 1
September 2024, some 45 days from the
date of the mention.
decision to relist the appeal for hearing was a case management decision. It is
in the interests of the parties, the Court
and other litigants before the Court
that the hearing of this appeal, which was originally listed to be heard on 24
January 2025,
not be unnecessarily delayed and that it proceed in a timely and
efficient manner.
[86] Further,
the listing of the appeal for hearing was not the determination of any issue
that would require determination in the
[87] Consequently,
Mr Mutonhori has failed to establish that the case management decision of
listing the appeal for hearing establishes
actual bias or apprehended bias of
the Court as presently constituted.
[88] For the
reasons set out above, I make the following order:
application for recusal filed by the Appellant on 22 July 2025 is dismissed.
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City
Council (No. 2)
[2024] QIRC 240
('Primary Decision').
Primary Decision (n 1) 1.
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City
[2025] ICQ 1
('legal representation decision').
(emphasis in original).
Michael Wilson &
Partners Ltd v Nicholls
(2011) 244 CLR 427.
Jia v Minister for
Immigration & Multicultural Affairs
[1998] FCA 768
(1998) 84 FCR 87
, 106 (French
[2022] FCA 1006
Ibid [63]-[64] (citations
As presently constituted.
[2023] ICQ 27
[25]-[34] (emphasis in original) (citations omitted).
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
[2025] QCA 66
('the Court
of Appeal Decision').
The Court of Appeal
Decision (n 13) 3.
See the Court of Appeal
Decision (n 13).
Mount Isa City Council,
'Outline of Submissions', Submission in
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City
, C/2024/35, 15 August 2025, [18]-[20] (citations omitted).
Legal representation
decision (n 3) [12] (citations omitted).
Legal representation
decision (n 3) [19]-[22] (citations omitted).
Simon Mutonhori,
'Application for recusal of Deputy President Hartigan in this matter',
Submission in
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council
, C/2024/35, 1 August
2025, [80].
Ibid [76]-[79].
Transcript of Proceedings,
Mutonhori v Mount Isa City Council
(Industrial Court of Queensland,
C/2024/35, Hartigan DP, 18 July 2025) 2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (434 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter