URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCAT/2025/422.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Draper & Anor v Kinna & Anor [2025] QCAT 422 (24 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Draper & Anor v Kinna & Anor
[2025] QCAT 422
DEIRDRE DRAPER
(applicant)
ANTHONY COLAHAN
(applicant)
ALLAN KINNA
(respondent)
NAVUT BUMRUNGSENA
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO:
MATTER TYPE:
Other civil dispute matters
DELIVERED ON:
24 October 2025
HEARING DATES:
20 October 2025
DECISION OF:
Member Roney KC
respondents shall cause the subject Tallowwood tree undergo a complete dead wood
pruning procedure which includes all dead branches
on the southern extent over
the applicants’ property to 1 centimetre in diameter.
respondents shall have the subject tree inspected yearly by a Minimum AQF level
5 arborist to determine ongoing health, any rate
of decline and overall safety
and obtain advice as to whether further pruning is appropriate in the
respondents shall not permit any live tissue to be removed from the tree until
future assessments deem the subject healthy enough
to tolerate further loss of
photosynthetic production.
grant the parties liberty to apply in respect of any other consequential or
other orders which might be required to be made.
CATCHWORDS:
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING – TREES, VEGETATION AND HABITAT PROTECTION
DISPUTES BETWEEN NEIGHBOURS – whether trees have or are likely to
cause serious damage to the neighbours’ land or property
– whether a
substantial Forest Red Gum tree causing substantial, ongoing and unreasonable
interference – where
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing
Fences and Trees) Act 2011
(Qld) provides land is affected by a tree if the
tree has caused, is causing, or is likely to cause serious injury to a person;
damage to land or property; or substantial, ongoing and unreasonable
interference with the use and enjoyment of land – where
commenced proceedings in QCAT seeking orders requiring the respondents’
tree be removed because of concerns for
their safety from falling material
–where respondents had conducted annual maintenance to the tree –
where the tree
is a native and a very important species as a food source for
native wildlife and adjacent to a conservation area
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Belcher v Sullivan
[2013] QCATA
Body Corporate – Highlands Vista v Taylor
Bunyard v McManus
[2013] QCAT 258
Cacopardo v Woolcock
[2017] QCAT 214
Brisbane City Council
[2018] QCAT 282
Hoy v Fox & Anor
Laing v Kokkinos (No.2)
[2013] QCATA 247
Street v Smith & Rogers
[2018] QCAT 193
Thomsen v White
[2012] QCAT 381
Watson-Brown v Heaton & Anor
[2014] QCAT 346
Webb v Dwyer & Clarke
[2014] QCAT 219
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
Applicants:
Self-Represented
Respondents:
Self-represented
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicants and the respondents own adjoining suburban properties in Buderim
north of Brisbane. The applicants’ property
is at 5 Mountain Ridge
Crescent and adjoins the respondent tree-keepers’ property at 3 Mountain
Ridge Crescent.
[2] On 14 July
2022 the applicants filed an application under the
Neighbourhood Disputes
(Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
‘ND Act’) for the removal of a large
Eucalyptus microcorys, commonly known as Tallowwood, growing some 2.5 metres
the boundary line of the respondents’ property.
statement filed later in support of the application they contended (as corrected
for grammatical error) that:
It has already caused serious damage to our house during the supercell storm on
17 Nov 2019, when large branches fell onto our driveway
One of several large branches fell onto our roof, breaking a solid steel gutter
bracket before bouncing off into our driveway. -see
photo of broken bracket
& branch that caused the damage and other branches that fell from this fee
onto our driveway during this
It is very likely in future, especially during in our storm season, that falling
branches will cause further damage and may go thru
our roof, break a window or
damage our solar panels. There is a risk of whole tree toppling over and
completely destroying our house.
There is a risk of seriously damaging vehicles using the driveway.
A projectile (branch) falling from a height over 30 metres, could potentially go
through our roof, and kill or seriously maim a person
on our property.
A large number of debris & branches, fall from this tree onto our roof,
solar panels and driveway.
This limits the use driveway for parking as there is a high risk of damaging
motor vehicles whilst using our driveway. Usually, we
have to wash to wash cars
very early morning before the wind starts to fill in around 8 am /9am when
debris starts falling out of
the tree onto our drive.
We seek to have the tree removed as no amount of money or paying of insurance
excess/rise in premium would compensate us for a serious
injury to persons
damage to property including family & travel photos (pre digital photography
era), original paintings, family
heirlooms, a life time of worldly collections,
etc. losing our home and loss of life.
[4] The Form
Number 52 (Response to application for a tree dispute) response was completed by
the respondent "tree-keepers" in QCAT
on 6 March 2023. They oppose the order for
removal of the tree and take issue with claims about the source of debris in the
applicants’
yard and a range of other matters. They point to the fact that
they have conducted anneal maintenance on the tree using a qualified
for many years and would continue to do so at their own expense. They put into
evidence the invoices for that work, which
total more than $9,000 between 2018
respondents obtained at their own expense a report dated 6 February 2023 from
Brendan Martin, Director and Principal Consulting
Arborist from Tree Solutions
who had been responsible for maintenance work on the tree over a long period. He
concluded that the
tree was some 65 years old, |had a height of 35 metres, a
canopy diameter of 18 metres, 1 one-meter diameter, and was in good condition.
He concluded:
Previous maintenance on the tree conducted by Tree Solutions has included dead
wood removal, canopy maintenance and reduction pruning
from the neighbouring
property. These works have been carried out in September 2018 July 2019 July
2020 and December 2021. Care has
always been taken not to over prune the tree
whilst considering all safety requirements for the owners of the tree and the
neighbours.
There are no drainage issues as the tree is situated on a slope and all rain and
excess water will run of, adequately.
Pruning works over the last 10 years have managed the canopy so that it is only
minimally over the boundary at present.' Future works
can manage this issue but
the tree cannot sustain anymore heavy pruning but deadwood removal will maintain
safety and condition.
accept the evidence as to the tree being in good condition and that the canopy
was and still is only minimally over the boundary.
[7] A Tribunal
appointed Arborist Steven Richards did a report
‘the second arborist report’)
subsequent to orders appointing him to do so. In his report following his site
1 December 2023 he concluded that the tree is a mature Tallowwood Tree.
It is wholly located within the respondent's property and
is positioned
approximately 1.8m from the dividing fence. The subject tree was estimated at
being 70-80 years of age. The subject
tree was said to be in good health and is
mechanically robust. There was no evidence of historic limb failure visually
observed with
the exception of clad ptosis (natural shedding of small twigs and
dead branches). The subject tree extends across the dividing fence
approximately
2.5m at a height of approximately 14m above ground level. I accept his evidence
in relation to those matters.
second arborist report went on to say that the subject tree has been extensively
pruned in an attempt to reduce both overall
canopy spread and encroachment into
the applicant's property. The subject tree is now marginally asymmetrical
favouring the southern
side. A large co-dominant leader near the base of the
tree has been removed in its entirety which would have constituted upwards
30% of the entire upper canopy prior to removal. I also accept his evidence in
relation to those matters.
second arborist report concluded, and I find that:
The subject tree is situated on the eastern periphery of Gum Tree Drive
conservation park. It is considered remnant vegetation and
pre-existed the
construction of the applicant's and respondent's dwellings which were built in
The subject tree is native and is a very important species as a food source for
native wildlife, including Koalas, Gliders, Possums,
Nectar feeding birds and
[10] The second
arborist report concluded, and I find, that pruning of the subject tree had been
ongoing and at the time of inspection,
the extent of live tissue removed in a
short period of time had actually been excessive such that further removal of
live tissue
may begin to have negative consequences to overall plant
[11] The second
arborist report concluded, and I find that:
A moderate amount of small dead wood (to 3cm diameter) was visually observed in
the upper canopy. These dead limbs were considered
to be natural redundancy due
to shading out. These small pieces of deadwood are reasoned to be the primary
cause of nuisance for
the applicant.
The subject tree was assessed as having a low
likelihood of failure for both whole tree and major component parts.
It is an attractive amenity addition to the surrounding landscape and is a
feature component to the respondent's property.
The pieces of dead wood that are shedding, although small, still gain
considerable inertia in an unbroken fall. Removal of all dead
wood within the
canopy will mitigate any potential damage as well as forming a base line to
determine if dead wood formation is natural
or being accelerated due to over
pruning and tree decline.
Regular monitoring of the subject tree by a suitably qualified consultant will
be able to draw conclusions as to overall tree health
by having more data from a
longer time frame.
Currently the tree is considered to have a low likelihood of causing injury or
he concluded that the small pieces of deadwood were the primary cause of the
nuisance being caused to the applicants, he
recommended that the subject tree
undergo a complete dead wood pruning procedure. This was to include all dead
branches on the southern
extent over the applicants’ property to 1cm in
diameter. He recommended that the tree be inspected yearly by a Minimum AQF
level 5 arborist to determine ongoing health, any rate of decline and overall
safety in the current landscape and that no live tissue
is to be removed from
the tree until future assessments deem the subject healthy enough to tolerate
further loss of photosynthetic
production.
[13] He does not
say so, but clearly his report proceeds on the basis that removal of the tree
should not occur and is unnecessary.
position of
the applicants was lacking in
proportionality and was an unreasonable response to the difficulties that the
presence of this tree
presented. They were unprepared to resolve the issue for
anything less than orders for the destruction of the tree.
applicants were properly concerned with potential of damage to their property
caused by the presence of the tree, but when
carefully examined ultimately,
their concerns about that were confined to circumstances in which there were
severe weather events
or very high winds or storm cell events. The damage that
they claimed had been caused to their home over time was not corroborated
photographic evidence nor was there objective evidence of expense said to have
been incurred in remedying any of that damage.
[16] Although
initially they gave the impression they could not and did not use their driveway
generally and did not permit trades
persons to park in it, it became evident by
the end of the argument that, in fact, there were only a limited or narrow range
of circumstances
in which that was true. Generally, except in high wind
conditions coming from a particular direction, the driveway was used both
washing vehicles, access and parking, albeit not directly under that tree.
impression was that their evidence was often prone to overstatement and
argumentativeness seen to support their contention
that the tree ought to be
evidence that a metal gutter bracket had been broken by the force of falling
timber bore little scrutiny, and I was not
prepared to speculate on whether
damaging one gutter bracket was an outcome that led to the need to destroy this
tree. In any event
the cost of damage caused to the gutter on their property
after the 2019 storms was met by the respondents, without admission as
responsibility for that.
applicants were rightly concerned that their insurers had a practice of asking
questions in policy renewals forms about,
and expecting answers to questions
does not follow
trees that insurers might ask about should be destroyed. Nor
would insurers be justified in refusing insurance merely because of
the presence
of protected trees in a neighbourhood, but even were that refusal something that
might occur, there was no evidence
that this tree had led to that occurring
introduced complaints which were of no real significance, including that there
were drainage issues associated with the
tree, which might cause erosion and
ultimately, the failure of the root system. There was however no objective
evidence that there
was such a risk. There was evidence which I accept that
steps had been taken to ensure that this did not occur. As I have identified
above, the arborist Mr Mitchell in February 2023 specifically observed in his
report there were no drainage issues as the tree was
situated on a slope and all
rain and excess water would run off. There was also objective photographic
evidence that landscaping
had occurred. That did not deter the applicants from
maintaining their position that there were erosion and tree collapse risks.
[21] When it
came to the applicants producing photographs that supposedly demonstrated the
extent of the problem of falling debris,
I was taken to a photo taken more than
five years ago of a stick which had fallen into their yard. It was of some 4
metres in length
and what looked to be some three to five centimetres in
diameter. Not a twig, not a limb but seemingly deadwood. This had been the
result of an exceptional weather event with a very serious storm involved, and
was by no means something they had been forced to
tolerate with any regularity
since. Whilst the stick was not something someone would care to be hit by; it
was of a dimension that
one could easily expect to be thrown in a significant
storm event involving any tree.
[22] Another
example I was taken to was also of relative insignificance. In 2024 they found a
fairly small wishbone shaped branch
with attached leafy material with the branch
being approximately 1m in length and what looked to be about a centimetre or so
in diameter.
One could expect to find that sort of material cast in any
neighbourhood where eucalypts would be found and windy weather encountered.
[23] Another
photographic example was of a fallen stick or branch taken in 2024, but it was
revealed to have not even fallen into
the applicants’ property, but fell
to the respondents’ side.
[24] Improperly,
in my view, the applicants sought to challenge the objectivity, honesty and
integrity of the QCAT appointed tree
assessor who did the assessment of the tree
and wrote a report which by implication rejected the contention that it should
be destroyed.
They even made a formal complaint to QCAT using the complaint
process for dealing with registry staff, even though he was not an
employee or
agent of QCAT. In my view there was no reasonable basis to challenge his
objectivity and bona fides, but they did so
anyway, amongst other things,
accusing him of falsely stating the period for which he was on site for his
inspection when, in fact,
they had no real understanding of when it was that he
had arrived or what he did when he arrived there before he spoke to them.
conclusions were also challenged because amongst other things he was alleged to
have estimated the height of the tree using
his own judgement, instead of using
more sophisticated measuring equipment to do so, and had taken photographs of
the tree using
a mobile phone camera rather than what it was suggested should
have been a more complex SLR camera. In my view those criticisms were
applicants rejected the QCAT appointed tree assessor’s assessment of the
extent to which there was any encroachment
of the upper canopy, and as to the
height and breadth of the canopy. Despite this, they presented no alternative
measurement taken
or measured by any other objective party or any other
arborist. They did seek to seize upon discrepancies concerning the dimensions
the tree to be found within the two arborist reports obtained, despite the fact
they did not generally agree with what was in
either of those reports
themselves.
[27] I gained
the impression that they had become advocates for the cause of ensuring the
destruction of the tree and would not permit
objectivity to intervene in that
conceded appreciation of the neighbourhood amenity, which included a Substantial
Gumtree Bushland conservation reserve immediately
adjacent to the two properties
and having left substantial trees on their own site, although not in the
immediate vicinity of their
[29] On the
other hand despite evidence that the respondents had acted diligently to ensure
proper maintenance of the tree each year,
except for the previous year and a
half while this proceeding was awaiting determination, they were not prepared to
accept maintenance
would continue, and that if given effect to, the
recommendations by the arborist that maintenance had been appropriate and would
be appropriate to continue in the future, provided an acceptable outcome to
allay their concerns.
[30] Again, the
impression that they wanted this tree gone because of the inconvenience it
caused them and their own concerns for
their safety and that of their house in
severe storms, although understandable, that concern is not given priority over
the fundamental
principles that apply in determining these kinds of applications
and critically, that a living tree should not be removed or destroyed,
the issues concerning it cannot otherwise be satisfactorily
The relevant provisions of the ND Act
[31] Under s 46
of the ND Act land is taken to be affected by a tree only in limited
circumstances. Accordingly, the land is only
tree affected if it satisfies one
of the following, namely:
(ii) the tree has caused, is causing, or is likely within the next 12 months to
(A) serious injury to a person on the land; or
(B) serious damage to the land or any property on the land; or
(C) substantial, ongoing and unreasonable interference with the
neighbour’s use and enjoyment of the land;
applicants bear the onus of establishing on the balance of probabilities their
entitlement to orders under the ND Act. The
tribunal has broad powers to hear
and decide: “...any matter in relation to a tree in which it is alleged
that, as at the date
of the application to QCAT, land is affected by the
[33] The second
arborist report concludes and I accept that branches from this tree extend over
the applicants’ land to a small
degree and thus satisfy the definition in
s 46(a)(i) of the ND Act as to when land is affected, that is in this case
because the
“branches from the tree overhang the land”.
ND Act defines “tree” to mean any woody
perennial plant or any plant resembling a tree in form and size. This definition
has been held in case law to include roots and stumps rooted in land and a dead
[35] Land is
‘affected by a tree’ if the tree has caused serious damage to the
land or any property on the land, or substantial,
ongoing and unreasonable
interference with the neighbour’s use and enjoyment of the land, and the
land adjoins the land on
which the tree is situated. A tree is situated on land
if the base of the tree is or was previously situated wholly or mainly on
S 66 of the ND Act the tribunal has broad powers to make an order it considers
appropriate about a tree to:
(i) prevent serious injury to any person;
(ii) remedy, restrain or prevent serious damage to the Applicants’ land or
any property
(iii) remedy, restrain or prevent substantial,
ongoing and unreasonable interference with the Applicants’ use and
of the neighbour’s land.
constitutes serious injury or damage, or substantial, ongoing and unreasonable
interference has generated much case law
in this tribunal over
Belcher v Sullivan
[2013] QCATA 304
Member Dodds held:
[22] “Serious” is a word in common usage. It is not given any
special meaning in the Act. In the context of this matter
its meaning may be
regarded as “not slight or negligible”.
[23] “Substantial” also is a word not given any special meaning in
the Act. It is a word in common usage. In the context
in which it is used in the
Act it indicates on-going and unreasonable interference with enjoyment or use of
land which has substance,
is of real or considerable importance.
[24] Both require a decision maker to assess the degree of damage or
interference in the light of all the evidence provided.
ND Act s 72 recognises the importance of trees in residential neighbourhoods. It
makes clear that a living tree should not
be removed or destroyed, unless the
issue cannot otherwise be satisfactorily resolved. I am required to consider
various matters
including the contribution to amenity the trees make to the
respondents’ land including their contribution to privacy and protection
from noise.
[40] Sections 71
and 72 of the ND Act provide that the primary consideration is the safety of any
person, but that the removal or
destruction of a living tree to be
The contribution of the tree to amenity
[41] In the
second arborist report it is said that the
Tallowwood the subject to this application is native
and is a very important species as a food source for native wildlife, including
Koalas, Gliders, Possums, Nectar feeding birds and insects. I accept that
evidence. It follows that it has high ecological and amenity
values. It is only
partially contributing to the accumulation of tree and tree leaf debris within
the applicants’ property,
but even were it the substantial or sole cause
of it, I do not consider that removal of the tree is justified.
[42] Although
under s 66 of the ND Act the tribunal has broad powers to make an order it
considers appropriate about a tree to (i)
serious injury to any person; (ii) remedy, restrain
or prevent serious damage to the applicants’ land or any property; or
remedy, restrain or prevent substantial, ongoing and unreasonable
interference with the applicants’ use and enjoyment of the
neighbour’s land, I do not consider that destruction of the tree is needed
to prevent serious injury to any person or prevent
serious damage or
substantial, ongoing and unreasonable interference with the applicants’
use and enjoyment of their property.
a proper maintenance regime of the kind recommended by the arborists,
unreasonable interference with the applicants’
use and enjoyment of their
property can be prevented.
Disposition
applicants want an order for the destruction and removal of the offending tree.
As I have said I do not consider that removal
of the tree is justified having
regard to the requirements of the ND Act and the evidence before me.
[45] I order
the respondents:
(a) Cause the subject Tallowwood tree to undergo a complete dead wood pruning
procedure which includes all dead branches on the southern
extent over the
applicants’ property to 1 centimetre in diameter.
(b) Have the subject tree inspected yearly by a Minimum AQF level 5 arborist to
determine ongoing health, any rate of decline and
overall safety and obtain
advice as to whether further pruning is appropriate in the future.
(c) Not permit any live tissue to be removed from the tree until future
assessments deem the subject healthy enough to tolerate further
photosynthetic production.
[46] I grant the
parties liberty to apply in respect of any other consequential or other orders
which might be required to be made.
ND Act s 61.
Watson-Brown v Heaton &
[2014] QCAT 346
Street v Smith & Rogers
[2018] QCAT 193
Cacopardo v Woolcock
[2017] QCAT 214
Hewitt v Brisbane City
[2018] QCAT 282.
ND Act ss 46(a), 46(b), s
Hewitt v Brisbane City
[2018] QCAT 282
(a claim for $817 was not sufficient to be
‘serious damage’);
Bunyard v McManus
[2013] QCAT 258
Belcher v Sullivan
[2013] QCATA 304
, [22]–[26] (Judicial Member
Hoy v Fox & Anor
[2013] QCAT 728
Cacopardo v Woolcock
[2017] QCAT 214
Belcher v Sullivan
[2013] QCATA 304
Laing v Kokkinos (No.2)
[2013] QCATA 247
Thomsen v White
[2012] QCAT 381
(sunlight);
Body Corporate
– Highlands Vista v Taylor
[2018] QCAT 244
; (view re body corporate
and multiple units),
Webb v Dwyer & Clarke
[2014] QCAT 219
ND Act s 73(1)(g).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (222 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter