URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2009/60.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:38:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JAC, Re [2009] QGAAT 60 (20 July 2009)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL,
JAC, Re [200 ] QGAAT 60
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Guardianship Application
Administration Application
Application for
declaration of capacity for adult
In the matter of JAC
MATTER NUMBER:
2009/2450 2009/2451 2009/885
2009/886 2009/887
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
DATE OF HEARING:
27 April 2009
DATE OF ORDER:
27 April 2009
DATE OF REASONS:
20 July 2009
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
M Watson Presiding Member
L Clarkson Member
G Quinlivan
CATCHWORDS:
CAPACITY-ADMINISTRATORS-ENDURING POWER OF
ATTORNEY-INVALIDITY-REVOCATION-Where family conflict-Where expressed preference
members as substitute decision maker.
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Attorney Act 1998
DECLARATION ABOUT CAPACITY
the application for the declaration about capacity for JAC is dismissed.
GUARDIANSHIP
the applications for the appointment of a guardian for JAC are dismissed.
ADMINISTRATION
HM and BR are appointed jointly as administrators for JAC for all financial
Tribunal directs the administrators to provide accounts to the Tribunal eight
(8) weeks prior to the anniversary of this appointment
and annually
thereafter.
the Tribunal orders otherwise, this appointment remains current for two (2)
NOTICE OF INTEREST IN LAND
the administrator shall within three (3) months:
by way of a search of the records held by the Registrar of Titles or other
means, any interest in real property registered
in the name of JAC (“the
with the Registrar of Titles a copy of this order and a notice notifying the
Registrar of any interest in land held by the adult
which is subject to this
administration order.
to the Tribunal:
(i) a copy of
the search of records held by the Registrar of Titles referred to above
(ii) a copy of
the lodgement summary with the dealing number showing lodgement of the order in
respect of any interests in land held
by the adult which is subject to this
administration order.
if any change is made in an interest in land held by the adult which is the
subject of this administration order or if there
are any further dealings in
land on behalf of the adult by the administrator, the administrator shall lodge
with the Registrar of
Titles within 14 days of the finalisation of such interest
a copy of this order and a notice (in a form prescribed by the Registrar
Titles), concerning such changes or dealings.
the administrator pay, from the adult’s funds, any fee associated with the
above notices.
ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
the following Enduring Power of Attorney for JAC is declared invalid pursuant to
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
and s84(2) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(a) The Enduring Power of Attorney dated 16 January 2009
appointing JK, LJ and BR as attorneys for financial, personal and health
the following Enduring Power of Attorney for JAC is revoked pursuant to
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
and s84(2) of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(a) The Enduring Power of Attorney dated 24 January 2006 appointing
JK as attorney for financial, personal and health matters.
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
[1] JAC is a 77 year old widower who resides in his own home in South East
Queensland. JAC was born in overseas and worked as a merchant
seaman arriving in
Australia in 1950/51 where he commenced a motor mechanic business. JAC has four
children: JP and JK and two daughters,
HM and LJ. Additionally, JAC also has
step sons: BC, BL and BR and JS.
[2] Before the Tribunal for consideration were five (5) applications: -
Guardianship and Administration applications and a Declaration
of Capacity
lodged by JK. BR submitted a letter on 26 February 2009 in which he states his
opposition to the proposal and appointment
of JK solely as Guardian and
Administrator to JAC. BR stated in his letter that he wished to be appointed
jointly with JK as Guardian
and Administrator. BR added in his letter
“with the Adult Guardian and the Public Trustee of Queensland to take
over if we cannot work together”.
[3] Family members had concerns as to the ability of JAC continuing to remain in
his home due to the level of care required by him.
While the family wish to
support JAC’s expressed wish to remain in his home, there are also
concerns as to how long this will
be possible.
[4] On 24 January 2009, JAC executed an Enduring Power of Attorney at a Police
Station appointing JK, LJ and BR to operate as a majority
for financial
personal/health matters. At two family meetings, JAC had expressed
his wish to have more than one family member appointed as his
Attorney. JAC was
also angry at family members over differing attitudes and opinions on his
capacity to safely navigate on his mobility
scooter. Family members also held
views about JAC’s capacity to make a new Enduring Power of Attorney so had
refrained from
signing acceptance of their appointments. Due to these concerns,
JK had arranged for himself and his father to visit an independent
solicitor on
10 February 2009 to determine JAC’s understanding of and ability to make a
new Enduring Power of Attorney.
[5] Previously, JK had been solely appointed Attorney by his father under an
Enduring Power of Attorney dated 24 January 2006 for
personal/health matters.
[6] Submitted to the Tribunal were two typed and signed notes from JAC entitled
Power of Attorney – 31 January 2009
in with JAC stated:
I have a decision on this subject:
JK will continue
as my attorney
BR and LJ will
also be my attorneys
The majority
I have good reason for my decision:
I did not know
until recently that I could have more than one attorney
Two or three
brains should be smarter than one
JK is away at
sea from time to time and is not always readily available
BR and LJ are
fit and proper family members to be involved in making decisions for me
introduce a system of everyday checks and balances that should reduce the risk
of decisions based on unreasonable personal
[7] In the signed note entitled
Power of Attorney - 9 February 2009
had stated:
This subject was
discussed at the family meeting on 31 January 2009
I decided to
appoint each of JK, LJ, HM and BR as my attorney, with the majority to rule
I definitely do
not want JK to be my sole attorney
JK expressed
some doubts about my capacity to appoint new attorneys. He can either accept my
decision or step aside
I will ask JK to
have the new power of attorney put in place by a solicitor this week.
[8] These letters appear to have been written when JAC became aware that JK
queried his capacity to create the Enduring Power of
Attorney on 24 January
2009. Following the family meetings, JK arranged the visit to a solicitor to
comment on his father’s
ability to understand and make a new Enduring
Power of Attorney.
The Parties
The following persons attended the hearing as active parties:
JAC - Adult
JK - Son and Applicant
BR - Stepson and Applicant
AJ - Office of the Adult Guardian
CC - Representing Public Trustee
[9] Others Present at the Hearing:
JS - Stepson
JB - Grandson
JY - Daughter in Law
HM - Daughter
LJ - Daughter
BL - Stepson
The Issues and the Legislation
[10] The issues for the Tribunal are:
(a) JAC have capacity for
the matter?
(b) Is there a need for a Guardian? If so, who should be appointed? and
(c) Is there a need for an Administrator? If so, who should be appointed?
[11] In determining whether or not JAC has capacity, the Tribunal must consider
the definition of capacity in Sch 4 of the
Guardianship and Administration
, for a person for a
matter, means the person is capable of-
(a) understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the matter;
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
(c) communicating the decisions in some way.
DOES JAC LACK CAPACITY FOR THE MATTER?
[12] Following is a summary of the medical evidence obtained by the Tribunal and
contained within it’s file and relied upon
by the Tribunal:
30 June 2006
– RK, Neuropsychologist –
Screening MMSE 21/30 (gross memory impairment); Stress Index 6/18 (moderate
symptoms regarding
anxiety and stress). Neuropsychological investigation
suggests Adult has significant memory and cognitive deficits consistent with
progressive Alzheimer’s disease.
11 May 2008 –
Dr H, Consultant Physician of Internal medicine
and geriatrics – Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) score 12/30. Past
history includes diagnosis of dementia thought to be a mixture of
alcohol abuse plus Alzheimer’s’ Disease. Initial MMSE
22/30 in 2005
gradually improving to 29/30 late 2006. CT head shows cerebral atrophy.
Cognitive Assessment of Minnesota testing showed
JAC had moderate deficits with
visual and auditory memory and sequencing, auditory recall, mental manipulation
and severe deficits
with motor recall, multiple digit maths skills, complex
problem solving, mental flexibility and abstract thinking. BRISC score 81/135.
Repeat cognitive assessment improved to 15/30.
31 July 2008 –
Dr B, Consultant psychiatrist – While in
hospital, Adult’s MMSE score was 12/30 and subsequently improved to 15/30.
subsequently improved cognitively with a MMSE score at that date of
20 October 2008 –
Dr H – report refers to past medical
history of dementia – mixture of alcohol abuse and Alzheimer’s
Disease. Reference
to JAC’s son attending to bill paying.
27 October 2008 –
DD – Occupational Therapist – MoCA
score on admission was 14/30 (compared with 12/30 during previous admission in
2008) Score indicates impaired basic cognition. Adult admits his memory is
. Given his greatly
reduced memory skills, JAC requires supervision to ensure his safety.
18 December 2008
– FN, Occupation Therapist (Electric Scooter
Assessment Report) –adult had difficulties following verbal instructions
and required repeated instructions on a number of occasions. MoCA score was
16/30 indicating impairment of basic cognition with particular
deficits in
executive functioning, recall, language and abstract thinking. In relation to
general cognitive skills, JAC displayed
reduced insight into his medical
condition and demonstrated poor short term memory. In the off- road assessment,
deficits were identified
in relation to Adult’s cognition. In the on-road
assessment, deficits were noted in the areas of observation and
planning/judgement.
20 January 2009 –
Dr B – JAC was seen for review on 15
January. On repeat MMSE he scored 19/30. His main deficits were in orientation
and for short term memory.
18 February 2009 –
Dr C is GP to JAC and has known him
approximately 14 years. JAC has a number of medical conditions including
dementia from 2005 with
a progressive decline since then. JAC has limited
ability to understand and make decisions about:
Health care:
JAC has discarded medications, thinking they are no
longer required.
JAC continues to smoke and drink to his detriment. He is
concrete in his views on accommodation.
JAC’s mental state is not adequate for dealing with
finances. He has short term memory deficit.
[13] Dr C summarised by stating that JAC can understand and make simple
decisions about health care matters, but not about lifestyle
and financial
matters. He understands none of the criteria of an Enduring Power of Attorney.
[14] At the commencement of the hearing with all persons and parties present,
the Tribunal spoke to JAC regarding capacity issues.
JAC appeared physically
well and fit and was in a wheelchair due to ongoing difficulties with his ankle.
Following the hearing he
was to be admitted to hospital for surgery on the
ankle. In response to enquiring why he was at the Tribunal, JAC stated the
“trying to get things straightened out”
JAC admitted he has been relying a lot on his son JK to attend to his finances
and other matters. JAC described his memory at the
time of the hearing as
quite reasonable”.
[15] In discussing matters relating to the execution of the Enduring Power of
Attorney document, JAC was unable to recall whether
or not he had done this. JAC
stated he “
didn’t think he had signed an EPOA
had never signed a document”
and that if such a document existed it
would favour
“JK if it was anyone”.
[16] During the Tribunal’s conversation with JAC, he would turn to ask JK
for clarification or answers to questions posed by
the Tribunal. When asked, all
family members stated their agreement that JAC did not have capacity to make his
own decisions or manage
his finances. The family agreed with the opinions of the
medical practitioners in relation to JAC’s capacity, a summary of
was read to them. Family members stated there were issues relating to
JAC’s ophthalmic health and safety issues regarding
a mobility scooter
which had caused differing opinions and responses in the family. Additionally
there were concerns that JAC had
cancelled a community aged care package aimed
at assisting him remain in his home. It was reported by family members that JAC
discontinued some medications and thrown others away, believing them to be
no longer necessary.
[17] On the basis of the evidence provided, the Tribunal made the following
(a) JAC has a
number of medical conditions including dementia diagnosed in 2005 with a
progressive decline in his cognition since
(b) JAC has
discarded some medications believing they are no longer required; and
(c) JAC is not
able to make decisions for himself in personal/health or financial matters.
APPLICATION FOR A DECLARATION OF CAPACITY
[18] Based on the Tribunal’s finding that JAC does not have capacity for
personal/health or financial matters, this application
is dismissed.
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF A GUARDIAN?
[19] JK has provided a great deal of support and practical assistance to his
father. Other family members have also provided support
and assistance. There
were varying opinions amongst family members about JAC’s desire, ability
and functioning to remain in
his own home, his use of a motor scooter vehicle to
assist his mobility and his cancellation of a community aged care package to
assist him remain at home.
[20] JAC stays with family members on some occasions and JK has on occasions,
stayed overnight in his father’s home to support
and assist him. JK
expressed his concerns that his father was losing the ability to cook his own
meals, that there is the issue of
macular degeneration of his eyes to be
attended to and the correct administration of medications. JK stated in his
opinion, matters
relating to his father’s capacity to self care
had substantially gone downhill in the past 3 years”.
[21] In the near future an accommodation decision will be required for JAC. He
has specifically requested of his family that if he
is to enter an aged care
facility, he wished it to be one situated close to his current home. It was
clear to the Tribunal during
the hearing, that despite varying opinions amongst
family members relating to where and how JAC resided and the freedoms he should
have with his mobility, all persons were united in their best interests for
[22] The views of AJ representing the Office of the Adult Guardian were sought
during the hearing. AJ reported that based on the
evidence provided by the
family during the hearing, she was confident that the family could and would
work together as all parties
appeared to be genuine in their desire to see that
decisions were made in JAC’s best interests. AJ supported and praised the
efforts of family members to meet and openly communicate between themselves
despite their differences.
[23] After much discussion, an adjournment during the hearing and the views
sought of the AJ, the family decided they would be able
to work together
informally to make personal decisions in the best interests of JAC.
[24] The family identified JK, HM and LJ as Statutory Health Attorneys.
[25] Based on the family’s willingness and belief they can make informal
personal decisions in the best interests of JAC, the
Tribunal found there is no
need for the formal appointment of a Guardian. Accordingly, the Tribunal
dismissed the applications for
the appointment of a Guardian.
ENDURING POWERS OF ATTORNEY
[26] On 16 January 2009 JAC executed an Enduring Power of Attorney, appointing
JK,LJ and BR as attorneys for financial, personal
and health matters. This
occurred when JAC learned that he could appoint more than one Attorney. On 24
January 2006, he had previously
appointed JK as sole Attorney for financial,
personal and health matters.
[27] The Tribunal concluded that JAC lacked capacity to execute the Enduring
Power of Attorney on 16 January 2009 due to his cognitive
impairment. The
Tribunal relied on the evidence from medical reports and assessments as stated
above in [13]. In particular, the
report of Dr B who reviewed JAC on 15 January
2009, the day prior to his execution of the Enduring Power of Attorney dated 16
2009. On that review, Dr B found JAC scored 19/30 on the MMSE,
indicating a significant cognitive deficit. Dr B stated that JAC’s
deficits were in orientation for time and short term memory.
[28] Of additional evidence was a letter from RG, Solicitor dated 16 February
2009 to JK written following the visit of JAC and JK
to the solicitor relating
to JAC’s capacity to execute a new Enduring Power of Attorney - following
is a relevant extract from
the letter:
“Re: JAC – Enduring Power of
“We write further to our RG’s meeting with yourself and your
father, JAC on 10 February 2009.
It became clear during the conversation that your father was not clear as
to the meaning of the document. He could not remember signing
the document, he
was not aware of who prepared the document nor could he remember where he had
signed it and who had witnessed his
We consider JAC’s capacity to sign significant legal documents must
be in question and hence the validity of any recent documentation
signed by him
must be treated with great care.”
[29] On the basis of the evidence presented to it, the Tribunal declared the
Enduring Power of Attorney executed by JAC on 16 January
2009 invalid pursuant
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
and s84(2) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
IS THERE A NEED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF AN
ADMINISTRATOR
[30] The application of JK proposes the appointment of himself as Administrator.
A letter submitted on 27 February 2009 by BR after
advice of this application,
states he does not support the sole appointment of JK. BR proposed the
appointment jointly of himself
[31] With his application JK provided an extensive submission detailing the past
and recent history of events impacting his father.
JK informs that his brother,
JP formerly principal solicitor of Js’ Solicitors misappropriated monies
belonging to JAC when
these funds were entrusted to JP in 1994. The loss of
these substantial monies, in the vicinity of $430,000.00 was not discovered
until 2001. JP had been appointed solely as his father’s Attorney under an
Enduring Power of Attorney on 5 October 1994. JAC
had entrusted his savings to
and relied on his son to manage them. JP was subsequently charged, convicted and
imprisoned for 10 years
for fraudulent dealings of his clients and his
father’s monies as well as failed property investment dealings.
[32] In his submission, JK documents that JP is now on parole until March 2013
and is currently employed by BR. JK is of the understanding
that BR develops
residential and commercial properties. Further, JK informed the Tribunal that he
and BR until recently had no had
4 years. This was also confirmed by BR
[33] JK reported to the Tribunal that he has been successful in having
approximately $100,000.00 of the misappropriated monies restored
to his father
from the Queensland Law Society. Currently before the Courts is a bankruptcy
matter concerning JP and his former wife.
This matter relates to the transfer of
assets to his former wife by JP prior to his sentencing. JAC is a creditor in
these proceedings.
[34] JK believes his father may be influenced by JP and BR in financial matters
as JAC had been staying with BR and his family for
a period of time in
November/December 2008.
[35] BR stated it was important for the Tribunal to be aware that as Attorney,
JK had been the recipient of monies from his father.
These monies were in the
form of payment of his children’s school fees. The Tribunal enquired of JK
as to the details and accuracy
of this. JK agreed that his father was grateful
and happy that he had done so much work and effort on his behalf in attempting
regain his monies taken by JP. JAC had wanted to pay his
grandchildren’s school fees which amounted to $500-$800 per term for
approximately 3 years. The total amount of fees was between $8,000.00
-$9,000.00. JK described these payments as
“a loving gesture and
from his father.
[36] JAC has substantial assets which require management. These assets consist
of his home valued at approximately $350,000.00 and
a motor vehicle valued at
$4,000.00. He had combined investments and savings totalling $184,871.11 at the
time the application was
lodged. JK reported that his father’s capital is
increasing. JAC receives a pension of $526.35 per fortnight and interest from
investments and savings of approximately $15,000.00 per annum based on above
[37] JAC informed the Tribunal he was aware his property was “
, however he was unable to describe its value. He
stated that if he wished to sell his property, he would consult a real estate
He added that he did not own a motor vehicle, he was aware he had some
savings however did not know how much. He added that he does
receive monthly
bank statements, however was unaware of the amounts of his savings and
investments from the statements.
[38] The Tribunal asked JK his opinion of BR’s proposal that they both be
appointed as administrators. JK stated he was uncertain
how such an arrangement
would work, given the history of conflict between them. The Tribunal explained
the appropriateness considerations
to those present and provided an adjournment
for the family to discuss the proposal.
[39] On commencement of the hearing, JK suggested that HM be also joined as an
administrator with himself and BR. JK described HM
moderator, she keeps everyone happy”
. JK expressed his willingness to
work with other family members. JAC verbalised his preference for the
appointment of family members.
No person at the hearing objected to the proposed
appointees.
[40] JAC has significant assets requiring management. There are also ongoing
legal matters needing to be addressed on his behalf.
JAC is unaware of the value
of his assets or his income.
WHO SHOULD BE APPOINTED?
[41] Due to the history of family conflict and differences, there appeared
suspicions if one family member were to be appointed as
Administrator. The
Tribunal during an adjournment allowed time for the family to consider the
alternatives and the prospect of them
working together in the best interests of
JAC. Despite some conflict between family members, there is trust among them and
respect and intention that all family members are concerned for
JAC’s best interests. The family consider that the three family
selected by them to be Administrators will be able to work harmoniously and
collaboratively together.
[42] The only remaining issue for the Tribunal was its
consideration of the 2006 Enduring Power of Attorney in favour of JK. This
document essentially became operative with the Tribunal declaration of
invalidity in relation to the later enduring document. While
the Tribunal
appointments would overtake the 2006 enduring document, it would still remain
technically operative in those areas where
the Tribunal made no formal
appointment.
[43] The evidence clearly indicated the tensions within JAC’s family which
flowed from the single appointment. The evidence
also established JAC’s
clear preference to have more than one attorney, and his execution of the 2009
Enduring Power of Attorney
reflected his attempt to implement his
preference.
[44] The Tribunal concluded in all circumstances that the appropriate course was
to revoke the 2006 enduring document.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (184 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter