URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2015/79.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Whitby v Stockair Pty Ltd & Jackson [2015] QDC 79 (16 April 2015)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Whitby v Stockair Pty Ltd & Jackson
[2015] QDC 79
ALLAN MATTHEW WHITBY
(appellant)
STOCKAIR PTY LTD
(respondent)
SIMON GRAYDON JACKSON
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Magistrates Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
23 March 2015
Farr SC DCJ
appeal is dismissed.
will hear the parties as to costs.
CATCHWORDS:
S 222 APPEAL - COSTS – where the matter involved “special
difficulty, complexity or importance” and determination
as to whether
costs should have been limited in accordance with the scale prescribed in
Schedule 2 of the
Justices Regulation
2004 (Qld) – where the
magistrate’s decision not to require an itemised bill was reasonable
– where determination
required as to whether any higher amount of costs is
restricted to the scale items in Schedule 2 of the
Justices Regulation
2004 – where the magistrate did not fail to use the scale amounts as a
starting point in determining what was just and reasonable
and did not err in
determining an amount for costs.
M J Copley QC and M McCarthy for the appellant
B B O’Sullivan QC and J Noud for the respondents
SOLICITORS:
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions for the appellant
McCullough Robertson for the respondents
[1] Each respondent was acquitted after trials which, with the
consent of all parties, were conducted simultaneously, in the Brisbane
Magistrates Court over a period of four days on 12 and 13 June 2014 and 13 and
16 July 2014. After they were each acquitted, the
learned magistrate ordered
the complainant to pay the costs of the defendants fixed at $100,000 within two
[2] This is
an appeal against that order pursuant to
Justices Act 1886
(“the Act”).
Grounds of appeal
[3] The grounds of appeal
1. The matter did not involve “special difficulty,
complexity or importance”, costs should have been limited in accordance
with the scale prescribed in Schedule 2 of the Justices Regulation 2004
2. The material before his Honour did not provide a proper basis to
identify which costs, if any, ought to be included in the award;
3. The order
for costs should not have included any award in favour of Stockair Pty Ltd in
respect of costs incurred in defending
another charge against Simon
Proceedings
at first instance
[4] The proceedings were commenced by two Complaints and
Summons issued under the Act. Each was signed by Allan Matthew Whitby as
complainant. Mr Whitby is an officer with the Commonwealth Department of
Agriculture (as it is now called).
[5] Simon Jackson was charged with one
count of contravening s 135.1(7) of the Criminal Code (Cth) (acting to
dishonestly influence
a Commonwealth public official) and Stockair Pty Ltd with
one count of contravening
Export Control Act 1982
(failing to comply with a condition to which a permission granted under the
Export Control (Animals) Order 2004 was subject).
[6] The matter concerned
the transport by truck of 249 breeding cattle from Mundoona Park in Numurka,
Victoria to Mascot Airport,
Sydney, on 14 May 2012, and events at that airport
on 15 May 2012. Simon Jackson was the managing director of Stockair Pty Ltd,
which at that stage held an export licence permitting livestock to be exported
by air. Evidence was presented over the first three
days of the trial whilst
written and oral submissions were presented on the morning of the fourth. The
learned magistrate delivered
judgment and reasons that
[7] The prosecution called 13 witnesses and the defence called 5, including
a handwriting expert and two character witnesses. There
were 80 exhibits
tendered during the course of the proceedings and the defence had prepared a
chronological bundle of documents relied
on by the prosecution, which ran to
several hundred pages. Similarly, documents delivered by the Department of
Agriculture on subpoena
were likewise paginated by the defence. The defence
also provided the court with copies of the relevant Commonwealth legislation
regulations applicable to the export of livestock from Australia by air. The
magistrate observed that the defence solicitors
had prepared the case
“efficiently”, and said that “the prosecution (was made)
easier through the work that’s
been done by the
hearing the evidence and receiving detailed written and oral submissions from
the prosecution and defence, the learned magistrate
dismissed both charges.
Extensive ex tempore reasons were
dismissing the charge against Stockair Pty Ltd, the learned magistrate
considered that the prosecution had not negatived the
defence that arose
pursuant to s 10.1 of the Criminal Code (Cth). In respect of the charge
against Mr Jackson, the learned magistrate
was not satisfied that he had made
the false entry in the document in question.
[10] There were several features
of the trial that are said to be relevant to the issue of costs. In order to
understand these, it
is necessary to briefly explain the charges and how the
trial unfolded.
[11] Mr Jackson was charged with having dishonestly
falsified a document called a “National Vendor Declaration”
by writing “6 00” over the numbers “2 30” on
the NVD to record the time that movement of the cattle commenced.
alleged to have done this on 15 May 2012 at Mascot Airport in order to conceal
the fact that something called a “permission
to leave for loading”
had not been granted by the Department before the cattle were loaded onto trucks
at Mundoona Park, at
Numurka in rural Victoria, and sent to Mascot
It was alleged that Mr Jackson
had falsified the document so as to dishonestly influence the Department’s
vet at the airport
(Dr Hunter) into granting export documents for the
[12] It was common ground that
the time on the NVD had been altered. The question was whether the prosecution
could prove beyond
reasonable doubt that Mr Jackson had altered it and with the
relevant intention. Despite being dealt with summarily, this charge
constitutes
an indictable offence which has a maximum penalty of 5 years imprisonment when
dealt with on indictment.
[13] The charge against Stockair Pty Ltd was that
it contravened a condition to which a condition granted under the Export Control
(Animals) Order 2004 was subject, in that the loading and transport of the
cattle occurred before permission to leave was
This is a summary offence and punishable by a maximum fine of $27,500.
[14] The following matters emerged at the trial:
(a) The cattle were carried from Mundoona Park to Mascot
Airport on three trucks. The drivers of these trucks were Glen Viney, Martin
Pratt and Kevin Caccianiga;
(b) Three months before the trial (on 1 April
2014), the defence had served an expert report from a handwriting expert (later
in the defence case) who expressed the view that the alteration to the
NVD was more consistent with the writing of Glen Viney than
Simon Jackson, and
that both the original and altered entry were written by ballpoint pen, and
recommended that further testing be
prosecution did not carry out the testing recommended by the expert;
alleged offence was investigated by an employee of the Department of
Agriculture, Phillip Oldfield, a former police officer
based in Perth, who
compiled an investigation
and then a brief of evidence for the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions;
(e) The investigation log recorded (on p 5) that “it
is recommended that statements be obtained from the below list of witnesses
Kevin Caccianiga”;
(f) Mr Oldfield interviewed truck drivers Glen Viney
and Martin Pratt and obtained statements from them, and they were called by the
prosecution. Mr Oldfield did not question or obtain a statement from Kevin
Caccianiga;
(g) The defence located and interviewed Mr Caccianiga and
subsequently flew him from Victoria to Brisbane to give evidence on the
day of the hearing;
(h) Mr Caccianiga’s evidence exculpated Mr Jackson.
He recalled the consignment and said that Glen Viney told him during that
journey that he, Viney, had changed the time written on the NVD on instruction
from Robert Lawless, the owner and operator of Mundoona
In dismissing the charge against Simon Jackson, the learned magistrate found Mr
Caccianiga to be an impressive and honest witness,
who became more believable
and reliable as the cross-examination of him
progressed;
(i) When giving reasons for
ordering costs, the learned magistrate observed that Mr Caccianiga was
“the key dramatic”
witness in the proceedings, and that “the
whole case changed dramatically because of his
principal witness called by the prosecution was Robert Lawless, the owner and
operator of Mundoona Park;
(k) Mr Lawless gave unchallenged evidence on oath
that after he had been interviewed by Phillip Oldfield in September 2012 and had
provided a statement, Mr Oldfield returned to Numurka in January 2013 and
demanded that he (Mr Lawless) change his signed statement,
which he refused to
asked by the court whether he ever considered any other person to be a suspect,
the investigator failed to provide a responsive
(m) Insofar
as the charge against Stockair Pty Ltd was concerned, the relevant physical
element was the failure to comply with a condition
of the NOI approval. The
respondents’ submission was that the failure to comply was “brought
and that Mr Lawless was a “person over whom
the defendant had no control”;
(n) In dismissing the charge against
Stockair Pty Ltd, the learned magistrate considered that the prosecution had not
negatived the
defence provided by s 10.1 of the Criminal Code
Application for costs
[15] After judgment was delivered on the morning of the fourth
day, there was discussion of the defendants’ proposed applications
[16] The learned magistrate indicated that if applications for costs
above scale were to be made, significant case authority would
considered, and factors taken into account, and he indicated that although he
had an open mind on the question, he would
be reluctant to make such an
In particular, his Honour said “I’m not, at this stage, favourably
inclined because of the fast and loose manner that
your client conducts his
That was a reference to
the magistrate’s finding that Mr Jackson had failed to take sufficient
steps to arrange for a Departmental
vet to inspect the cattle at Mundoona Park
in the three days before the shipment was to depart for the
[17] The application for costs
was then heard over a period of two hours and the argument extended to some 40
transcript.
learned magistrate was referred to ss 158, 158A and 158B of the Act as well
as several decisions that were relevant to the topic.
He also considered the
evidence regarding the defendants’ costs as detailed in an affidavit of
their solicitor, Trent Thorne,
sworn 16 July 2014, and he received submissions
from all parties regarding that document.
[18] At the end of the argument,
the magistrate ordered that the complainant pay the defendants’ costs
fixed at $100,000 within
two months which was less than onethird of the
extraordinary amount of $327,350 actually incurred by the defendants in
the charges.
Reasons for the costs order
[19] In light of the matters noted earlier, the learned
magistrate found that there had clearly been a failure in the
investigation.
went on to conclude that because of that failure and the general failure of the
prosecution, it was an appropriate case for the
[20] The appellant has conceded
that the magistrate’s decision to award costs was correct, taking into
account the requirements
of s 158A of the Act.
[21] In considering the
issue of costs, the magistrate correctly held that in order to award costs above
Justices Act
scale, he had to be “satisfied that the higher amount is
just and reasonable, having regard to the special difficulty, complexity
importance of the
[22] His Honour then addressed in some detail why, in his opinion, the
matter was one of special difficulty, complexity and importance,
and why, in his
judgement, it was just and reasonable for costs to be ordered in excess of the
Justices Act
held as follows:
(a) that the matter was one of special importance to
Stockair and Mr Jackson. He found that they had “a lot at stake
and placed emphasis on the fact that a show cause letter had been issued as to
why Stockair’s licence should not be cancelled,
and that the allegations
made in the letter were the subject of the
prosecution.
His Honour held that the
matter was of special importance to Stockair and Mr Jackson because of its
importance to their reputation,
which his Honour found was “at
stake” and “on the
(b) that for Mr Jackson to
have been found guilty “would have done immeasurable damage to his and the
reputation”,
and that it was “reasonable that a considerable amount of effort was put
into defending the matter” notwithstanding that
the company had since
surrendered its export licence;
the impact of a prosecution on an individual was a factor that could be taken
into account in assessing whether the matter
was of special
importance;
matter was also one of special public importance, being concerned with the
treatment of animals for export, about which there
has been public controversy,
and because of the importance to the community of the proper treatment of
animals, the prosecution revolving
around whether the complex regime for animal
welfare was complied
(e) the matter was also one of special complexity, with 80 exhibits, and
was a complex area of much federal
regulation.
[24] The magistrate did not accede to the defendants’
application that the complainant pay half of the $327,350 costs incurred
defendants, and said that because Mr Jackson had to a certain extent
brought the prosecution upon himself (by failing to organise
a vet inspection at
Mundoona Park in a timely
general exercise of his discretion, he would fix costs at the lesser sum of
[25] He considered whether an assessment should be ordered of a
bill of costs, and noted that this would involve having the bill set
detail, the bill assessed, and submissions by both sides, and that this would
have the effect that “the costs would
blow out even more” and would
be “a lot higher”. His Honour concluded that this was not the
appropriate course
circumstances.
Nature of the appeal
[26] Pursuant to
of the Act, this appeal is by way
of rehearing on the evidence (original evidence) given in the proceeding below.
The nature of
such an appeal was considered in White v Commissioner of Police
[2014] QCA 121.
, Morrison JA, with whom Muir JA and
Atkinson J agreed, noted that:
“In the appeal to the District Court,
Justices Act
provides for a rehearing on the evidence given at
trial, and any new evidence adduced by leave. That is a rehearing, in the
sense consisting of a review of the record of the proceedings below,
rather than a completely fresh hearing. To succeed on such an
appellant must establish some legal, factual or discretionary error.”
(footnote removed)
Preliminary issue
[27] One issue that requires resolution is whether Stockair Pty
Ltd is the only respondent to this appeal or whether both defendants
respondents. The Notice of Appeal nominates both defendants as parties,
although, if the appellant’s submissions are accepted,
there would be no
order relevant to Steven Jackson against which an appeal could be lodged. It
seems to me that resolution of this
issue will very much depend on the
resolution of the substantive grounds of appeal. Accordingly, I will return to
this issue later,
but for ease of reference, I will, until then, refer to both
defendants as being the respondents to the appeal.
Ground 1 – did the case involve special
difficulty, complexity or importance?
Legislation
Section 158
Justices Act 1886
158 Costs on dismissal
(1) When justices instead of convicting or making an order dismiss the
complaint, they may by their order of dismissal order that
the complainant shall
pay to the defendant such costs as to them seem just and reasonable.
(2) When a complaint is before a Magistrates Court which the court has not
the complaint to be
struck out for want of jurisdiction and may order that the complainant pay to
the defendant such costs as to
the court seem just and reasonable.
Section 158A(1)
relevantly qualifies
to the extent
that an order for costs should only be made against a public
justices are satisfied that it is proper that the order for costs be made.
Subsection (2) states that all relevant circumstances
must be taken into account
in determining whether it is proper that an order for costs is made and lists a
number of considerations,
whilst noting that the list non-exhaustive.
[30] In this matter the appellant has conceded that the making of costs
orders in favour of the defendants was
appropriate.
Section 158B
of the Act states:
158B Costs for division
(1) In deciding the costs that are just and reasonable for this division,
the justices may award costs only—
(a) for an item allowed for this division under a scale of costs
prescribed under a regulation; and
(b) up to the amount allowed for the item under the scale.
(2) However, the justices may allow a higher amount for costs if the
justices are satisfied that the higher amount is just and reasonable
regard to the special difficulty, complexity or importance of the case.
Special importance
[32] In concluding that the case against each defendant was of
special importance, the learned Magistrate concluded that:
(a) the defendants’ reputations “were on the
line” and “at stake” and that a finding of guilt would
caused “immeasurable damage” to their reputations; and
matters were concerned with treatment of live animals for export and that
considerable public interest presently exists in
that topic.
[33] In support of his conclusion in [32](a) above, the
magistrate relied on the decision of Samios DCJ in Power v Lewis
[2007] QDC 188
where his Honour, in overturning the magistrate’s decision, found that the
magistrate had failed to take into account the seriousness
of the prosecution
and its impact on the
[34] Similarly
in Hickey v Crime and Misconduct Commission (unreported, file 2868 of 2006, 19
May 2008) (‘Hickey’), Shanahan
DCJ allowed costs in excess of the
scale for the summary trial and the appeal. In so doing, his Honour took into
account the importance
of the case to the accused, who was a solicitor. His
Honour said:
“The importance to the appellant himself of
the outcome, is also, in my view, relevant. Whilst it is trite to say that the
of a criminal trial is important for any accused, here the impact that a
conviction for such an offence would have on the appellant’s
profession,
his business and his public reputation would be substantial. The importance of
the appeal must be assessed in that
[35] The appellant has submitted that the magistrate erred in
considering that the objective seriousness of the cases to each of the
defendants amounted to special importance. The respondents have submitted that
the magistrate was correct to conclude that the special
importance of the case
to them was a matter he could take in to account in determining the issue.
[36] Given the decisions in Power v Lewis and Hickey the respondent’s
submission appears to be well founded.
[37] Comment should be made at this
stage about another matter, Cullinane v McCahon
[2014] QDC 120
, in which I made
this statement:
relation to the second point, I accept that this case was important to the
appellant, as no doubt every criminal case is
to every defendant. To invoke
special importance however, the case must involve more than the charge merely
relating to a defendant
in his/her professional capacity. ‘Special
importance’ is clearly a reference to the importance of the case
in terms of questions of law or public interest (this list is not
exhaustive) and is not intended to refer to the subjective assessment
defendant as to whether the case is important to him or her.”
[38] The learned magistrate in this matter, in the course of
his reasons, said that the view that I expressed in that matter differed
that expressed by Samios DCJ in Power v Lewis. Both senior counsel for the
appellant and the respondent have submitted however,
that his Honour erred in
drawing that distinction between the two matters. That submission is
well-founded.
test of importance of a matter to a defendant, as identified by Samios DCJ in
Power v Lewis, is an objective test. So too is
the test referred to by Shanahan
DCJ in Hickey. The statement in Cullinane v McCahon however, only negates the
relevance of the subjective
view of the defendant as to the seriousness of the
case to him or her. That does not have any impact on an objective assessment of
the issue. The distinction is important.
[39] In Interclean Industrial
Services Ltd v Auckland Regional Council
[2000] 3 NZLR 489
, the Council sought
higher costs after the defendant entered pleas of guilty. Costs in excess of
the scale could only be ordered
if the case involved “special difficulty,
complexity or importance”. Randerson J said at pages 496-7:
“[32] As observed by
Tipping J in T v Collector of Customs (High Court, Christchurch, AP 167/94, 28
February 1995) at p 2:
‘The use of the word
‘special’ when applied to the concepts of difficulty, complexity and
importance means that
it is not enough simply to say that the case was
difficult, complex or important. The necessary difficulty, complexity or
must be such that it can be said to be significantly greater than is
ordinarily encountered. Similarly the focus on the case itself
means that it is
not enough for the applicant to be able to say that by dint of its features the
case had special importance to him.”
[40] In relation to paragraph [32](b) above, the appellant has
submitted that the magistrate’s reliance upon his perception
interest in matters involving the overseas export of live animals was
impermissible. He submits the court was restricted
when considering the issue of
special importance, to matters that were in evidence. In that regard he relies
on the following passage
in Palmgrove Holding Pty Ltd v Sunshine Coast Regional
[2014] QDC 77
by Long SC DCJ at [84]:
“In that context, the consideration as to
the issue of the infringement notice does not mean that this case could not or
not have been regarded as one of special importance. By the time the
Magistrate came to exercise his discretion as to costs, his
concern was
necessarily as to the costs that had been incurred in the proceedings before him
and with the question of the extent
of the indemnity to be allowed to the
successful party. On the one hand, it is true that the incurrence of those costs
may have been
avoided, if the appellant had chosen to accept the effect of the
infringement notice, but that is a consideration that does not avail
appellant’s contention. Notwithstanding this and as the Magistrate’s
reasons indicate he was, the necessary concern
is with assessment of the
importance of the case from the perspective of what was revealed to the Court in
the trial.”
[41] The respondents on the other hand submit that no such
restriction applies and draw attention to the approach of Shanahan DCJ
Hickey, where his Honour paid judicial notice of the media attention that had
been paid to the City Council election, behind which
sat the charges that were
before the court. That media attention was not something about which evidence
had been received.
[42] The appellant can point to no definitive authority
in support of its submission in this regard and I consequently find myself
agreement with the respondents’ submission. The fact that
non-evidence-based decisions have been made in the past is a relevant
consideration as is the maintenance of consistency of approach. Furthermore, it
is common practice that when a court is determining
a costs issue, it is not
necessarily restricted to consider those matters about which evidence has been
placed before the court.
Many factual scenarios can be reasonably envisaged
where judicial knowledge applies notwithstanding the absence of evidence on a
topic. For instance, a Commissioner of Police on trial for an offence of
dishonesty may well be a matter that is objectively considered
one of special
importance for that very reason, notwithstanding the absence of evidence to that
[43] In my view, the learned magistrate has not erred in his
approach in this regard.
[44] Finally, the determination as to special
importance calls for the exercise of judicial discretion. Before an appellant
can interfere in the exercise of that discretion an error of the type
referred to in House v The
is required. I can discern no such error on the part of the magistrate.
Special difficulty or complexity
[45] The appellant has submitted that, whilst the
“factual framework” of the two cases involved technical matters that
are “peculiar to the export industry, the issues for determination were
unremarkable, save for those arguments that were presented
by the defence and
rejected by his Honour” and “ultimately the matter was determined by
his Honour on a simple point
that could have been argued more
[46] The respondents have submitted that the magistrate’s assessment
once again involved the exercise of discretion and that
the magistrate had many
years of judicial experience and was uniquely placed to determine the issue
having presided over the trial.
[47] The appellant’s submission that
the conduct of the defence complicated the cases was also made before the
magistrate and
His Honour accepted that whilst the respondents advanced a construction argument
(about the terms of the relevant export conditions)
which was rejected, this did
not prolong the proceedings unreasonably, and the prosecution’s argument
to the contrary was “not
[48] Ultimately, the
magistrate concluded that given that 80 exhibits were tendered during the
hearing and that the charges brought
into relevance a complex set of
regulations”
as well as the fact that the trials ran into four days despite the efforts of
counsel to streamline the trial process by pre-trial
endeavour, the cases were
ones of special difficulty and/or complexity.
[49] Once again, given the
discretionary nature of this decision, I can find no error on the part of the
magistrate in reaching that
conclusion – even if I might have decided it
differently had I been looking at this issue in the first instance. Given that
this trial involved a total of 18 witnesses, 80 exhibits, complex federal
regulations, and ran into a fourth day are all matters
which, when considered
collectively, would justify and support the conclusion that the case was one of
special difficulty and/or
complexity.
Ground 2 – did the material provide a
proper basis to identify which costs ought to be included in the award
[50] The issue which arises under this ground of appeal
involves statutory interpretation of
[51] The appellant has
submitted that
allows for a higher amount for costs only in relation
to the scale items prescribed in Schedule 2 of the Justices Regulations 2004
(“the Regulations”), and then, only in accordance with clause 3 of
regulation 2.
[52] Clause 3 states:
Only necessary or proper costs may be allowed
A cost is to be allowed only to the extent to which—
(a) incurring the cost was necessary or proper to achieve justice or to
defend the rights of the party; or
(b) the cost was not incurred by over-caution, negligence, mistake or
merely at the wish of the party.”
[53] The appellant has submitted therefore that before higher
than scale costs can be awarded, the costs being claimed must first
be itemised
to determine whether they fall within the scale categories and were necessary
and proper. It follows, it is submitted,
that as no such itemisation occurred in
this matter, no proper basis was presented to allow the court to identify which
costs ought
be included in the award.
[54] In fact, the only material
provided to the court was an affidavit of the respondents’ solicitor which
had attached a copy
of the spreadsheet of invoices and work in progress relating
to the fees and disbursements incurred by the defendants in relation
proceeding.
[55] The respondents have submitted that s 158B(2) does not say a
“higher amount” must be limited by or having regard
to, clause 3 of
Schedule 2 of the Regulations. In support they submit that the matters that
must be regarded (i.e. special difficulty,
complexity or importance of the case)
do not include clause 3 of Schedule 2. The respondents also submit that to
award costs having
regard to the special difficulty, complexity or importance of
the case, is quite different from, and inconsistent with, awarding
costs only in
respect of expenses that are necessary or proper to achieve justice or to defend
the rights of the party, and not by
over-caution, negligence, mistake or merely
at the wish of the party.
[56] In support of that submission, the
respondents have referred to Lucy v OCC Holdings P/L & Ors (No 2)
(“Lucy”), a case where the respondent argued that the appellant
had not used any evidence supporting the making of an
order under
Robin QC DCJ, in rejecting that submission said:
“... the court would not consider making an order under
unless satisfied that the party entitled to costs had paid or would have to pay
substantially more than the Justices Regulation scale.
I do not think that there
is any need for precision. ... the amount of costs incurred (or to be incurred)
would exceed the Justices
Regulation scale by orders of magnitude.”
[57] Later, his Honour said:
“... the court, conscious that the
successful party’s costs substantially outweigh those allowed by the scale
must decide
what costs it would be ‘just’ to allow. Those may fall
far short of the costs actually incurred, the precise amount of
therefore be irrelevant. While I would have been willing to send the matter back
to the parties ... it is clear that considerable
costs would be expended in that
exercise, and very likely without obviating the need for further involvement by
the court. Thus,
the court now has to determine the ‘just’
[58] Similarly, in Morley v Senewiratne
[2008] QDC 296
QC DCJ again noted that the absence of an itemised account did not prevent a
costs order being made, and underlined that:
“... it would be an indefensible imposition
on the parties to require a conventional taxation or
assessment.”
[59] Given the courts’ approach to this issue in those
matters, the learned magistrate’s decision to avoid the imposition
further costs on the parties by not requiring an itemised bill of costs is
understandable, reasonable and well within the exercise
of his discretion.
[60] Those cases however do not address the primary issue that is in dispute
in this matter – that is, whether the higher amount
that may be awarded
pursuant to s 158B(2) is restricted to those items in Part 2 of Schedule 2
of the Regulation and in accordance
with the provisions of clause 3 of Schedule
[61] Some limited guidance can be found from the nature of the order
proposed by Robin QC DCJ in Lucy, where after determining that
was one in which a higher amount for costs was just and reasonable having regard
to the special difficulty, complexity
or importance of the case, his Honour
opined that item 1 should be increased to $4,000. In that regard he seemed to
be of the view
that any higher award than that permitted by the scale was
nevertheless restricted to the scale items. That inference however is
only inference reasonably open and is not determinative of the issue.
[62] Similarly, in Morley v Senewiratne, Robin QC DCJ, whilst not expressly
determining the issue, made comments that could only be
consistent with the view
that any amount awarded above the scale, was still to fall within the categories
of the scale items. His
Honour said that [35]:
appellant, as prosecutor cannot expect anything like a costs indemnity.
Traditional practice precluded costs orders for
or against the prosecution. The
statutory in-roads are on the basis of a modest scale which imposes a cap. The
discretion the court
has to exceed that cap must still have regard to it as the
starting point. In other words, I think the question comes down to one
much should the cap amount be increased.”
[63] Conversely in Hickey Shanahan DCJ considered the very
point and said
“The respondent also submits that the amount of costs be limited to
the items set out in Schedule 2 of the Regulation. That
may be so when the costs
are awarded under s 158B(2)
s 232A(1) but I am of the view that no such limitation applies, when it is
appropriate to award a higher amount under s 158B(2)
or s 232A(2). In that
regard, the note to paragraph 1 of the (sic) Schedule 2 of the Regulation
recognises the discretion to allow
a higher amount for costs which, in my view,
qualified the limitation paragraph one.”
[64] However, in Merrin v Commissioner of Police; Merrin &
Anor v Commissioner of Police [2012] QCA
North J said
“Section 158B is important, it provides that costs that are just and
reasonable may be awarded ‘only’ under a scale
of costs prescribed
under a regulation.”
[65] The footnote which accompanied that
relevant. It states:
“Section 158B also provides for an allowance for specific items that
might be provided by a scale and also for a higher amount
that may be just and
reasonable ‘having the regard to the special difficulty, complexity or
importance of the case’.
This refers to items such as those set out in
Part 2 of Schedule 2 to the Justices Regulation 2004 which makes provision for
professional work’.”
[66] The respondents have submitted that the contention that
the magistrate was restricted to ordering costs in respect of scale items
to read restrictions into the statutory language that are not present, and is
contrary to authority. As I have demonstrated
however, there is potentially
conflicting authority on the topic, with the case of Merrin being the most
[67] The respondents have submitted that there is no justification
for reading s 158B(2) as if it permitted the court to awards costs
free of the
second restriction (i.e. s 158B(1)(b)), but not the first restriction
(i.e. s 158B(1)(a)). It is submitted that when
s 158B(2) speaks of a
“higher amount” than the amount allowed under s 158B(1), it
means the whole of subsection (1),
not only part of it. I have found this to be
quite a perplexing issue. Section 158B can be read in ways that allow for
equally competing
interpretations. The use of the word “higher”
connotes that it must be higher than some limited amount i.e. the amount
the scale items and is therefore consistent with the “higher amount”
being restricted to scale items. However,
it may equally refer to the total
amount allowed under the scale and is not only referrable to scale items.
Similarly, had the legislature
intended to restrict the higher amount to only
refer to scale items it could easily and unambiguously have said so by simply
the word “such” in subsection (2): i.e. “However,
the justices may allow for a higher amount for such costs...”.
one can easily identify any number of ways that the section could have been
worded that would have negated any ambiguity
one way or the other.
[68] Equally, even if the words “for costs” were absent from the
section there would be little doubt that the costs spoken
of were those
restricted to scale items. The words “for costs” however, must mean
something and in the absence of clear
authority to the contrary, in my view
should not be read restrictively. In the circumstances, I am inclined therefore
to the view
consistent with that expressed by Shanahan DCJ in Hickey. That
approach is not, in my opinion, necessarily inconsistent with the
comments of
North J in Merrin. In that regard I note that his Honour in that footnote, said
that the sections reference to a “higher
amount” refers to items
such as those set out in Part 2 of Schedule 2 to the Justices Regulation
...” (my underlining).
The term “such as” does not of course
mean “restricted to” and leaves open the interpretation that an
of costs under the subsection (2) is not necessarily restricted to scale
[69] It follows, that the court did not need to have before it a
fully itemised statement of costs for each defendant before the issue
could be resolved, and the appellant’s argument in that regard fails.
[70] At the end of the day, probably little turns on the issue, given Item
1’s wide range of parameters (i.e. “work for
hearing of complaint up
to and including day 1
1. Instructions and preparation for the hearing, including
attendance on day one of the hearing.”)
[71] That however is not the end of the matter. There is still
the issue of whether the material provided a proper basis to identify
costs ought be included in the award.
[72] As I have said, the only material
before the court was a one-page document headed “Invoices issued by
matter” which
merely summarised and totalled the amounts billed by
reference to invoice number and date.
[73] Whilst it is true that the
document lacks detail, in my view, it nevertheless serves a greater purpose as
it provides proof of
the total amount of legal costs that have accumulated in
the preparation for and the conduct of these hearings. It demonstrates that
legal costs far exceed the maximum amounts that would have been allowable under
s 158B(1) and perhaps even provides some further
basis for the conclusion that
the matter was of special difficulty or complexity.
Robin QC DCJ said in Morley v Senewiratne when confronted with a
“I am in no doubt that the bulk of the costs has been properly and
reasonably incurred – producing a sum so far in excess
of any costs order
the court is likely to make that it would be an indefensible imposition upon the
parties to require a conventional
taxation or assessment.”
[75] In Lucy his Honour relevantly
“In my opinion, the court would not consider making an order under s
232A(2) unless satisfied that the party entitled to costs
had paid or would have
to pay substantially more than the Justices Regulation scale. I do not think
there is any necessity for precision.
A sufficient case for an order by reference to s 232A(2) has been made.
The position reached is that the court, conscious that the
party’s costs substantially outweigh those allowed by the scale must
decide what costs it would be ‘just’
to allow. ...”
[76] These comments have application to this matter, with the
qualification that under s 158B (2), the Justices in such circumstances
must decide what costs it would be “just and reasonable” to allow.
[77] There is ample authority for the proposition that when determining what
costs it would be just and reasonable to allow, “when
a statutory scale is
provided then the starting point is always that the amount of costs is to be in
accordance with the scale prescribed,
and even where there is a discretion to
award a larger amount, the prescribed scale should be used as a guide to the
proper exercise
discretion”.
[78] Although
it is not the subject of a specific ground of appeal, the appellant has
nevertheless submitted, without objection, that
the magistrate in this matter
failed to give the scale sufficient consideration, as a starting point or as a
guide, in the exercise
of his discretion when determining the amount he
considered to be just and reasonable.
[79] In that regard, in the course of
his remarks, the magistrate said:
“There is a scale
which seems hasn’t been changed since 1999. It’s clearly inadequate
in this day and age to expect
counsel to accept $875 for a subsequent day of a
hearing and $1500 for the preparation of a matter such as this, so to be able to
go outside the scale, it has be that I have to be satisfied that the higher
amount is just and reasonable, having regard to the special
difficulty,
complexity and (sic) importance of the case. The discretion as to costs is very
general as to what is just and
reasonable.”
[80] Whilst I may not have reached the same conclusion as the
Magistrate as to the amount considered to be just and reasonable, I
nevertheless
cannot conclude that his Honour, a very experienced magistrate, failed to use
the scale amounts as a guide or starting
point given his express reference to
the provisions of Schedule 2 of the Regulation, including its maximum amounts. I
note also that
during the course of submissions the magistrate was taken to
ss 158, 158A and 158B of the Act. Furthermore, several decisions relating
to these sections were provided to him.
[81] When it comes to a request to
interfere with a discretion exercised by the Court below regarding costs, I am
reminded of the
words of Nettle JA (as his Honour then was) in Daulizio v Trust
Company of Australia
[2005] VSCA 215
where his Honour said:
“The principles
which govern an appeal against an order as to costs are clear. They proceed from
the recognition that a trial
judge has considerable latitude and individuality
of choice in the formulation of orders for the payment of costs of the
proceeding.
In order for a party successfully to impugn an order as to costs, he
or she must demonstrate that the judge erred in principle or
took into account
considerations which were irrelevant or left out of account considerations which
were relevant or gave improper
weight to some factors at the expense of others
or too little weight to some factors relative to others or otherwise that the
was just so obviously unreasonable that the judge’s discretion must
have miscarried. A court of appeal must keep a tight rein
on interference with
costs orders, and consequently, it has been said, it is extraordinarily
difficult to show that a court of first
instance has erred in its power to award
(footnotes omitted)
[82] The appellant has not identified any particular error in
the magistrate’s approach to the determination of the amount of
other than for those that I have already referred to and addressed (with one
exception which will be dealt with when Ground
3 is considered).
[83] In the
circumstances (and bearing in mind the qualification that I have not yet
addressed the Ground 3 issue), I am not persuaded
that the magistrate erred in
his determination as to the appropriate amount of costs to award.
Ground 3 – the
order for costs should not have included any award in favour of Stockair Pty Ltd
in respect of costs incurred
in defending another charge against Simon Jackson
[84] After providing his ex tempore reasons, the magistrate
made the following order:
“that Allan Matthew Whitby pay the costs of
the defendants fixed at one hundred thousand dollars, within two months.”
[85] In response to a question from the prosecutor asked during
the delivery of the
magistrate made clear that the order was made in respect of the costs of both
defendants.
[86] His Honour went on to
say that the order would be made “on the Stockair file” but took
pains to emphasise that the
order remained one in respect of the costs of both
defendants. The order could be said to be one in favour of the company only in
the sense that it was made “on that file”. He made that order in
recognition of the fact that Stockair had paid all
of the legal bills including
those that arose in relation to the representation of Steven
defendants were represented by the same firm of solicitors and the accounts
generated as a consequence of the representation
of both defendants were, at all
times, addressed to Stockair.
[87] The appellant has submitted however that
the magistrate, in effect, dismissed the application for costs made by Mr
Jackson. That
is not correct. The magistrate unambiguously accepted the
submission made on behalf of Mr Jackson regarding costs, and made an order,
relevant to that submission, on “the Stockair file”. He did not
stipulate what percentage of the $100,000 applied to
each defendant.
[88] The appellant has alternatively submitted that the order for costs
should not have included any award in favour of Stockair Pty
Ltd in respect of
costs incurred in defending the charge against Mr Jackson. He further submits
that Mr Jackson cannot claim costs
when he has not incurred any, and that
nothing in the terms of ss 158 to 158B of the Act or the prescribed scale
provides for reimbursement
of costs voluntarily incurred on behalf of another
party. In response, the respondents have referred to Shaw v Yarranova Pty Ltd
[2011] VSCA 55.
In that matter the applicant’s primary
argument was that as the respondents’ parent company, MAB Corporation Pty
had paid the respondents’ legal costs, the claim that the applicant
should pay the respondents’ taxed costs offended
the indemnity rule as
they had no liability to their solicitors. In rejecting that argument, Redlich
and Mandie JJA
“[19] Courts generally accept the existence of a contract of
retainer when a solicitor has performed work on behalf of a person
with his or
her knowledge and assent, in circumstances which are consistent with that person
being the solicitor’s client.
The existence of a contract of retainer and
the liability of the client for the solicitor’s costs will be presumed,
party who challenges the existence of the retainer in such circumstances
bears the onus of establishing the absence of it.
Failure to prove that there was no obligation to pay costs
[20] Where the party against whom the costs order has been made seeks to
displace the rule, it is necessary to prove that under no
circumstances does the
client have any liability to pay costs to his or her solicitors. In Adams v
London Improved Motor Coach Builders
[1921] 1 KB 495
Bankes LJ found that
although the plaintiff was represented by the solicitors for the union, he
became liable to the solicitors for
costs, and that liability was not excluded
merely because the union also undertook to pay the costs. To displace the
obligation to
indemnify the plaintiff, Bankes LJ stated that it was necessary to
go a step further and prove that there was a bargain, either between
and the solicitors or between the plaintiff and the solicitors, that under no
circumstances was the plaintiff to be liable
for costs. Atkin LJ stated
that the solicitors’ personal claim against the union could coexist with
an obligation of the plaintiff
to the solicitors. There was no doubt that a
retainer, even if only implied, existed between the solicitors and the
plaintiff. A
similar situation arises in the case of a party who is insured and
is represented by a solicitor engaged by the insurer.
[21] In Halliday v High Performance Personnel Ltd (in liq)
(1993) 113 ALR
the applicant had also contended before Mason CJ that the judgments in Adams
do not support the approach taken by Dawson J. Mason
CJ was of the view
that what his Honour said plainly accorded with the judgments of Bankes LJ and
Atkin LJ in that case.
[22] Adams’ case has been cited and followed in numerous decisions
in this country. The principle for which it stands has been
consistently
applied. In Victoria and elsewhere in Australia the indemnity rule has been
treated as permitting recovery of costs
from the party against whom the order is
made, although a third party has indemnified the successful party or paid their
(footnotes removed)
[89] Accordingly, the existence of a contract of retainer and
the liability of Steven Jackson for his solicitors’ costs is presumed,
unless the appellant meets the onus upon him of establishing its absence. In
that regard the appellant has failed as there has been
no evidence placed before
the court, either direct or indirect, that could potentially establish that
there had been a bargain, either
between Stockair Pty Ltd and the solicitors or
between Steven Jackson and the solicitors, to the effect that under no
circumstances
would Steven Jackson be liable for his costs.
[90] The final
issue raised by the appellant is that the magistrate ordered the complainant to
pay to Stockair Pty Ltd, in addition
to an amount that was referable to its own
legal costs, an undisclosed amount for the legal costs of Mr Jackson. The
appellant has
submitted that such an order is ultra vires, the
magistrate’s power as the legislative authority to order costs in a matter
such as this is that provided by s 158 of the Act, which specifically
empowers justices to make a costs order against an unsuccessful
complainant only
in favour of a successful defendant – and not to a third party that has
paid the defendant’s legal expenses.
[91] To assess this submission,
one must first look at the terms of the order. His Honour said:
I order Allan Matthew Whitby pay to – pay the costs of the defendants
fixed at $100,000 within two months. And that’s
on the – I’ve
done that on the Stockair file, but I’ve made it plural.
Defendants.”
[92] The magistrate’s order is that the complainant pay a
total amount of $100,000 to the defendants. The order itself does
s 158. As I understand it, his comment “I’ve done that on the
Stockair file” does not constitute an
order that Stockair be paid Mr
Jackson’s costs, rather it is a statement of functionality, dictating for
court records, on
which file the order is to be placed. No doubt, his Honour
considered this to be appropriate given the commonality of the proceedings
regarding the two respondents and the fact that the one firm of solicitors and
the same counsel represented both respondents. It
appears to me to be a
statement that sensibly and conveniently recognises these features without the
necessity of having to examine
a detailed costs statement to determine the
precise percentage of the $100,000 that each respondent should receive, noting
an exercise would have achieved an identical overall outcome at much
greater expense to the parties.
[93] For these reasons, I conclude that
there is no merit to this ground of appeal.
Are one or both
defendants parties to this appeal?
[94] As I indicated earlier, I have referred to both defendants
as being respondents to this appeal. Whilst the Notice of Appeal
respondents as parties, the appellant’s Outline of Submissions seemed to
be drafted on the basis that there was
no appeal relating to Steven Jackson as
no order was made relating to him against which an appeal could be
the appellant, as I have already indicated, has submitted that the magistrate
dismissed Steven Jackson’s application
for costs. I note however that no
Notice of Discontinuance has been filed in relation to the appeal insofar as it
concerns Mr Jackson.
Furthermore, unsurprisingly, the submissions in response
have been made on behalf of both respondents. Given my conclusion that
for costs in favour of Steven Jackson was made, I have proceeded, as did the
respondents, on the basis that both respondents
are parties in this proceeding.
1. The appeal is dismissed.
2. I will hear the parties as to
Transcript decision p 12
lines 10-12, p 13 lines 32-34.
These are the grounds as
listed in the Notice of Appeal. The appellant’s Outline of Submissions
however lists three different
appeal grounds. I note however that the
“grounds” listed in that document merely repeat the list of
“matters in
issue” detailed in the Certificate of Readiness. As
there has been no application to amend the grounds, I proceed on the basis
the “grounds” listed in the Outline of Submissions are in fact a
summary of the matters in issue that arise from
the grounds contained in the
Notice of Appeal.
At 11.43 a.m. on 16 July 2014:
transcript decision p 1.
Transcript decision p 8
lines 40-45.
These ran to six and a-half
transcript pages: transcript decision p 2-8.
The NVD was Exhibit 50.
The “permission to leave
for loading” was Exhibit 51.
The particulars of the charge
are contained in Exhibit 80.
The particulars of the charge
are found in Exhibit 80.
Exhibit 77.
Exhibit 70.
Transcript p 3-40
lines 25-35.
Transcript p 4-4 lines
Transcript decision
p 9 lines 25-30.
Transcript p 3-13
lines 30-40; p 3-19 lines 30-46.
Transcript p 2-58
Transcript decision
Transcript p 4-16
lines 1-5, lines 25-35.
Transcript p 4-16 lines
Transcript p 4-16
lines 1-5; p 4-26, lines 4-15.
Transcript p 4-20 to
Transcript decision
p 10 lines 9-10.
Transcript decision
p 10 lines 22-24.
Transcript decision
p 10 line 31.
Transcript decision
p 10 line 25 – p 11 line 42.
Transcript decision
p 10 line 37.
Transcript decision
p 10 lines 37-40; p 11 lines 33-35.
Transcript decision
p 11 lines 15-16, lines 27-35.
Transcript decision
p 11 line 37.
Transcript decision
p 11 lines 33-35.
Transcript decision
p 11 lines 24-27.
Transcript decision
p 11 lines 4-16.
Transcript decision
p 11 lines 2-5.
Transcript decision
p 4-16 lines 1-5, also p 4-26 lines 5-15.
Transcript decision
p 8 lines 25-40.
Section 158 applies to
indictable offences dealt with summarily. (See
Starkey v Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions (No 2)
[2013] QDC 132
Dorney QC DCJ.) The charge against Mr Jackson involved an indictable
The complainant in this
matter was a Commonwealth public servant and was a public officer.
Applicant’s Outline
of Submissions, paragraph 31.
Paragraphs [28]-[33].
At paragraphs
It should be noted that the
learned magistrate was led into error by the submissions presented to him on the
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
Paragraph 39 of Outline of
Submissions.
Transcript p 4-25
lines 35-40.
Transcript p 4-25
lines 4-39.
Transcript decision
p 11 line 4.
Exhibit 84.
Section 232A(2)
Justices Act
is in the same terms as
, but relates to
the costs on appeal rather than at summary disposition.
It is obvious that this was
a typographical error, and that his Honour was clearly referring to
, in conjunction with
, and contrasting with the
provisions of
A case, it must be noted,
was concerned with whether self-represented litigants can recover their costs of
travel and accommodation
under the “disbursement” provisions of
in Schedule 2, and was not concerned with legal costs.
Footnote 55.
At [7] and [8].
Durrant v Gardner
[2000] QDC 198
; 21 Qd R 113 at
Washbourne v State Energy
Commission (WA)
(1992) 8 WAR 188
at 193-194;
Nicolson v Milveskiy
(unreported, QSC 20/84, 6 December 1984);
Haddon v Everitt
(Full Court of
the Supreme Court of WA) BC 2001 08160 by Wallwork J at [14];
Holdings Pty Ltd v Sunshine Coast Regional Council
[2014] QDC 77
Transcript decision
p 10 lines 26-33.
Transcript decision
p 11 line 44.
Transcript decision
p 11 line 45; p 12 lines 1-12; p 13 lines 30-35.
Transcript decision
p 8 lines 37-40; p 12 lines 4-10.
At [19]-[22].
Justices Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (278 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter