URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2014/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moreton Bay Regional Council v Mekpine Pty Ltd & Anor (No. 2) [2014] QLAC 5 (24 July 2014)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Moreton Bay Regional Council v Mekpine Pty Ltd & Anor
[2014] QLAC 5
MORETON BAY REGIONAL COUNCIL
(appellant)
MEKPINE PTY
(LAC009-12)
(respondent)
MORETON BAY REGIONAL COUNCIL
(appellant)
(LAC010-12)
(respondent)
LAC009-12 (Mekpine Pty Ltd)
Land Court No. AQL816-11
LAC010-12 (Zacsam Pty Ltd)
Land Court No. AQL817-11
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
Costs of appeal to the Land Appeal Court
DELIVERED ON:
24 July 2014
DELIVERED AT:
On the papers
Peter Lyons J
CAC MacDonald, President of the Land Court
PA Smith, Member of the Land Court
LAC009-12, the respondent Mekpine Pty Ltd is to pay the appellant's costs of the
appeal on the standard basis, such costs to be
agreed or, failing agreement, to
be assessed.
LAC010-12, the appellant is to pay the costs of the appeal of the respondent
Zacsam Pty Ltd on the standard basis, such costs to
be agreed or, failing
agreement, to be assessed.
CATCHWORDS:
COSTS - two related appeals heard at single Land Appeal Court (LAC) hearing
- much common argument - one appeal allowed, one dismissed
- whether costs award
in each case should 'follow the event' - some distinctive features but normal
costs rule to apply - apportionment
a matter for costs assessor.
COSTS - further appeal to Court of Appeal (QCA) from LAC decision - whether
LAC costs decision should be delayed until QCA decision
- costs decision not
delayed - finality in LAC decision desirable.
COSTS - costs of Land Court (LC) hearing of general applications reserved
by LC - not sufficient information before LAC to vacate
such order.
Acquisition of Land Act
Appeal Costs Fund Act
Land Court Act
Retail Shop Leases Act
Uniform Civil Procedure
LGM Enterprises Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council
(2008) 29 QLCR
Mekpine Pty Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council
Mentech Resources Pty Ltd v MCG Resources Pty Ltd (in liq) (No 2)
(2012) 33 QLCR 43
Moreton Bay Regional Council v Mekpine Pty Ltd
[2013] QLAC 5
SOLICITORS:
Moreton Bay Regional Council, Legal Services Department for the
Hillhouse Burrough McKeown for the respondents
[1] On 14 November 2008 a small strip of vacant land was compulsorily
acquired by the appellant, Moreton Bay Regional Council (
the Council
from the south-west corner of a retail shopping centre known as the Castle Hill
Shopping Court, under the provisions of the
Acquisition of Land Act
). At the date of resumption, the first respondent
Mekpine Pty Ltd (
) was the lessee of a grocery store trading as
the Castle Hill IGA and the second respondent Zacsam Pty Ltd (
the lessee of a pizza shop trading as Eagle Boys Pizza. Both businesses were
situated in the Castle Hill Shopping Court.
[2] Mekpine and Zacsam lodged applications for the determination of compensation
in the Land Court. Prior to the hearing of the
claims, the Land Court ordered
that a preliminary point be determined as to whether, at the date of resumption,
Mekpine and Zacsam
had an estate or interest in the resumed land pursuant to the
[3] The Land Court held that both Mekpine and Zacsam had an interest in the
resumed land for the purposes of the
The Council
appealed against that decision to this Court.
[4] This Court decided that the appeal in relation to Mekpine's claim should be
allowed and that the preliminary point as to whether
at the date of resumption
Mekpine had an estate or interest in the resumed land pursuant to the ALA should
be answered "No". It
was also held also that the Zacsam appeal should be
dismissed, and that matter was remitted to the Land Court for the determination
of the claim for compensation of
and Scope of any costs order
[5] Both parties have filed submissions in relation to the costs of the appeal.
The Council submitted that it was premature for
orders to be made in respect of
costs as the decision of the Land Appeal Court in the Mekpine proceedings is the
subject of an appeal
to the Court of Appeal. The Council contended
Mekpine and Zacsam proceedings are inextricably linked and that arguments in
relation to costs should only proceed when both matters
have concluded. If this
Court were to make an order as to the costs of the appeal and the Court of
Appeal were to reverse the decision
of the Land Appeal Court, it may be
necessary to rehear the argument in relation to costs in the Land Appeal
Alternatively,
to the interrelated nature of the two matters, a single costs order should be
made in respect of both matters which recognizes:
relative success of each of the parties; and
(ii) the effort
necessitated by each appeal.
decision of the Land Court regarding costs of the general application should be
Council is entitled to 75 per cent of the costs of both matters as it prevailed
in respect of the Mekpine proceedings and those
proceedings represented the
majority of the evidence, argument, court time and cost expended in the appeal
to the Land Appeal Court.
the further alternative, because the Council was successful in the Mekpine
matter, the costs of that appeal should follow the event.
[6] Due to the interrelated nature of the two proceedings, the Council
submitted, it is difficult to determine which costs apply
to which matter. To
now disentangle the costs attributable to one action from the other would
involve an arbitrary exercise in which
costs claimed for the proceeding in which
one party has been successful were likely to be heavily loaded as against the
which had not been successful. Counsel’s and solicitors' time
spent in perusing and writing correspondence largely dealt simultaneously
both matters as did obtaining evidence and preparing for hearing. The process
of apportioning costs between matters will be
an exercise in artificiality
likely to result in ongoing dispute and expense.
[7] The Council submitted that the Mekpine proceedings represented the majority
of effort by the parties and entailed more time in
argument before the Court as
it was necessary to conduct a forensic examination of the Mekpine lease and its
applicability to the
resumed area. No such enquiry was required of the Zacsam
lease. The extra effort required in the Mekpine proceeding is evidenced
the Council's
submissions dealt exclusively with Mekpine for just under one page but otherwise
addressed both matters equally;
the respondents'
submissions devoted two pages exclusively to the Mekpine proceeding but
otherwise dealt with both matters equally;
the Council's
submissions in reply devoted one and a half pages exclusively to Mekpine but
otherwise dealt with both matters equally;
in the decision
of the Land Appeal Court, over five pages were devoted to the Mekpine proceeding
as opposed to less than three for
[8] In our opinion, it would be inappropriate to make a single costs order in
respect of both matters. We accept that the proceedings
were heard by the Land
Appeal Court together and that one judgment was delivered dealing with both
matters. However, it is clear
from our reasons for judgment that while some
issues were common to both appeals, others were not. Moreover, it was decided
the Mekpine appeal should be allowed and the Zacsam appeal be dismissed,
which is a clear indication that separate issues arose in
each appeal. If we
were to deal with the costs of the appeals by way of a single costs order, we
consider that the result would
be arbitrary and unable to be justified for sound
reasons. Accordingly, the costs in relation to each matter should be dealt with
separately.
[9] Further, we do not consider that our decision as to the costs of the appeals
should be deferred until the result of the Mekpine
appeal to the Court of Appeal
is known. Zacsam is not involved in that appeal and we can see no good reason
why the costs of Zacsam
in the Land Appeal Court should not be dealt with at
this stage. As to Mekpine, although an appeal by Mekpine is pending in the
Court of Appeal, we are of the view that it is convenient to deal with Mekpine's
costs in the Land Appeal Court to avoid any delay
in the ultimate disposition of
that proceeding.
Legal principles
Land Court Act
(1) Subject to the provisions of this or another Act to the contrary, the
Land Court may order costs for a proceeding in the court
as it considers
appropriate.
(2) If the court does not make an order under subsection (1), each party to the
proceeding must bear the party’s own costs
for the proceeding."
Section 72(1)
of the LCA provides, inter alia, that
of the Act applies
with necessary changes to the Land Appeal Court and
provides that a
reference in the applied section to the Land Court is taken to be a reference to
the Land Appeal Court.
[12] It has been held on many occasions that the discretion to award costs
is unfettered but that the discretion is to be exercised
judicially, that is for reasons that may be explained and
substantiated.
However it has also been recognized by the Land Appeal Court that although the
discretion to award costs is unfettered, the rule
that costs follow the
may inform the
exercise of the discretion granted under
, "as there is justice in that
approach. It protects those put to unnecessary and substantial expense at the
behest of others."
[13] Applying that approach, we consider that Zacsam should be awarded its costs
of the appeal. Zacsam succeeded in its response
to the appeal and no good
reason has been put forward as to why an award of costs should not be made in
Zacsam's favour. It will
be a matter for the person who assesses the costs to
determine how costs for work common to both proceedings will be dealt
[14] Mekpine has submitted that there are good reasons to depart from the usual
practice that costs follow the event and that there
should be no order as to
costs in respect of the Mekpine appeal proceedings, because:
was entitled to rely on the decision of the Land Appeal Court in
Enterprises Pty Ltd v Brisbane City
Court found that a claimant in a materially identical position to Mekpine had an
estate or interest in the resumed land,
pursuant to the operation of the
Retail Shop Leases Act
Land Appeal Court decision in relation to Mekpine rejected the reasoning in
and the reasoning of the learned Member in these proceedings on the
issue of whether the RSLA operated to create an estate or interest
in land. In
lodging its claim in the Land Court and resisting the appellant's appeal,
Mekpine's conduct was based on known authority
and sound reasoning.
acted reasonably and in good faith in consenting to the determination of the
question as to whether it had an estate or interest
in the resumed land as a
preliminary point of law.
has no ability to apply for an indemnity certificate in respect to a costs order
if one was made against it in these
proceedings.
Council, being a constructing authority, would suffer no substantial prejudice
or injustice if no order as to costs were made.
the alternative, in view of the appeal to the Court of Appeal, questions as to
costs should be stayed pending the outcome of that
[15] We do not accept that our reasoning in relation to the application of the
decision represented a rejection of the earlier decision of the Land
Appeal Court in that case. We
, it was held that a lessee had an interest in
certain walkways in a shopping centre, which were external to the leased
In reaching that conclusion, the Land Appeal Court referred to 'the
combination of the terms of the lease, the provisions of the
RSLA and the
uncontested evidence of the de facto recognition by the landlord of the areas of
land on the gardens as walkways to
the businesses in the shopping centre', as
suggesting that 'the interest is not qualitatively different and, by no means,
"absurd" category'. The provisions of the RSLA which the Court had in
mind included
It is not clear whether the Court found that
sufficient to give to a lessee in a retail shopping centre, an interest in land
beyond the leased area. If that were a finding
of the Court, we would not be
prepared to follow it." (citation omitted)
Notwithstanding what has just been set out, if our decision were to be
regarded as overruling
, that is not a sufficient reason to deprive
the Council of its costs in this case. The
decision is relatively
recent and there is uncertainty as to its true effect. In the circumstances of
this case, we do not think
that reliance by Mekpine on the decision in
warrants a departure from the usual rule, namely, that costs follow the
[16] Further, we consider that the other reasons put forward by Mekpine for not
awarding costs are unpersuasive. It does not appear
to us to be relevant to the
question of liability for costs that the issue of whether Mekpine had an estate
or interest in the land
was determined by a preliminary point of law. Indeed
Mekpine has been relieved of the likelihood of incurring the costs of a full
hearing as a result of this Court's decision. Similarly we do not consider that
the question of whether Mekpine might apply for
an indemnity certificate is
relevant to the issue of liability for costs. Finally we do not consider that
it is correct to say that
the Council, being a constructing authority, would
suffer no substantial prejudice or injustice if this Court makes no order as to
costs. There is no authority to this effect and we can see no rational ground
on which we could accept such a submission.
[17] Our reasons for judgment in the substantive appeal show that there were a
number of issues raised by Mekpine at that hearing,
whether the land
resumed was included within Mekpine's lease;
whether on the
proper construction of the Mekpine lease, Mekpine had a contractual right to use
the resumed land for car parking by
its customers;
whether that
contractual right constituted an estate or interest in the resumed land;
whether the
resumed land was a common area of a retail shopping centre under the RSLA;
whether, if the
resumed land were a common area under the RSLA, the rights created under that
Act gave rise to an estate or interest
held by Mekpine in the resumed
[18] Mekpine failed in relation to the first issue identified above and
consequently it was unnecessary for the Land Appeal Court
to determine the
second and third issues. Mekpine succeeded on the question of whether the
resumed land was a common area of a retail
shopping centre under the RSLA but
failed in its submission that that Act created rights giving rise an estate or
interest held by
Mekpine in the resumed land.
[19] When the matter is looked at as a whole, it can be seen that Mekpine failed
on most of the issues raised in its submissions
at the hearing of the appeal.
Accordingly, we consider that Mekpine should pay the Council the costs of the
appeal to the Land Appeal
Other issue
[20] The Council submitted that a decision of the Land Court regarding costs of
a general application should be vacated. This appears
to refer to the general
applications filed in the Land Court by the Council in both matters, on 15
February 2012. The applications
sought a determination of the question of
whether Zacsam and Mekpine had an interest in the resumed land under the ALA, as
a preliminary
point. The applications were successful, directions were made by
the Land Court and the costs of the applications were reserved.
[21] There has been no appeal to this Court against the orders reserving costs
so there is an issue as to whether we could interfere
with the orders made by
the learned Member. In any event this Court does not have any information as to
whether it would be appropriate
to vacate those orders and we therefore decline
LAC009-12, the respondent Mekpine Pty Ltd is to pay the appellant's costs of the
appeal on the standard basis, such costs to be
agreed or, failing agreement, to
be assessed.
LAC010-12, the appellant is to pay the costs of the appeal of the respondent
Zacsam Pty Ltd on the standard basis, such costs to
be agreed or, failing
agreement, to be assessed.
PETER LYONS J
CAC MacDONALD
PRESIDENT OF THE LAND COURT
MEMBER OF THE LAND COURT
Mekpine Pty
Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council
[2012] QLC 46.
Moreton Bay
Regional Council v Mekpine Pty Ltd
[2013] QLAC 5.
BHP Queensland Coal Investments Pty Ltd v Cherwell Creek Coal Pty
(2009) 30 QLCR 173
Anson Holdings Pty Ltd v Wallace
(2010) 31 QLCR 130
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
Mentech Resources Pty Ltd v MCG Resources Pty Ltd (in liq) (No 2)
We note that
there is some authority for the proposition that fees for work which is common
to more than one proceeding may be
divided or apportioned: see
R v Hore, Ex
parte Brisbane City Council
[1969] Qd R 75
, 91; cited in Roger Quick,
Thomson Lawbook Co,
Quick on Costs
, vol 2 (at update 72) [4.3380]; and
see the other authorities discussed
Appeal Costs Fund Act
Moreton Bay Regional Council v Mekpine Pty Ltd
[2013] QLAC 5
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (114 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter