URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/58.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
G37 and Queensland Police Service [2025] QICmr 58 (28 August 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
G37 and Queensland Police Service
[2025] QICmr 58
Application Number:
Respondent:
Queensland Police Service
Decision Date:
28 August 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS - CONTRARY
TO PUBLIC INTEREST INFORMATION - request for access to historical
investigation documents - eligible family member of deceased - crime scene
photographs and autopsy details - accountability
and transparency - personal
information of deceased - privacy of the acquitted individual - no control over
further dissemination
- whether disclosure would, on balance, be contrary to the
public interest - sections 47(3)(b) and 49 of the
Right to Information Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied
to the Queensland
Police Service (
) under the
Right to Information Act 2009
for documents
regarding the investigation, undertaken over 30 years ago, into the death of her
sister. The request was framed to
‘crime reports, court
documents, case notes, coroner’s report’
documents regarding the charges and acquittal’
of a named individual.
located 40 pages in response to the application and
to disclose some of that
information.
QPS relied on the
prejudice to the flow of information to police and prejudice to the
deceased’s privacy, if they were still
alive, to support its decision that
disclosure of the refused information would, on balance, be contrary to the
public interest.
applicant applied to the Office of the Information Commissioner (
external review of QPS’s decision to refuse access to
information.
During the review,
the applicant also raised concerns about missing
required QPS to undertake further
QPS located some further
documents through those additional
and agreed to partially
disclose some of those documents to the
However, QPS
submitted that access to some of the additionally located documents, namely
photographs and information in an autopsy
report, should be refused on public
interest grounds.
QPS was also
unable to locate a box of evidence, despite extensive enquiries with the
relevant region.
applicant was represented during the course of the external review process by a
family friend. The applicant, through her representative,
was receptive to
informally resolving the issue of unlocatable documents, and accepted
nondisclosure of other individuals’ personal
information.
Those issues are
therefore, not dealt with in these reasons for decision.
remaining information in issue (
Information
) comprises
35 photographs of the deceased taken at the crime scene, and during the autopsy;
and information on three pages of the
autopsy report about the deceased’s
The issue for
determination is whether it would be, on balance, contrary to the public
interest to disclose the Remaining
Information.
making this decision, I have considered evidence, submissions, legislation and
other material as set out in these
I have also had regard
Human Rights Act 2019
), particularly the
right to seek and receive
information,
and in doing so,
have acted in accordance with section 58(1) of the HR
the reasons set out below, I vary QPS’s decision and find that access to
the Remaining Information may be refused under
section 47(3)(b) of the RTI Act,
on the basis that its disclosure would, on balance, be contrary to the public
Relevant law
the RTI Act a person has a right to be given access to documents in the
possession or under the control of a Queensland government
It is Parliament’s
intention that the RTI Act is administered with a pro-disclosure
Access under the RTI Act
is, however, subject to limitations, including grounds for refusing
Relevantly, access to
information may be refused if disclosure would, on balance, be contrary to the
public interest.
term public interest refers to considerations affecting the good order and
functioning of the community and government affairs
for the well-being of
citizens. This means that, in general, a public interest consideration is one
which is common to all members
of, or a substantial segment of the community, as
distinct from matters that concern purely private or personal interests.
there are some recognised public interest considerations that may apply
for the benefit of an individual.
determining where the balance of the public interest lies, the RTI Act requires
a decision maker to consider the relative weight
of applicable public interest
factors for and against
disclosure.
Schedule 4 of the
RTI Act contains non-exhaustive lists of factors that may be relevant in
determining where the balance of public
interest lies in a particular case.
Submissions
have carefully considered the applicant’s submissions made throughout the
review process.
In response to
OIC’s preliminary view,
the applicant (through her representative)
as follows:
We do not agree with the QPS nondisclosure position. The public interest in
disclosure outweighs nondisclosure factors, especially
given missing evidence,
no coronial inquest, no ongoing investigation, the historical corruption
context, and the family’s
ongoing trauma.
[The applicant]
is the younger sibling of the deceased, making her an
eligible family member. The homicide remains unresolved after 40 years, with
critical evidence missing and no coronial inquest held.
This homicide occurred ... during a period of systemic QPS corruption. Loss
of evidence in this climate raises serious concerns about
investigative
weight after 40 years. The family seeks private access,
dissemination.
The loss of the evidence box is a major failure. Where other evidence has
been lost, the Remaining Information is even more important.
Unresolved violent bereavement causes lasting mental health impacts. Access
to this information is part of healing.
also made submissions to OIC in support of its nondisclosure
In summary, QPS
submitted that:
passage of time does not diminish the deceased’s right to privacy as
individuals should be afford dignity and privacy in
of photographs would not assist inquiry into QPS’s investigation.
Disclosure could
be distressing to the family and members of the community generally which could
negatively affect the good order
of the broader community.
The case is not
the subject of a
‘cold case’
investigation, rather it is
recorded as a failed prosecution as an offender was identified and was acquitted
in a court.
Whilst it is
acknowledged the applicant is an eligible family member of the deceased; this
does not allow unfiltered access to their
personal information.
The RTI Act
provides that disclosing personal information of a person, whether living or
dead, could reasonably be expected to cause
a public interest harm.
sensitivity and very private nature of the personal information contained in the
photographs, the public interest harm resulting
from disclosure of this
sensitive personal information would be significant and should be afforded
significant weight to this factor
favouring nondisclosure.
There is no
provision for disclosure subject to any condition, republication of the accessed
documents or dissemination of the information
contained in the documents. Once
QPS releases material there can be no limitation to further disclosure.
Irrelevant factors
RTI Act requires a decision maker to identify
and disregard
irrelevant factors.
I find that
it is not relevant to take into account the perceived emotional distress that
disclosure may have on an applicant, as
submitted by QPS. I am satisfied that
any anticipated distressing impact arising from disclosure, as raised by QPS, is
to determining the public interest. Accordingly, I have disregarded
this factor, as required by the RTI
Factors favouring disclosure
am satisfied that the following public interest factors are relevant in this
(a) the applicant is an eligible family
and the Remaining
Information would be the personal
information
of the deceased if
she were still alive
(b) community members being provided with access to information held by
government that may assist in the grieving process and obtaining
(c) enhancing the accountability and transparency of
(d) allow or assist inquiry into possible
deficiencies in the
investigation
(e) contribution to informed debate on a matter of
serious interest,
violence against women and girls, noting that police responses to violence
against women and girls remain ongoing matters
of serious interest to the
(f) the administration of justice generally and for a victim’s
(g) promoting the rights of victims of crime and family members of deceased
analysing the public interest factors and determining the weight to be afforded
to the relevant factors, I also consider it is
relevant to take into account the
particular circumstances of this case, including:
there was no
coronial inquest following the acquittal
QPS has advised
the case is not the subject of a
‘cold case’
investigation
released by QPS to date have been limited, largely relating to administrative
actions (eg. travel reimbursement for QPS
an evidence box
has not been located, confirmed by search records from the region
nearly 40 years
has passed since the death of the applicant’s sister; and
the applicant
has been unable to obtain access to the court transcripts through other access
mechanisms.
Eligible family member – disclosure factor
noted at paragraph
above, the applicant is an eligible
family member and the Remaining Information would be the personal information of
the deceased
if she were still alive. This raises a
avouring disclosure.
Through this factor, the RTI Act recognises that there is a public interest in
an eligible family member receiving access to a deceased
family member’s
personal information. Previous decisions of the Information Commissioner have
tified circumstances
may assist a decision maker determine the weight of this factor (and its
corresponding nondisclosure fac
r, discussed
Although arising more commonly in an application for
deceased family member medical records, I have had regard to those factors
determining the weight of this factor in this case.
applicant was a teenager at the time of her sister’s death. The applicant
has described the impact of her sister’s
death on her and her family as
significant and that it has caused extreme and unresolved distress for nearly 40
years; this is evident
from the applicant’s submissions provided during
the review.
accept that the Remaining Information is the sensitive personal information of
the deceased and that the content of the photographs
and autopsy report is not
expressly known to the applicant, other than to the extent the applicant may
have become aware of any content
through evidentiary discussions in the court
proceedings or through media reporting at the
Having considered the
deep impact that the loss of her sister has caused, the ongoing grief and
distress the applicant suffers in
the absence of a finding of guilt, and no
indication from QPS that the case will be re-investigated, I am satisfied the
as an eligible family member, has a particularly strong right of
access to this information in the circumstances of this case. I
am therefore,
satisfied that significant weight applies to this factor to favour
disclosure.
Wellbeing of the community – grieving
have also considered the public interest in community members being provided
with access to information held by government agencies
that may assist them with
their grieving process and obtaining closure; this has previously been
identified by the Information Commissioner
as a public interest factor
contributing to the wellbeing of the
Again, this factor
more commonly arises in the context of family members seeking medical records of
a deceased person.
applicant has expressed that
‘the family has suffered greatly not
knowing the facts about
[the deceased’s]
last movements’
and she feels
‘very strongly [the deceased’s] short life deserves
validation and justice, and [it] has been a long time to carry our
questions.’
observe that the impact on families of homicide victims who are unable to find
closure is a matter of general public interest.
applicant has grieved for many years over the sudden loss of her sister in
violent circumstances; I accept that the applicant
is seeking access to the
information to aid her and her family in achieving closure. Given the
circumstances of the acquittal and
no subsequent coronial inquest, I consider
the photographs and autopsy report information represent information that may be
by the applicant to understand the deceased’s end of life. I am
satisfied that providing access to the Remaining Information
would contribute to
the applicant’s grieving process and enable the applicant to assess any
further courses of action that
she may wish to pursue to achieve closure. Having
had regard to the particular circumstances of this case at paragraph
, the nature of the Remaining
Information, and the submissions advanced by the applicant during the review, I
am satisfied that disclosure
would contribute to the applicant’s grieving
process and afford the community wellbeing factor significant
Accountability, transparency and assisting
circumstances of this matter include what appears to be the loss of police
investigation records; resulting in a substantial void
in what is available to
the applicant to piece together the police investigation into the case. While an
individual was charged and
subject to a criminal trial for murder, for reasons
that I am not privy to, the proceedings resulted in an acquittal, and further
prosecution proceedings were not pursued. Further, the released documents
confirm that a coronial inquest was not undertaken on the
‘no good purpose will be
there has been no legal outcome to address the deceased person’s death
through the justice system.
Remaining Information does not however, explain the reasons why further
prosecution proceedings were not pursued, nor do they
contain information about
the steps followed by QPS in conducting the investigation, other than confirming
photographs were taken,
and an autopsy was conducted. I acknowledge that release
of the Remaining Information will afford some additional transparency and
insight into the evidence that was gathered by QPS. Given the particular nature
of the Remaining Information, I am satisfied that
moderate weight should be
afforded to the public interest factor at paragraph
have also considered whether disclosure could reasonably be expected to allow or
assist inquiry into possible deficiencies in QPS’s
investigation
taking into
account the minimal documents located by QPS – a regrettable outcome for
the applicant and other members of the
deceased’s family. The threshold
for establishing this factor is
I am satisfied that this
factor would be advanced through disclosure of the Remaining Information as it
would reveal further evidence
gathered by QPS, and enable the applicant to
assess that against actions taken during the investigation, and make resulting
Taking into account that QPS did not lay any other charges in
connection with the death, and there being no coronial inquest, I am
that this factor applies, and I afford it moderate weight.
Administration of justice
applicant has submitted that they seek to understand
steps can now be taken with experts in the Forensic DNA field... and any fresh
and compelling evidence obtained through experts
in Forensic
The applicant
has also submitted that she and the family are
‘exploring the coronial
inquest pathway as an alternative avenue for
investigation’
therefore considered the public interest factors associated with the
administration of justice.
accept that there have been cases in recent years where community
interest/action has contributed to the reopening of unsolved cases.
make no finding on the probative or evidentiary nature of the Remaining
Information, it does not comprise DNA, nor statements
made by witnesses or other
individuals. While I accept that disclosure of the Remaining Information would
provide the applicant with
access to additional evidentiary material that she
could include in any request she submits to the Coroner, I do not consider there
is sufficient information available to me to demonstrate that the Remaining
Information if disclosed, would contribute, beyond a
limited degree, to the
administration of justice. In the circumstances, taking into account the nature
of the Remaining Information,
I afford these factors low weight.
Victims of crime
in favour of disclosure, I have considered whether disclosure of the Remaining
Information could reasonably be expected to
promote the rights of victims of
crime, and their families, by providing them with access to
information.
it is not necessary for me to make a finding on the applicant’s status as
a victim of crime, based on the information
available to me and for the purpose
of this considering this factor, I find it uncontroversial that she would fall
within the relevant
legislative definition of a ‘victim of
applicant has submitted that she has been unsuccessful in obtaining information
including being refused
access to the transcripts from the Supreme Court
proceedings.
As noted above,
while the applicant has obtained access to some information from QPS, certain
evidence gathered by police was not
able to be located. Taking into account the
particular information that has been disclosed to the applicant, and the broader
circumstances
of this case, I consider there is moderate weight to afford to
this factor.
Factors favouring nondisclosure
Eligible Family Member – nondisclosure
the applicant’s position as an eligible family member raises a factor
favouring disclosure, the RTI Act also recognises
that there is a competing
nondisclosure factor to take into account, where an individual is seeking
information about a deceased
family member. That public interest factor will
apply where the information relates to the deceased and all of the following
(a) the information would, if the person were alive, be their personal
information;
(b) the applicant is an eligible family member of the person;
(c) the disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected, if the
person were alive, to impact on the person’s privacy.
determining the weight of the Eligible Family Member nondisclosure factor, I
have taken into account that the applicant is aware
that her sister’s
death was investigated as a homicide by QPS and that it was prosecuted in the
Supreme Court. The applicant
has knowledge of some of the circumstances of her
sister’s death through information disclosed under the RTI Act and through
information she has obtained over the years through other avenues. I am
satisfied that the information that is already in the applicant’s
possession and the passage of time of nearly 40 years both operate to slightly
reduce the weight of the Eligible Family Member nondisclosure
factor. However,
despite the applicant’s knowledge of the case and her relationship to the
deceased, I still consider that
there would be a significant impact to the
deceased’s privacy, if she was alive, given the highly sensitive nature of
the Remaining
Information.
Personal Information of the deceased – harm
RTI Act recognises that disclosure of information could reasonably be expected
to cause a public interest harm if disclosure would
disclose personal
information of a person, whether living or
addition to the privacy impacts outlined above, I have considered the Personal
Information harm factor and how it applies to the
personal information of the
deceased. As already indicated, the Remaining Information is largely comprised
of graphic photographs
taken at the crime scene and autopsy. The deceased
appears in a vulnerable state in the images and in my view, such images are of
an inherently personal and private nature which would lead to significant public
interest harm if disclosed.
affording weight to the Personal Information harm factor, I am required to take
into account the principle that information released
under the RTI Act is done
so on the basis that there can be no control over or limitation placed on its
further dissemination, and
there are no legal mechanisms by which I can impose
limits on the future use or dissemination of the
This is unlike a court
which has powers to issue orders or directions controlling the use or
dissemination of information or documents
before the court. Taking this into
account, I must afford this factor significant weight.
Right to privacy – acquitted individual
further nondisclosure factor that arises for consideration in the circumstances
of this case is in connection with the acquitted
individual’s right to
Remaining Information is solely
the deceased and the documents, on
their face, do not explicitly identify the acquitted individual nor contain
their personal information.
However, in the circumstances of this case, I
consider there is a reasonable expectation that a connection could be made
the acquitted individual and the information, if it was released under
the RTI Act. Having regard to the fact that there can be
no control over
further dissemination of information released under the RTI Act,
there is a significant level of public interest harm that could arise, through
disclosure of the information given the
likelihood of the acquitted individual
being identified, by association, with the Remaining Information.
Importantly,
I do not consider the passage of time serves to reduce the weight to be afforded
to the acquitted individual’s
right to privacy, rather, it strengthens the
case for nondisclosure. To my mind, a person who was acquitted of a violent
crime should
be entitled to privacy in respect of charges that were brought
against them nearly 40 years ago and in respect of which they were
acquitted by
a court. In affording the privacy factor significant weight, I have also taken
into account that the acquitted person
would have been considered to be a child
Youth Justice Act 1992
(Qld) at the time of the court
proceeding.
in considering the weight of the privacy nondisclosure factor, I am required to
take into account that there is no limitation
on the use or further disclosure
of information released under the RTI Act. My reasons should not be taken as
suggesting that the
applicant would further disseminate the information in a way
that would prejudice the acquitted individual’s privacy, but rather
there is no
over disclosure once information is released and that
is how the prejudice to another individual’s privacy must be measured.
Balancing the public interest factors
the circumstances of this case, I have afforded significant weight to the
applicant’s status as an eligible family member
and her right to seek
access to personal information of her deceased sister. I have also afforded
significant weight to the public
interest in the wellbeing of the community as I
am satisfied that disclosure would contribute to the applicant’s grieving
and enable her to assess any further courses of action that she may
wish to pursue to achieve closure.
the reasons set out in this decision, and given the particular nature of the
Remaining Information, I have found that the accountability
and transparency and
assisting inquiry factors will be served to a moderate degree by disclosure. I
acknowledge that the applicant
is seeking the Remaining Information to pursue
justice for her deceased sister, and therefore, I consider the public interest
relating to the administration of justice arise for consideration.
However, in the circumstances of this case and taking into account
particular nature of the Remaining Information, I have afforded only low weight
to these factors. Lastly, in favour of disclosure,
I have considered the public
interest in promoting the rights of victims of crime, and their families,
through obtaining access to
information as eligible family members. Given the
relatively limited amount of information that the applicant has been able to
through the RTI Act process, and other information access mechanisms, I
have afforded this factor moderate weight.
against the factors favouring disclosure, and the applicant’s compelling
submissions in support of her case, I have
also found that due to the extremely
sensitive nature of the Remaining Information, significant weight must be
afforded to applicable
nondisclosure factors as discussed in paragraphs
namely, the privacy and personal information of the deceased, and the privacy of
the acquitted individual. In doing so, I have given
thorough consideration to
the principle that information released under the RTI Act is done so on the
basis that there can be no
control or limitations over its further
dissemination, and that therefore, there are no mechanisms by which I can impose
future use or dissemination of material once released under the RTI
Act. On balance, I am satisfied that the nondisclosure factors
significant weight in this case that they outweigh the disclosure factors, and
that therefore, disclosure of the Remaining
Information would be contrary to the
public interest.
the reasons set out above, I vary the reviewable
by finding that access
to the Remaining Information may be refused under section 47(3)(b) of the RTI
Act, on the basis that its disclosure
would, on balance, be contrary to the
public interest.
Information Commissioner
Date: 28 August
Access application dated 21
August 2023, which became valid on 1 September 2023.
On 1 July 2025 key parts of
Information Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2023
(Qld) (IPOLA)
came into force, effecting significant changes to the RTI Act and the
Information Privacy Act 2009
(Qld) (IP Act). In accordance with Chapter 7
Part 9 of the RTI Act and Chapter 8, Part 3 of the IP Act, comprising
transitional
provisions requiring that access applications on foot before 1 July
2025 are to be dealt with as if the IPOLA Act had not been enacted,
in this decision to the RTI Act and IP Act are to the those Acts as in force
prior to 1 July 2025.
On 31 October 2023. This is the
reviewable decision
for the purpose of this external
Three full and 27 part
pages; the remaining parts of those 27 pages and 10 full pages were refused. The
released documents included
the result of the trial, the court brief, requests
and reimbursements for overtime, travel, telephone charges and accommodation,
and information conveyed to the QPS media
Sections 47(3)(b) and 49
of the RTI Act.
On 31 October
In phone contact with OIC
on 8 February 2024.
dated 12 March 2024 and 19 August 2024.
37 pages and 199 photographs
held with the Forensic Imaging Unit at QPS provided to OIC on 16 May 2024 and 19
Including most of
the autopsy report, internal QPS documents from 2003 and 2004 reviewing the
case, documents pertaining to the decision
not to hold a coronial inquest and
certain photographs.
Submissions received on 23 September
Conveyed by letter
dated 4 November 2024 and email dated 18 November
Email to OIC dated 15
January 2025.
I am limited
in the extent to which I can describe the content of the Remaining Information
due to the operation of section 108 of
the RTI Act. However, it is implicit,
given the known circumstances of the death, that the content of the Remaining
Information is
of a highly sensitive nature.
Section 47(3)(b) of the RTI
Section 21 of the HR
OIC’s approach to the HR Act
set out in this paragraph has been considered and endorsed by the Queensland
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal in Lawrence v Queensland Police Service
Section 23 of the RTI
Section 44 of the RTI
Section 47(3) of the
Sections 47(3)(b)
and 49 of the RTI Act.
Section 49(3) of the RTI
External review
application on 31 October 2023, and emails dated 15 June 2024, 8 August 2024, 3
October 2024, 10 and 22 November
2024, 15 January 2025, 7 February 2025 and 14
August 2025.
Conveyed by
letter dated 23 June 2025.
Submission dated 14 August
On 23 September
Section 49(3)(d) of
the RTI Act.
In addition to
the pro-disclosure bias in section 44 of the RTI Act which I have also taken
into account.
As defined in
schedule 5 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 5 of the RTI Act and section 12 of the IP Act defines personal
information as
‘information or an opinion, including information or an
opinion forming part of a database, whether true or not, and whether
recorded in
a material form or not, about an individual whose identity is apparent, or can
reasonably be ascertained, from the information
4, part 2, item 9 of the RTI
As recognized in
and Department of Communities
(Unreported, Queensland Information
Commissioner, 9 July 2009) (
) at [82] and
Department of Health
(Unreported, Queensland Information Commissioner, 31
August 2010) (
Schedule 4, part
2, item 1 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 2, item 5 of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 2,
item 3 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 2, items 16 and 17 of the RTI
Per section 3(a) and
Schedule 1, division 1,
Victims’ Commissioner and Sexual
Violence Review Board Act 2024
Confirmed by the
Department of Justice and Attorney General Recording and Transcription
Services’ correspondence dated 6 February
2025 refusing to grant the
applicant access to the transcripts of the trial. This letter was provided to
OIC by the applicant with
submissions to OIC dated 7 February 2025.
Schedule 4, part 2, item 9
of the RTI Act.
the extent to which the eligible family member was in contact with and/or had a
relationship with the deceased and the
extent to which that overlaps with the
time the information covers; the nature and sensitivity of the information; and
to which the information is or may be known to the
Department of Health
(Unreported, Queensland Information Commissioner, 25
November 2010);
WEU27L and Mackay Hospital and Health Service
information available to me to establish what was revealed through the court
proceeding, nor has the applicant indicated
she has awareness of any evidentiary
content from the trial. I make this observation only to acknowledge that there
may be some existing
awareness of the content of
of the Remaining
Information.
Schedule 4,
part 2, item 9 of the RTI
at [82] and
at [12]-[22].
In her external review application dated 31 October 2023 and submissions dated
15 June 2024.
Page 4 of the
additional documents released to the applicant on external
Schedule 4, part 2,
item 5 of the RTI Act.
Kelson v Queensland Police Service
[2019] QCATA 67
Submission dated
3 October 2024.
dated 14 August 2025 at page 1 of the applicant’s briefing note regarding
a potential coronial
Schedule 4, part 2,
items 16 and 17 of the RTI
In identifying this
factor, I am informed by the Charter of Victims’ rights as set out in
Schedule 1 of the VCSVRB Act which
includes various rights relating to the
criminal justice system.
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
See footnote 40
Schedule 4,
item 5 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 4, section 6 of the RTI
FLK v Information
Commissioner
[2021] QCATA 46
Schedule 4, part 3,
item 3 of the RTI Act.
footnote 40 above.
4, part 3, items 3 and 5 of the RTI Act, and schedule 4, part 4, section 6 of
the RTI Act.
Under section
110(1)(b) of the RTI Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (546 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter