URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIRC/2025/288.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:40:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Perry v State of Queensland (Queensland Reconstruction Authority) [2025] QIRC 288 (28 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Perry v State of Queensland (Queensland Reconstruction Authority)
[2025] QIRC 288
Perry, Jason
(Applicant)
State of Queensland (Queensland Reconstruction Authority)
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Application for reinstatement
DELIVERED ON:
28 October 2025
On the papers
Matter TD/2023/99 is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – APPLICATION FOR REINSTATEMENT – EXTENSION OF
TIME – application for reinstatement - where application
filed outside
statutory time limit for filing – length of delay – explanation for
delay – prejudice to the applicant
or respondent considered –
whether the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission should exercise
discretion to grant extension
– discretion not exercised –
application for reinstatement dismissed.
LEGISLATION:
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Erhardt v Goodman Fielder Food Services Limited
(1999) 163 QGIG 20
Fletcher v State of Queensland (Queensland Police Service)
Gambaro v Workers’ Compensation Regulator
[2017] ICQ 005
Mather v Commercial and General Insurance Brokers
[2005] QIRComm 18
(2005) 178 QGIG
Queensland Public Sector Union of Employees v Department of Corrective
[2006] QIC 42
(2006) 182 QGIG 503
Rich v Chubb Protective Services
[2001] QIC 24
(2001) 167 QGIG 159
Wantling v Department of Community Safety (Queensland Corrective
[2013] QIRC 43
Weaver v Ipswich City Council
[2021] QIRC 234
[2005] QIRComm 18
(2005) 178 QGIG 132
Reasons for Decision
[1] Mr Jason
Perry commenced employment with the Queensland Reconstruction Authority ('the
QRA') in the role of Regional Liaison Officer
(PO6) on 24 October 2022.
Perry’s employment was subject to a three-month probationary period which
was due to expire on 23 January 2023. However,
on 19 December 2022, the QRA
decided to extend Mr Perry's probationary period to 21 March 2023 (‘the
extended probationary
December 2022 Mr Perry received the following correspondence from the Acting
Chief Executive Officer of the QRA, Mr Jimmy
Extension of Probationary Period
In accordance with the
Public Service Act 2008
(the Act), the
probationary period of your employment with the Queensland Reconstruction
Authority has been extended for a further
period of seven weeks to 21 March
This possibility of this extension was raised with you in a meeting with your
supervisor, Mr Damian Bicknell, Director (Regional Liaison),
on 8 December 2022.
This extension will provide you with additional time to perform the full
range of responsibilities of the Regional Liaison Officer
The extension will compensate for the compulsory Christmas closure of the QRA
office from 26 December 2022 to 2 January 2023 and will
also allow for an
appropriate period to review your performance against the measures contained in
your performance and development
agreement, which is scheduled to be completed
20 December 2022.
To acknowledge this extension, please sign below and return a copy to
[redacted]@qra.qld.gov.au by COB Monday 19 December 2022.
[4] Mr Perry
signed the correspondence from Mr Scott to acknowledge the extension. It is fair
to note that the extended probationary
period was imposed on Mr Perry though
nothing of relevance arises from this.
[5] On 20 March
2023, while within the extended probationary period, Mr Perry received
notification his employment had been terminated.
[6] On 11 April
2023, Mr Perry filed a general protections application (matter GP/2023/9)
(‘the GP matter’) in the Commission,
pursuant to section 309 of the
IR Act. The remedy sought by Mr Perry
1. That my employment be reinstated until:
grievance and request for dispute resolution is adequately heard, investigated
and resolved;
afforded procedural fairness and natural justice in relation to allegations of
poor performance; and
required in relation to the extension of my probations, an appeal is lodged and
heard in relation to a directive decision and a
fair treatment
matter proceeded to conciliation conference on 5 July 2023. The parties were
unsuccessful in reaching a resolution. The
question of whether Mr Perry had any
remedy available to him in respect of any alleged unfair dismissal was raised at
that conference
but whether Mr Perry would (or would not) elect to pursue such
proceedings was a matter very much left to
[8] On 2 August
2023, Mr Perry filed an application to amend the GP matter (‘the amended
GP matter’) seeking
, that he be afforded an opportunity
to file an application for reinstatement in circumstances where such application
became a ‘more
appropriate’ cause of
as discussed on 5 July 2023
, if this application is
more appropriately considered to be a case for unfair dismissal:
be afforded an opportunity to lodge a Form 12 – Application for
reinstatement
attempt to have this matter heard as a general protections application be
when assessing the delay in lodging the application for
reinstatement
information disclosed and discussed as part of this general protections
application be considered when hearing the application
reinstatement.
(Emphasis added)
[9] Relevantly,
Mr Perry’s amended pleading acknowledges his awareness of the possibility
of an application for reinstatement
as a cause of action from 5 July 2023. He
also acknowledges such action as separate to the GP matter, including that it
the filing of a separate application. Importantly, his pleading also
acknowledges that any such reinstatement application would be
affected by the
delay in lodging.
[10] The parties
attended a second conciliation conference on 21 August 2023 and were once again
unsuccessful in reaching a resolution.
September 2023, 22 days after the second conciliation conference, Mr Perry filed
an application for reinstatement pursuant
to s 317 of the IR Act (Matter
TD2023/99) (‘the TD application’).
[12] The TD
application seeks various orders including that Mr Perry be re-employed by the
QRA in another role or, in the alternative,
he be paid an amount for loss of
remuneration arising from the dismissal.
September 2023, the QRA raised a jurisdictional objection on the grounds that
the reinstatement application was filed outside
the prescribed time limit of 21
days. Notwithstanding this, there were two conciliation conferences convened in
respect of the TD
application on 14 November 2023 and 4 March 2024, but the
matter ultimately did not resolve. It is unclear why there were two conferences,
and why they were almost 4 months apart.
certificate was issued pursuant to s 318 of the IR Act on 12 March 2024. Mr
Perry then waited until 2 September 2024, almost
the full length of the maximum
period of 6 months prescribed by s 318(4) of the IR Act, before asking the
Commission to progress
the TD application. By this stage, the better part of 18
months had elapsed since Mr Perry’s employment was terminated.
[15] The matter
was then allocated to me for hearing of the QRA’s objection with respect
to the TD application having been filed
outside the prescribed time limit. The
single issue for determination in this decision is whether I ought to exercise
the discretion
to grant an extension of time for the filing of the TD
application.
Legislative framework and legal principles
[16] Section
317(2)(a) of the IR Act provides that an application for reinstatement must be
made to the Commission within 21 days
after the dismissal takes effect. Section
317 of the IR Act is, relevantly, in the following terms:
317 Application for reinstatement
(1) If it is claimed that an employee has been unfairly dismissed, an
application for reinstatement may be made to the commission
for the dismissal to
be dealt with under this part.
The application must be made within –
21 days after the dismissal takes effect; or
if the commission allows a further period on an application made
at any time – the further period
(Emphasis added)
[17] Section
317(2)(b) of the IR Act provides the Commission with a discretion to extend the
time for filing of the application for
reinstatement. The exercise of the
discretion to extend time has been considered in previous decisions of the
Commission and the
Industrial Court.
Queensland Public Sector Union of Employees v Department of Corrective
President Hall
This Court has consistently adhered to the view that the 21 day limitation
period imposed by s. 346 should be seen as an assessment
by the legislature that
in the ordinary category of case justice will be best be served by adhering to a
21 day limitation period,
though on occasion the limitation period may defeat a
perfectly good case.
Wantling v Department of Community Safety (Queensland Corrective
Deputy President O'Connor (as he then was) observed that the statutory time
limit in section 74(2)(a) should only be departed
from in the most compelling of
circumstances and where necessary to ensure that justice is done between the
Relevantly, in
, Deputy President O'Connor citing President Hall in
Chubb Protective Services
His Honour President Hall outlined the effect of the limitation period set
out in s. 74(2) as follows:
The view which I expressed in
Christie v Austotel Management Pty Ltd
(1998) 159 QGIG 108
at 109 about the counterpart provision in the
Relations Act 1997
(s. 218(3)) is equally applicable here. The power to
allow a further period of time within which an application about an alleged
unfair dismissal may be made is vested in the Commission by statute because by
statute a time limit of 21 days is imposed and because
the legislature
recognised "that general conceptions of what justice requires in particular
categories of cases may sometimes be
overridden by the facts of an individual
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR
at 553 per McHugh J (with whom Dawson J agreed).
In exercising the
power, the legislature's choice of a 21 day limitation period must be respected,
Thomasiello v Silverview Homes Pty Ltd
(1997) 155 QGIG 1060
Christie v Austotel Management Pty Ltd
(1998) 159 QGIG 108
The limitation period of 21 days should not be seen as an arbitrary
cut off point unrelated to the demands of justice and general
purposes of the
Act. It should be treated as representing the legislature's judgement that
industry will best be served by applications
commenced within that brief limitation period, notwithstanding that on occasion
the limitation period
may defeat a perfectly good case
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR 540
553 per McHugh (with whom Dawson J agreed). Section 74(2)(b) should not be
treated as having equal standing with s. 24(2)(a).
Section 74(2) is not the
equivalent of a rule of court providing that if a matter is not commenced within
21 days it may be commenced
only with leave of the relevant tribunal.
is not the case that once an application for an extension of time within which
to make an application about alleged unfair dismissal
is made, the Commission is
to exercise a broad discretion about whether to refuse or to grant the
extension. The task confronting
the Commission is to exercise a power to grant
upon the footing that the interests of the Queensland industry and of those who
in it are best served by the 21 day limitation period
An applicant has the positive burden of demonstrating that the
justice of the case requires the indulgence of the further period
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR 540
547 per Toohey and Gummow JJ and at 554 per McHugh J (with whom Dawson J
(Emphasis added) (Citations omitted)
determining applications to extend the 21-day time limit pursuant to s 317(2)(b)
of the Act, the Commission has previously
had regard to the following
length of the delay;
explanation for the delay;
prejudice to the applicant if the extension of time is not granted;
prejudice to the respondent if the extension of time is granted;
relevant conduct of the respondent; and
prospects of success of the substantive application.
Mather v Commercial and General Insurance
Commissioner Asbury (as she then was) observed:
All of the principles may not be relevant in all cases.
consideration is whether in all of the circumstances of a particular case, it is
equitable to extend time
. This consideration has also been expressed as
whether in a particular case justice requires an extension of time. In seeking
achieve an equitable outcome, the Commission will be required to give greater
weight to the facts or matters considered under some
principles than it does to
those considered under others, depending on the facts and circumstances of each
(Emphasis added)
[22] While each
of these factors must be considered, not all of them will be equally relevant in
the circumstances of each case. The
consideration requires holistic evaluation
of the circumstances of each case. Mr Perry bears the onus of demonstrating that
the justice
of the case requires an extension of
Submissions of the parties
[23] The parties
were directed to file written submissions. The directions also invited either
party to request a hearing following
the filing of submissions should they wish.
In the event that neither party required a hearing, the directions provided that
matter would be heard and determined on the papers.
[24] The parties
filed submissions in accordance with the directions. Neither party requested a
hearing and consequently, the matter
has been heard on the papers.
[25] I have read
the submission of the parties. I do not intend to replicate them in these
reasons. I will refer to the salient portions
of those submissions in the
reasons that follow.
The extended probationary period
extended probationary period has caused something of a distraction in this
application. In those circumstances the relevant
considerations to determine
whether the extension of time ought to be allowed are more efficiently dealt
with by firstly determining
the impact of the extended probationary period on Mr
Perry’s right to pursue proceedings for unfair dismissal.
[27] It is trite
to note at the outset that the IR Act provides that certain classes of employees
serving within the terms of a probationary
period prescribed by s 315 of the IR
Act are excluded from pursuing unfair dismissal proceedings.
[28] On the
facts of this matter, I can categorically conclude that Mr Perry was
amongst the class of employees excluded from bringing unfair dismissal
proceedings by the IR Act.
[29] Section 315
of the IR Act relevantly provides:
Employees to whom this part does not apply
(1) Section 316 does not apply to any of the following—
(a) an employee
during the first 3 months of employment
employer (the
"probationary period"), unless the employee and employer agree in writing
that the employee serve—
(i) a period of probation that is shorter than the probationary period; or
(ii) no period of probation; or
an employee serving a period of probation that is longer than the
probationary period, if the period decided, by written agreement
between the
employee and employer
the employment started,
is a reasonable period
having regard to the nature and
circumstances of the employment;
Perry’s probationary period was extended
commenced employment. As such s 315 of the IR Act does not operate to preclude
him from bringing proceedings for unfair dismissal.
[31] Whether the
QRA held an erroneous belief about the effect of the extended probationary
period is ultimately not relevant in this
matter, especially given that there is
no evidence of any express representation to Mr Perry by the QRA to discourage
an unfair dismissal application on that basis.
completeness I note further that there is nothing improper about the extension
of the probationary period from a purely contractual
perspective. While I accept
that this may have caused some confusion for Mr Perry when investigating his
rights, his own evidence
demonstrates he was more than capable of accessing
informing about his rights. Despite this, it appears he ultimately misinformed
himself or he was misinformed by the ‘trusted individuals’ that he
says he sought counsel from. At the very least, it
appears Mr Perry failed to
fully investigate whether the extended probationary period was a barrier to
dismissal proceedings.
Consideration
Length of delay
[33] Mr Perry
was dismissed on 20 March 2023. The time limit for filing a reinstatement
application expired on 10 April 2023. Mr Perry
filed his application on 12
September 2023. The length of the delay is approximately 5 months.
[34] Determining
whether a delay is significant should not rest exclusively on a consideration of
the number of days or weeks elapsed
since the time limit expired. In keeping
with the holistic nature of the consideration required, it is not difficult to
contemplate
scenarios where an explanation might justify a delay of many months,
while there will be others where a single day outside the time
limit cannot be
[35] Litigants
will often cite ignorance of time limits as a starting point to explain their
failure to commence proceedings. A lack
of knowledge as to time limits or one's
right to commence proceedings will not usually be a sufficient explanation for
lengthy delay.
Factors unique to each case that are asserted to have impacted
the understanding of an individual as to their rights will be crucial
determining whether their ignorance or error warrants any indulgence on the
prescribed time limit.
[36] In this
matter Mr Perry’s explanation for the delay will aid in determining the
significance of the length of the delay.
There are complexities in the facts of
this matter in that Mr Perry’s state of knowledge about his rights to
bring such an
application changed between the date of his dismissal and the date
he filed the TD application. In this matter, the true test of
whether the
5-month delay is significant will depend
on a consideration of
Mr Perry’s explanation as to:
not file a reinstatement application within the prescribed time
When during
the relevant timeline he realised he could file a reinstatement application; and
What steps he
took (and how quickly he took them) after he acquired that
Explanation for delay
explanations offered by Mr Perry are extensive and multifarious. These multiple
explanations relate variously to his decision
to file the GP matter in
preference to the TD application at the relevant time, the timing of his
decision to file the TD application,
and the barriers to filing the TD
application when he eventually decided to do so.
submissions of Mr Perry filed on 30 September 2024 were supported by an
affidavit of the same date which expanded on the
propositions set out in his TD
application. With respect to identifying explanations for delay there is
something of a disconnect
between the TD application, the written submissions
prepared by Mr Perry’s lawyers, and Mr Perry’s
[39] In the TD
application filed on 12 September 2023 Mr Perry explains his delay in filing by
saying he was ‘overwhelmed by
personal circumstances outside of (his)
control’. While he goes on to identify other explanations consistent with
the content
of his lawyer’s submissions and his affidavit, he very plainly
identifies the personal circumstances as one of the explanations
for the delay.
contrast, while his affidavit filed on 30 September 2024 provides particulars of
his personal circumstances in a manner that
suggests they were problematic, he
does not go on to depose that they are an explanation for the delay in
problematically, the submissions prepared by his lawyers focus entirely on Mr
Perry’s alleged erroneous belief that
he could not file dismissal
proceedings.
The submission
did not have legal representation
which, in turn, appears to be an oblique
explanation for why Mr Perry was apparently mistaken about his right to pursue
proceedings.
[42] In all of
the circumstances I intend to treat the alleged personal circumstances as an
explanation for the delay offered by Mr
Perry. I am assured of this approach
given that they were the first thing he nominated in the TD application when
asked to explain
[43] In his
affidavit Mr Perry outlines his personal and other circumstances in the 5 months
that passed between the date of his dismissal
and the filing of his
reinstatement application and how those circumstances impacted on the timing of
the filing of the TD application.
[44] In relation
to the personal issues referred to above, Mr Perry offers the following as
explanations for his delay in filing the
reinstatement application (in summary):
the date of dismissal and the date of filing, he had been affected by his
personal circumstances,
a single parent with care of two teenage children (every second week);
was preparing for mediation in the context of family law proceedings with his
ex-wife which was then held on 3 May 2023;
experienced financial abuse from his ex-wife which caused him to become
was a self-represented litigant, being unable to afford legal representation
within the limitation period due to his personal circumstances;
QRA led him to believe that, because he was on probation at the time of his
dismissal, reinstatement was not available to
Further, he was advised by
'trusted individuals' to file a general protections application instead of an
application for reinstatement;
came to realise that an application for reinstatement was a more appropriate
cause of action during the conciliation process, as
a result of disclosures made
by the QRA and the discussions that ensued during the conciliation
[45] The various
explanations offered by Mr Perry present as a complex combination of factors.
The broad tenor of Mr Perry’s
submissions and evidence hints that these
were all factors out of his control and that they either led to him filing the
instead of the TD application or prevented his timely filing of the TD
application (or both).
[46] Additionally,
the explanations offered by Mr Perry are respectively restricted in their
relevance to various stages of the chronology.
Some purport to explain why he
did not file the TD application in the first instance, while others purport to
explain why he delayed
in filing once he resolved to do so.
[47] To aid with
clarity I will consider the explanations for delay across the relevant
chronology, though it ought to be clearly
understood that my consideration of
the explanations offered by Mr Perry is ultimately an all-inclusive
consideration.
Explanation re initial filing period of 21 days
important undisputed fact in this matter is that,
of his dismissal, Mr Perry considered his options and made a conscious decision
to file the GP matter instead of the TD application.
The evidence reveals that
Mr Perry elected to do this quite deliberately albeit for reasons he now
contends were mistaken. In those
circumstances, the contention that his marital
and parenting issues somehow impeded him is both perplexing and contradictory.
filing the GP matter Mr Perry clearly demonstrates he had capacity to
commence legal proceedings within time.
[49] Further,
while he has provided an extensive list of various factors, Mr Perry has
supplied no evidence to elaborate on how his
personal circumstances contributed
to or explain the delay. For example, he does not elaborate on how (or if) his
(part-time) parenting
responsibilities impeded him from identifying and filing
the TD application within time. He merely cites the co-parenting (of his
teenage children) on a week on/week off basis as some sort of apparent hardship.
[50] In the
absence of further details, I am unable to appreciate how (part-time) parenting
contributed to Mr Perry’s delay
in filing. Such an arrangement is no
different from that undertaken by countless other parents, most of whom manage
their personal
and professional affairs efficiently. While such arrangements
will undoubtedly impact on available spare time to research and prepare
litigation, that cannot have been the case for Mr Perry. This is because his own
evidence and the broader undisputed facts demonstrate
that Mr Perry plainly had
the time to research his rights and file the GP matter.
[51] Mr Perry
similarly supplies no additional or independent evidence (other than his
testimony) to demonstrate how his wife was
allegedly abusing him, or to explain
why his involvement in family law proceedings impeded the filing of the TD
application. The
family law proceedings were plainly a demand on his time. The
affidavit supplied by Mr Perry cites multiple dates on which he says
‘involvement was required’. But there is no evidence as to what
aspects of the family law proceedings were being
dealt with on all those various
dates, or how long his involvement was required for. I note that Mr Perry has
referred to having
legal representation in the family law proceedings. The
allegations of abuse by his ex-wife are particularly serious, and for that
reason I am reluctant to give them consideration or reach conclusions in the
absence of more compelling evidence. I would have thought
a short affidavit from
his family lawyer verifying these things would have been easy enough to obtain.
[52] Again, it
is more than apparent from his own evidence and the broader facts of this matter
that, despite his involvement with
family law proceedings, Mr Perry was able to
research his rights and organise himself to file the GP matter.
[53] Mr Perry
also describes himself as having become ‘homeless’ because he was
unable to find a property to rent in his
own right. He blames this on his
ex-wife though produces no independent or other evidence to support such a
conclusion. Mr Perry
describes his ‘homelessness’ as a period when
he was living with his brother and sister on alternate weeks. Such an
arrangement
is not consistent with being homeless. Mr Perry had a roof over his
head at all times and, despite the inconvenience and indignity
he might have
felt by his temporary predicament, he has failed to explain how he was impeded
[54] Again, his
demonstrated capacity to commence the GP matter within the period of an
identical statutory limit following his dismissal
would suggest quite strongly
that he was not impeded by these personal circumstances during that period.
Perry’s life appears to have undergone a series of unfortunate changes
throughout the better part of 2023. But the mere
assertion of these
circumstances is not, of itself, enough. Many people endure the added
responsibility of (part-time) solo parenting
or the stress of acrimonious family
law proceedings without losing capacity to conduct other litigation.
[56] Independent
have assisted if Mr Perry had truly wanted to assert these
circumstances somehow impeded his ability to lodge the TD application.
absence of such evidence Mr Perry’s unsupported assertions in his
affidavit are not satisfactory, especially when he
has demonstrated the capacity
to have filed the GP matter within time. Indeed, the absence of evidence in Mr
Perry’s affidavit
gives rise to more questions than answers.
[57] A dominant
theme of the various sources of explanations supplied by Mr Perry is that he
held a mistaken belief about his right
to commence dismissal proceedings. He
contends that he only became aware of this after the conference on 21 August
2023. Mr Perry
gives evidence in his affidavit as to the reasoning behind his
election to file the GP matter. In general term he contends his reasoning
impeded by various factors. It is stated in his affidavit that the reason why Mr
Perry filed the GP matter (instead of the TD
application) was because, having
relied on his own research and the advice of those he describes as
‘trusted individuals’,
he believed at the time that he could not
file the TD application.
[58] One of Mr
Perry’s explanations for what he now appears to characterise as an error
is that he was self-represented. This
is a familiar plea by individuals seeking
an indulgence or to explain their incompetent conduct of their own proceedings.
Gambaro v Workers’ Compensation Regulator
President Martin (as he
then was) made the following observation about
self-representation:
Although the appellant is unrepresented, this does not excuse his
noncompliance.
A lack of legal representation is a misfortune, not a
Robertson v Hollings
, Keane JA (with whom
Fraser JA and Cullinane J agreed) said:
“Litigation is not a learning experience. The courts do not permit
litigants, even unrepresented litigants, to prosecute claims
which cannot
proceed fairly to the other parties.
It is no doubt unfortunate for Mrs
Robertson that she does not have the benefit of competent legal advice and
representation; but
her misfortune in this regard does not license her to
proceed unconstrained by the rules according to which adversarial litigation
(Emphasis added)
[60] Self-representation
cannot, of itself, be an explanation for delay. It goes without saying that a
non-legally qualified person
who represents themselves is almost always at a
higher risk of making errors. That is all part of that particular misfortune
such litigants.
[61] However, Mr
Perry refers in his application to receiving guidance from ‘trusted
individuals’ but he makes no attempt
to identify these individuals,
disclose their qualifications, or otherwise clarify to what degree he acted on
the information they
gave him. If any of those ‘trusted individuals’
were e.g. a lawyer, and if it was their advice that Mr Perry acted on,
have had the benefit of relying on something akin to representative
error as his explanation for delay. But an absence of details
‘trusted individuals’ leaves me with nothing to
[62] Further
again, without making direct allegations, Mr Perry seeks to explain his error by
alluding to having been misled by both
the QRA and the Commission’s
The basis for Mr
Perry’s alleged erroneous understanding as to his rights is best described
in his own evidence where he says:
my own understanding of my rights
QRA’s emphasis on my
probationary status
the information I read on the QIRC website
my understanding that the effect of being on probation was that I was unable to
bring an unfair dismissal claim...
(Emphasis added)
submission appears to suggest that the QRA and the Commission bear some
responsibility for Mr Perry believing his probationary
status precluded him
commencing dismissal proceedings. But on this point, Mr Perry’s affidavit
is more revealing of the truth
of the matter for what it does
Perry’s affidavit, accompanying submissions, and attached documents,
contain no trace of an overt or even tacit assertion
by the QRA that, at the
relevant time, the probationary status referred to in the relevant
correspondence would be a barrier to an
unfair dismissal application.
[65] As a matter
of law, it cannot be disputed that at the time of his dismissal Mr Perry’s
contractual
status was that he was still on
The termination
letter provided to Mr Perry merely refers to the relevant chronology of events
and performance concerns leading to
the decision to terminate his employment. In
setting out the chronology, the letter includes the headings ‘Concerns
with performance
during probation’ and ‘Unsuccessful
probation’.
[66] While the
absence of the typical public sector pre-termination procedural steps might
suggest that the relevant decision makers
at the QRA erroneously believed Mr
Perry’s probationary status barred him from bringing an unfair dismissal
application, there
is nothing contained in the termination letter that could be
regarded (either expressly or even inadvertently) as a representation
to Mr Perry that he was precluded from bringing dismissal proceedings.
[67] Further,
the fact that the contractual probationary status was legally distinguishable
from the probationary period prescribed
by the IR Act was not a matter that the
QRA were obliged to make clear to Mr Perry. The QRA have, in no way, misled Mr
respect to the information obtained by Mr Perry from the Commission’s
website, it is extracted and reproduced in his
There are also certain circumstances in which you
eligible to make an application including:
if you were
on probation
within the first three months
if you were a
short-term casual (worked for the employer for less than one year); or
if you were
engaged for a specific period or task.
Should any of those circumstances apply to you, you should seek further
advice regarding your eligibility.
An application should be made with 21 days of the dismissal taking
(Emphasis added)
Perry’s affidavit then goes on to state that he called the Commission
‘for some guidance’ but was (quite
properly) advised that no advice
would be given to him. With the exception of his reference to speaking with
‘trusted individuals’
Mr Perry does not say whether he sought any
other advice elsewhere.
[70] Having
accessed the Commission’s website, it is apparent that Mr Perry was
expressly informed of two matters very relevant
to him, namely: a dismissal
application had a time limit of 21 days from the date of dismissal and, more
importantly, that probationary
be a barrier to
dismissal proceedings. But additionally (and more significantly), the website
refers to probation as ‘generally
within the first three months’ of
employment.
[71] At the time
of his dismissal Mr Perry was in his fifth month of employment. This fact alone
ought to have caused Mr Perry to
question whether his probation would be a
barrier to dismissal proceedings.
[72] What is
clear from his evidence is that Mr Perry had access to clear and reliable
information on the Commission’s website.
While that information was
necessarily equivocal on precise details relevant to the impact of probationary
employment on his rights,
it could not have reasonably left him with the
impression that he was absolutely barred from filing dismissal proceedings. On
contrary, the information that he obtained via his own investigations
plainly revealed the potential complexities arising from the
probationary status
of his employment. These are matters he could and should have investigated
further had it been his preference
to file dismissal proceedings.
explanation by Mr Perry invites a conclusion that he elected to file the GP
matter instead of dismissal proceedings because
he erroneously considered that
he was unable to start dismissal proceedings because of his status as a
probationary employee. This
explanation is offered in addition to the other
(contradictory) explanations offered by Mr Perry in the form of his alleged
personal circumstances that (somehow) affected his decision or
[74] But all of
the explanations offered to this point stand in stark contrast to yet another
explanation that has been offered by
Mr Perry as to why he did not file
dismissal proceedings within the 21-day time limit.
conciliation conference on 21 August 2023 in the GP matter, Mr Perry tells the
Commission in his own words why he filed
And I know we spoke last time, that’s perhaps the unfair dismissal,
but for this is
for me it was general
protection.
I genuinely believe I had the protection of the positive
performance management process and natural justice, procedural fairness
was not provided to me
when I insisted upon it
appears that my responses and requests for natural justice, procedural
all that sort of stuff, was then used to terminate my
employment because they branded me as argumentative
(Emphasis added)
[76] In his own
words to the Commission, Mr Perry not only clearly articulates the framework of
his general protections complaint,
but he also appears to say that filing the GP
matter was a
choice. While I appreciate that the choice
have been influenced to some extent by his uncertainty about
dismissal proceedings, Mr Perry tells the Commission on 21 August 2023
formed a view that “
for me it was general
” i.e. having considered his options, he identified (what he
considered) the most suitable cause of action at that time i.e.
protections complaint.
explanation offered to the Commission on 21 August 2023 not only contradicts the
explanation relating to the multitude of
personal circumstances, but it also
tends to contradict the explanation that Mr Perry was somehow dissuaded by the
QRA or the Commission
website from bringing dismissal proceedings.
[78] In my view,
the conflict between each of these explanations offered by Mr Perry renders all
of them unreliable and unsatisfactory.
[79] This is not
a case of a self-represented litigant filing proceedings out of time because
they were ignorant about time limits.
Similarly, it is not a delay caused by a
self-represented litigant filing proceedings e.g. in the wrong jurisdiction and
then seeking
to correct that error after they become aware of it. Mr
Perry’s evidence reveals that he gave careful consideration to his
and made enquiries in doing so. Having made that effort to inform himself of his
options, Mr Perry made a clear election
to commence the GP matter
[80] In those
circumstances I consider that the failure to file dismissal proceedings within
the 21-day limit was, in all probability,
a consequence of Mr Perry making a
considered decision to elect to pursue the GP matter instead of the TD
application. Mr Perry was
not impeded by his personal circumstances to the
extent that he was prevented from filing dismissal proceedings. Mr Perry was not
misled by anyone or anything. While Mr Perry’s choice to pursue the GP
matter might have been influenced by doubts about his
ability to pursue unfair
dismissal proceedings, he ultimately elected not to resolve those doubts
because, in his own words,
“for me it was general
[81] That is the
reason why Mr Perry did not file within the prescribed time limit, and it is the
reason why he continued not to consider
actioning the dismissal proceedings
right through until after a conciliation conference was held in the GP matter on
21 August 2023
i.e. because he had elected not to pursue it.
terms of matters relevant to the exercise of a discretion to waive a prescribed
time limit, a considered, deliberate, and
freely made election to pursue one
fully considered)
is not a satisfactory explanation sufficient to justify an
extension of time in my view.
[83] While I
find Mr Perry’s explanation for the initial delay in filing dismissal
proceedings to be unsatisfactory, I am also
conscious of the fact that his
decision to file the GP matter was, at least partially, influenced by his belief
that dismissal proceedings
were not an option for him. Notwithstanding that his
belief in that regard is a consequence of his own failure to fully examine the
impact of his probationary status on his rights under the IR Act, fairness
dictates that I further consider Mr Perry’s explanations
for the delay as
[84] I therefore
turn now to consider explanations offered for the delay that occurs in the
period after the expiration of the 21-day
time limit.
ii. explanation – post-expiration of time limit – 5 July to 2
August 2023.
it is not expressly stated in his evidence, it seems that Mr Perry did not
further turn his mind to the viability of dismissal
proceedings between April
and July 2023.
[86] On 5 July
2023 and again on 21 August 2023 Mr Perry participated in a conciliation
conference before another member of the Commission
in relation to the GP matter.
Those proceedings were recorded, and transcripts were created.
transcript of 5 July 2023 is useful to my consideration only for general
reference to the fact that it appears to record
that there was a discussion
might expect, without
urging either way, the closing remarks of the Commissioner
recorded on the 5 July 2023 transcript plainly leave the question of dismissal
proceedings as a course of action for Mr Perry to
[88] On 2 August
2023 Mr Perry filed an amended version of the GP matter (‘the amended GP
The relevant
portion of the amendments are set out earlier in these reasons but, for
convenience, ought to be reproduced here. The
amendments relate to aspects of
the GP matter but additionally contain the following:
as discussed on 5 July 2023
, if this application is more
appropriately considered to be a case for unfair dismissal:
an opportunity to lodge a Form 12 – Application for
reinstatement
attempt to have this matter heard as a general protection application be
considered when assessing
the delay in lodging the application for
reinstatement
information disclosed and discussed as part of this general protections
application be considered when hearing the application
reinstatement
(Emphasis added)
[89] As noted
earlier in these reasons, the amendments reveal three important matters with
respect to Mr Perry’s state of knowledge
as at 2 August 2023. Firstly, Mr
Perry is plainly aware that an application for reinstatement is a separate
proceeding. Secondly,
Mr Perry appears to have been aware of this following the
conference on 5 July 2023 and thirdly, is aware there has been a delay
filing of such an application.
[90] The portion
of the amendments extracted above does not represent a positive step towards
commencing dismissal proceedings. On
the contrary, it purports to defer taking
such a step until someone or something decides the GP matter is ‘more
appropriately
a case for unfair dismissal’. Mr Perry does not explain how
this conclusion would be arrived at or by whom. I can only presume
anticipated that the Commission might, somehow, at some stage, make the decision
for him. Nothing about the pleading suggests
he intends to do it.
[91] The clear
tenor of the amendment is that Mr Perry, while now conscious that dismissal
proceedings
be possible, remains equivocal about pursuing them. The
clear intent expressed by Mr Perry in the amended GP matter demonstrates
remained committed to that cause of action. He only foreshadows invoking his
rights with respect to dismissal proceedings if or
when it is ‘more
appropriately considered to be a case for unfair dismissal’.
[92] By the end
of the conference on 5 July 2023 Mr Perry had been presented with the
opportunity to consider pursuing dismissal proceedings.
As he did back in April
2023, Mr Perry again eschews that path in favour of maintaining his pursuit of
the GP matter albeit this
time, by way of the amended GP matter in which he has
sought to ‘hedge his bets’ in the event dismissal proceedings were
(somehow) deemed more appropriate.
[93] What can
relevantly be divined from all of this is that by 2 August 2023 Mr Perry appears
to be aware he could potentially bring
dismissal proceedings. But Mr Perry
elects to defer responsibility for the decision to commence dismissal
proceedings until some
undefined event occurs that has the effect of rendering
that proceeding ‘more appropriate’.
completeness I would note here the concerning submission at paragraph 6(c) of
the reply filed by Mr Perry’s lawyers
on 15 October 2024. The submission
extracts a carefully selected portion of transcript from 5 July 2023 to support
a contention that
Mr Perry was further misled about his rights to bring unfair
dismissal proceedings by a ‘positive assertion’ made by
a solicitor
appearing for Crown Law. The submission is problematic for numerous
[95] Firstly,
the relevant statement is not an assertion by the solicitor. The solicitor
merely agrees with the vocal musings of the
Commissioner which are themselves
equivocal and very much in keeping with the meandering nature of conciliation
discussions. Secondly,
in the context of the closing remarks by the Commissioner
that are recorded on the same transcript, Mr Perry was plainly counselled
advice on whether he has an avenue for unfair
Finally, the reply
submission cannot be sustained in circumstances where Mr Perry’s own
pleadings of 2 August 2023 reflect
his enhanced understanding of the potential
to file dismissal proceedings.
[96] I consider
that the use of the transcript in this manner by solicitors for Mr Perry to be
concerning because, on a superficial
level, it is a rather hackneyed attempt to
‘cherry pick’ a few lines out of 22 pages of transcript that
ultimately do
not assist Mr Perry’s increasingly weak arguments. But what
I find more troubling is that it is a submission that improperly
draws a Member
of the Commission into the controversy.
[97] Despite the
contention that it was the solicitor from Crown Law who makes the positive
assertion (which he does not), the transcript
plainly reflects that it is the
Commissioner who speculatively raises the notion of unfair dismissal being
excluded. Had it been
put bluntly and definitively by the Commissioner to Mr
Perry that he could not bring dismissal proceedings, I might consider that
an appropriate circumstance to resort to the transcript. But, as I noted above,
the language used by the Commissioner is entirely
equivocal and in keeping with
the necessary practices of conciliation which include exploring (by discussion)
aspects of the matter
being conciliated. Moreover, the closing remarks plainly
leave the option of dismissal proceedings open to Mr Perry, and his own
subsequent pleadings confirm he was conscious of this.
[98] There was
nothing to be gained from this very obviously flawed and arguably inappropriate
submission, and the practitioner responsible
for it would do well to reflect on
the appropriateness of its inclusion.
explanation – post-expiration of time limit
– 2 August to 21 August 2023.
[99] Following
the filing of the amended GP matter, the respondents filed a formal response,
and the matter was listed for further
conference on 21 August 2023. In his
affidavit Mr Perry relevantly
On 21 August 2023, during conciliation...,
I became aware
spite of my extended probation period, I was eligible to file an application for
reinstatement.
If I had known this earlier, I would have filed an unfair
dismissal application
earlier and would not have needed to pursue an unfair
dismissal application.
(Emphasis added)
statement he makes in his affidavit suggests that he only became aware he could
file dismissal proceedings during the conciliation
conference on 21 August 2023.
The statement further contends that dismissal proceedings were his preference.
These contentions are
contradicted by Mr Perry’s own earlier
[101] Firstly,
as I have addressed above, Mr Perry gave consideration to his options in April
2023. While I accept that Mr Perry might
have had some unresolved questions
proceedings were
an option. On 5 July 2023 the possibility of bringing dismissal
proceedings was again raised albeit as a possible alternative that
responsible for considering and getting advice on.
[102] Even if Mr
Perry could fairly be said to have been labouring under some mistaken belief
the discussion that took place on
5 July 2023 clearly should have disabused him of that idea. While the
discussions at that conference
(quite properly) did not rise to the level of
giving Mr Perry advice, the spectre of viable dismissal proceedings had to have
enhanced in Mr Perry’s mind. So much is plainly evident from the
amendments he filed on 2 August 2023.
[103] So, even
if Mr Perry’s explanation for the delay from April to 5 July 2023 were
wholly accepted, that delay is compounded
by Mr Perry’s further inaction
after 5 July 2023. The amended GP matter does not represent a positive step
towards dismissal
proceedings in my view. Unfair dismissal is not, for example,
pleaded as an alternative cause of action in those proceedings. If
anything, the
amended GP matter represents a reaffirmation of Mr Perry’s intent to
pursue that cause of action.
[104] While the
idea of commencing dismissal proceedings might have been slow to fully
crystalize in Mr Perry’s mind, there
is ample evidence from Mr
Perry’s own words and actions to demonstrate that he was or should have
been aware of that option
from (at the absolute latest) 2 August 2023. Yet even
then, approximately 6 weeks pass without action to commence unfair dismissal
proceedings.
[105] In my
view, what more probably occurred is that during or following the conciliation
conference on 21 August 2023, Mr Perry
perhaps anticipated the looming technical
challenges to the amended GP matter, and only then did he resolve to start the
proceedings that he must have been conscious of since at least 5 July
2023. And notwithstanding all this, even further delay ensued
after 21 August
[106] Between 5
July and 21 August 2023 there was ample information available to Mr Perry that
would have reasonably caused him to
appreciate the possibility the unfair
dismissal proceedings were available to him. The amended GP matter plainly
demonstrates he
was of this view by 2 August 2023. And yet, even by the time of
the conference on 21 August 2023, Mr Perry has taken no steps to
commence those
proceedings and still appeared intent to press the GP matter.
[107] As I said
earlier in these reasons: In terms of matters relevant to the exercise of a
discretion to waive a prescribed time
limit, a considered, deliberate, and
freely made election to pursue one type of proceeding to the exclusion of others
known to be
available (albeit not fully considered) is not a satisfactory
explanation sufficient to justify an extension of time in my
[108] After the
enlightenment he benefited from on 5 July 2023, the filing of the amended GP
matter by Mr Perry on 2 August 2023 demonstrates
he elected to press the general
protections proceedings. The reference to dismissal proceedings in the pleadings
contained in the
amended GP matter is little more than a half-hearted
afterthought. Nothing about the events between 2 August and 21 August 2023 rises
to the level of a satisfactory explanation for the further delay in filing the
dismissal proceedings.
explanation – post-expiration of time limit – 21
August to 12 September 2023.
[109] Following
the second conciliation conference, a period of 22 days elapses before Mr Perry
successfully files the TD application.
If the earlier explanations for delay
offered by Mr Perry were unsatisfactory then, by comparison, it must be said
that the explanation
offered for this final period is catastrophically devoid of
clear or compelling detail.
[110] In his
affidavit Mr Perry states that ‘as well as his work’, he is involved
in a ‘social enterprise project
on the Great Barrier
It is not clear
what this is and neither the affidavit nor the submissions filed by Mr
Perry’s lawyers provide any further
[111] While it
appears the project is something distinct from his work, there is no other
information supplied that might inform the
Commission e.g. what the
‘social enterprise project’ is, how many people are involved, what
Mr Perry’s role is,
whether participation is voluntary, what are Mr
Perry’s obligations with this project, and how do those obligations arise
by contract, statute, or some other means?
[112] Having
furnished the Commission with no meaningful information about this ‘social
enterprise project’ Mr Perry then
goes on to depose that he was required
to devote significant amounts of his time to it between February and August
2023, in various
locations along the eastern seaboard. Mr Perry states he was
required to attend meetings, make preparations, travel extensively,
(relevantly) spend several weeks at
[113] It goes
without saying that a litigant seeking the very great indulgence of the
Commission to waive a statutory time limit ought
to avoid shrouding their
explanation for delay in mystery.
[114] Mr Perry
contends that immediately after the conference on 21 August 2023 he left
Brisbane for Gladstone. It appears that Gladstone
was the departure point for Mr
Perry’s seaborne adventures over the weeks that followed. Mr Perry does
not inform the Commission
(with precision) the date he went to sea. He refers to
a departure date of 28 August 2023, and in the absence of any other evidence,
am left to presume that was the date he left. According to his affidavit, Mr
Perry was sailing the high seas on these ventures
unknown from 28 August until
16 September 2023.
[115] If 28
August 2023 is the date of departure, then Mr Perry’s affidavit fails to
address when (on or after 21 August 2023)
he began to prepare the TD
application. What Mr Perry’s affidavit also fails to properly address is:
if he made the decision
to file the TD application on or about 21 August 2023,
why was he unable to complete and file the TD application in the 6 –
period that he was presumably in Gladstone.
respect to his activities during that critical timeframe, Mr Perry alludes to
‘commissioning new underwater robotic
equipment and training people to use
it’. As intriguing as that all sounds, without particulars in terms of
what it entailed
and how it occupied his time, it is impossible to conclude
whether it could reasonably have impacted on Mr Perry’s ability
dismissal proceedings before going to
And, when considered in
conjunction with the lack of particulars as to how or why Mr Perry was obliged
to be doing any of this, it
falls well short of a satisfactory explanation for
the (further) delay.
conclusion of Mr Perry’s wholly uninspiring, lengthy, and complex tale of
conflicting explanations is that, on 4
September 2023 he attempted to file the
TD application via email while at still at sea. But on 5 September 2023 he was
the Registry that the document was too large to file electronically.
Rather than modify his document to conform with email electronic
restrictions, Mr Perry instead decided to wait another 7 days until he was back
from his maritime journey, finally filing
his application on 12 September 2023.
[118] These
final actions of Mr Perry are not the actions of a litigant who, appreciating
they are filing a proceeding well outside
a prescribed time limit, acts with
appropriate urgency to ensure filing is completed as soon as possible.
v. explanations for delay – summary of conclusions
[119] Overall Mr
Perry has offered multiple explanations relevant to different stages of the
5-month delay. The explanations are as
unconvincing as they are numerous. I find
Mr Perry has offered no satisfactory explanation for his delay in filing the TD
application.
Prejudice to the respective parties
[120] In general
terms there will invariably be prejudice suffered by an applicant denied the
opportunity to pursue a legal remedy
purely by virtue of a failure to adhere to
a prescribed time limit. In many such cases the opportunity denied is the only
opportunity
that an applicant would have to pursue a remedy. Despite this, the
prejudice alone is not a basis for waiving a prescribed time limit.
prejudicial impact must be evaluated in the context of all relevant
considerations in the exercise of the discretion to waive
a prescribed time
[121] Similarly,
a respondent to proposed proceedings commenced outside of a prescribed
limitation period will equally experience
prejudice. This typically takes the
form of the removal of the certainty and finality a respondent was otherwise
entitled to enjoy
once it was apparent the applicant had not initiated
proceedings. Additionally, depending on the length of the delay and the relevant
antecedents to the proposed claim, a respondent can suffer a very significant
prejudice by virtue of
the diminution of reliable memories of
material witnesses, or the loss of relevant documents.
[122] In this
matter I note that Mr Perry has had two opportunities to conciliate the TD
application. I note they occurred approximately
4 months apart and that Mr Perry
then waited a further period in excess of 5 months before he asked the
Commission to progress the
matter. None of this post-filing delay is explained
by Mr Perry, particularly his failure to press the matter for over 5 months
the issue of the certificate by the Commission.
[123] Notwithstanding
this unexplained further delay by Mr Perry, I am generally not persuaded that
the QRA would experience prejudice
to a material degree if I extended the period
for filing the TD application. Mr Perry initiated proceedings within the
time limit that broadly takes issue with the circumstance of his
termination. Indeed, the pleadings in the GP matter contend a denial
procedural fairness, a matter directly relevant to unfair dismissal proceedings.
Given the dispute surrounding his termination
was underway relatively quickly,
it would require a relatively effortless pivot by the respondent to respond to
unfair dismissal
proceedings. But the lack of prejudice to the respondent is not
reason of itself to waive the prescribed limit.
[124] Unlike
many litigants facing a similar risk of extinguishment of their rights, Mr Perry
has the unique advantage in this matter
of already having commenced proceedings
that could address loss arising from the termination of his employment. While
the amended
GP matter traverses a number of issues, the loss of employment would
be a significant matter relevant to the consideration of remedy
Commission in circumstances where the QRA was found to have contravened the IR
[125] In those
circumstances it is difficult to see how Mr Perry suffers any prejudice in not
being allowed to press dismissal proceedings,
effectively in parallel to the
general protections matter, in which all the same remedies are available to him
(and more).
Perry’s lawyers also contend in their submissions that Mr Perry initially
disputed his dismissal in the ‘wrong’
There was a choice of
actions available to Mr Perry, and the election Mr Perry made was his own.
Importantly, while he now says that
his uncertainty about the impact of his
probationary status on his right to bring unfair dismissal proceedings caused
him to proceed
with the GP matter instead, he was not necessarily
‘wrong’ in doing so.
[127] At this
point in time, I note that the amended GP matter remains active, albeit in
abeyance. It is not clear from the submissions
how Mr Perry proposes to have the
Commission deal with the amended GP matter if he is allowed to pursue the TD
application. While
no detailed evaluation of merit can be made at this time,
the pleadings evident in the amended GP matter do not immediately reveal
flaws of a type that would render it liable to be dismissed before the hearing
of evidence.
Perry’s rights with respect to the amended GP matter were exercised within
time and remain protected. In my view this
very much mitigates any prejudice he
might suffer if the TD matter is dismissed. I am therefore not persuaded that
there is significant
prejudice to either party if Mr Perry is refused permission
to proceed with his TD application.
Relevant conduct of the respondent
[129] Beyond
matters already addressed in these reasons, Mr Perry does not make any
submission of any specific conduct relevant to
this factor. As I have already
concluded earlier in these reasons, I reject any suggestion that the conduct of
the QRA misled Mr
Perry. Mr Perry misled himself.
Prospects of success
[130] On the
relatively sparse material available it is difficult to evaluate Mr
Perry’s prospects of success on the TD application.
There are broadly two
aspects to consider in evaluating the fairness or otherwise of a dismissal:
whether there was a valid reason,
and whether the employee was afforded
procedural fairness. On the question of valid reason,
I am unable to make any evaluation of the merit or
otherwise of the matters relied on by the respondent to terminate Mr
employment. I must therefore assume a neutral (albeit superficial)
conclusion as to the validity of grounds relied on to terminate
respect to procedural fairness, it must be said that the simplistic approach
taken by the QRA would suggest they have proceeded
with the termination on the
basis that they had the protection of s 315 of the IR Act. They plainly did not.
[132] To the
extent the QRA might be in error it would appear that such error caused them to
depart from the usual procedures adopted
by the public sector in respect of the
termination of an employee for performance reasons. This gives rise to a
question as to whether
Mr Perry was denied procedural fairness which, of itself,
can render a dismissal unfair.
[133] It is
important here to clearly differentiate between adherence to procedure and
procedural fairness. The role of the Commission
in determining whether a
termination was unfair involves a consideration of all of the circumstances. In
that sense, it is entirely
possible that a departure from a prescribed procedure
for dismissing an employee will not, of itself, equate with a denial of
fairness. In particular, the nature and seriousness of a valid reason
giving rise to the dismissal of an employee can inform the
extent to which the
employee requires the benefit of the full suite of procedures commonly requiring
compliance in the public sector.
again unable to make any proper evaluation of the merit or otherwise of
contentions about procedural fairness. While I
can appreciate there is an
approach taken by the QRA that appears consistent with an erroneous belief that
they had the protection
of s 315 of the IR Act, I am unable to be satisfied
whether that might be characterised as a denial of procedural fairness that
render the termination unfair. I must therefore again assume a neutral
(albeit superficial) conclusion on the question of the merits
of any argument
[135] While I am
unable to reach any compelling conclusion on the merits of Mr Perry’s TD
application, even accepting that he
might have some prospects of success will
not be enough. Considering the merits in conjunction with all of the other
considerations
addressed earlier in the reasons, his putative prospects of
success are insufficient to persuade me to waive the prescribed time
[136] Having
regard to all of the relevant considerations I am not persuaded to exercise my
discretion to waive the prescribed time
limit. I am entirely unconvinced by Mr
Perry’s assertions about being weighed down by personal circumstances or
being misled
by the respondent. Neither of these explanations were factually
established.
[137] Further,
it was clear that Mr Perry had every opportunity to investigate his options, and
he did. He contemplated dismissal
proceedings but elected to proceed with the GP
matter. However, as much as he might regret his choice of proceeding, he made
choice while fully aware he had another option, albeit an option he did not
fully explore. His failing was that he prematurely dismissed
the option of
dismissal proceedings. That was entirely his choice. Mr Perry’s
unfortunate lack of legal representation is not
sufficient to warrant the
Commissions indulgence. Mr Perry has demonstrated he had the ability to research
and consider his options.
He had the assistance of ‘trusted
individuals.’ With the benefit of all of this, Mr Perry plainly stated to
the Commission
on 21 August 2023 he chose the GP matter because ‘for
him’ the GP matter was appropriate.
[138] It would
seem that the submissions of the QRA and the Commission’s observations at
the two conferences on 5 July and 21
August 2023 (eventually) prompted Mr Perry
to the view that he ought to pursue dismissal proceedings. But even once he
formed that
view, he delayed acting on it.
amended GP matter filed on 2 August 2023 demonstrates knowledge but no actual
action towards advancing dismissal proceedings.
Even after 21 August 2023 when
he appears to have finally decided to file the TD application, he continued to
conduct himself without
the degree of urgency he ought to have, given that by
then he undoubtedly knew he intended to file dismissal proceedings that he
were well outside the prescribed time limit.
prejudice to Mr Perry or merit to his claim could overcome the effect of the
wholly unsatisfactory collection of contradictory
or incomplete explanations he
has offered for his significant delay in filing.
[141] In all of
the circumstances, because it was filed outside the prescribed time limit, I
decline to allow Mr Perry’s TD
application to proceed.
[142] I make the
following Order:
Matter TD/2023/99 is dismissed.
Exhibit 'OF-3' to the Affidavit
of Oliver Fitzgerald affirmed on 9 October 2024, page 42.
Exhibit 'OF-2' to the
Affidavit of Oliver Fitzgerald affirmed on 9 October 2024, page
T 1-22, ll 3-12.
Exhibit 'OF-4' to the
Affidavit of Oliver Fitzgerald affirmed on 9 October 2024, page
[2006] QIC 42
(2006) 182 QGIG
[2013] QIRC
Section 74(2)(a) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1999
(Qld) is in the same terms as
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Rich v Chubb Protective Services
[2001] QIC 24
167 QGIG 159.
Ipswich City Council
[2021] QIRC 234
Fletcher v State of Queensland
(Queensland Police Service)
[2022] QIRC 428
[9]. See also
v Goodman Fielder Food Services Limited
(1999) 163 QGIG 20.
[2005] QIRComm 18
(2005) 178 QGIG 132
Rich v Chubb
Protective Services
[2001] QIC 24
(2001) 167 QGIG
Submissions filed 30
September 2024 at [8]-[9].
Submissions filed 30 September 2024 at
Affidavit of Jason
Perry filed 30 September 2024, at
Affidavit of Jason Perry filed 30 September 2024, at
[19] and [22].
Application
for Reinstatement filed 12 September 2024, page 4.
[2017] ICQ 005
Affidavit of Jason
Perry filed 30 September 2024, at
This is conceded in
his own submissions filed on 30 September 2024 at paragraph
Affidavit of Jason Perry
filed 30 September 2024, at
Exhibit ‘OF
7’ to the affidavit of Oliver Fitzgerald filed on 10 October 2024 at T
2-5, ll 30-45.
‘OF 8’ to the affidavit of Oliver Fitzgerald filed on 10 October
2024 at T 1-22, ll 3-12.
Exhibit ‘OF 4’ to the affidavit of
Oliver Fitzgerald filed on 10 October
Affidavit of Jason
Perry filed 30 September 2024 at paragraph [28]. Note the reference to
‘unfair dismissal’ at the end
of the last sentence appears to be an
error. It is presumed Mr Perry intended to refer to the GP matter.
Affidavit of Mr Jason Perry
filed 30 September 2024 at
Affidavit of Mr Jason
Perry filed 30 September 2024 at
Affidavit of Mr Jason
Perry filed 30 September 2024 at [29].
Affidavit of Mr Jason Perry
filed 30 September 2024 at
Applicant’s
submissions filed 30 September 2024 at [14].
Exhibit ‘OF 4’
to the affidavit of Oliver Fitzgerald filed on 10 October 2024.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (523 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter