URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QChCM/2009/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Yarnold v JL & MT [2009] QChCM 2 (16 June 2009)
MAGISTRATES COURTS OF QUEENSLAND
Yarnold v JL & MT
[2009] QChCM 2
KRISTY YARNOLD
(applicant)
(respondent mother)
(respondent father)
CCM10075/08(4)
Childrens Court (Magistrate)
PROCEEDING:
Application for Child Protection Order
ORIGINATING COURT:
Childrens Court at Southport
DELIVERED ON:
16 June 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
29 April 2009, 30 April 2009
MAGISTRATE:
A supervision order be made
CATCHWORDS:
CHILD WELFARE – GUARDIANSHIP – guardianship order –
whether child in need of protection – whether a parent
is willing and able
to protect child – whether a less obtrusive order should be made
Child Protection Act 1999
Respondents on own behalf
SOLICITORS:
Respondents on own behalf
The Application.
[1] This application concerns the welfare of the child MJ
born in 2006.
[2] In the hearing before me, MJ’s parents, JL the
mother and MT the father, represented themselves.
Section 109
Child Protection Act 1999
( CPA ) provides:
“(1) If, in a proceeding or an application for an order for a child, a
parent of the child appears in the Childrens Court but
is not represented by a
lawyer, the Court may continue with the proceeding only if it is satisfied the
parent has had reasonable
opportunity to obtain legal representation.”
[4] Affidavit material filed on behalf of each parent was prepared by
solicitors. It was clear from the proceeding that the mother
had prepared her
case with the assistance of solicitors. She provided an Outline of Submissions
which had been prepared by solicitors.
[5] Those solicitors have advised the
Court that they did not hold a grant of aid and not having received contact from
for some months, had advised her that they were no longer in a
position to continue acting for her. However, it is clear that notwithstanding
that correspondence, they provided assistance to the mother.
satisfied that each parent has had a reasonable opportunity to obtain legal
representation.
Section 105(2)
CPA provides:
“If, on an application for an order, the Childrens Court is to be
satisfied of a matter, the court need only be satisfied of
the matter on the
balance of probabilities.”
[8] Whenever I have expressed myself satisfied of a matter, I am satisfied on
the balance of probabilities.
Historical Background.
[9] MJ was initially
placed in the care of the Department of Child Safety (the Department) between
3 June 2008 and 12 June 2008.
[10] He was returned to his
parents’ care upon undertakings given by both parents.
MJ’s father, undertook:
1. to remove himself from MJ’s place of residence;
2. to provide
3. to cooperate in a final assessment order.
[12] JL, MJ’s mother, undertook:
1. to abstain from alcohol and drugs;
2. to notify of a change of
3. to cooperate with the Department.
[13] On 14 August 2008 this Court made an order that MJ be supervised:
1. to ensure that he not be exposed to domestic violence;
2. to ensure that
he reside in a safe environment;
3. to ensure that his social, emotional and
physical care needs were met within the family.
(the Supervision Order)
[14] The matters resulting in that order were:
1. Substance abuse by both parents.
2. Domestic violence in the relationship
between the child’s parents.
3. Concerns about the father’s
mental health.
[15] On 22 September 2008, this application was brought to revoke the
Supervision Order and for a custody order following:
1. Two domestic violence incidents involving the child’s parents which
occurred whilst the mother was intoxicated. the mother
assaulted the father and
damaged property in the presence of the child. the father observed the mother to
be affected by alcohol
at this time.
2. A failure by the parents to engage
with the Department whilst subject to the Supervision Order. In this regard,
both parents were
uncooperative about arranging to receive home visits from a
child protection officer.
[16] On 25 September 2008, a temporary custody order was made and that order has
been repeatedly extended and is currently in place
until the delivery of this
[17] Subsequent to this application having been brought, the
mother advised the Applicant, Kristy Yarnold, that the father while
intoxicated
had assaulted her and that she believed that in her absence he
entered her place of residence and caused significant property damage.
[18] In an affidavit sworn on 12 November 2008, the mother said
that she has addressed the Department’s concerns by ending her
relationship with the father and obtaining a no contact temporary protection
order on 1 October 2008. However the mother has subsequently
arranged to have
that order removed.
[19] The Affidavit of the Applicant sworn on 12 November
2008 deposes to the father having been denied contact with the child, following
aggressive behaviour towards a Departmental officer.
[20] That Affidavit
also deposes to the fact that a case plan was developed on 15 October 2008
but that the Applicant had not observed
significant behavioural changes since
that time. In that Affidavit Ms Yarnold acknowledged that separation between the
the father would provide MJ with a sufficient level of protection but
expressed concern at the history of separation and reunification
with no change
to the frequency and severity of domestic violence in the relationship.
[21] She expressed concern that the father had failed to demonstrate insight
into the effect of his behaviour.
[22] The Affidavit made reference to a
continued denial of alcohol and drug use by the father. In this regard,
reference was made
to the father’s denial of drug use since 2002. The
Affidavit makes reference to his subsequently recently testing positive
amphetamine use. However, that allegation appears to be unfounded and resulted
from a misinterpretation of the result of drug
tests undertaken by the father.
Notwithstanding this, it does appear that at that time, the father was a
significant abuser of marijuana.
[23] In his Affidavit sworn on 12 November
2008, the father said that he was undergoing the Get Smart Program and would
domestic violence program” in the immediate
[24] Rod Preston, a behavioural consultant engaged by
MJ’s independent legal representative, provided a report dated 1 December
[25] Mr Preston interviewed both parents separately. He also
interviewed MJ’s carer and observed the child at his place of residence
i.e. the carer’s place of residence. He also spoke with the Applicant, a
team leader with the Department.
[26] Mr Preston did not observe MJ in the
presence of either parent.
[27] When he interviewed the mother, Mr Preston
says that she was drinking from a can and smelt strongly of alcohol. In
cross-examination,
he conceded that the mother advised that she had recently
arrived home and had just opened a drink. He said that the alcohol was
other than beer. Accordingly, it seems likely that the mother was consuming a
can of spirit with mixer. The strong smell
of such alcohol would more likely to
have been present on her breath. In the absence of evidence of other indicia I
do not conclude
from that that the mother was adversely affected by alcohol at
the time of her interview with Mr Preston.
[28] In his report, Mr Preston
expressed concern that the mother, knowing that one of the Department’s
concerns was the abuse
of alcohol, was drinking whilst undergoing the interview.
[29] Certainly it was not prudent but absent any objective evidence of her
being adversely affected by alcohol consumption, I draw
no adverse inference
from the mother having an alcoholic drink at 3:00pm in the afternoon after
returning home from work.
[30] the mother admitted a history of drug use but
denied using any drug other than marijuana since undergoing a drug
rehabilitation
program in 2005.
[31] the father reported to Mr Preston that
the mother was argumentative and violent when abusing alcohol.
mother reported to Mr Preston being off drugs but denied a drinking problem.
This indicates that she is in denial regarding
her alcohol abuse.
[33] According to Mr Preston, the mother expressed a lack of insight into
the potential harm from the use of marijuana.
[34] In Mr Preston’s
interview with the father, he disputed Department claims. He said that MJ had
never been involved or witnessed
domestic violence. The fact is that whilst MJ
was never a victim of domestic violence, he witnessed it and these comments show
remarkable lack of insight on the part of the father.
[35] Mr Preston
noted that at the time of his interview, the mother had been in the same
accommodation for eight months. It is a three
bedroom house. The landlord was
living downstairs with the mother living upstairs.
[36] Mr Preston made
adverse comments regarding the age of the property and indicated that it would
not in all likelihood meet the
standards for a carer placement.
[37] Neither
parent was working at the time of Mr Preston’s report.
[38] the father
informed Mr Preston as follows:
1. He was undertaking the Get Smart Program.
2. He had just started the
domestic violence program.
3. He was seeing a psychiatrist.
[39] The mother reported that she had ended the relationship with the father but
the father kept contacting her. The father advised
that the domestic violence
occurred “only occasionally” in front of MJ, again demonstrating a
lack of insight into the
consequences of witnessing domestic violence.
[40] The father described the mother as a loving mother.
[41] At the
time of Mr Preston’s report, the mother was having contact with MJ twice a
week for two hours but the father was
having no contact at all.
[42] When he
met with MJ (at the place of the carer) Mr Preston noted MJ to be neat, tidy and
[43] The father was living in a home with a landlord who had a
disabled daughter and the father was assisting with her
[44] Allegations have been made on the part of the carer that MJ
presented to her with worms and head lice. The mother has made allegations
MJ was returned to her with head lice. The carer was not available for
cross-examination. I am not satisfied that any such condition
was due to any
want of care on the part of the mother.
[45] Mr Preston said in his report
“I have concerns for him living at his mother’s place given the
nature of the social
environment I observed during my visit.” Mr Preston
was not cross-examined on this comment. However, it is clear that there
suggestion that there was any lack of proper furniture, clothing, books or toys
and I assume therefore that Mr Preston was
referring to the mother’s
consumption of alcohol and marijuana.
[46] In his report, Mr Preston refers
to evidence that MJ had been exposed to domestic violence and pot
[47] Relevantly, there is no allegation that MJ experienced any
behavioural problems.
[48] Mr Preston quite properly states that MJ’s
removal was due to domestic violence and drug issues and it is inappropriate
a child to be raised in that environment.
[49] Mr Preston states that he has
doubts about the parents’ capacity to meet the protective development and
cultural needs
of the child. He does not elaborate on this but I assume this is
because of the domestic violence, drug and alcohol issues.
[50] Mr Preston
did not identify any mental or physical illness or disability which impacted
upon MJ’s parents’ ability
to meet his needs.
[51] The report
noted that MJ was not displaying any behavioural issues which would be
suggestive of exploitation or abuse.
[52] Mr Preston noted that there had
been various reports of the mother being aggressive toward Department
representatives. The carer
was finding notes sent to her by the mother to be
aggressive.
[53] The father expressed the view that he felt it was unfair
that MJ had been removed from him because of the mother’s previous
involvement with the Department. Again, this shows remarkable lack of insight
into the factors occasioning MJ’s removal from
his parents, and the
father’s contribution to those factors.
[54] Mr Preston noted that as
usual when children are placed in care, the social position of the carer is
different to that of the
parents, both financially and in the nature of the
amenities and facilities that they can provide. He said that it would be hard
for MJ to return to an environment which offered less than he has been used to
since being in his care. When I asked him about this,
he found it difficult to
pin point anything other than the age of the mother’s accommodation and
her furniture and he conceded
that these would not be of significant importance
to a three year old. Mr Preston noted that the carer did not drink or smoke
it was his view that she could provide “a much safer environment for
MJ to live in”.
[55] A case plan with the ultimate goal of
reunification has been prepared by the Department. Mr Preston supported the
arrangements being made for the father to have supervised contact
separately from the mother, subject to the father agreeing not
aggressive and to threaten or abuse Departmental staff.
[56] In conclusion,
Mr Preston expressed himself satisfied that MJ was in need of protection and
that the Department had taken appropriate
steps to ensure his safety. He
expressed concern that MJ’s parents had not fully addressed the issues
that are of concern to
the Department. His recommendation was that the
Department be granted a two year custody order, that the case plan of 15 October
2008 be implemented, that the father have supervised access without the mother
present subject to him agreeing to appropriate behaviour
to both the supervisor
and Departmental officers and with both parents agreeing not to consume alcohol
or marijuana within 24 hours
of having contact with MJ.
[57] There is
affidavit evidence to support aggressive and confrontational behaviour on the
part of the mother whilst having supervised
indicated that this has arisen over her frustration at the circumstances to
which she is subject
when exercising contact with MJ.
[58] In her Affidavit
filed on 18 March 2009, Cassie Wentworth, child safety officer with the
Department deposes that on 9 February
2009, she received a telephone call from
Senior Constable Richard Gilespe from the Southport Watch house who advised that
was in the Watch house for domestic violence issues and had requested
that he contact the Department and advise that the father would
be unable to
have contact with MJ that day by reason of those matters.
[59] The Affidavit
further records that the father did not attend a contact visit with MJ on 16
February 2009. Subsequently, MJ’s
carer reported him having made reference
to his father having been naughty by hurting his mother’s face. The
mother, denied
that her facial bruising in early February 2009 was as a result
of domestic violence by the father. However, given the father’s
breach of domestic violence orders in February 2009, the mother’s physical
appearance, and MJ’s comments to
his carer, I am satisfied that the facial
bruising observed on the mother in early February 2009 was as a result of an
the father. I attribute the mother’s reluctance to admit this
to her knowledge that domestic violence is one of the major concerns
Department and of this Court in assessing MJ’s future. Concerns have been
expressed by an officer with the Department
on 9 March 2009 at a contact
visit with the father who appeared affected by alcohol.
father’s criminal history includes an assault conviction on 20 May 2005,
drug possession charges dealt with in on 20
February 2006 and 19 December 2007,
breach of domestic violence orders dealt with on 6 July 2007 and 23 August 2008,
and an assault
or obstruction to police officer charge finalised on 12 September
[61] The mother’s criminal history is for numerous offences in
2004 and 2005, a time at which the mother was using speed, a
drug she has not
used since 2005.
[62] Police records show that on 15 January 2006, during an
argument, the father assaulted the mother and threatened to kill her.
2007, police attended an incident whereby the father punched his arm through a
bedroom window screen and attempted to
grab the mother. On 26 August 2007,
police responded to an incident during which the father was physically violent
toward the mother
in MJ’s presence.
[63] On 24 January 2008, a further
argument ensued between the father and the mother involving physical violence.
[64] On 22 March 2008, police responded to an argument between the father
and the mother which involved the mother drink driving with
MJ in the vehicle
and involved violence between MJ’s parents.
[65] On 19 September 2008,
police were called to an altercation between MJ’s parents.
January 2009, the father was arrested for being drunk in a public place. His
dog, which in his Affidavit he referred to
as a source of pleasure for MJ, was
removed from his care after he jumped off a bridge into water with the dog. The
explanation in his evidence for this behaviour was
unsatisfactory. Police records suggest that on 8 February 2009, the father
assaulted the mother. Whilst this incident is denied by the father
and the mother, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that it occurred.
[67] On 11 February 2009, police attended a disturbance at the
mother’s place involving an argument between the mother and another
However, I am satisfied with the mother’s explanation as to this incident
and draw no adverse inference from it.
[68] The Royal Brisbane and Womans
Hospital (RBH) records show an admission by the father on 4 March 2004 due to
escalating paranoia
and aggression. The assessment identified that the father
was having auditory hallucinations and paranoid delusions, and demonstrated
aggressive, violent behaviour. It referred to a diagnosis of schizophrenia in
1987 and referred to the father’s abuse of alcohol
and marijuana and at
that time, intravenous speed. The father’s discharge summary reveals a
diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder.
[69] On 5 November 2005, the father
was brought to RBH by police. A mental health assessment revealed intoxication,
and auditory hallucinations.
He was noted to be a very heavy marijuana user and
[70] On 28 November 2006, the father presented at the RBH and
underwent a mental health assessment which revealed that the father
experiencing paranoid ideation.
[71] In his evidence, the father stated his
mental health was stable and sound. He denied being in need of a mental health
assessment.
He said the diagnosis of schizophrenia was made in his teens and was
not a correct diagnosis. However, regardless of the diagnosis,
his mental health
history is of concern.
[72] The records of the father’s probation and
parole officer reveal that the father commenced the Get Smart Program on 13
2008 but was excluded from the Program on 4 December 2008 due to
poor attendance and failure to provide a relapse prevention plan.
father’s explanation was that he missed four appointments, the fourth
being when he was required to attend Sydney when
his grandmother was
[73] The father had failed to undertake a domestic violence
perpetrator’s program notwithstanding that it was a condition of
probation order. In cross-examination, the father stated that he was to commence
that program in a few weeks. His explanation
for failing to undertake the
program to date was its cost, namely $360.00. It is of concern that the father,
knowing that one of
the major reasons for MJ’s removal from his parents
was domestic violence, and that this is one of the requirements of his
probation, has not taken active steps to ensure that he has at least commenced
to undertake such a program.
[74] Ms Wentworth’s affidavit refers to a
urine sample taken from the father on 3 February 2009 having tested positive to
benzodiazepine,
marijuana and meth-amphetamine. Proper perusal of the urine
analysis indicates that he tested positive only for marijuana. In evidence,
father stated that he last used marijuana in December 2008 and that is what
accounted for the positive reading in February 2009,
and that he has not used
any drugs at all subsequent to December 2008.
[75] A further Affidavit of
Cassie Wentworth affirmed on 21 April 2009, deposes to the fact that on 16 March
2009, Ms Wentworth telephoned
the mother and asked whether it would be possible
for the mother and the father to be in the same room together for a family group
meeting in light of the domestic violence order conditions. Ms Wentworth
informed the mother that a new case plan was required for
MJ and required a
family group meeting. The mother stated that the case plan was out of date and
she would not attend a meeting because
there were meant to be changes such as
changes to her contact that had not yet occurred. The mother stated there was no
restraining
order with respect to the father and that having contact with him
was fine. The mother was also reported to be threatening in that
conversation.
[76] Ms Wentworth states that on 16 April 2009, the father
attended the scheduled family group meeting but was asked to leave due
aggressive behaviour. On 17 April 2009, he left the meeting prematurely after
becoming angry about the Department’s
case plan requests.
[77] At the
scheduled place for the family group meeting on 16 April 2009, the mother and
the father caused disturbance to other clients
by swearing and yelling in the
[78] In an Affidavit filed on 28 April 2009, the mother acknowledges
using alcohol on a more regular basis during the last twelve
months of her
relationship with the father, although she denies being intoxicated to the
extent that she was unable to care for MJ.
She stated that MJ was always fed and
well cared for and that she would never jeopardise his safety.
states that she and the father are no longer in a relationship and she considers
the relationship to be at an end. She states
that she obtained a temporary
protection order preventing the father from coming to her home. However, in her
evidence, she advised
that she had taken steps to have that temporary protection
order removed as she did not think it was any longer necessary.
[80] In her
Affidavit, the mother refers to having undergone counselling at Alegna Health
Care. In evidence are two reports from that
Centre. The report dated 28 October
2008 confirms that the mother attended the Centre for psychological treatment
since July 2008
for mixed anxiety and depression concentrated by alcohol issues.
It was stated that her recovery had been progressive. She had gained
insight and
understanding into her behaviours and emotional functioning. She reported a
reduced consumption of alcohol since finalising
her relationship with the
father. She also reported improved mood and ability to manage her anxiety,
frustrations and stress.
[81] A subsequent report dated 15 December 2008
stated that the mother had attended six psychological sessions since July 2008
mixed anxiety and depression complicated by alcohol but stated that
psychological treatment “has now been finalised as Ms Lisa
Johnson feels
she’s achieved her therapeutic goals”.
[82] My concern about this
report is that there is nothing to indicate that the finalisation of treatment
was with the approval or
endorsement of the mother’s treating
psychologist.
[83] In her most recent Affidavit the mother referred to her
stable accommodation, having resided there for the previous twelve
[84] She states that her alcohol consumption had reduced
significantly since the cessation of her relationship with the father. She
states that she would continue to remain in counselling for as long as her
counsellor deems necessary. As previously indicated, this
is not necessarily
consistent with the information provided by the treating psychologist. Although
the Affidavit is sworn in April
2009, it states that her most recent appointment
was on 1 November 2008 and that she had made arrangements for a further
appointment
on 20 November 2008.
[85] The mother gave evidence and was
cross-examined. Her love for MJ was evident, as was her concern for his material
well being.
She professed to have gained insight into the impact of domestic
violence since these proceedings were commenced and to have reduced
her alcohol
consumption in the previous 12 months. She found her consultations with a
psychologist to have been beneficial.
[86] The father also gave evidence and
was cross-examined. His love for MJ was also evident. He said that this
experience had been
a real eye opener for him.
Legislation.
Section 53(2)
Child Protection Act 1999
(“CPA”) provides:
“A child protection order is made to ensure the protection of a child the
Childrens Court decides is a child in need of protection.”
“A child in need of protection is a child who-
(a) has suffered harm,
is suffering harm, or is at unacceptable risk of suffering harm; and
not have a parent able and willing to protect the child from the
is in the following terms:
“(1) Harm, to a child, is any detrimental effect of a significant nature
on the child’s physical, psychological or emotional
immaterial how the harm is caused.
Harm can be caused by:
(a) physical,
psychological or emotional abuse or neglect; or
(b) sexual abuse or
exploitation.”
CPA is in the following terms:
“(1) The Childrens Court may make a child protection order only if it is
(a) the child is a child in need of protection and the order is
appropriate and desirable for the child’s protection; and
(b) there is
a case plan for the child-
(i) that has been developed or revised under
(ii) that is appropriate for meeting the child’s assessed
protection and care needs; and
(c) if the making of the order is being
contested, a conference between the parties has been held or reasonable attempts
conference has been made; and
(d) the child’s wishes or
views, if able to be ascertained, have been made known to the court;
(e) the protection sought to be achieved by the order is unlikely to be
achieved by an order under this Part on less intrusive terms.
(f) The court
must not make a child protection order unless a copy of the child’s case
plan and, if it is a revised case plan,
a copy of the report about the last
revision under
Section 51X
have been filed in the court.
(g) Also, before
making a child protection order granting custody or guardianship of the child to
a person other than the Chief Executive,
the court must have regard to any
report given, or recommendation made, to the court by the Chief Executive about
the person, including
a report about the person’s criminal history,
domestic violence history and traffic history.
(h) In addition, before
making a child protection order granting long-term guardianship of a child, the
court must be satisfied-
(i) there is no parent able and willing to protect
the child within the foreseeable future; or
(ii) the child’s need for
emotional security will be best met in the long-term by making the
(i) Further, the court must not grant long-term guardianship of the
(i) a person who is not a member of the child’s family unless
the child is already in custody or guardianship under a child
protection order;
(ii) the Chief Executive if the court could properly grant guardianship to
another suitable person.”
Section 104
CPA provides:
“In exercising its jurisdictional powers, the Childrens Court must regard
the welfare and best interests of the child as paramount.”
[92] The Applicant submits that I should be satisfied that MJ is at unacceptable
risk of suffering harm if the order sought is not
[93] In support of
this contention, it is submitted on behalf of the Applicant that the parents are
not capable of carrying out their
parental responsibilities competently or
properly from which I should infer unacceptable risk. The unacceptable risks
1. the potential of exposure to domestic violence
2. MJ’s exposure to a
parent affected by alcohol and substance abuse;
3. MJ’s exposure to
potential mental health instability.
[94] The factors urged by the Applicant in support of the making of the order
(a) The child’s carer seems to have a better understanding of
the child’s needs than his parents.
[95] I do not consider this a
proper basis for the making of an order.
(b) There are concerns that the
child will live at his mother’s place or residence due to the social
environment observed during
the assessor’s visit.
[96] This appears to
be based solely on the mother’s consumption of alcohol at the time of the
appointment. I do not think that
this of itself affords any basis for the making
of an order.
(c) There is evidence of the child being exposed to domestic
violence and of both parents smoking marijuana.
[97] It is of concern that MJ
has been exposed to domestic violence. On the other hand, his parents are no
longer living together.
However, unfortunately, it appears that the mother has
taken positive steps to remove the protection order which was in place. In
absence, I am concerned that there is a real risk of domestic violence taking
place if there is any contact between the child’s
parents, particularly
given that the most recent episode was on or about 8 February 2009, at a time
when these proceedings were,
to the full knowledge of both parents, pending. I
am also concerned at the mother’s lack of insight into the potential
consequences of her marijuana use and MJ’s exposure to such
(d) There is doubt that the parents can meet MJ’s protective,
developmental and cultural needs;
(e) the mother has an issue with
[98] I am concerned about the mother’s lack of insight into
the potential adverse consequences of her alcohol abuse and MJ’s
to the mother’s alcohol use;
(f) The child’s carer can offer more
amenities to the child than either parent.
[99] This would only be relevant
if the amenities offered by MJ’s parents posed an unacceptable risk of
harm to MJ. The evidence
does not support any such assertion.
carer’s home presentation and cleanliness is much better than the
[100] Again, absent this exposing MJ to an unacceptable risk
of harm, it is irrelevant. The evidence does not suggest that the presentation
and cleanliness of the mother’s home poses an unacceptable risk of
(h) The carer does not drink or smoke and can provide a much safer home
environment.
[101] This misconceives the issue before me. I am not concerned
with the safest environment for MJ. I am concerned with whether his
parents’ environment poses an unacceptable risk of harm.
satisfied that if an order is not in place, there is an unacceptable risk of MJ
suffering psychological or emotional abuse
by reason of exposure to domestic
[103] I am satisfied that if a protection order is not made, MJ is
at an acceptable risk of suffering psychological or emotional abuse
by reason of
the father’s mental health, a problem which appears to be exacerbated if
the father overindulges in alcohol and/or
[104] I am satisfied
that if a protection order is not made, there is an unacceptable risk that MJ
will suffer psychological or emotional
abuse by reason of his parents use of
alcohol and marijuana and his exposure to that use.
[105] Accordingly I am
satisfied that MJ is a child in need of protection.
[106] I then turn to the
best interests of MJ. In considering
what orders are appropriate to best protect
MJ, I must have regard to the principles relevant to the administration of the
1. every child has a right to protection from harm;
2. families have a
primary responsibility for the upbringing, protection, and development of their
3. the preferred way of ensuring a child’s wellbeing is
through the support of the child’s family;
4. powers conferred under
the Act should be exercised in a way that is open, fair and respects the rights
of people affected by their
exercise, and in particular, in a way that
(a) actions taken, while in the best interests of the child,
maintain family relationships and are supportive of individual rights
ethnic, religious and cultural identity or values; and
(b) the views that the
child and the child’s family are considered; and
(c) the child and the
child’s parents have had the opportunity to take part in making decisions
affecting their lives;
5. if a child does not have a parent able and willing
to protect the child, the State has a responsibility to protect the child, but
in protecting the child the State must not take action that is unwarranted in
the circumstances;
6. if a child is removed from the child’s
(a) the aim of authorised officers working with the child and the
child’s family is to safely return the child to the family
if possible;
(b) if the child’s need to maintain family and social contact, and
ethnic and cultural identity must be taken into account;
(c) in deciding in
whose care the child should be placed, the Chief Executive must give proper
consideration to placing the child,
as the first option, with kin.
[107] I must further have regard to
CPA. It sets forth the type of
child protection orders that can be made. This is particularly relevant in light
Section 59(1)(e)
[108] The order being sought is an order under
which is an order granting custody of the child to the Chief Executive.
The issue for me is whether the protection required by MJ
can be met by an order
less intrusive than the one sought by the Department.
[109] A supervision
order was made by this court on 14 August 2008. This application to revoke that
order was brought because of the
refusal of MJ’s parents to engage with
the Department, MJ’s continued exposure to domestic violence between his
and continued abuse of alcohol by MJ’s parents.
[110] It seems
clear that following the making of the supervision order, both the mother and
the father resented the involvement of
the Department. I am satisfied they now
have a greater appreciation of the need to co-operate with the Department. The
the father no longer live together, reducing the potential of MJ
being exposed to domestic violence. The father has reduced if not
discontinued
his marijuana use. The mother has undergone some counselling and professes to
have reduced her alcohol consumption.
[111] Whilst the father’s failure
to undertake a domestic violence prevention program, his failure to acknowledge
any existing
mental health issues, and the mother having removed the restraining
order in place with respect to the father are matters of concern
I am satisfied
that these concerns can be addressed within a supervision order, and without the
need for a custody order.
[112] The Supervision Order currently in place
expires on 14 August 2009 and the case plan on which it was based is outdated.
as this application is for a fresh protection order, there is nothing to
preclude me from making a further supervision order: see
s 65(4) CPA.
[113] However before making any such order there must be a case plan for MJ
appropriate for meeting his assessed care and protection
needs. As the case plan
developed for the existing order is outdated and no longer appropriate and as
the current case plan is inappropriate
for a supervision order, a new case plan
will need to be devised appropriate to a new supervision order. I invite the
address me in this regard.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (260 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter