URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QADT/2009/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Conde v Hunter & Karakan Hostels [2009] QADT 11 (14 May 2009)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL QUEENSLAND
Conde v Hunter &
Karakan Hostels
[2009] QADT 11
MILTON ARNOLDO CONDE
Complainant
JOHN HUNTER
First Respondent
KARAKAN HOSTELS ACN 009 868 286
Second Respondent
PROCEEDING:
Final Hearing
DELIVERED ON:
14 May 2009
DELIVERED AT:
Member P Roney
HEARING DATES:
26, 27 & 28 November 2008
is ordered that the complaint be dismissed.
give the parties liberty to apply within 28 days of the date of this
decision in respect of any other orders that any party asks
the event that any party seeks an order for costs against any party, they are
directed to file a brief statement of the grounds
for which such an order is
sought, and the amount or method of calculation of the claim.
CATCHWORDS:
Racial vilification. Wog, terrorist, go back to your country. Public act.
Communication to the public. Racially based insults directed
to a party during
neighbourhood dispute. Victimization by accommodation provider.
CASES CITED
Burns v Dye
[2002] NSW ADT 32
Deen v Lamb
[2001] QADT
Wilson & McCollum v Lawson & Anor
[2008] QADT 27
LEGISLATION CITED:
Anti-Discrimination Act
REPRESENTATION:
The complainant was self-represented.
Mr C Eberhardt of Counsel,
instructed by Connor Hunter for the first respondent.
Ms N Kidson of Counsel, instructed by Shand Taylor Lawyers for the second
Conde, the complainant, is an Australian citizen and has lived in Australia
since 1992. He is 53 years of age. His country
of origin was
El Salvador, but he took Australian citizenship in the early 1990s. He
makes claim to having acted in intelligence
for a counter-revolutionary
guerrilla fighting organization as an El Salvadorian “freedom
fighter” prior to his arrival
in Australia. He represented himself at the
hearing of his complaint, which occurred over a period of three days. English
his first language. He was assisted by an interpreter, and although that
assistance was not without its difficulties for Mr Conde,
I am satisfied
that he sufficiently understood the issues which arose in the case and during
the hearing. He appeared to have a
reasonably good understanding of spoken
English, but at times he struggled to articulate himself. He spoke with a heavy
and to any person like the first respondent to whom he spoke, it would
have been obvious that he had not grown up in Australia, and
that English was
not his native tongue. But there is no evidence at all that the first
respondent knew anything of his personal
history, or even that he had originally
come from South America.
case against John Hunter, the first respondent, was only indirectly related to
that brought against the second respondent. At
the time of the events
complained of, which is in the period from approximately March until June 2007,
the complainant was a resident
at a hostel in Buranda, Brisbane, which was
operated by the second respondent for the purposes of providing accommodation
and support
for persons in need. Mr Conde had applied for accommodation at
the Karakan Hostel in July 2006 and was approved to become a resident
August 2006 when he thereupon took up residence. Mr Hunter lived in the
house adjacent to the hostel, but had no direct
role in the administration or
other affairs of the second respondent as the operator of the hostel. For all
intents and purposes,
he and the complainant were all but strangers.
second respondent, Karakan, established the hostel at the instigation of health
care professionals in the early 1970s to provide
community based housing and
support for persons who had been released from mental institutions and no longer
required institutional
care. Karakan was a relatively small organisation with
approximately fifteen full-time employees at the time of the relevant incidents.
Its functions were essentially charitable but its philosophy was to attempt to
encourage those who come into the hostel to learn
to manage their own affairs
and become independent. In part the hostel was funded with State and other
governmental funds, but was
left to be administered mostly by persons who were
unpaid, or at least were volunteers for charitable purposes. It did have some
paid employees. Relevantly for the purposes of this proceeding, Ms Donna
Didlick was employed as a service manager and Ms Anne Esposito
support worker who dealt directly with residents at the hostel, and was the
support worker at the relevant time for Mr Conde.
The essential character of the complaint
Essentially
the complaint against the first respondent is that on a number of occasions
commencing from approximately 9 March 2007
until approximately mid April 2007 he
engaged in racial vilification of the complainant, essentially by making
offensive and insulting
remarks with varying content. They included references
to him being a “
”, telling him to go back to his
own country
”, telling him that he did not belong in
Australia, and calling him or implying that he was a terrorist. In an incident
to have occurred on 20 April 2007, that being the last of the complained of
incidents, he is alleged to have repeatedly called the
complainant a
”. Surrounding the making of these alleged remarks there
is said to have been a considerable body of other verbal abuse, threats
and personal insults passed between Mr Conde and Mr Hunter, some of
which had racist overtones.
first respondent is alleged to have engaged in that vilification on the grounds
of race, in contravention of
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
(“the Act”).
of the Act provides:-
124A Vilification on grounds
of race, religion, sexuality or gender identity unlawful
(1) A person must not, by a public act, incite hatred towards, serious
contempt for, or severe ridicule of, a person or group of
persons on the ground
of the race, religion, sexuality or gender identity of the person or members of
(2) Subsection (1) does not make unlawful—
(a) the publication of a fair report of a public act mentioned in
subsection (1); or
(b) the publication of material in circumstances in which the publication
would be subject to a defence of absolute privilege in
proceedings for
defamation; or
(c) a public act, done reasonably and in good faith, for academic,
artistic, scientific or research purposes or for other purposes
in the public
interest, including public discussion or debate about, and expositions of, any
act or matter
against the second respondent, Karakan, the complainant contends that
essentially he was unlawfully victimised in contravention
by the hostel operator because he had made a complaint against or sought to use
his statutory rights to protect himself
against the complaint of racial
vilification perpetrated upon him by the first respondent. Primarily this
victimisation is said
to have occurred by his eviction from the hostel.
complainant was approved as a resident at the hostel and commenced occupation,
in early August 2006. As one of the terms of permitting
him to occupy a room at
the hostel, he was required to abide by the terms of a simple rental agreement
which essentially permitted
either party to terminate the residency arrangement
as they saw fit. Residents were required to give two weeks notice. Another
express term of the residency was that the residency would be terminated if
there was physical aggression toward residents, staff
or others, or even the
threat of that occurring. There was a wide range of other circumstances which
entitled the hostel operator
to terminate the arrangement, including
specifically verbal or physical aggression toward support workers.
complainant contends that he was placed at a disadvantage by the hostel operator
because of the complaints that he had made against
the first respondent. This
included requiring that he vacate the hostel, falsely alleging that he had
abused the support worker,
Anne Esposito, falsely alleging that he had breached
his rental agreements with the hostel operator because of this and other similar
conduct. The complainant alleges that the dominant or substantial reason for
the acts of victimisation by the hostel operator were
because he had lodged
complaints with the Anti-Discrimination Commission of Queensland (“the
Commission”) about the conduct
of the first respondent, those complaints
allegedly having been lodged on 11 and 22 April 2007. There was in fact a
written complaint
made against the first respondent to the Commission on
11 April 2007. On 22 April 2007, the complainant provided information
the Commission about the second respondent’s alleged lack of response
to the treatment he was being subjected to by the first
respondent. He formally
lodged a complaint against the second respondent to the Commission on
24 June 2007.
The confrontations between the complainant and the first respondent in March
2007 – the squatter incident
complains essentially that he has been the victim of racial vilification by the
first respondent (whom he referred to as
various occasions since 9 March 2007.
first incident he described occurred on Friday, 9 March 2007. According to
Mr Conde, the first respondent was waiting for him
inside the front yard of
the Karakan Hostel near the garage with a woman who was a squatter underneath
the hostel. There was some
evidence, which is contested, as to whether she was
living under the house with or without authority and as to the circumstances
which she lived there. There is no doubt though that Karakan took steps to have
her removed once it became aware of her existence.
Mr Conde alleges that
the squatter had made herself at home with the help of the first respondent and
that when he saw the complainant,
the first respondent started yelling at him
with offensive and obscene language. The complainant says that he told him to
his language, told him that he was trespassing, and told him to leave.
then alleges that later the same day the first respondent tried to assemble a
bed for the squatter whilst at the same time
complaining about the fact that it
was illegal to have a woman living downstairs at the hostel. The complainant
said that it was
not his problem but in the course of all of this the
complainant told Mr Hunter to leave because he was trespassing. At that
the first respondent is alleged to have made racist remarks toward him.
That is the complainant’s characterisation of them.
What was actually
said, according to him was to the effect of “
Hey you fucking dog, wog
cunt, come here, give me the keys ... I need the keys for the girl because she
has the right to stay inside,
get the phone number to call the office ... give
me the keys
”. Also, in the course of a scuffle, “
You fucking
cunt, fucking wog, go back to your own country ... you
complainant describes a confrontation which then occurred in which the first
respondent grabbed his shoulder and pushed him downstairs
but by luck he was
able to grab a handrail on the stair and was able to get himself back inside the
house. The first respondent
is said to have then knocked very hard on the front
door after the complainant had gone inside. Then the first respondent is said
to have gone around the house for about 40 minutes yelling racial insults.
The complainant suggests that the first respondent wanted
him out of the hostel
and wanted to have his room available to give to the squatter because she was
anglo saxon Australian.
complainant says he called the police to come to the site and there was a
discussion with the police when they arrived. No one
was charged over the
incident but the police officers are said to have removed the squatter from the
house. Other evidence suggests
a staff member of Karakan was involved in
summoning the police.
to the complainant, the next day, 10 March 2007, there were further
incidents. The complainant contends that on that day
the squatter came back to
the house accompanied by the first respondent. The complainant confronted them
and the first respondent
is said to have insulted him with “
obscene word available in English language, followed by racial hatred insults,
including to come back to my country and physical
complainant made a subsequent complaint to the police about the activity of the
squatter who apparently kept returning to the
premises for some days.
to the complaint, after the 9 March 2007 incident, “
” the first respondent made his life “
”. He complained that he had “
no peace, no freedom of
movements, I am a prisoner of the house, I can not go outside at any time
without being harassed, insulted,
threatened, stalked and abused with racial
hatred. On top of these, he yells accusing me of being a terrorist possessing
The first respondent’s evidence of the squatter incident
to this incident, the first respondent initially disputed almost every critical
element of the version given by Mr Conde. John
Hunter was at the time in
his mid 50’s and lived at the house adjacent to the Karakan Hostel with
his mother, who was some
90 years of age. His version of what occurred on
9 March 2007 is that he had seen a female squatter under the hostel who had
an open fire under the house and was doing other things which were of
concern to him. He went to the front door of the house, knocked
on the door and
Mr Conde came to the front window. According to Mr Hunter he asked
Mr Conde for the phone number of the support
worker, Anne Esposito, so that
he could give her a warning about the fire risk associated with what the
squatter was doing. Mr Conde
was concerned and refused to give over
Ms Esposito’s phone number despite being asked a number of times.
The indifference
of Mr Conde had made Mr Hunter “
” and he said words to the effect that it was stupid to let a
person light a fire under the house. He denied saying anything
which was in any
way racially abusive. He then went home. He swore that later that day the
police visited him because of a complaint
made by Mr Conde. Mr Hunter
told them that he could not have grabbed Mr Conde’s arm and assaulted
him because at all times
Mr Conde had remained inside the house and he had
been on the front stairs speaking through a window. His mother, Mary Hunter,
provided a statement but neither her statement, nor in any useful way did
Mrs Hunter’s testimony, throw any light upon the
events of that day.
Notwithstanding
the content of his statement filed in the Tribunal, in a record of interview
between police and Mr Hunter conducted
on 23 May 2007, Mr Hunter
gave a significantly different version of the events of that day. According to
what he told the police,
when he spoke to Mr Conde he was not asking
Mr Conde for Ms Esposito’s phone number. Rather he commented
went up and I saw him
the window and I asked him what was going on and I wanted her removed. Would
you like someone laying under a set of back
stairs carrying on all
he was asked by the police about the verbal altercation he said that he had
given Mr Conde a “
” because he would not give
him the number of the woman who was looking after the house. He denied in any
way pushing him.
Initially when asked he could not remember what had been said
by him, when it was put to him by the police that he had called Mr
inter alia, a “
” and told him to go back to his own
case for the first respondent was essentially that he had no reason to be inside
the hostel and did not go in there. But there
was some very general evidence
from a witness called for Mr Conde’s case, Andrew McLean.
Mr McLean was also a resident of
the Karakan Hostel. He gave evidence that
he had seen Mr Hunter inside the house “
a handful of
”. But according to Mr McLean that was just to visit
Mr McLean and to talk with him. Generally speaking McLean’s evidence
suggested that in his dealings with John Hunter there had never been any
problems, and that he had never heard any verbal or racial
abuse directed at
Mr Conde or anyone else or him. Indeed it seems that Mr McLean did
not ever hear Mr Hunter become annoyed with
or say anything aggressive
toward Mr Conde. Some evidence was called also from Mr Des Breen,
which was in an attempt to corroborate
the evidence of Mr Hunter that he
was a person who had no propensity for aggressive, argumentative or insulting
conduct. The fact
remains though that even on his own version of events,
Mr Hunter was in some way verbally aggressive toward the complainant, at
in the course of the incident involving the squatter.
to this, Mr Hunter conceded that he was in the wrong in insisting that
Mr Conde provide him with Ms Esposito’s contact details.
evidence in chief, the first respondent described the 9 March 2007 incident
as one in which there was a “
verbal altercation
himself and Mr Conde. He swore, and at least in this respect his evidence
is consistent with that of Mr Conde, that
prior to that incident there had
been no problem between the two of them. He denied ever calling Mr Conde a
”, a terrorist, a Muslim, or suggested he go back to his
own country. But he volunteered that he had in fact sworn at Mr Conde
day because he was frustrated with Mr Conde because the squatter had lit a
fire under the house and because Mr Conde had refused
to give him
Ms Esposito’s phone number.
his interview with the police, despite having initially said that he did not
recall what he said to Mr Conde that day, Mr Hunter
pressed, that he had verbally abused him but he could not remember the exact
words he had used. Later in the interview
he volunteered that he had in fact
sworn at Mr Conde and asked why he would not “
fucking give me her
were no eye witnesses to the incident, or at least none who was called by the
parties. There is therefore a fundamental conflict
between the respective
versions of events. It seems to me that Mr Hunter was not entirely frank
in his description of this incident
when he described it in the statement which
he filed in the Tribunal. The truth of the matter only emerged once the content
record of interview between him and the police had gone into evidence,
and was eventually cross-examined upon by Mr Conde. Additionally,
when it came to giving his evidence concerning this issue, his evidence in chief
did not condescend to any detail about what
was actually said between them. One
might infer that his initial reluctance to concede that he had lost his temper
and verbally
abused Mr Conde at all implied that there was more to the
incident than he was saying.
The squatter incident as recounted to Karakan staff
squatter incident was reported to the acting support worker, Beverley Butkowsky,
at the time and she made notes in an incident
report relating to incidents from
8 through to 15 March 2007. She had a conversation with the complainant on
8 March 2007 over coffee.
In the course of that conversation he described
problems with a female squatter and other people under the house and the calling
of the police. She also records an incident on 9 March 2007 in which she
had a discussion with the earlier mentioned Mr McLean,
another resident in
the house, and she was told by him that the police had been called again to
remove a squatter and there were
no issues over this
”. She also had a call from Mr Conde at 5.30pm that day
when he informed her that the squatter had returned. She told Mr Conde
to approach the squatter. Ms Butkowsky then called the police who removed
the squatter again. On the next day on 10 March 2007
she again received a
call from Mr McLean to inform her that the squatter was back and arguments
were occurring, although no mention
is made of them involving any neighbour. On
Wednesday, 14 March 2007, Mr Conde informed her that the police had
been called again
was also a file note prepared by Ms Esposito concerning a discussion that
she had with Mr Conde on 3 April 2007 concerning incidents
from 8 March 2007 involving a squatter and a complaint from Mr Conde
mattress to
provide a bed for the squatter. As a result of that Ms Esposito went and
spoke to Mr Hunter about this. There was no
recorded complaint to
Ms Esposito by Mr Conde to the effect that Mr Hunter had racially
abused him in the course of the March incidents.
He did later report incidents
involving alleged racial abuse toward him and Mr Hunter but this report
only occurred in the second
week of April 2007. There is no plausible
explanation for why Mr Conde would not have been prepared to confide in
Ms Esposito about
those incidents.
the material provided to the Commission at the time of making his complaint, and
also in his submissions in this Tribunal, Mr Conde
gave the impression of
being a man intensely interested in racial discrimination law and in what he saw
as the right not to be exposed
to racist remarks and equal treatment under the
law for all Australians. He referred at length in his written submissions at
hearing to literature referring to the right to protect the dignity of all
individuals and the policy which stood behind legislation
which prohibited
behaviour based on racial hatred. He was demonstrably a man very sensitive to
these issues. He was proud of his
Australian citizenship and felt strongly that
he had earned the right to be treated the same as what he called “anglo
Australians. In those circumstances it seems to me to be highly
unlikely that if he was exposed to racial vilification in the incident
around 9 March 2007, as distinct from insults no one might have taken
seriously, he would have reported it both to Mr Butkowsky,
his trusted
support worker Ms Esposito, or mentioned it in a complaint to the police at
the earliest opportunity. He did tell the
police about it in a written
statement on 23 May 2007. He swore in cross-examination that he had
mentioned the incident “
” after 10 March to
Andrew McLean, but Mr McLean gave no evidence of that having occurred.
the circumstances, I am not satisfied that the incidents of 9 March 2007
occurred in the manner in which Mr Conde described them.
The evidence
suggests that he first made a complaint to the police in which he alleged racial
comments by Mr Hunter on or about
11 April 2007, that is after some
other incidents had occurred between them. The fact that Ms Didlick from
Karakan drafted a letter
on or about 14 March 2007 intended to be sent but
not in fact sent to Mr Hunter asking that he not contact any of the
residents that
live at the property, indicates that she was made aware that
there had been some kind of verbal altercation between him and Mr Conde,
but nothing in that letter suggests that there were acts of racial vilification
involved, and certainly not that one of the residents
under her care had been
contends that he had told Ms Butkowsky about the 9 March 2007 incident and
that indeed Mr Hunter was being verbally abusive
”, shouting at him in and under the house, and out of the window,
and also at the shops. But he conceded that he had no other
witness who was
able to testify to having heard any part of these incidents. He also agreed
that he had not attempted to find any
witnesses at the shopping centre who might
have corroborated his version of events about the incident there. In fact on
Ms Esposito had actually offered to help him find witnesses and
also offered to help him in other ways associated with the complaint,
he declined this assistance. Ironically then, it was Ms Esposito who
became the target of his claims that he had been wrongfully
treated in the
level to which Mr Conde, I think unconsciously, was prepared to exaggerate
the events which had occurred to him, is demonstrated
from a passage of his
evidence in which he summarised the effect of his dealings with Mr Hunter.
He essentially suggested that every
day from 8 March 2007 in various places
at or around the hostel, in the back yard and through the window, Mr Hunter
verbally abused
him in circumstances in which others were in a position to have
heard it, in the sense that it occurred in public. He also suggested
number of occasions abuse occurred with Mr Hunter actually coming into the
hostel. The evidence was to the effect that
every day this abuse involved the
same kinds of statements, to the effect that he should go back to his own
country, that he was
a terrorist, that there was nothing in Australia for
terrorists like him and that he was a “
”. Yet in all of
that, Mr Conde was not able to identify, or call as a witness in this
proceeding any other person who saw
or heard any of this kind of conduct.
were many elements of the complainant’s version of the events of that day
which are implausible. It is common ground
that although the first respondent
was trying to get the phone number from Ms Esposito out of Mr Conde,
he did not consider Mr Conde
as the person responsible for the squatter.
Mr Hunter seemed mostly frustrated by the fact that the squatter was there,
potentially
causing a fire risk and that he could not get any action about it
either through Mr Conde or through the persons who were in charge
Karakan. It is likely that the first respondent did in fact swear at, and
probably also directed some verbal abuse, including
the use of the words
” at Mr Conde in
the course of that discussion, but I am not satisfied to the requisite standard
of proof that the incident
that day included any assault upon Mr Conde by
Mr Hunter, or that there was any racial vilification of
The incident at Woolworths Buranda
in 2007 occurred from 6 through to 8 April 2007. The complainant alleges
that on Saturday, 7 April 2007, he had gone to Woolworths
at Buranda near
the hostel, for the purpose of buying groceries. He alleges that the first
respondent followed him to the shopping
centre and in an area outside of the
Woolworths store there, but within the shopping centre and in a public place, he
the complainant and started yelling racial abuse, making fun of his
English, his clothes and his physical appearance. In the course
of that the
first respondent is said to have called him a terrorist and accused him of
possessing weapons and invited him to pull
out his weapon. According to the
complaint, the complainant felt “
shock, terrified, humiliated,
ridiculed, embarrassed
”. He said that he tried to escape and even ran
across the street in a dangerous fashion with the first respondent in chase.
They confronted each other further down the street at which time the first
respondent is alleged to have threatened to kill him.
The complainant ran off
again and escaped to the hostel. In his description of this incident in his
statement dated 28 April 2007,
the complainant described various remarks
said to have been made to him in the shopping centre including “
bastard, go back to your country
there is nothing to do
here for a terrorist
pull out your weapons
come back here terrorist
if you don’t
leave the country I will cut off your head, because I am a veteran
There were various other threats allegedly made, including threats which
suggested that the complainant’s days were
numbered. There were other
insults which were not of a racist kind.
the version of events given by the first respondent bore almost no resemblance
to that given by the complainant. He swore
that on the Wednesday before Easter,
that is on 4 April he was placing rubbish bins out for collection when
Mr Conde walked past
on the footpath and called out to him that he was
going to cut his head off, and made a gesture drawing his hand across his throat
as if signifying that. Although stunned by this incident, the first respondent
did nothing about it that day, did not report it
to the police at that time and
apparently did not mention it to anyone else. As I have said, the complainant
alleges that the incident
at the Buranda Woolworths occurred on Saturday,
7 April. According to the first respondent, there was no incident on
Saturday, 7
April, but there was an incident on Easter Monday,
9 April. According to the first respondent as he walked into the shopping
he noticed Mr Conde walking toward him in the opposite direction.
Mr Hunter said to him, referring to the incident the previous
now cut my head off
”. According to Mr Hunter,
Mr Conde then put in his pocket and pushed his hand forward as if he had a
weapon in his pocket.
Mr Hunter was not afraid, intended to call his bluff
and took a step toward him. Mr Conde then began to run away to which
called out “
run you dog
”. The complainant
does not suggest that on that occasion he was referred to by Mr Hunter as a
dog or that that expression
was used. He does, however, contend that in a
different incident which occurred some weeks later on 20 April
Mr Hunter called the
complainant a dog. The first respondent did not deal
with such an incident as having occurred at all in his statement to the
nor did he lead any evidence to deal with this incident.
was a witness statement tendered by the complainant from Amy Tetley-Jones, who
was apparently another resident at Karakan.
It states that at 6 pm on
Friday, 20 April 2007, she heard the next door neighbour yell to
Mr Conde that he was a dog. She got up
to see what had happened and then
heard the remark made again. Ultimately, this incident goes only to credit.
Even if it occurred,
describing the complainant as a dog was nothing more than
personal insult and did not constitute rational vilification. It seems
likely in light of Mr Hunter’s concession that he had in fact called
the complainant a dog in the confrontation at the
Buranda Shopping Centre at
Easter, that he may also have used the same expression on a later date. The
fact that that occurred does
not, however in my view, lead to the conclusion
that Mr Conde’s evidence about the supermarket confrontation is
have already referred to the fact that Mr Conde had identified himself as a
former guerilla fighter in South America. He was asked
little about his
experience in that regard in the course of cross-examination. He did clarify
that although he was a guerilla fighter,
he was not a soldier and did not kill
anyone. He was part of the “intelligence” side of guerilla
fighting. But it is
reasonable to infer that he was a person who was not
unaccustomed to encountering violent, aggressive or confrontational conduct.
seems to me to be surprising that Mr Conde would have found the alleged
conduct directed toward him by Mr Hunter at the shopping
threatening as he suggests that it was. Indeed it was Mr Conde’s
case, identified by issues he raised in cross-examination
of Mr Hunter,
that Mr Hunter was a lay about, who spent most of his days drinking
alcohol. Although clearly he was capable of being
verbally aggressive toward
Mr Conde, it is doubtful how seriously he would have taken any threat by
Mr Hunter. Mr Conde attributes
to him a statement that he would
” Mr Conde’s head, because he was
”. There was no independent evidence of whether or
not Mr Hunter was a war veteran.
Breen was called to corroborate some of the elements of Mr Hunter’s
versions of events as to the shopping centre incident.
He lived in a unit
opposite Karakan and the Hunters’ house. He claimed to have no hearing
problems yet he had never seen
or heard the first respondent yell anything from
his house or any altercation between Mr Hunter and any of the neighbours,
Mr Conde. This is despite the concession by the first respondent
that he had in fact yelled at the Respondent from the front stairs
Karakan Hostel and given him “
” in March. In any
event, he testified that on Good Friday of 2007 the first respondent came to his
house and said that his
neighbour had threatened to cut his head off and made a
gesture of slitting his throat. It is difficult (in light of
confidence that this occurred on Good Friday) to treat
this evidence as corroborating Mr Hunter’s version of what he says
on Easter Monday. It may well be that Mr Hunter did tell
Mr Breen about a threat by Mr Conde to cut his head off, but he may
have been talking about the incident of the previous Wednesday,
4 April. I therefore am unable to derive any real assistance from
evidence of Mr Breen in determining what occurred at the Buranda Shopping
Centre on either Easter Saturday, or Easter Monday
truth of what was said between the two of them at or near the Woolworths at
Buranda over Easter in 2007 is not discernible from
the evidence. I am not
persuaded that the first respondent was the victim of threats by Mr Conde
that day or that Mr Conde in fact
pretended to be carrying a weapon in his
pocket. That is not to say that there was not some conduct by Mr Conde
which could reasonably
have been interpreted in that way. It is true to say
that the first respondent did make threatening remarks that day, including
his own evidence, sarcastically inviting Mr Conde to “
cut his head
”. It is highly likely that there were other things said between
them that day which were intended to offend, annoy and insult
the other. There
may well have been discussion in which Mr Hunter implied that Mr Conde
had previously made threats to cut his head
off, because that is in fact what he
believes had previously occurred. He may well have made remarks that suggested
he regarded
Mr Conde as a violent person or even a terrorist. That, in my
opinion, does not mean that whatever was said amounted to racial vilification.
On the other hand, I do not regard the evidence of Mr Conde as to what
occurred that day as credible, although it may well be that
interpreted what he heard, or indeed believed that he heard remarks that implied
that he was a terrorist, or was carrying
weapons, or that there was discussion
him in person,
they did not in my opinion and without more, constitute racial
vilification.
The complainant’s mental health history
10 July 2006, Mr Conde had applied to the hostel for accommodation and
support service. In his application form he identified
that he was suffering
from a mental illness which affected his “
sleep, mood, memory, good and
bad feelings and ability to do activities
”. This description
precisely mirrored examples on the pre-printed form as to examples of the way in
which his mental illness
might affect him. In other words it appears to have
been a rote response. He did identify independently in that application that
suffered from depression. In support of his application to the hostel there was
information supplied by his mental health professional,
Dr Syedjaffar. The
description of Mr Conde’s medical history in that application form is
one of the few places in which there
was any reliable evidence of his
psychiatric history. Dr Syedjaffar was not called as a witness. The
complainant did not appear
to contest any of the assertions in the submission
prepared by the doctor. One of the grounds for which the doctor suggested
be provided was that the complainant had suffered major depression with
neuro-vegetative disturbances, was socially isolated and
was lacking family and
other support. He described a history of intermittent suicidal thoughts. There
was an oblique reference
to a history of alleged domestic violence and previous
suicidal attempts. These issues were sought to be explored in cross-examination
by counsel for the first respondent.
particular, in the course of cross-examination it was suggested that the
complainant had been involved in an incident in August
2005 in which he had
taken a knife to his 14 year old son and had been placed in hospital for a
period of months. The complainant
disputed that this had occurred, or at least
disputed the severity of it. There is no direct evidence concerning this
emerged from cross-examination of Mr Conde that he had been involved in a
number of other incidents involving conflict between
himself and other members
of the public. He had commenced a claim for damages for a substantial sum
arising out of an alleged act
of defamation by a Mr Gamero, who is said to
have alleged that he had an affair with the complainant’s ex-wife. That
had ended in 2005. It was suggested to Mr Conde, and he denied
that a domestic violence order had been taken out against him, or
that he had
been detained under mental health laws. But he accepted that he had also
commenced defamation actions against his ex-wife
and also his own daughter. In
that claim he alleged that he had been exposed to embarrassing and stressful
statements, ridiculed,
and made the laughing stock of the Hispanic community.
became apparent that he attributed the same psychological injuries, in
particular depression and post-traumatic stress disorder
with the onset of
suicidal thoughts, to the alleged defamatory conduct of the Gameros, but also to
the conduct of his own family.
In both of those proceedings, and indeed in the
course of the conduct of his own case in this Tribunal, Mr Conde had a
demonstrated
propensity to suggest that others had conspired to lie to
intentionally damage him. He gave inconsistent evidence about whether
or had not, ever attempted suicide after the acts in which it had been suggested
he had been wronged by others. Included
in the allegations of conspiracies to
commit falsehoods against him was one where he alleged after the death of his
son at birth
in 1995 that the midwife involved was at fault, but that she had
falsified documents to conceal that fact. He also accused the doctor
performed the autopsy of having conspired to conceal the truth and he tried to
have him indicted. He accused the Health Rights
Commission of being involved in
a cover-up. He also accused the Ipswich Hospital of also being involved in the
concealment.
admitted to having sought to present his own indictment in the Supreme Court
charging the midwife who delivered his son with the
unlawful killing of his
child and an indictment against Dr McAdam of the Ipswich Court for
attempting to pervert the course of justice.
also commenced defamation proceedings against the representatives of Karakan who
were the material witnesses in this case, namely
Ms Didlick,
Ms Esposito, and Mr Manderson. As explained by Mr Conde, he
alleged that each of them had given false testimony against
him with a view to
having him wrongly evicted from the premises, and that they had conspired to
make false and unfounded accusations
against him, and had a vendetta against
him. Indeed he repeated the belief that they had done so in the course of
cross-examination
during the hearing before me.
was also cross examined about the content of some medical records that were
obtained pursuant to orders issued by the Tribunal.
In particular, there were
records from psychiatrist Dr Farouk, and from a Dr De Barros. The
report by Dr Farouk is dated 17 August
2006. It is not in evidence
and the doctors were not called. He was also asked about some information that
he provided to Dr Syedjaffar.
Mr Conde agreed that Dr Farouk had
described him as a person having a problem with “
all or nothing
over catastrophizing
”. The report
referred to his habit of thinking in that way “
was able to be partially
managed through reframing his cognitio
n”. He denied having
schizophrenia or delusions. Indeed he was rather sensitive to the suggestion
that he might be suffering
from such. “
All or nothing
thinking is a well recognized tendency in persons suffering from depression to
think in absolutes. Hence it prevents the
affected person from perceiving
degrees or shades of behaviour and fine distinctions.
Catastrophizing
” is characterized by a lack of confidence
and sense of control, and the expectation of a negative outcome. I was not
by medical opinion about whether these propensities on the part of
Mr Conde had any influence upon the events which I am to consider.
be accepted however that his ability to accurately judge the responses of those
around him was at the time of these events,
compromised.
Public Acts and mere personal abuse
there to be a contravention of
of the Act that there must be a
”. That expression is defined in
as follows:-
(1) A public act includes—
(a) any form of communication to the public, including by speaking,
writing, printing, displaying notices, broadcasting, telecasting,
screening or
playing of tapes or other recorded material, or by electronic means; and
(b) any conduct that is observable by the public, including actions,
gestures and the wearing or display of clothing, signs, flags,
(2) Despite anything in subsection (1), a public act does not include the
distribution or dissemination of any matter by a person
to the public if the
person does not know, and could not reasonably be expected to know, the content
of the matter
definition in
is not apparently intended to be exhaustive. It is one
which is inclusive of the matters mentioned in
But it cannot, in my
opinion, be suggested here that the definition, insofar as it refers to
communication by speaking, means anything
other than that it must be a form of
speaking which is by way of “
communication to the
I have already found, the statements which the complainant contends were made to
him in making reference to the fact that he was
in some way foreign to
Australia, to his being a terrorist, a dog, and suggesting he was not welcome in
Australia by the first respondent,
did not, in law amount to racial
vilification. I will now deal with what the authorities have said on this topic
to explain why.
the use of some racially based expression in a particular context suggests that
it is capable of being more than an insult
or is likely to incite hatred, severe
ridicule or serious contempt requires it to be considered in the precise factual
which it is spoken. In the context of homosexual vilification in
Burns v Dye
it was said that:-
61 While we accept that over time
certain terms of abuse take on a more general connotation we find that the words
and ‘faggot’ retain a specific meaning:
they are derisory terms used for homosexual males. (In certain
circumstances,
such as when used by homosexual male friends between themselves,
they may not be used in an insulting way but it is clear that they
insulting in the circumstances of this case.)
does not follow automatically that verbal abuse directed at a homosexual person
or persons that includes words understood to be
insulting of homosexuals, is
capable of inciting the requisite ill-feeling required to establish a complaint
of homosexual vilification.
The circumstances in which the abuse occurred are
critical. Relevant factors will include the context in which the abuse occurred,
the tone of voice used by the alleged vilifier and the observable relationship
between the vilifier and his/her victim.
establish capacity to incite, it is not enough in our view to merely prove that
the offending communication identified or ‘outed’
Mr Burns as
homosexual. Nor is it sufficient to prove that the victim was deeply
wounded or concerned for their privacy, or indeed
safety. It is also
insufficient to establish that the conduct simply conveyed hatred towards a
person, or the expression of serious
contempt or severe ridicule: (Wagga Wagga
Aboriginal Action Group v Eldridge).
64 Mr Burns
must establish, on balance, that all or part of Mr Dye’s conduct was
capable of urging on, stimulating, or prompting
to action the ordinary
reasonable person to the requisite feelings of ill will towards Mr Burns.
How would such person react on hearing
Mr Dye’s attack on
Mr Burns? In our view a section of the community would have dismissed this
conduct as the rantings of a
drunken, possibly mentally-ill individual and, if
anything, the attack may have engendered feelings of hatred towards, serious
for, or severe ridicule of Mr Dye himself.
the public act of course must be one which incites hatred towards,
serious contempt for, or severe ridicule of a person or group
of persons on the
ground of race. That element is not shown merely by showing that a person has
been subjected to personal insults
or taunts which relate to one’s race or
country of origin. Moreover, calling a person by names such as
”, even if said to a
person because they were in some way foreign, does not amount to vilification.
President of this Tribunal said in the context of a racial vilification
The question arises how one determines whether a
publication has the character referred to in
The test is plainly an
objective one rather than a subjective one. In the law of defamation the test
adopted has been to assume a
reader who is of fair average intelligence, and who
is neither perverse nor morbid, nor of a suspicious mind, nor one who is avid
scandal: see Lewis v. Daily Telegraph
(1964) AC 234
at 259. This test has been
adopted in the context of racial vilification legislation: see Kazak v. John
(2000) NSWADT 77
at paras. 31-34.
I agree that that is the appropriate test, but would add that it is also
necessary to exclude on the one hand those persons who are
either over-sensitive
to criticism of their race, religion or culture, and on the other hand, those
who are too thick-skinned to
appreciate the nature of an act as one which has
the relevant tendency to incite. cf. Lewis v. Daily Telegraph at
Wilson & McCollum v Lawson &
relation to this issue in the context of a case of vilification of the grounds
of sexuality:-
The requirement that there be an incitement
to another to hate goes hand in hand with the requirement that there be
communication
to the public or in other respects that there be a public act. In
the absence of those elements, the abuse of a person on the grounds
sexuality, including showing hatred or ridicule of the person on the grounds of
homosexuality, does not amount to vilification.
It is the propensity to incite
hatred in other members of the public, by the manifestation of the hatred of the
speaker that is
intrinsic to the act of vilification. In my view therefore, a
private conversation between one person and another which cannot be,
overheard by any other person, does not have the essential element of it being a
public act or one which is capable of inciting
hatred towards the other person
to that conversation. If the conduct in question amounts to the making of oral
statements, then
for the act to be a public act it must be a form of
communication “to the public” within the meaning of
of the Act.
In my opinion, where the conduct was of that kind, the observability of the act
in the sense that the public could see
that there was an incident occurring, but
not necessarily hear what was being said, would not be sufficient to demonstrate
was a public act. So, for example, in this case, the fact that
neighbours could see Mrs Lawson talking to either of the complainants
the time she was referring to them as “faggots” would not by itself
establish that the act was a public one. It would
be necessary that her remarks
be audible to others from where they were.
paragraphs [53] to [64] of the decision in
Wilson & McCollum v Lawson
I reviewed the case law on this subject and
53. There is little assistance to be found in the
case law concerning what is required to establish communication to the public in
circumstances in which personal statements have been made by the offender
directly to the victim of the alleged vilification.
internet website containing material which vilified on the grounds of
homosexuality was found to be a ‘public act’
within the meaning of
the equivalent provision of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW), Division
Similarly, a
broadcast on a public radio station has been held to be a ‘public
complaint of HIV and homosexual vilification was upheld in R v D & E
Marinkovic.
case a three member panel of the Equal Opportunity Tribunal of New South Wales
was called upon to consider a claim of vilification
concerning comments made by
a married couple who lived in the same block of units directly above the
complainant’s unit. Various
expressions were used over a period of about
a year, including describing him as a ‘poofter’, ‘gay
‘I don’t want faggots living nearby baby’,
‘Aids ridden cunt’. The evidence is that these comments
variously made and yelled from the balcony of the unit above. On another
occasion the complainant came home to find a letter
which had been written to
the respondents by a community justice centre attached to his front door with
sticky tape which had been
annotated by the respondents with comments such as
‘poofy bastard’, ‘can’t you read English, faggot’,
and in two places where his name was mentioned in the letter the respondents had
crossed it out and written the word ‘faggot’.
The Tribunal found
that the door on which the letter was stuck was in a corridor that was used by
other residents in the building
and by members of the public. The Tribunal
found, although without having conducted any particular analysis of the facts,
statements and conduct of the respondents were public acts. There was
no direct evidence that any other resident saw the letter
posted to the door but
clearly the circumstances were that any person who passed that way would have
been able to have observed it.
The day after the offending letter was posted on
the door, a copy had been slid by the respondents under the complainant’s
door. One could easily infer in those circumstances that the posting of it on
the door occurred with the intent that other neighbours
read it. On at least
one of the occasions when abuse was yelled over the balcony, the complainant was
with a friend who could hear
Peters v Constance,
an employee of a debt collection agency that went to the house of a homosexual
man who, when he refused to answer the door called
out loudly from the front of
the home that he was a paedophile. The Tribunal held that whilst there was no
evidence that anyone
other than the complainant had heard the accusation, there
was evidence which was accepted that the neighbours in the vicinity were
to have heard what went on outside the front of the house that morning and that
this was sufficient for the act to be public
within the meaning of
Menzies & Ors v
complaints was that the respondent drove a car the rear bumper of which affixed
a sticker which read, ‘Gay rights?
Under God’s law the only
‘rights’ gays have is the right to die.
Member of this Tribunal
vehicle was driven to the Council chambers on 23 August 2005 and parked
outside the chambers. It was observable by
members of the public when it was
being driven and when it was left outside the chambers. The display of the
bumper sticker involved
a form of communication to the public and it was also
the display of a sign that was observable by the public’.
incident in that case concerned the respondent there, who was a local
councillor, providing a report to the Cooloola Shire
Council. The report was
published by the Council in the agenda for its meeting. The content of the
report has held to have ‘incited
hatred for and severe contempt of
homosexuals because they engage in sexual acts with members of the same sex and
because Mr Owen
ascribes paedophilic tendencies towards them’. It
was held that the incitement was on the basis of the sexuality of homosexuals.
The respondent had argued that the provision of the report to the chief
executive officer was a private act and the decision to
publish the report in
the agenda was one made by the Council, for which he was not
responsible.
Member found
the respondent:-
‘... wrote the report and handed it to
the chief executive officer of the Council. The report was said to be
‘For Council’s
consideration’. The natural and probable
consequence was that the chief executive officer would cause the report to be
in the agenda. That was what in fact happened. I also find that
Mr Owen intended that consequence. The publication of the report
agenda was a form of communication to the public. In these circumstances, I am
satisfied that Mr Owen engaged in a public
act by writing and providing the
report to the chief executive officer.’
statement to ‘the public’ has been held to include the possibility
of a statement being overheard by or visible to passers
by, even if the act took
place on private
South Wales Tribunal held that abusive words spoken on the stairwell of a block
of units constituted a form of communication
to the public because although
there were no eyewitnesses there was evidence that the words were spoken with
such force they could
be overheard by other residents.
Kirstenfeldt
complainant alleged offensive behaviour based on race or colour, which is
unlawful conduct under
Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) (‘the RD Act’). The allegation
was to the effect that there were a number of comments passed over a
neighbourhood
fence to an aboriginal person who was standing outside watering
and gardening while her son and some of his friends (some of whom
aboriginal and some of whom were not) were playing cricket to the effect of
‘you nigger, coon black bastard, go back where
you belong in the
scrub’. Also, in front of another neighbour, calling her ‘nigger,
alleged conduct was held to be unlawful under s.18C of the RD Act, which
requires the conduct to be an act performed ‘otherwise
private’. Section 18C provided relevantly
‘(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an act
is taken not to be done in private if it:
(a) causes words, sounds, images or writing to be communicated to the
(b) is done in a public place; or
(c) is done in the sight or hearing of people who are in a public
(3) In this section: public place includes any place to which the public
have access as of right or by invitation, whether express
or implied and whether
or not a charge is made for admission to the place.’
Court held as
relation to each incident the Court is satisfied that the act was one performed
otherwise than in private. This is because
in relation to each of the incidents
they have occurred either:-
a neighbourhood fence; or
shouted, or at least capable of being heard, between one property and another;
capable of being heard in public being said on one property to people either on
a public footpath or in a public reserve across
the road from the house;
that each of the houses faces directly onto a footpath and road that the acts
complained of (being words spoken) in each case
would, the Court finds, have
been capable of being heard in a public place, being either the footpath, or the
road or the park reserve;
therefore not made in private, and in any event, were not private exchanges, but
exchanges heard by the complainant, and members
of her family on some occasions,
persons who are not members of her family on other occasions (including the
neighbour who was with
the respondent on at least two occasions), or generally
capable of being heard in the neighbourhood.’
as a whole, it is clear to me that there has been a regular pattern of verbal
abuse and insult which has occurred by both of
the respondents and which is
directly referrable to the complainants’ homosexuality. Whilst it may
well be true that the abuse
was personal abuse, designed to be hurtful, and to
inflict damage as part of an ongoing neighbourhood dispute where abuse may well
have passed from all sides, it does not mean that the conduct complained of did
not amount to vilification if it amounted to a communication
appeal from the decision in
Wilson & McCollum
was dismissed by
Mullins J in the Supreme Court of Queensland on 9 March 2009, although
that decision was not based on a merits review
but failed because the appeal was
commenced out of time.
The evidence as to communication to the public
evidence in relation to the alleged vilification at the time of the squatter
incident and the extent to which anything said could
be described as
communication to the public, is in conflict. Mr Conde of course says that
Mr Hunter was in fact within the hostel
on the front veranda.
Mr Conde was standing on the veranda of the house and initially
Mr Conde came into the property and tried
to get into the house itself and
says that Mr Hunter blocked the stairs. Mr Hunter says he was never
inside, but was on the front
to Mr Conde, the racial abuse took place on the front porch or veranda of
the house. Initially he said that because it
was a Friday night, everyone else
in the hostel had gone home to see their parents, but that there were other
people around in the
neighbourhood. He says he saw people in other houses
pulling their curtains and neighbours were closing their windows. As to the
other alleged racial abuse that occurred almost daily after that, on some of
these occasions Mr Hunter is said to have said these
things from his own
house, or from the backyard toward Mr Conde in his yard. He swore that
other people had clearly been able to
hear these comments and that the things
that were said were said loudly.
for the incident at Easter, this incident clearly occurred in a public place and
with the public present. According to Mr Conde
the incident occurred
outside of Woolworths in a shopping mall. Mr Conde came out of Woolworths
with some bags of groceries. The
area was crowded with other customers and
Mr Conde said he believed Mr Hunter said what he said because he
wanted to draw attention
so as to get Mr Conde “
”. He did not see whether anyone else was looking at the
incident or comment on what they might have heard.
seems to me that if these statements were made, they were clearly made in
circumstances in which the possibility of the statements
being overheard or seen
by passers by is shown, and that therefore there was a communication to the
The conduct of Karakan after the squatter and Woolworths incidents
then to the narrative involving the first respondent. After the incidents
involving the squatter and the first respondent,
Ms Didlick, the service
manager for the second respondent, drafted but did not send a letter to
Mr Hunter pointing out the service
that Karakan sought to provide and
mentioning that the first respondent had supposedly told people in the community
that if they
were homeless they could stay at Karakan. The letter mentioned
that the residents at the house and support workers were to call
anyone was found trespassing. It also mentioned allegations of “
altercations
” between the first respondent and one of the residents.
The letter invited the first respondent to refrain from contacting
residents at the property. In general terms, the letter was supportive of the
position of Mr Conde and essentially invited
the first respondent to act
with restraint. This letter was never sent, although it was presented to the
committee of Karakan who
approved the sending of it. It was not sent because it
was decided apparently that the position should be more carefully monitored
individual staff and since there had been no further altercations since the
weeks earlier, it was apparently decided not to send
the letter. The
significance though is that it shows that the hostel had sided with the
complainant, the person to whom it existed
to provide assistance in
circumstances of need.
1 April 2007, Ms Didlick actually went and met the first respondent
and discussed the incidents which had been reported. In the
course of that
meeting, he admitted that there had been a verbal altercation with Mr Conde
over the squatter and that the police
had told him not to come onto the
property. The first respondent also told Ms Didlick that the complainant
had suggested he was
going to cut off his head, and that when he had seen the
complainant at the shops he had made a comment about this. In the course
that discussion, the letter of 24 April 2007, mentioned earlier, was handed
over and the first respondent was told that the residents
had been told that if
there were any further altercations to call the police. She asked that he
ensure that he keep his contact
polite and neighbourly, to which he agreed.
person primarily responsible for ensuring the welfare of the complainant was
Anne Esposito. She was on vacation since 5 March
2007 until 2 April
2007. She was informed on her return about the events involving the squatter.
She read an incident report concerning
that incident from her fellow worker,
Ms Butkowsky. This report appeared to focus primarily on the presence of
the squatter, and
does not mention in any relevant respect any problem with the
neighbour, the first respondent.
her return from vacation, Ms Esposito spoke to the complainant in early
April 2007. There was no mention in that discussion
of any further
confrontation between the first respondent and the complainant. She made a file
note of her conversation with him
on that date. She made her own inquiries and
investigations that day about aspects of the incident involving the squatter.
of it mentions any racial abuse or vilification by the first respondent,
although I do not regard the fact that there is no record
of complaint to her as
significant. The evidence shows that in the period from 5 March to
2 April 2007, Ms Butkowsky, who was standing
in for Ms Esposito,
was generally supportive of the complainant’s feelings of maltreatment.
Woolworths incident was reported to Ms Esposito who made a file note of it
on 10 April 2007. The note of what was reported on
that date suggested
verbal harassment, abuse with racial slurs and a “
”. It is common ground that Ms Esposito suggested that
this should be reported to the police. There was a trip to the police
on 11 April 2007 at which Ms Esposito attended with the complainant to
report these incidents. Even before that, on 10 April
Ms Esposito told the complainant that she would speak to the first
respondent about his behaviour.
the same day as the trip to the police station, namely 11 April 2007, the
complainant wrote to the Commission. In that letter
he described what he called
racist behaviour by the second respondent in the following
(the first respondent)
is our next
door neighbour, but I never have insulted him, his mother Maria, or any other
members of their family or any visitors
by gestures, verbally abused, offended,
or threatened physical harm towards them, or racial discrimination, ridiculed,
racial vilification,
or incited other migrants or another white persons who
disagree with his unjustified, shameful and reckless hatred, racial behaviour
against other Australian Citizens who are not from Anglo
is then a strident argument in favour of the rights of immigrant persons to
equal treatment under the law and the policy behind
various legislative attempts
to outlaw racial vilification. In the course of that letter, he described the
situation at Karakan,
and described the “
provided to him by Ms Anne Esposito, who he wished to use as his character
referee. Clearly at that point he found himself
being supported by the second
respondent and its staff. This is supported by a file note by Ms Esposito
of their visit to the police
station on 11 April 2007. In the course of
her note made of the incidents of that day, a note made on 16 April 2007,
she observed
that she knew that a complaint was now being made to the
Anti-Discrimination Commission, and that she had been given a copy of that
complaint. She noted that she always inquired about how things were going in
that regard when she saw the complainant. There is
nothing in that report, or
indeed anything else in the evidence, to suggest that as at 16 April 2007
the second respondent was concerned
for itself or the second respondent that a
complaint had been made against the first respondent alleging racial
vilification, nor
to suggest that anything other than support was being provided
by the second respondent to the complainant both in relation to his
circumstances and that complaint.
matters had changed within a week. On 2 April 2007 the complainant wrote
to Karakan complaining of what he called “
the lack of interest shown by
” toward the allegedly discriminatory conduct of the first
respondent. His complaint was in essence articulated as one in which
the staff of Karakan being aware of the “
daily racial hatred and
” by the first respondent, they were doing nothing about it. He
then threatened to sue Karakan for negligence and breach of
duty. On the same
day he wrote formally making a complaint to the Commission. But that letter
referred to a continuation by the
first respondent of racial harassment. It was
not concerned with any conduct on the part of Karakan. Two days prior to the
of this complaint, Ms Amy Tetley-Jones, whose statement I have
mentioned earlier, observed an incident on Friday, 20 April 2007,
while sitting in the front room of Karakan, she heard the first respondent
describe the complainant as a “
”. She heard this comment
repeated. She was not called so as to be available for cross-examination, so
little weight attaches
to her evidence. But she probably did hear this said by
Mr Hunter, as he concedes that at least once he used this expression to
describe Mr Conde, albeit in a different context.
24 April 2007, Ms Esposito saw the complaint which was made about
Karakan and some other documents relating to Mr Conde’s
complaints.
There was then a meeting held that day between Ms Esposito, Ms Didlick
and Ms Butkowsky, to discuss the situation.
It was agreed that
Ms Esposito would try to arrange a meeting with Mr Conde as soon as
possible, and she contacted Mr Conde that
day and arranged a meeting for
1 May 2007. On the same day a letter was sent by Karakan to the first
respondent. The letter was
supposed to be delivered by Ms Didlick and
Ms Esposito to Mr Hunter. It communicated that there was an incident
at the end of March
2007 where a young woman was squatting under the house, that
there were strict protocols and processes that applied before persons
to stay at the hostel, and that if Mr Hunter had any questions about this
to contact Karakan. Reference was made to verbal
altercations between him and
one of the residents, and indicated that residents and support workers had been
told to contact police
if altercations continued. It is not entirely clear from
the evidence that this letter was in fact delivered, although the complainant
obtained a copy of it on FOI release and it appears to have been a letter
actually delivered to the first respondent on that day.
Ms Esposito,
who was generally sympathetic to Mr Conde, met with him on 27 April
2007 at the house. During that meeting, Ms Esposito
Mr Conde was harbouring animosity toward him, and accused her of displaying
indifference and of not caring in her dealing
with the issues with
Mr Hunter. She was upset by that meeting and felt that he had not
explained to her why he was dissatisfied
with her conduct and needed to take the
rest of the day off. In fact, she reported to a supervisor, Ms Didlick on
April about the events of that day, and
expressed her concerns about Mr Conde’s mental health and spoke to
psychiatrist about the need for him to have a person
appointed as a case manager for him.
1 May 2007 there was a meeting between Ms Didlick, Ms Esposito
and the complainant. The point of the meeting was to discuss the
complaint to Karakan and the complainant’s expectations of Karakan. He
explained in the course of that meeting that
he believed they should have spoken
in support of him and written a letter to the neighbour after the early
incidents involving the
complainant. In the course of that meeting
Ms Didlick apologised and explained how it had come to be that the letter,
although drafted,
had not in fact been sent. This included the fact that there
had been a conversation between Mr Conde in the course of which, whilst
crying, he had told Ms Esposito that he did not want Ms Esposito to
speak to the neighbour about the incident. Mention was also
made of an offer to
take him to the police station to make a complaint and a decision being made to
do this later. In the course
of this meeting the complainant produced a copy of
Disability Services Act
and suggested that Karakan had statutory
responsibilities to him. The complainant was offered counselling, which he
refused. The
notes of what was discussed at that meeting clearly suggest that
Karakan was continuing to provide a support role for Mr Conde in
circumstances and was not acting in a defensive or self-protective manner.
3 April, Mr Conde was asked to execute a new support agreement with
Karakan. The purpose of this was to give them express authority
to deal with
his psychiatrist, and also with his recently appointed case manager provided by
a local mental health service.
May there was a meeting at the Annerley Mental
Health Service between Ms Didlick, Ms Esposito, Mr Conde’s
psychiatrist and case
manager. All of this was designed to be of assistance in
managing Mr Conde’s situation. By this time Mr Conde was
considerable animosity toward Ms Esposito and in fact when they
drove to the supermarket to buy groceries, he refused to sit in the
with her and would not respond in conversation.
May 2007, Ms Esposito went to the Karakan
Hostel to get something from another resident’s room. Mr Conde took
great umbrage
at what he saw as her trespass, or an invasion of privacy,
although it was not his room that she had wanted to go into. He accused
also going into Mr Conde’s room, which was not in fact the case. She
described the things that he said to her as amounting
to a verbal assault,
although there is no accusation of actual assault. One of the matters that
pre-occupied Mr Conde, wrongly it
turned out, was that Ms Esposito had
falsely accused him of physically assaulting her.
a result of this incident there was a meeting held between Mr Manderson,
who held a senior role at Karakan, Ms Didlick, Ms Butkowsky
Mr Conde where an attempt was made to resolve the issues between them. In
fact, the matters were not able to be resolved at
all and he was provided with a
letter evicting him from the premises. Mr Conde referred to the fact that
it had become obvious
from their meeting that his relationship with Karakan had
terminated and that the purpose for which support was being provided to
could no longer be achieved. They gave him until 2 June to depart from the
premises, and offered a support worker to be available
to assist him in finding
alternative accommodation. In fact, at this meeting Mr Conde was verbally
hostile. He said he would not
provide them with information needed to resolve
the issues which had arisen between himself and Karakan, but kept insisting that
the truth would come out in court. Attempts to discuss Mr Hunter’s
conduct were met with the suggestion by Mr Conde that courts
and the media
would resolve the matter. I accept that the administrators of Karakan were
presented with a dilemma, in that one of
its clients was involved in an
acrimonious dispute with a neighbour but was also making serious allegations
Karakan staff. These allegations had been adversely
affecting staff morale, and the ability of Karakan to provide service to its
residents. I accept that the decision to evict him from the hostel was based
upon those issues, and those issues alone, and was
in no way related to the fact
of the making of complaint to the Commission by Mr Conde against
made a formal complaint to the Commission against Karakan on 24 June 2007.
In that complaint Mr Conde alleges that the staff
fabricated evidence to end my residential agreement, alleging without
any credible evidence that I breached the support agreement
and for that reason
they evict me from the premises by the police
The real motive to evict
me from the premises was because during the three past months I was complaining
for negligence and breach
and duty in relation to the racial hatred abuse,
racial discrimination and disability discrimination by the next door neighbour
who was daily trespassing the premises and entering the house to racial
abuse me and also discriminating against me for my mental
The complaint then went on to suggest that he was evicted to avoid potential
claims of litigation or civil claims for negligence
and breach of duty against
is of course necessary to support a claim of victimisation under s.130(1) of the
Act, that Mr Conde show that he was subjected
to or that there was a threat
to subject him to any detriment “
on the ground
person has made, or proposes to make a complaint under the Act. In my view,
there is no evidence to suggest that
any of the categories of detriment which
Mr Conde contends he was subjected to by Karakan, and in particular his
eviction, bore any
causal nexus between the fact that he had made a complaint
against Mr Hunter to the Commission or as to its circumstances. I find
that the decision by the second respondent to evict him, and any other of the
decisions it made associated with that determination
were unrelated to the
existence of the complaint against Mr Hunter, or any of the circumstances
to which that complaint related.
I reject the assertion that there was any
fabrication of evidence or ulterior motive in requiring him to leave.
the circumstances, the complainant has failed to make out his case against
either the first or second respondents. Accordingly
I dismiss the complaint. I
give the parties liberty to apply within 28 days of the date of this
decision in respect of any other
orders that any party asks be made. In the
event that any party seeks an order for costs against any party, they are
directed to
file a brief statement of the grounds for which such an order is
sought, and the amount or method of calculation of the claim.
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal Queensland
[2002] NSW ADT
[2001] QADT
[2008] QADT 27
[2005] NSW ADT 261.
Sydney Pty Ltd & Ors v Burns
[2004] NSW ADT AP 53
Burns v Radio 2UE
Sydney Pty Ltd & Ors (No.2)
[2005] NSW ADT 24.
[2000] FMCA 3
Chambers v Darley
[2002] FMCA 3.
[2005] QADT
[2008] QADT
At paragraphs
At paragraphs
[1991] NTSC 19
(1991) 77 NTR 27
Kane v Church of Jesus Christ Christian
Aryan Nations (No 3)
(1992) 18 CHHR 268.
[2001] NSWADT
[2008] FMCA
[2008] FMCA
at paragraph 29.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (684 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter