URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTBCCM/2009/43.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gardenia Homes Pty Ltd v The Body Corporate for Williams Retreat CTS 23581 [2009] QCCTBCCM 43 (28 September 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
GARDENIA HOMES PTY LTD V THE BODY CORPORATE FOR WILLIAMS RETREAT CTS
[2009] CCT KA006-09
GARDENIA HOMES PTY LTD
THE BODY CORPORATE FOR WILLIAMS RETREAT CTS 23581
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
28 September 2009
DELIVERED AT:
DECISION ON
THE PAPERS OF:
Mr K D Dorney QC
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal – whether “question of law” refers to decision or
order, and with what effect on process (if any) –
whether Tribunal unable
to consider ground of appeal where possible “per incuriam” decision
binding on it –
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 100
Body Corporate and Community
Management (Accommodation Module) Regulation 2008
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
application in this proceeding, filed 7 August 2009, is an appeal from a
decision of a specialist adjudicator by a legal entity
that was the applicant
before that adjudicator.
application is brought pursuant to
section 289
Body Corporate and
Community Management Act 1997
facilitated by
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act
applicant is, relevantly, the Lot owner of Lots 16 and 17 in the Community
Titles Scheme known as “Williams’ Retreat”
Community Titles
Scheme No. 23581 (“CTS”). The relevant legislation module of the
CTS is “Accommodation”.
respondent to the application is the Body Corporate for the CTS.
relevant order, against which the appeal is made, was made by the Specialist
Adjudicator on 29 June 2009. The adjudicator was
Adjudicator D Toohey. Also,
on that day, the Adjudicator published his Reasons.
the limitation on an appeal pursuant to section 289(2) of the
that it can be “only on a question of law”, the Tribunal has
determined that applying that limitation means that in
this proceeding the
appeal must be unsuccessful and that, therefore, the Tribunal confirms the order
under appeal pursuant to section
294(1)(a) of the
determination has been “on the papers” pursuant to section 48 of the
. Written submissions have been filed pursuant to an order of the
Tribunal dated 27 August 2009.
Legislation
section 289(1) of the
deals with pre-requisites for the legal
entitles to be involved in the appeal, since neither party to the appeal has
raised any issue
concerning the application of that provision, it is unnecessary
to state, or canvass, its details. More importantly, as already
mentioned, is
section 289(2). It states that the relevant “aggrieved person”
within the meaning of section 289(1) may
appeal to the appeal body (in this
case, the Tribunal), but only on a question of law.
is clear both from section 289(1) [particularly paragraphs (b), (c) and (d)] and
section 294 that this appeal is against the relevant
“order” made by
a relevant adjudicator.
the force of section 5 of the
, Schedule 6 contains the
Dictionary. It defines, relevantly, “order”, for an application
under Chapter 6 for the resolution
of the dispute, as “includ(ing)”
an order dismissing the application: see paragraph (a).
also earlier noted, section 294 deals with the powers of the Tribunal on appeal.
Relevantly, for present purposes, section 294(1)
states that, in deciding an
appeal, the Tribunal may –
(a) confirm or
amend the order under appeal;
(b) set aside
the order and substitute another order or decision; or
(c) through the
Commissioner, refer the order back to the adjudicator with appropriate direction
having regard to the question of
law the subject of the appeal.
far as the adjudication is concerned, the relevant provisions are contained not
only in the
but also in the
Body Corporate and Community
Management (Accommodation Module) Regulation 2008
Accommodation
accordance with
Accommodation Module
, it commenced on 30
August 2008. The reason why this particular version of the
Accommodation
is applicable is that the decisions of the Committee of the
respondent Body Corporate were relevantly made in October 2008.
deals with the power of the Committee of the relevant
Body Corporate to act for the Body Corporate. Section 100(1) states that a
decision of the Committee is the decision of the Body Corporate; but section
100(2) states that section 100(1) does not apply to
a decision that, under the
regulation module, is a decision on a “restricted issue” for the
Committee. Section 100(5)
states that the Committee must act
“reasonably” in making a decision.
force of section 21(1) of the
, a regulation module such as the
Accommodation Module
is a regulation under the
3 of Chapter 3 of the
Accommodation Module
deals with restricted issues
under section 100 of the
. In particular, section 42(1)(b) of
Accommodation Module
states that a decision is a decision on a
“restricted issue” for the Committee if it is a decision “to
change rights,
privileges or obligations of the owners of lots” included
in the CTS.
the issues in this appeal raise attacks on the validity of identified By-Laws,
it is necessary to consider Part 5 of Chapter
169(1)(b)(i) states that the By-Laws for a CTS may “only” provide
for the regulation of, including conditions
applying to, the use and enjoyment
of lots included in the scheme. Although section 169(1)(c) states that such
By-Laws may provide
for other matters that the
permits to be
included, no party has relied upon this provision. Section 169(2) states if
there is an inconsistency between a By-Law
and a provision of the Community
Management Statement that is not a By-Law, the other provision, to the extent of
the inconsistency,
prevails. Again, no party has identified any particular
“other provision” that might be contended to prevail.
deals with limitations on such By-Laws. In
particular, section 180(1) states that if a By-Law for a CTS is inconsistent
(including a regulation module applying to the scheme)
or another Act, the By-Law is invalid “to the extent of” the
inconsistency.
Section 180(5) states that a By-Law must not discriminate
between “types of occupiers” (an example of which is that
cannot prevent a tenant from using a pool on the common property).
Dictionary defines an “occupier”, relevantly, as
“mean(ing)” a resident owner or resident lessee of, or
someone else
who lives on, the lot.
the application before the specialist Adjudicator ranged over many issues, the
appeal is limited to two grounds. The first
is that the Adjudicator
“erred in law” by “failing to find” that By-Law 13 was
invalid on the basis that
it discriminated between types of occupiers, in
contravention of section 180(5) of the
. The second is that the
Adjudicator’s “decision” was “wrong as a matter of
law” because decisions
on the matters that were required to be considered
by By-Law 13 were “restricted issues” for the Committee of the Body
Corporate pursuant to section 100 of the
and section 42 of the
Accommodation Module
, meaning that the “decision” of the
Committee was “of no effect”. Section 97 of the
concerning non-delegation, is subsumed for present purposes in the consideration
of section 100.
the respondent’s written Submissions raise the issue of the
applicant’s second ground never having been raised
as an issue before, or
even considered by, the Adjudicator, it is necessary to briefly consider the
Adjudicator’s file and
his reasons.
is clear from reading the Adjudicator’s file, given to the Tribunal
pursuant to section 290(3) of the
, that the applicant did not
agitate, at all, potential invalidity on the basis of, in particular, section 42
Accommodation Module
: see, for instance, the letter of Teys Legal
Pty Ltd dated 13 February 2009.
Furthermore,
it is clear from a close reading of the Adjudicator’s reasons that, among
the many issues canvassed - noting that
the reasons set out the various
Submissions made by all interested persons – again there is no reference
to section 42 of the
Accommodation Module
. The challenge to the validity
of By-Law 13 was limited in the way that the Adjudicator noted, namely, that,
while By-Laws can properly
impose building and architectural conditions upon
owners wishing to build upon a Lot within a CTS, however “the applicant
some of the relevant by-laws on the basis that they are
discriminatory or inconsistent with the Act”: at page 7. The contended
inconsistency is dealt with on page 8 of the Reasons; but does not involve
section 42.
the Tribunal accepts that the second ground of appeal was not one which was
agitated before, or decided by, the Adjudicator.
“Question of law”
meaning of provisions which contain phrases such as “on a question of
law” already have been, and still are, the subject
of much analysis, some
of it having a tendency to confuse, rather than enlighten.
extremely recent consideration was undertaken by the New South Wales Court of
HIA Insurance Service Pty Ltd v Kostas
[2009] NSWCA 292.
the reasons of Basten JA there was a survey of various statutory appeal
provisions, all restricted in some way to legal error.
It was suggested that
they fell within three broad categories which could be identified by reference
to different forms of statutory
language: at [83]. Ignoring the first and
broadest category (where the phrase that is used is “involves a question
the second and third categories are stated to be, respectively,
an appeal “on a question of law from a decision of”,
say, a Tribunal
and an appeal restricted to “a decision of a Tribunal on a question of
law”. Basten JA stated that the
second category means that the appeal
must be on a question of law with that question being not merely a qualifying
condition to
ground an appeal, but the sole subject matter of the appeal, to
which the ambit of the appeal is confined: at [85]. As for the
third category,
it is not sufficient to identify some legal error attending the judgment or
order of the Tribunal but, rather, it
is necessary to identify a decision by the
Tribunal on a question of law, with that decision constituting the subject
matter of the
appeal: at [86].
problem with applying such an analysis uncritically is that the analysis
concerns appeals from a “decision” rather
than from an
“order”. Basten JA drew a distinction between different potential
outcomes depending upon which of those
two words was used. Although it was done
in a consideration of dealing with a provision concerning the powers on appeal
similar to those given under section 294 of the
he held that once it is accepted that the subject matter of the appeal is a
“decision”, and not necessarily a
final “order”, an
argument in favour of construing the scope of the appeal by reference to the
powers conferred in determining
the appeal was stated to lose much of its force:
at [112]. All this was done in the context where the argument raised was that,
if a reference to a decision of the Tribunal were indeed a reference to its
final and operative decision, there might be good reason
to adopt a broader
approach rather than an approach which seeks to isolate and identify the matter
of law as an interlocutory issue,
or step on the way to a final resolution of
the dispute, suggesting that a narrow construction is to be preferred: at
HIA Insurance
, Spiegelman CJ, subject to some specific observations,
agreed with the reasons of Basten JA: at [1]. In particular, he noted that
analysis undertaken was specific to the statute under consideration and that
decisions on other legislative schemes must be used
with care, even when
employing similar language (such as “on a question of law” or
“involving a question of law”):
HIA Insurance
also agreed generally, although subject to certain
qualifications, with both the reasons of Basten JA and the observations of
CJ: at [24]. Nevertheless none of the qualifications is relevant
here, primarily because the relevant expression in that case was
decision on a question with respect to a question of law”.
TNT Sky Pack International (Aust) Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
[1988] FCA 119
(1988) 82 ALR 175
, Gummow J (then on the Federal Court of
Australia), considered
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
(Commonwealth). He held that the section which stated that a party to
a proceeding before the Tribunal may appeal to the Federal
Court of Australia,
on a question of law “from any decision of the Tribunal in that
proceeding”, meant that the existence
of a question of law was not merely
a qualifying condition to ground the appeal, but also “the subject matter
of the appeal
itself”: at 178.
the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia had considered this issue where
it concerned the
Repatriation Act 1920
(Commonwealth). In
Brown v The
Repatriation Commission
[1985] FCA 194
(1985) 7 FCR 302
, the Court was concerned with a
provision that stated that an applicant in a proceeding may appeal to the
Federal Court of Australia,
on a question of law, from any decision of the
Tribunal in that proceeding. To that extent, at least, it is similar to the
considered by Gummow J. It was held that, using similar terms to
those used by Gummow J, the existence of a question of law was
not merely a
qualifying condition to ground an appeal from a decision of the relevant
Tribunal but, rather, it and it alone was the
subject matter of the appeal, and
the ambit of the appeal was confined to it: at 304.
Unfortunately
for present purposes, both those decisions of the Federal Court of Australia
merely place the provision here within
either of the second or third categories
– but the complication still remains as to what is the effect of section
being relevant to an appeal from an
“order”, rather than from a “decision”.
the end, it is more likely that the correct construction of the relevant
provision is that it is the second category identified
by Basten JA which is
relevant here, if only because the third and narrowest category requires that it
is not sufficient for it to
apply to be able to identify some legal error
“attending the judgment or order of the Tribunal”.
Effect of issue not being raised in adjudication
relevant principles applicable to the circumstance of a question of law being
raised for the first time on appeal were considered
by Santow JA in the New
South Wales Court of Appeal decision of
Owners Strata Plan No 50411 & Ors
v Cameron North Sydney Investments Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWCA 5.
As identified
there, two principles are involved. The first is that, where a point is not
taken in the hearing below and evidence
could have been given there which, by
any possibility, could have prevented the point from succeeding, it cannot be
taken afterwards:
at [176] relying upon, among other cases,
Water Board v
[1988] HCA 12
(1988) 180 CLR 491
at 497. Similarly, the point cannot afterwards
be taken where, if the point had been raised, the other party might have
the case differently at the hearing: also at [176] relying upon
Multicon Engineering Pty Ltd v Federal Airports Corporation
at 645, per Mason P. The second principle is that, usually, parties
must be bound by the course which they adopted at the trial:
at [177], relying,
amongst other cases, on
University of Wollongong v Metwally (No 2)
59 ALJR 481
at 483. As noted there, at least in part, this principle is founded
on public policy considerations of favouring the finality of
litigation and the
use of the word “usually” emphasises the conclusion that the
interests of justice may exceptionally
justify a departure from the requirement
that the parties are bound by the course that they have adopted at the hearing.
with respect to the matter of the possibility of additional evidence,
Santow JA held that while once additional evidence is identified
it requires
very little to demonstrate there was at least the bare possibility that it could
have prevented the point from succeeding,
nonetheless “it must be
identified”, with it being added that it is not unduly onerous to require
that there be stated
with some specificity the additional evidence where it is
otherwise not apparent what evidence could conceivably have borne upon
of law not taken below, but sought to be agitated on appeal: at [188].
the respondent’s written submissions, after referring to the relevant
authorities, contend that “some evidence
may well have been adduced”
(at paragraph 18), no particular identification of that evidence has been
attempted; and it is
difficult, in the circumstances, to think of what that
evidence could be. After all, this ground of appeal is concerned with what
appears to be simply a question of law about the interplay between section 100
, section 42 of the
Accommodation Module
facts as found by the Adjudicator. While it might be surmised that some
additional fact might be relevant, such as whether
or not the proposed
“works” for which approval was sought from the Committee were
entirely within the boundaries of the
2 Lots in question, it would seem to be a
fair implication from the evidence led before the Adjudicator that such works
were entirely
within the boundaries of those registered Lots. But even if those
particular facts were to have been agitated, and even if findings
were to have
been made by the Adjudicator that the works were outside the relevant boundaries
and such as to impinge on the relevant
common property of the CTS, such an
outcome would only be an issue with respect to the power of the Body Corporate
itself to make
appropriate decisions of that order. It would not impinge upon
the question of whether the Committee could exercise such a power.
Consequentially,
even though unusual, the Tribunal will consider the second of the grounds raised
by the applicant because it is an
important question of law which ought to be
canvassed in such a proceeding as this.
First ground of appeal
first ground relies upon a contention that the whole of By-Law 13 is invalid
because it discriminates between types of occupiers
in contravention of section
180(5) of the
terms of a “question of law”, there is no doubt that a legal
question arises. Since it does go to whether or not there
is some legal error
attending the order of the Tribunal, it would meet the qualifying condition.
But in doing so, the ambit of the
appeal on this ground is confined simply to
the question of law. That is, there is to be no review of the evidence; and the
of appeal is the legal subject matter itself.
the problem with relying upon section 180(5) of the
circumstances is that it is limited to “types of occupiers”. While,
section 14D
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
an example is not
exhaustive, does not limit and even may extend the meaning of the provision, the
example and the provision are
to be read in the context of each other and of
other provisions of the Act; but, noting, that if the example and provision so
are inconsistent, the provision prevails. Inconsistency is not a problem
here and while the example is not exhaustive and do not
limit the meaning of the
provision, it can be readily seen that the focus is on a person as
“occupier” and that there
is to be a differentiation between various
“types” of such a legal personality.
noted, the definition of “occupier” in Schedule 6 relevantly defines
an occupier as meaning a resident owner or resident
lessee of the lot, or
someone who lives on the lot (or even a person who occupies a lot for business
purposes or works on the lot
in carrying on a business from the lot).
that definition emphasises is that the provision in question refers to
discrimination between occupiers according to their type.
“type” of occupier is not directed to a question of whether the
person is an original owner or a later owner, but
what kind of occupation it is
that is the subject of the particular By-Law.
such circumstances, the example shows the notion in question. That is, the
concern is with a type of occupier who cannot be discriminated
against (such as
a tenant) in contrast to another type of occupier (such as an owner).
relevant “order” which is the first of the orders made, while it
does not refer expressly to validity, would not be
capable of being validly made
if the underlying basis of the “motions” passed by the Committee
– being By-Law 13
itself – was not itself valid.
the reasons of the Adjudicator are not the subject of the appeal, the
Adjudicator correctly addressed the argument raised by
the applicant which was
contended to cause discrimination, identified what the provision should be
interpreted as meaning and concluded,
correctly in the Tribunal’s view,
that By-Law 13.1.6 does not contravene section 180(5) of the
since its concern is not with “occupation”.
the fact that that particular part of that particular By-Law might be
discriminatory would not necessarily mean that the
whole of By-Law 13 would
contravene the relevant statutory provision. Given the terms of Schedule 5 and,
in particular, Item 21
(which permits an adjudicator, if satisfied that a By-Law
is invalid, to declare such invalidity and require the Body Corporate to
request to record a new community management statement to remove the By-Law), it
is likely that the proper interpretation
of “by-law” would include a
part of such a By-Law as this. This receives support from the definition of
in Schedule 6 which refers back to section 168 of the
. By section 168(1), by-laws, for a community title scheme, are
“provisions” that appear in the community management
statement under
the heading of “BY-LAWS”. It would be anomalous if parts of a
numbered by-law could not be seen to be,
of themselves, provisions that appear
in such a statement under such a heading. Additionally, section 180(1)
determines that invalidity
is only “to the extent of” the
inconsistency: see
Harrington v Lowe
(1996) 190 CLR 311
at 328 in its
reference to “textual surgery”. It is of course unnecessary to take
the consideration of this ground to
this extent; but it does illustrate that a
declaration of invalidity must be directed towards achieving the goal of
non-discrimination
and if this can be achieved by declaring “part”,
which is discrete in itself, of a numbered By-Law, as invalid, then
that course
ought to be taken. But it would leave the remaining parts, essential to the
Committee’s decision here, intact.
Second ground of appeal
ground of appeal, as earlier analysed, deals with the interplay between By-Law
13 as a whole and the relevant statutory, including
regulatory, provisions.
earlier analysed concerning the category of appeals, since the orders made
depend upon a conclusion that the by-law in question
(namely By-Law 13 taken as
a whole) is valid, if that clear implication from the nature of the order
arises, as here, then, provided
the ground of appeal can be raised, it does
involve a question of law because there would be some identified legal error
that attended
the order, or orders, of the Adjudicator.
for the reasons canvassed above, the ground can be raised despite not being
raised before the Adjudicator, it remains for the
Tribunal to consider whether
the ground has any basis for the assertion that there was relevant
invalidity.
the question were to be directed solely to the question of whether a body
corporate such as this Body Corporate is empowered to
decide issues of the kind
that are raised by By-Law 13, it might be thought that the Queensland Court of
Appeal decision of
Bartlett v Brisbane City Council
[2003] QCA 494
[2004] 1 Qd R 610
might militate against such empowerment. There, the Court held that where no
part of the common property was involved in, or impacted
upon by a proposal by
lot owners to undertake work entirely within the boundary of the relevant lot,
the requirement under the then
section 3.2.1(3)(a)(ii)
Planning Act 1997
to obtain the written consent of the owner of the land did
not require the consent of all the owners of, or of any of the owners
lots in the scheme. Thus, where as here, the relevant format plan of
subdivision is “standard” – and
therefore does not trigger a
provision such as section 157(2)(b) of the
Accommodation Module
it might be thought that the Body Corporate would have no power to control works
to be done which are entirely on such Lots
as 16 and 17, although affected
utility infrastructure on common property could complicate the picture in a
particular case.
decision was based upon, at least in part, the New South Wales Court of Appeal
decision of
Owners Strata Plan No 50411 & Ors v Cameron North Sydney
Investments Pty Ltd
(mentioned earlier). The Queensland Court of Appeal
expressly adopted the analysis of Heydon JA concerning similar New South Wales
provisions. But what is important for present purposes is the unambivalent
conclusion by Heydon JA that it would be “an extreme
step to hold that a
lot owner can never develop the lot unless the body corporate consents to the
lodging of the development application”,
since it “would be radical
derogation from the enjoyment of land in which the lot owner has a fee absolute
in possession”:
such a first glance approach does not survive the scrutiny of a further decision
of the Queensland Court of Appeal. In
Mineralogy Pty Ltd v The Body
Corporate for “The Lakes Coolum”
[2002] QCA 550
[2003] 2 Qd R 381
construing what is now section 169(1)(b)(i) – but was then in
section 131
– the Court held that a By-Law which provided that an occupier must not
carry out any construction, improvements or landscaping
on the lot other than
those to which the “Body Corporate Committee” had given approval in
writing, which was not to be
unreasonably withheld provided the relevant works
met certain standards, was a “valid” by-law. The leading judgment
was given by McPherson JA, with whom Jerrard JA and Philippides J expressly
agreed. McPherson JA held that the relevant statutory
provision simply spoke of
providing for the regulation, including the conditions to be applied, of the use
and enjoyment of lots
and that one way, and perhaps the most obvious way, of
using and enjoying a lot is to a build a dwelling or other structure on it:
383 [5]. As for the further issue of whether the relevant By-Law was regulatory
rather than prohibitory, it was held that since
an approval could not be
withheld arbitrarily but only according to an objective standard, it was
regulatory and that, accordingly,
the by-law was authorised and therefore valid.
Since the legal challenge here is or cannot be with respect to the prohibitory
or withholding of approval not according to an objective standard, it is
unnecessary to consider those issues in this appeal.
stripped to its essence, an appeal, on the basis of By-Law 13 being invalid
because the “Committee” of the
respondent Body Corporate is not
authorised to be making the decision, cannot stand against the decision of the
Court of Appeal in
. It is not to the point that, perhaps, the
Court may have made the decision
per incuriam
(perhaps because its
attention was not drawn to the equivalent of section 100 of the
and of section 42 of the
Accommodation Module
). Certainly, so far as the
Body Corporate and Community Management (Standard Module) Regulation 1997
is concerned, from its commencement, it contained, in section 26, a relevant
identical provision to section 42 of the present
Accommodation
it is not open to a Tribunal such as this at this level in the appellate
structure to decide that
was wrongly decided because, for
instance, the Court of Appeal did not have brought to its attention equivalent
provisions to section
and section 42 of the
Accommodation Module
. The position of the court, or Tribunal, which is
inferior in the hierarchy of the appellate structure being precluded from
its own fresh approach has been made clear, despite some contrary
observations (which will be dealt with next), in cases such as
Full Court of the
Federal Court of Australia of
Algama v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
[2001] FCA 1884
(2001) 115 FCR 253.
There, Whitlam and Katz JJ, with
whom French J (as he then was) expressly agreed, held that it would not have
been open to the primary
judge in the matters then under appeal to conclude that
an earlier Full Court decision had been decided
per incuriam
therefore, even if its
rationes decidendi
had included a ruling about the
construction of a new provision in the relevant Act, that ruling did not bind
that primary judge:
at 261 [41]. Expressed even more clearly in
Village Inc v Pryde
[2002] FCAFC 58 by Finkelstein J, after describing a
per incuriam
decision as a judgment given in ignorance of some authority,
or statutory provision, which, had it been referred to, would have resulted
different decision, a trial judge is bound by a decision of the Full Court
because the
per incuriam
rule is not available to a court in relation to
a decision of the court superior in the relevant hierarchy: at [84] –
To the extent to which it is suggested in
Orica Ltd v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
(2001) 182 ALR 77
that a different rule applies,
its reliance on
Young v Bristol Aeroplane Co Ltd
(1944) 1 KB 718
728-730 (per Lord Greene MR) is misplaced. That Court of Appeal decision was
concerned only with its “own” decisions.
Further, any reliance upon
R v Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal; Ex parte Shaw
as supporting such an outcome is also misplaced. What Lord Goddard CJ
held there, a conclusion with which Hilbery and Parker JJ
agreed, was simply
that if there was a decision of the House of Lords which says one thing and a
decision of the Court of Appeal,
in which the decision of the House of Lords was
not cited, which says another, the plain duty of the Court of Appeal is to
the decision of the House of Lords: at 724. That is entirely different
from what is encountered here.
was considering the very same statutory expression and
given that it specifically was concerned with a body corporate
“committee”
which was granted the power to give the approval, this
Tribunal is bound by that decision, even if it might be said that
overlooked relevant statutory provisions which might, or even
would, have resulted in a different decision.
is thus unnecessary consider further the details of the written submissions by
both parties about the second ground of appeal.
the Tribunal has found that neither of the two grounds of appeal can succeed, it
must, pursuant to section 294(1)(a), confirm
the order of the Adjudicator under
there has been no order granting legal representation under section 76 of the
, given the Tribunal’s decision in
Maxine Seaton Pty Ltd
v Body Corporate for Fuel Apartments CTS 32734
[2009] QCCTBCCM 17
Tribunal provisionally reaches the conclusion that there should be no order as
to costs. This is particularly where, as here,
the decision was made “on
the papers” pursuant to section 48 of the
Nevertheless,
because no submissions have so far been made concerning costs which address the
issues raised in
Maxine Seaton
, both parties will be given 7 days to make
further submissions, if any, concerning that provisional decision.
______________________________
MR K D DORNEY QC
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (827 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter