URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2018/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:47:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Scutt, Re [2018] QMHC 10 (7 September 2018)
Scutt, Re [2018] QMHC 10 (7 September 2018)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of Brian Andrew Scutt
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
7 September 2018 (delivered
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
7 September 2018
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr FT Varghese and
Dr RE Phillipson
DETERMINATION:
1. The defendant at the time
of the alleged offences was not of unsound mind.
2. The defendant is permanently unfit for trial.
CATCHWORDS:
MENTAL HEALTH – DECLARATION OR FINDING OF MENTAL ILLNESS OR
INCAPACITY – where the defendant was charged with dangerous
operation of a
vehicle causing death or grievous bodily harm, and dangerous operation of a
vehicle – where the charges arose
from the alleged collision of the
defendant’s vehicle with, and the resulting explosion of, an LPG cylinder
outside a café
– where, of the 19 people injured in the explosion,
two later died of their injuries – where the defendant had likely
an epileptic seizure at the wheel of his vehicle shortly before the collision
– where the defendant had, prior to
the alleged offending, been advised by
medical professionals on multiple occasions not to drive due to his diagnosis of
– whether the defendant was of unsound mind when the offences
were allegedly committed, pursuant to s 267 of the
Mental Health Act
(Qld) – whether the defendant is fit for trial pursuant to s 270 of the
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
(Qld), s 267, s 270
K Prskalo for the defendant
J Tate for the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist
Lehane for the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the defendant
for the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist
Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
[1] This is a reference under the
Mental Health Act
(Qld) in respect
of Brian Andrew Scutt, born 24 January 1955. The Court is assisted by Dr
Varghese and Dr Phillipson. The reference
concerns two charges of dangerous
operation of a vehicle causing death or grievous bodily harm, and one charge of
dangerous operation
of a vehicle, all alleged to have been committed on 9 June
[2] On this day, it is alleged that the defendant was the driver of a Toyota
Landcruiser driving north through Ravenshoe. Approximately
20 people were in or
near the Serves You Right Café at 59 Grigg Street, Ravenshoe. Police
allege that the defendant’s
vehicle failed to negotiate a bend and struck
a power pole. The vehicle then travelled through parkland, incurring damage
branches to both sides and leaving a trail of debris in the park.
After that, it crossed a street, striking a tree, and then flattened
fence at the rear of the café.
[3] The defendant’s vehicle subsequently crashed into and punctured one of
two large LPG cylinders outside the café
kitchen, resulting in an
explosion. This explosion caused a fireball, which engulfed the
café’s interior and burst
through the front and rear glass doors
onto the footpath, where people were walking and dining.
[4] As a result of the explosion and resulting fireball, 19 people were
seriously injured. Two people tragically later died as a
result of their
injuries sustained in the explosion. Nicole Dempsey, née Nyholt, aged
37, married with two children, who
was the daughter of the café
proprietors who were overseas, died from her injuries in the Royal Brisbane and
Hospital Burns Unit three days later, as did Margaret Clarke, who
was 82 years of age.
[5] The first charge on the reference concerns the defendant dangerously
operating the vehicle causing the deaths of Nicole Dempsey
and Margaret Clarke.
As to the remaining 17 victims, 14 suffered grievous bodily harm, which
constitutes the second charge; and
three suffered bodily harm, which constitutes
the third charge. According to the QP9s, a number of victims were able to
self-evacuate
from the café, while others were assisted by highly
committed local civilians.
[6] A large-scale emergency response commenced involving the Queensland Police
Service, Queensland Ambulance Service and the Queensland
Fire and Rescue
Service. Burns victims were initially triaged and then transported by road and
air to local hospitals. Eleven victims
were admitted to a specialised burns
unit in Brisbane. The defendant was the driver and sole occupant of the
vehicle. He received
significant burn injuries and was assisted from the
[7] Police commenced an operation called North Squall to investigate the
circumstances surrounding the incident. During the course
of the investigation,
police identified a number of persons who witnessed the driver’s and
vehicle’s actions pre-explosion.
[8] The vehicle was heard to rev loudly and increase in speed prior to and after
mounting the kerb. The driver was described as
possibly unconscious and leaning
over towards the passenger side of the vehicle. Witnesses did not observe the
vehicle to brake
at any stage prior to impacting with the gas bottle.
[9] Further investigations conducted by police indicated that the defendant had
a pre-existing medical condition which may have affected
his fitness to drive.
Witnesses informed police that they had observed the defendant suffer from
seizures prior to this incident.
Medical records document that two doctors at
the Atherton Hospital in both 2009 and 2014 advised the defendant not to drive a
vehicle and to report his medical condition to the Department of
Transport. Department of Transport records indicate that the defendant
notified the Department regarding his medical condition. The defendant’s
licence has been cancelled as a result of
this incident.
[10] During the course of the investigation, police provided medical records and
witness statements to a neurologist, Dr McLaughlin,
for review. Dr McLaughlin
is of the opinion that there is sufficient evidence to make a diagnosis of
[11] The defendant, in reporting to the forensic psychiatrists who have provided
reports in relation to the incident, states that
he does not remember ever being
told that he was not to drive because of his medical condition.
[12] Dr McLaughlin provided a report dated 10 February 2016. He opines that the
defendant had five epileptic seizures – 7
March 2004, 19 May 2009, 25
September 2010, and twice on 18 August 2014. While no underlying cause had been
found, there was sufficient
evidence to make a diagnosis of epilepsy.
[13] In relation to his seizure on 19 May 2009, the defendant attended the
Atherton Hospital. The clinical notes of Dr Suzette Pyke
record her view that
the defendant had had a tonic-clonic seizure, previously known as a grand mal
seizure. It was also stated in
Dr Pyke’s written notes, and in her letter
to the defendant’s general practitioner, that advice was given to the
not to drive.
[14] Similarly, in relation to a seizure on 18 August 2014, the defendant again
attended the Atherton Hospital and was diagnosed
with a seizure of unknown
cause. In her statement dated 19 June 2015, Dr Briana Van Beekhuizen states
that in relation to the presentation
of 18 August 2014 that she “had a
very long discussion with Mr Scutt about the risk of driving with uncontrolled
and “strongly advised him that he was not to drive or
operate heavy machinery until he had been seizure-free for two years.”
[15] The prosecution case for the three charges is based on the defendant
driving when, because of his medical condition, he had
been previously advised
not to. In relation to the three charges, the expression “operates a
vehicle dangerously” in
general does not require any given state of mind
on the part of the defendant as an essential element of the offence.
‘Dangerously’
is to be given the ordinary meaning of something that
presents a real risk of injury. The prosecution must prove that there was
situation which, viewed objectively, was dangerous. No part of the prosecution
case relies on any alleged conduct on the part
of the defendant driving
deliberately into the café. To the contrary, there is a significant body
of evidence which supports
the prosecution case that the cause of the incident
was a medical mishap, most likely an epileptic fit at the wheel, which altered
the defendant’s state of consciousness or rendered him unconscious.
[16] Dr McLaughlin at page 4 of his report explains the effect of an epileptic
seizure on a person while driving:
“The effect on a person
suffering an epileptic seizure while driving a motor vehicle depends on the
nature of the seizure.
Where a generalised tonicclonic seizure occurs, there is
usually abrupt onset without warning symptoms. The loss of awareness and
associated convulsive activity typically lasts from 60 to 120 seconds. During
this time a person is no longer in control of the
vehicle. The nature of
movements occurring during a seizure might result in stiffening of the arm and
leg on that side of the body.
This could result in the accelerator or brake
pedal being forcibly depressed. It can be associated with turning of the
wheel altering the course of the vehicle.”
[17] A number of witnesses were aware that the defendant suffered from seizures.
He had been observed driving oddly or awkwardly
incident. On the day of the incident, he complained that he was feeling sick.
Not long before the crash,
he was observed to be glassy-eyed and emotionless.
Two witnesses observed the vehicle travel at speed on its erratic course before
impact, and neither could see the outline of a driver. One witness thought the
vehicle was driverless, while another thought the
driver had slumped sideways.
Another witness described the vehicle as “out of control”, and that
the person in the car
appeared to be “on the passenger side, bounding
around”. The defendant has no recollection at all as to what
[18] There are four psychiatric reports before the Court: Dr Greg McKeough
dated 6 February 2018, Dr Pamela van de Hoef dated 31
March 2018, Dr Edward
Heffernan dated 14 April 2018, and one from Dr Tania Rohde dated 21 August 2018.
Dr McKeough’s opinion
is that it is likely the defendant was unconscious
from an epileptic seizure at the time of the incident. Dr van de Hoef notes
epilepsy is not a mental illness. A seizure at the wheel would have
rendered the defendant unable to control his actions at the
material time. Dr
van de Hoef further opines at page 25 of her
“However, his prolonged deliberate concealment of
his epilepsy, and active and prolonged avoidance of assessment and treatment
it in my view directly led to another seizure, which resulted in the Ravenshoe
disaster, and I cannot diagnose any state of mental
disease that can explain the
deliberate concealment and avoidance. In that case, I therefore cannot support
a finding of unsoundness
[19] To similar effect is the opinion of Dr Heffernan at page 19 of his report
where he states:
“If Mr Scutt lost control of his vehicle
because of a seizure due to epilepsy then the mental disease and issues of
unsoundness
of mind would not be a relevant consideration to deprivation of the
capacities.”
[20] There is no suggestion in the present case that the defendant in deciding
to drive on 9 June 2015 was deprived of any of the
relevant capacities.
Both Dr van de Hoef and Dr Heffernan agree that the defendant developed a
paranoid psychotic disorder in early
2015. This was characterised by delusional
beliefs he had cancer and that he was being watched by police who were planning
him, as well as persecutory and referral delusions relating to the
town of Ravenshoe and the Serves You Right Café itself.
He was also
anxious and had suicidal ideation.
[21] According to Dr Heffernan, there seems little doubt that the defendant had
epilepsy characterised by seizures, and mental disorder
characterised by
cognitive decline, psychotic symptoms, and mood and behaviour changes prior to
the incident. The differential diagnosis
for the psychotic symptoms includes
the onset in context of a neurocognitive disorder (dementing illness), a mood
disorder with psychotic
features, which in the course of the hearing Dr
Heffernan stated is probably more accurately identified as psychotic depression
depression with psychotic features, secondary to epilepsy. Dr Heffernan
concludes that on balance, the most likely diagnosis explaining
the onset of the
defendant’s cognitive and psychotic symptoms is a neurocognitive disorder.
“This diagnosis requires evidence of a cognitive
decline such that it interferes with independence and function. The reports
Mr Scutt, his wife and others support this, as does the available account of the
neuropsychological testing, his treating psychiatrist
and the assessment of the
geriatrician during his inpatient treatment in 2015. Psychotic symptoms are not
uncommon with a neurocognitive
disorder, particularly with causes such as
Frontotemporal, Lewy body or Alzheimer’s disease. It is unclear what the
of Mr Scutt’s neurocognitive disorder is, and further assessment,
and testing, particularly neuropsychological testing and
neuroimaging may
[22] Dr van de Hoef also supports a present diagnosis of moderately severe
dementia. The primary issue therefore is whether the
defendant is temporarily
or permanently unfit for trial. Dr Rohde in the most recent report of 21 August
2018 opines as follows
in relation to the issue of fitness for
“Mr Scutt presents as unfit for trial. He displays
a limited depth of understanding of the processes of court, having explained
these processes in a rudimentary fashion when discussed in previous interviews.
Mr Scutt’s cognitive impairment and diagnosed
progressive cognitive
disorder negatively impact upon his fitness for trial and impair his ability to
understand and meaningfully
participate in court proceedings, including
directing and constructing a defence, and understanding the evidence to be
considered.
The progressive nature of his cognitive disorder results in an
unfitness for trial which will in all likelihood be permanent.”
[23] Dr van de Hoef at page 26 of her report states in relation to the issue of
fitness for trial as follows:
“In my opinion, however, when
I saw him, Brian Scutt’s predominant feature on mental state examination
was a moderately
severe dementia, and it is that condition which I think renders
him unfit for trial as he barely understands the charges against
him, and he
seemed to me to be incapable of instructing counsel or entering a meaningful
plea. He did not understand, in even a
basic way, the nature and function of
the agents of the Court. He could not, in my view, withstand the rigours of a
trial without
detriment to his mental health, and moreover, given his
significant cognitive impairment and poor coping skills would be likely to
respond to that stress in a catastrophic reaction, or with threats or attempts
to self-harm. I think it is likely that unfitness
will be of a permanent
[24] Dr Heffernan at page 20 of his report also opines that the
defendant’s unfitness for trial is likely to be permanent.
evidence, Dr Heffernan described the defendant as being “drastically
unfit”. Both Dr van de Hoef and Dr Heffernan
identify that at the most
basic level, the defendant could not even understand the nature of the charges
brought against him, even
when, according to Dr Heffernan, this was sought to be
explained to the defendant on three occasions. It is not so much a case of
defendant being unable to follow proceedings. His unfitness for trial is at a
very fundamental level, namely, a basic inability
to even understand the nature
of the case brought against him by the prosecution.
[25] Dr van de Hoef in oral evidence stated that the defendant’s dementia
is likely to progress, rendering his unfitness for
trial permanent. The
defendant hearing delusional voices would also add to him not being fit for
trial, and according to Dr van
de Hoef, he is incapable of even entering a
meaningful plea, because he could not understand the nature of the charges, and
a very poor understanding of the nature of the proceedings. Further, Dr
van de Hoef opined that the defendant could not even generally
proceedings if these first two initial hurdles were somehow overcome.
[26] Dr Heffernan summarises his findings in relation to fitness in his report
at page 20 as follows:
“Although Mr Scutt could name a
charge of ‘dangerous driving’ he did not fully comprehend the nature
of the charges he was facing. He did not seem able to incorporate
the relevance of the diagnosis of epilepsy, previous medical advice
and how this
related to the charges. He could outline the meaning of a guilty and not guilty
plea, and could describe the roles
of officials in the Court process in general
and brief terms. I did not believe however, he would have the capacity to
what was occurring during Court proceedings. I did not think he
could follow the Court process due to his apparent challenges with
processing. As a result, I also believe he would not be able to understand the
effect of complex evidence against him, despite
efforts to accommodate for this.
I believe the later [sic] would also compromise his ability to make a defence
and answer the charges.”
[27] Dr Heffernan added this to his
“Neurocognitive testing would help objectively
demonstrate the extent of his cognitive impairment, but my conclusion based on
the assessment of 23/02/2018 was that he was unfit for trial and that the
probable cause was a neurocognitive disorder. The usual
course of a
neurocognitive disorder is that it becomes progressively worse. Therefore, the
unfitness is likely to be permanent.”
[28] Dr Heffernan in expressing that opinion has a distinct benefit in that he
first assessed the defendant as early as 2015 after
the alleged offending. He
therefore has a longitudinal view of the defendant’s progress and
symptoms. Dr Phillipson, who
assists the Court, advises the Court that he
supports the views of both Dr van de Hoef and Dr Heffernan that the dementing
is likely to progress, and the Court should find that the defendant is
permanently unfit for trial. Dr Varghese, in an insightful
examination of both
Dr van de Hoef and Dr Heffernan, suggests an alternative scenario, namely, that
many of the presenting symptoms
of the defendant were consistent with a
psychotic depression, or a depression with psychotic features.
[29] The issue that these questions raised for both Dr van de Hoef and Dr
Heffernan was that the Court would be in a better position
to determine whether
the defendant was permanently unfit for trial if he was further treated for his
depression, and underwent further
neurocognitive testing, including
neuroimaging. Both Dr Heffernan and Dr van de Hoef are of the view
that the underlying dementia
that the defendant has is sufficient to support
their opinions that he is permanently unfit for trial. They do not believe that
any further treatment for depression or neurocognitive testing would alter their
opinions in this respect.
[30] I accept the evidence of both Dr Heffernan and Dr van de Hoef as to the
defendant being permanently unfit for trial, but I also
take on board Dr
Varghese’s view that it is in the defendant’s own interest in terms
of his future treatment, including
the fact that he has previously had renal
failure and a transplant, for there to be undertaken further neurocognitive
testing. The
Court therefore finds that:
1. The defendant at
the time of the alleged offences was not of unsound mind.
2. The defendant is permanently unfit for trial.
[31] The assisting psychiatrists advise, and I accept, that a forensic order in
this case, given the serious nature of the offending,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (201 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter