URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Romanski v Stone [2025] ICQ 5 (28 March 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Romanski v Stone
[2025] ICQ 005
Romanski, Marek Roman
(Appellant)
Stone, Mark Douglas
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
25 March 2025
HEARING DATE:
30 May 2024
Hartigan DP
The application in existing proceedings filed 26 March 2024 by the
Respondent is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – QUEENSLAND – APPEALS – APPEAL TO
INDUSTRIAL COURT – OTHER MATTERS – where the appellant
interlocutory decision of the Industrial Magistrates Court regarding an
application to strike out paragraphs of the respondent's
statement of
contentions – where the respondent has filed an interlocutory application
seeking that a determination be made
as to whether the Industrial Court of
Queensland is the proper court to determine the appeal – where the
respondent submits
that the District Court of Queensland is the correct
Coal Mining
Safety and Health Act 1999
(Qld) – whether the Industrial Court of
Queensland has jurisdiction to hear the appeal – where the application is
LEGISLATION:
Coal Mining Safety and Health Act 1999
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Workers Compensation and Rehabilitation Act
Central Queensland Services Pty Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Mining and
Energy Union
[2017] FCAFC 43
(2017) 249 FCR 154
Dalliston v Taylor & Anor
[2014] ICQ 17
Fuller v Stone
[2023] ICQ 8
v Metro North Health and Hospital Service (No 2)
(2023) 327 IR 282
Nicholson v Carborough Downs Coal Management Pty Ltd & Ors (No 4)
[2023] ICQ 5
Paulger v Hall
[2002] QCA 353
[2003] 2 Qd R
Schneider v Curtis
[1967] Qd R 300
Workers' Compensation Regulator
[2021] ICQ 8
Turay v Workers'
Compensation Regulator
[2023] ICQ 13
APPEARANCES:
Mr N.D. Boyd of counsel instructed by McGinness & Associates Lawyers
for the Appellant
Mr S. McLeod KC of counsel instructed by Resources
Safety and Health Queensland for the Respondent
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
[1] Mr Marek
Romanski, the Appellant, appeals a decision of an Industrial Magistrate
dismissing an application to strike out certain
paragraphs of the Respondent's
Statement of Contentions ('the Appeal').
Respondent, the Chief Executive Officer, Resources Safety and Health Queensland,
has filed an application in existing proceedings,
seeking that the appeal be
dismissed for want of jurisdiction. The Respondent raises the jurisdictional
objection on the basis that
it contends that the Industrial Court of Queensland
('Industrial Court') does not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal and, rather,
the appeal should have been commenced in the District Court of Queensland
('District Court') in accordance with
Coal Mining Safety and
Health Act 1999
(Qld) ('CMSH Act').
Relevant background
Decision of the Industrial Magistrate
proceedings below involved an appeal in the Industrial Magistrates Court of two
decisions made by the Respondent, cancelling Mr
Romanski and Dr Black's
certificates of competency under
[4] Relevantly,
Mr Romanski had, prior to the decision, held certificates of competency being an
underground mine manager's certificate
of competency and a site senior executive
[5] The decision
of the Respondent cancelling the certificates of competency followed a process
in which Mr Romanski was placed on
notice that it intended to cancel the
certificates, including the reasons relied on in support of that proposed
action, and
Mr Romanski was given an opportunity to make written submissions
as to why the certificates should not be cancelled.
[6] During the
course of the appeal proceedings below, Mr Romanski and Dr Black, each filed
applications seeking,
inter alia,
that identified paragraphs in the
Respondent's Statement of Contentions be struck out on the grounds that these
paragraphs contained
"new claims" that went beyond the particulars of the
reasons for the decision. On this basis it was contended that the Industrial
Magistrates Court lacked the jurisdiction to entertain the said "new claims".
Specifically, Mr Romanski submitted that the jurisdiction
of the Industrial
Magistrates Court in hearing the appeal was expressly limited to considering the
grounds for cancellation detailed
in the Respondent's Show Cause Notice and
subsequent decision. In the alternative, the Applicants sought further
directions be made
including for further disclosure by the
Respondent.
Industrial Magistrate dismissed Mr Romanski's application to strike out
paragraphs 15(d), 86(b)(c), 88(a)(b), 89, 90, 93-95,
97 and 100 – 103 of
the Respondent's Statement of Contentions and, instead, made an order striking
out paragraphs 18, 115,
116 and 117 in accordance with the orders sought by Dr
Appeal to the Industrial Court
[8] Mr Romanski
has appealed to this Court seeking orders that the decision of the Industrial
Magistrate be set aside, and a declaration
be made that the jurisdiction of the
Industrial Magistrates Court is confined to the grounds for cancellation
contained in the Proposed
Action Notice and the Decision of the Respondent. Mr
Romanski also seeks his costs.
[9] Mr Romanski
filed an application to appeal in the Industrial Registry on 14 February 2024.
The grounds relied on in support of
the application to appeal are as follows:
(a) the Industrial Magistrate has erroneously asserted the existence of
contained in the
Proposed Action Notice and the Decision of the Respondent; and
(b) the Industrial Magistrate has misconstrued the
erroneously assert the existence of jurisdiction to hear grounds of cancellation
that were not contained in the Proposed Action
Notice and the Decision of the
Respondent.
The current application
[10] The current
application requires consideration as to whether the decision of the Industrial
Magistrate is one that may be appealed
to this Court.
[11] In support
of the application, the Respondent submits that the avenue for an appeal of a
decision made under
is to the District Court rather than
the Industrial Court on the following grounds:
... where a decision is made under Division 1 of [Part 14] of the
the appeal must, pursuant to
, take place in the District
Court of Queensland.
Respondent further contends that both interlocutory and final decisions of the
Industrial Magistrates Court under
, Division 1 are appealable to the
District Court under
In the alternative, the
Respondent argues, that should it be found that
only applies to final, and
not interlocutory, decisions, then there is no right of appeal from an
interlocutory decision under
response, Mr Romanski argues that the Industrial Court has jurisdiction to hear
the appeal on the following summarised basis:
provides for an appeal to the District Court on questions of
(b) the right of appeal right relates to "the decision"
of an Industrial
Magistrate, which is a reference to the final decision disposing of the appeal
rather than an interlocutory order;
(c) the use of the definite article "the" as opposed to the indefinite article
"a" before the word "decision" in
supports a conclusion
that the reference is to the decision made under
(d) as no decision has been made pursuant to
, the appeal
right created by
has not been enlivened.
[14] Additionally,
Mr Romanski also seeks to rely on the fact that he has sought relief against the
interlocutory decision through
the supervisory jurisdiction conferred by
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld) ('IR Act') and by
way of appeal under
. He argues that there is no clear
statutory indication that
are inconsistent with the
operation of the
Relevant statutory scheme
has objects that include the protection of the safety and health of persons
at coal mines and to require that the risk of injury
or illness to any person
from coal mining operations to be at an acceptable
seeks to achieve these objects by,
, imposing safety and
health obligations on persons who operate coal mines or who may affect the
safety and health of others at coal
providing inspectors and
other officers to monitor the effectiveness of risk management and control at
coal mines, and to take appropriate
action to ensure adequate risk
management;
providing a way for the
competencies of persons at coal mines to be assessed and
recognised;
and requiring
management structures so that persons may competently supervise the safe
operation of coal mines.
Division 2 of the
provides for the establishment of a board of
examiners which has functions
inter alia,
deciding necessary competencies for holders of certificates of competency
and granting certificates of competency and keeping a
provides for a process of suspending and cancelling certificates of
competency and site senior executive notice by the CEO.
provides for the grounds upon which a person's
certificate of competency may be suspended or cancelled as follows:
(a) the person has contravened a safety and health obligation;
(b) the person has committed an offence against a law of Queensland or another
corresponding
) relating to mining safety;
(c) a certificate, equivalent to a certificate of competency, that was issued to
the person under a corresponding law of another
State has been suspended or
provides that, a site senior executive notice may be
cancelled or suspended if:
(a) the person has contravened a safety and health obligation;
(b) the person has committed an offence against a corresponding law.
[21] When the
CEO considers there is a ground to suspend or cancel a board qualification, then
provides a process whereby the CEO must give the person
notice of the proposed action within the terms of
provides a process whereby the person may make a written
submission to the CEO as to why the CEO should not take the proposed
[23] Relevantly,
provides that the CEO may make a decision
suspending,
or cancelling the
certificate of competency or site senior executive
[24] The CEO
must give notice of the
including the reasons
substance of Mr Romanski's interlocutory application before the Industrial
Magistrate seemingly is related to the process
set out above as he contends that
the particulars stated in the Statement of Contentions before the Industrial
Magistrate went beyond
the grounds stated and relied on in the notice of
proposed action and the decision cancelling his certificate of competency. Mr
argues that, consequently, the Industrial Magistrate erred in not
striking out the additional particulars contained in the Statement
Contentions.
Romanski's appeal to the Industrial Magistrates Court was commenced pursuant to
, Division 1 of the
provides for two distinct avenues of appeal depending on the type
of decision being appealed. Division 1 deals with "Appeals against
decisions of Minister, CEO or board of examiners" ('Division 1 decisions') and
Division 2 relates to "
Appeals against chief
inspector's directives and particular decisions" ('Division 2 decisions').
[28] Relevant to
this appeal,
, which falls within Division 1 of
identifies the persons who may appeal against a Division 1 decision as follows:
236A Appeals against CEO's decisions
The following persons may appeal against the CEO's decision under the
following provisions to an Industrial Magistrates Court under
(a) a person whose certificate of competency or site senior executive notice is
suspended or cancelled by the CEO—
section 197D
(b) a corporation on which a civil penalty is imposed—
section 267I.
[29] Mr Romanski
is a person whose certificate of competency was cancelled under
by the CEO and consequently that decision is a Division 1 decision.
provides that an appeal of a Division 1 decision,
inter alia,
is commenced by filing a notice of appeal with an Industrial
Magistrates Court.
Section 240
provides for the hearing procedures in the following
240 Hearing procedures
(1) Unless this division otherwise provides, the practice and procedure for
the appeal are to be in accordance with the rules of court
or, if the rules make
no provision or insufficient provision, in accordance with the directions of the
(2) An appeal must be by way of rehearing, unaffected by the original
decision-maker's decision.
(3) However, for deciding an appeal against a decision of the CEO
section 267I
to impose a civil penalty on a corporation,
information that was not available to the CEO in making the decision must not be
into account.
(4) In deciding an appeal, an Industrial Magistrates Court—
(a) is not bound by the rules of evidence; and
(b) must observe natural justice.
(5) In this section—
decision-maker
means the Minister, CEO or the board of
and (2) of the
are in similar terms to
and (2) of the
the operation of which
was considered by Martin J in
Dalliston v Taylor &
language used in
is inconsistent. For an "appeal by way of rehearing" to
be successful it ordinarily requires that the original decision-maker be
to have erred in law or fact. But this section says that the appeal is to be
“unaffected by the chief inspector's review
decision” which would
seem to be inconsistent with the ordinary understanding of an appeal by way of
clumsiness of expression is to be found in other statutes. A similar provision
was considered in
De Tournouer v Chief Executive, Department of Environment
& Resource Management
where Fraser JA said that the expression meant
that the appeal tribunal could "exercise afresh the statutory power". In other
section 246
uses a form of words which is more clearly understood as an
. An appeal
involves a rehearing of the
evidence by the appellate court. It is analogous to a new
[33] Similarly,
the appeal of a Division 1 decision before an Industrial Magistrate is
effectively a hearing
wherein the Court stands in the shoes of
the CEO and exercises the powers afresh.
Section 241
sets out the powers of an Industrial Magistrates Court in
deciding an appeal of a Division 1 decision as follows:
241 Powers of court on appeal
(1) In deciding an appeal, an Industrial Magistrates Court may—
(a) confirm the decision appealed against; or
(b) set aside the decision and substitute another decision; or
(c) set aside the decision and return the matter to the original decision-maker
with directions that the court considers appropriate.
(2) In substituting another decision, the court has the same powers as the
original decision-maker.
In an appeal against the Minister's decision to cancel an accreditation, the
court may decide to cancel the accreditation or to amend
the accreditation by
imposing conditions.
(3) If the court substitutes another decision, the substituted decision is
taken to be the decision of the original decision-maker.
(4) The court may make an order for costs it considers appropriate.
Section 242
identifies the circumstances in which an appellant may appeal
the decision of an Industrial Magistrates Court with respect to a Division
decision to the District Court as follows:
242 Appeal to District Court on questions of law only
(1) An appellant may appeal against the decision of an Industrial Magistrates
Court to the District Court, but only on a question
(2) On hearing the appeal, the court may make any order for costs it
considers appropriate.
[36] Division 2
sets out the appeal process with respect to Division
2 decisions, namely, particular decisions regarding chief inspector's directives
and other particular decisions.
Section 243
sets out that an appeal to the
Industrial Court may be made by persons whose interests are affected by the
following Division 2 decisions:
(a) a decision of the chief inspector under
section 149(3)(a)
to retain a seized
(b) a directive given by the chief inspector;
(c) a review decision of the chief inspector under
, division 5,
subdivision 8.
Section 244
provides that an appeal with respect to a Division 2 decision
may be appealed by filing a notice of appeal with the registrar of
Section 248
identifies the powers
of the Industrial Court on appeal
as follows:
248 Powers of court on appeal
(1) In deciding an appeal, the Industrial Court may—
(a) confirm the directive or decision appealed against; or
(b) vary the directive or decision appealed against; or
(c) set aside the directive or decision appealed against and make a directive or
decision in substitution for the directive or decision
set aside; or
(d) set aside the directive or decision appealed against and return the issue to
the person who gave the directive or to the maker
of the decision with
directions the court considers appropriate.
(2) If on appeal the court acts under subsection (1)(b) or (c), the
decision is taken, for this Act (other than this part), to be
that of the chief
inspector or the person who gave the directive.
(3) The court may make an order for costs it considers appropriate.
apparent from the above provisions, that the
provides separate pathways
of appeal depending on the type of decisions which are the subject of the
appeal. An appeal from an Industrial
Magistrates' decision with respect to a
Division 1 decision is to the District Court, but only on a question of law. An
appeal with
respect to a Division 2 decision is to the Industrial Court.
[40] The term
"decision" is not defined within the
. The term will be considered
further below.
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Romanski's application to appeal relies on several
provisions of the
in pursuit of the relief sought, being
ss 424(1)(e)
Mr Romanski does not seek to rely on the appeal provisions set out in the
to appeal the decision.
as follows:
424 Jurisdiction and powers
(1) The court may—
(a) perform all functions and exercise all powers given to the court under this
Act or another Act; and
(b) hear and decide, and give its opinion on, a matter referred to it by the
commission; and
(c) hear and decide an offence against this Act, unless this Act provides
otherwise; and
(d) hear and decide appeals from an industrial magistrate's decision in
proceedings for—
(i) an offence against this Act; or
(ii) recovery of damages, or other amounts, under this Act; and
(e) if the court is constituted by the president, exercise the jurisdiction and
powers of the Supreme Court to ensure, by prerogative
order or other appropriate
(i) the commission and magistrates exercise their jurisdictions according to
(ii) the commission and magistrates do not exceed their jurisdictions.
(2) In proceedings, the court may—
(a) make the decisions it considers appropriate, irrespective of specific relief
sought by a party; and
(b) give directions about the hearing of a matter.
(3) The court's jurisdiction is not limited, by implication, by a provision
of this Act or another Act.
(4) The jurisdiction conferred on the court by this Act or another Act is
exclusive of the jurisdiction of another court or tribunal,
unless this or the
other Act provides otherwise.
[43] During the
course of the hearing of this application, it was confirmed that, in addition to
the application to appeal, Mr Romanski
also sought orders by way of prerogative
As noted above, when the
Court is constituted by the President,
s 424(1)(e)
provides that
the Court may "exercise the jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court to
ensure, by prerogative order or other appropriate
process" that "the
commission and magistrates exercise their jurisdictions according to
provides an avenue of appeal from a decision of a Magistrate
as follows:
556 Appeal from magistrate
A person aggrieved by a decision of a magistrate may appeal against the
decision to the court.
[45] "Decision"
is defined in sch 5 of the
as meaning:
(a) a decision of the court, the commission, a magistrate or the registrar;
(b) an award, declaration, determination, direction, judgment, order or ruling;
(c) an agreement approved, certified, or amended by the commission and an
extension of the agreement; or
(d) a bargaining award made or amended by the commission.
Should the appeal properly lie to the District Court pursuant to
Respondent contends that the strike out decision which is the subject of
Romanski's appeal was made pursuant to
consequently, may only be appealed to the District Court as it is an appeal with
respect to a Division 1 decision.
Respondent further contends that the
Uniform and Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) ('UCPR') provides that the District Court may hear a decision, being a
judgment (without qualification as to whether it is an
interlocutory or final
from the Magistrates Court) and, consequently, may hear the appeal of the
interlocutory decision of the Industrial
Magistrate.
[48] In contrast
Mr Romanski contends that the correct construction of
supports the conclusion that "the decision" referred to in
can only be a
decision dispensing of the appeal as provided for in
the decision, appealed against in this matter is an interlocutory decision it
cannot be the subject of a
Relevant principles with respect to the approach to be taken in statutory
construction
[49] The task of
determining whether the reference to "the decision" in
includes reference to an interlocutory decision is a task of statutory
construction. The Court in
Gilbert v Metro North Health and Hospital Service
considered the
relevant principles as follows:
approach to be taken to ascertain the true meaning of words used is well
settled. The approach requires that the text of the legislative
provision in
question be construed by reference to its context and its legislative purpose.
relevant principles with respect to statutory construction were considered and
summarised in
(citations omitted):
[32] The method
to be applied in construing a statute to ascertain the intended meaning of the
words used is well settled. It commences
with a consideration of the words of
the provision itself, but it does not end there. A literal approach to
construction, which requires
the courts to obey the ordinary meaning or usage of
the words of a provision, even if the result is improbable, has long been
by this Court. It is now accepted that even words having an apparently
clear ordinary or grammatical meaning may be ascribed a different
legal meaning
after the process of construction is complete. This is because consideration of
the context for the provision may point
to factors that tend against the
ordinary usage of the words of the provision.
[33] Consideration
of the context for the provision is undertaken at the first stage of the process
of construction. Context is to
be understood in its widest sense. It includes
surrounding statutory provisions, what may be drawn from other aspects of the
and the statute as a whole. It extends to the mischief which it may be
seen that the statute is intended to remedy. "Mischief" is
an old expression. It
may be understood to refer to a state of affairs which to date the law has not
addressed. It is in that sense
a defect in the law which is now sought to be
remedied. The mischief may point most clearly to what it is that the statute
to achieve.
[34] This is not
to suggest that a very general purpose of a statute will necessarily provide
much context for a particular provision
or that the words of the provision
should be lost sight of in the process of construction. These considerations
were emphasised in
the decisions of this Court upon which the Court of Criminal
Appeal placed some weight.
[35] The joint
judgment in
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
rejected an approach which paid no regard to the words of the
provision and sought to apply the general purpose of the statute, to
revenue, to derive a very different meaning from that which could be drawn from
the terms of the provision. The general purpose
said nothing meaningful about
the provision, the text of which clearly enough conveyed its intended operation.
Similarly, in
Saeed v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
the court below was held to have failed to consider the
actual terms of the section. A general purpose of the statute, to address
shortcomings identified in an earlier decision of this Court, was not as useful
as the intention revealed by the terms of the statute
, it was necessary to reiterate that the question of whether there
had been a "substantial miscarriage of justice" within the meaning
relevant provision required consideration of the text of the provision, not
resort to paraphrases of the statutory language
in extrinsic materials, other
cases and different legislation.
[36] These cases
serve to remind that the text of a statute is important, for it contains the
words being construed, and that a very
general purpose may not detract from the
meaning of those words. As always with statutory construction, much depends upon
of the particular statute and what may be drawn from the context for
and purpose of the provision.
[37] None of
these cases suggest a return to a literal approach to construction. They do not
suggest that the text should not be read
in context and by reference to the
mischief to which the provision is directed. They do not deny the possibility,
adverted to in
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
in a particular , "if the apparently plain words of a provision are read in the
light of the mischief which the statute was
designed to overcome and of the
objects of the legislation, they may wear a very different appearance". When a
literal meaning of
words in a statute does not conform to the evident purpose or
policy of the particular provision, it is entirely appropriate for
the courts to
depart from the literal meaning. A construction which promotes the purpose of a
statute is to be preferred.
v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
the High Court
identified that consideration of context may include consideration of statutory,
historical and other context as follows
(citations omitted):
The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory
provision is the text of the statute whilst, at the same time,
regard is had to
its context and purpose. Context should be regarded at this first stage and not
at some later stage and it should
be regarded in its widest sense. This is not
to deny the importance of the natural and ordinary meaning of a word, namely how
is ordinarily understood in discourse, to the process of construction.
Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise that,
understood in its
statutory, historical or other context, some other meaning of a word may be
suggested, and so too, if its ordinary
meaning is not consistent with the
statutory purpose, that meaning must be rejected.
Additionally,
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(Qld) provides
that, when interpreting a provision, the interpretation that best achieves the
purpose of the Act is to be
Respondent seeks to rely on the terms of
to argue that the
appeal of the Industrial Magistrate's interlocutory decision should have
properly been commenced in the District
Court of Queensland.
construing the provision regard must be had to the meaning of the words "the
decision" within
. In this regard, Mr Romanski submits that
the use of the definite article "the" before "decision" is relevant to such a
consideration.
Central Queensland Services Pty Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Mining and
Energy Union,
the Full Bench
of the Federal Court embarked on a process of statutory construction with
respect to the phrase "the purpose". In
construing that phrase, the Full Court
considered the use of the definite article "the" as follows:
the Full Court observed in
Australian Crime Commission v AA Pty Ltd
[2006] FCAFC 30
(2006) 149 FCR 540
(at [28]): "The
Cambridge Australian English Style
, describes the definite article as signalling 'that a noun is to
follow, and it very often implies that the noun is one with which
the reader is
already acquainted' so that '
' says: 'You know which one I mean', and
reminds us of an earlier reference to the same thing in the text' (emphasis in
Cambridge Australian English Style Guide
University Press, 1995) pp 747-748." Similarly, in
Tamas v Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal
[2003] VSCA 113
(2003) 9 VR 154
(at [8]), Callaway JA pointed
out: "it is a natural and correct use of English to employ the definite article
when one is referring
to a person or thing already identified expressly or by
implication".
observations therefore suggest that the usual grammatical use of the definite
article is to indicate that there is an earlier
reference to that expression in
the writing in
question...
[53] Having
regard to the plain meaning of the words and adopting a similar approach to that
Central Queensland Services
Pty Ltd v CFMEU
, the use of
"the" before "decision" is taken to be a reference to a previously identified
"decision". Accordingly, consideration
will need to be had with respect to
whether, within the context of the
, there is a previously identified
[54] As noted
appears within
, Division 1 of the
which provides
for an appeal avenue with respect to Division 1 decisions. Within this context,
identifies the types of decision that may be made by an
Industrial Magistrate in such an appeal. These decisions include decisions
confirming the decision, setting aside the decision and substituting with a
fresh decision or setting aside the decision and returning
the matter to the
original decision-maker. It is apparent that the type of decision that may be
made pursuant to
are in the nature of decisions that
dispose of the appeal.
Section 241
immediately precedes
and defines the type of decision that
may be made by an Industrial Magistrate.
Tuesley v Workers' Compensation
Industrial Court considered the operation of
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
(Qld) which are in similar terms to
[57] Section 558
of the WCR Act provides for the powers of the Commission on deciding an appeal.
It is in similar terms to
and provides that the appeal
body may confirm,
set aside the decision and
substitute it with another
or return the matter
to the Regulator.
[58] Relevantly,
s 561(1) of the WCR Act provides that a party aggrieved by, relevantly, an
Industrial Commissioner's decision may
appeal to the Industrial
[59] The Court
construed the relevant provisions of the WCR Act as follows:
"decision of ... the Industrial Commission", to which Division 1A applies, is a
decision made under s 558. There isn't yet
a decision made by the QIRC under s
558 in the present case.
[44] Under s
561, the party who may appeal to the Court is one "aggrieved by ... the
Industrial Commission's decision". Again, that
is the decision made under s 558.
Ms Tuesley cannot be "aggrieved" by a decision that has not yet been made.
[45] The powers
of this Court are prescribed by s 562 to "confirm", "vary" or "set aside" the
"decision". Consistently, the "decision"
is one made under s 558. As there is,
as yet, no such decision, there is nothing to "confirm", "vary" or "set aside".
[46] Section
561(2) applies the
to the appeal brought under the WCR Act. There is
nothing in the WCR Act itself which confers jurisdiction on this court to
an appeal from Industrial Commissioner Hartigan's
[60] Applying
similar reasoning and having regard to the relevant statutory context, "the
decision" referred to in
is the decision of the Industrial
Magistrate that accords with the type of decision able to be made pursuant to
, that is, a decision to "confirm", "vary" or "set aside" the decision.
[61] For the
sake of completeness, I note the Respondent's submissions that the definition of
"decision" in the "UCPR" would encompass
a decision of an interlocutory nature.
Whilst that may be the case, the definition contained in the UCPR is irrelevant
on the basis
that a reference to the UCPR would only be applicable if the appeal
was before the District Court. It is not.
Respondent further submits that
assists in the
construction of what amounts to "the decision" in
and relevantly
encompasses the making of an interlocutory decision. The purpose of
provide for the procedures for the hearing. It does so by stating,
, that the practice and procedure for the appeal are to be in accordance
with the rules of the court, or if they are insufficient,
in accordance with a
direction given by the court.
Section 240(1)
makes no reference to the making of
any decision. Whilst it is accepted that a decision may be made incidental to
the court exercising
its powers with respect to the practice and procedure for
the appeal, it certainly could not be said that
contains an identified prior use of the term "decision" so as to aid in the
construction of
Respondent contends that the Industrial Court's decision in
assists in the
interpretation of what amounts to a "decision" under the
more broadly.
Relevantly, the Respondent's submissions in this regard were as
discussed in the judgment at [17],
(contained in
Division 2) vests jurisdiction upon the Industrial Magistrates Court to hear
complaints against offences created by the
, but also expressly provides
for an avenue of appeal to the Industrial Court by way of
which provides:
"255 Proceedings for offences
(1) A prosecution for an offence against this Act, other than an offence
, is by way of summary proceedings before an industrial
magistrate.
(2) More than 1 contravention of a safety and health obligation
may be charged as a single charge if the acts or
omissions giving rise to the claimed contravention happened within the same
and in relation to the same coal mine.
(3) A person dissatisfied with a decision of an industrial magistrate in
proceedings brought under subsection (1) who wants to appeal
must appeal to
the Industrial Court."
J, President observed at [18]:
"Although the industrial magistrate's judgment was not a final hearing and
determination of the complaint, no party suggests it was
a decision...
in proceedings
a prosecution for an offence against [the
", so the appeal is competent."
a decision on a strike out is an appellable 'decision' for the purpose of
, then it is axiomatic that a decision on strike out under
afforded the same
interpretation.
apparent in the extract above, the terms of
different language to
and provides for a broad avenue of
appeal from a decision including from a decision made in the proceedings. That
alone distinguishes
[65] Further,
the extract of the decision from
referred to in the Respondent's
submission excluded a relevant footnote reference which sought to distinguish
the matter from
. The relevant footnote reference to the words "no
party suggests it was not 'a decision ... in proceedings'" is as
Compare, for example, the statutory provisions considered in
Workers' Compensation Regulator
(2021) 307 IR
[66] For these
reasons, I do not consider that the Respondent's submissions with respect to
assist as an aid in the construction of
[67] Whilst
there has been no previous consideration as to whether an interlocutory decision
of an Industrial Magistrate with respect
to a Division 1 decision may be
appealed pursuant to
, there are several authorities which
assist in such a consideration.
Schneider v Curtis
Full Bench considered whether an appeal to the District Court pursuant to
Justices Act 1886
(Qld), 1886 to 1965, only lies from an order
which disposes of a complaint. Relevantly, Gibbs J (as his Honour then was)
The question we have to decide is whether an appeal under
Justices Acts
lies in the present case. That section gives
a right of appeal not from any order but only from "any order made.... upon a
for an offence or breach of duty." The section does not give a right
of appeal from any order made in proceedings commenced by a
complaint but only
from "an order made upon a complaint." These words (which are similar to the
words of the definition of "order"
originally contained in
Justices Act
of 1886, whose effect was discussed by Griffith C.J.
Castlemaine Brewery and Quinlan Gray & Co. Brisbane Limited v.
Callings Ex parte Ceilings
(1896) 6 Q.L.J.s 273, at p. 275) in my opinion
refer to an order disposing of the complaint itself and do not include an order
an application made during the course of the proceedings instituted by the
There was a sound reason for the legislature to allow a right of appeal under
only from orders disposing of the complaint itself. On the hearing of an
order to review the court has a discretion to refuse relief.
Whether or not
there is a discretion at the outset to refuse an order to review (a question
discussed in Byrne v. Baker (supra) at
(supra) at p. 71) it is clear that on the return of the
order the court has a discretion to discharge it; it is expressly provided
the proviso to s. 213 that notwithstanding that the court or judge may be
of opinion that any point raised by the order
to review might be decided in
favour of the appellant the court or judge may discharge the order if it or he
considers that no substantial
miscarriage of justice has occurred. However there
is no similar discretion to refuse to allow an appeal under
established that the order appealed from was erroneous. Serious inconvenience
could result if litigants could appeal from
any decision on any interlocutory
application made during the course of a case, including an application for a
ruling on an incidental
question that arose during the trial, and the court had
no discretion to refuse to entertain such appeals.
In my opinion the legislature did not intend that the wide powers of control
over the proceedings of magistrates which this court
may exercise by way of
order to review should also be available on an appeal under
appeal in my opinion only lies from an order which disposes of a complaint, for
example by dismissing it, or by entering
a conviction and imposing a penalty. It
does not lie from a magistrate's ruling, given at the close of the complainant's
there is a case for the defendant to answer, for although such a
ruling may amount to the refusal of an application, and may be regarded
order within the definition in
, it is made upon an incidental
application during the hearing of the complaint, and is not an order made upon
the complaint.
correctness of this approach was approved by the Court of Appeal in
Additionally, Holmes J
(as her Honour then was) also considered why, on policy grounds appeals from
interlocutory rulings would not
relevantly be permitted as follows:
[27] Quite apart
from the construction question addressed in
Schneider v. Curtis
much to be said on policy grounds for prohibiting the bringing of appeals under
against interlocutory rulings. Such appeals may lead to fragmentation of
the criminal process, may in the long run prove to have
been pointless, and are
capable of being misused to exhaust the resources of a less well-heeled
opponent. But an appellant may in
an appeal against a final judgment properly
raise the issue of the correctness of an interlocutory order "which affected the
Gerlach v. Clifton Bricks Pty Ltd
. Thus, an appeal from a
ruling before any evidence had been put before the court on the
or called in the case might well be doomed to failure, because of the
impossibility of saying whether it had affected the final result.
On the other
hand, it does not follow in a case such as the present that every piece of
evidence available to the prosecution must
be called before it can be said that
an interlocutory ruling has affected the
Industrial Magistrate's interlocutory decision did not dispose of the appeal. It
follows that the interlocutory decision
was not made in the exercise of the
Industrial Magistrate's powers pursuant to
Division 1 of the
does not provide for an avenue of appeal from a
decision made on an interlocutory application during the course of the appeal
proceedings.
[71] Accordingly,
as the Industrial Magistrate is yet to make a decision pursuant to
is not yet enlivened. It follows that there is
no avenue of appeal from the interlocutory decision to the District Court.
[72] It must now
be considered as to whether the Industrial Court has jurisdiction to hear the
appeal pursuant to
as contended by Mr
Can Mr Romanski seek to appeal the decision pursuant to
Section 556
provides that a person aggrieved by a decision of a Magistrate may
appeal against the decision to the Industrial Court.
[74] Mr Romanski
contends that the interlocutory decision of the Industrial Magistrate is a
"decision" within the meaning of that
term as it is defined in sch 5 of the
and consequently he is entitled to appeal the interlocutory decision
pursuant to
[75] Mr Romanski
submits that the use of the indefinite article "a" before the word "decision" in
supports a conclusion that the language is permissive of an
appeal of an interlocutory decision.
[76] In taking
this position, it is apparent that Mr Romanski seeks to rely on
as providing an alternative avenue of appeal to the Industrial Court
separate from the avenues of appeal available pursuant to the
[77] There is an
obvious tension between the relevant appeal provisions contained in the
. As already established, under the
, the appeal
pathway hierarchy with respect to a Division 1 decision made by the CEO is
firstly to the Industrial Magistrates Court
and, then to the District Court but
on a matter of law only. The Industrial Court is not included in the appeal
pathway hierarchy
with respect to appeals arising from Division 1 decisions. The
tension arises because it is contended by Mr Romanski that
provides an alternative avenue of appeal to the Industrial Court with respect to
such appeals as it permits a party to appeal a decision
of an Industrial
Magistrate.
response, the Respondent submits that it would be a "non-sensical situation if
an interim appeal could take place in the Industrial
Court, but any final appeal
on the same subject matter is to be heard in the District Court".
[79] In order to
resolve the tension, consideration must be given to the identification of the
statutory source that creates the right
of appeal. The Court has previously
engaged in such an exercise but with respect to a right of appeal arising in the
context of a
worker's compensation appeal pursuant to s 561 of the WCR Act and
v Workers' Compensation
considered the operation of s 561 of the WCR
respectively. Relevantly, his
Honour held:
explained in Glass, the structure is that the WCR
Act creates the right of appeal from decisions of the QIRC made under
WCR Act and then picks up the 2016
which provides
the procedural provisions. Therefore, the construction task is not to attempt to
construe all the provisions of the
two Acts consistently with each other but to
identify the provisions of the WCR Act which provide the right of
appeal. Those provisions
may well be consistent with the 2016
provisions but, if not, will prevail to the extent of any
inconsistency. This is a product of the legislative scheme rather than
application of the doctrine of
generalia specialibus non
which only applies where there are inconsistent provisions
which cannot be reconciled as a matter of ordinary interpretation.
[76] Section 557
of the 2016
gives a right of appeal generally from decisions of
the QIRC. It does not provide an appeal against decisions made by the QIRC under
the WCR Act. Section 561 of the WCR Act does that. None
of the provisions of Division 2 of Part 6 of Chapter 11 applies
under the WCR Act. In particular:
556 of the 2016
: Section 561(1) of the WCR
Act provides an avenue of appeal from the Industrial Magistrates Court or
the QIRC to this Court in relation
to decisions made under the WCR Act.
Section 556 of the 2016
must only concern other
557 of the 2016
: As already observed, s 561(1) of
the WCR Act provides the avenue of appeal from the QIRC, not s 557 of
which provides for other appeals from the
558 of the 2016
: Section 562 of the WCR
Act provides the powers of this Court upon an appeal from the QIRC on
matters under the WCR Act. Section
558 of the 2016
powers on this Court in relation to other appeals from the
559 of the 2016
: Section 559 of the 2016
application to appeals against decisions under the WCR Act because an
appeal from the QIRC in a case under the WCR Act is
under s 561 of the WCR Act, not
. Therefore, no "appeal" is made under
[77] Division 5
of Part 6 of Chapter 11 of the 2016
does apply,
at least in part, to appeals under the WCR Act:
563 of the 2016
: Section 563 of the 2016
definitions section. This Court, being the court to which an appeal lies
under s 561 of the WCR Act, is included in the definition
"industrial tribunal" in s 563 of the 2016
564 of the 2016
: Section 564 of the 2016
the time for appeal. Nothing in s 561 of the WCR Act speaks
of a time limit for an appeal. There is no reason why s 564 would
apply to appeals under the WCR Act. This is confirmed by the extrinsic
material to the Electrical Safety Amendment Act.
565 of the 2016
: Section 565 of the 2016
applies to appeals under
. An appeal against the QIRC's decision under the WCR
Act is an appeal under s 561 of the WCR
566 of the 2016
: Section 566 of the 2016
concerns stays of judgments pending appeal. It is clearly intended
applies generally to appeals under the WCR
Act. Section 566(2) specifically accepts some appeals from its
567 of the 2016
: Section 567 of the 2016
provides the "nature of appeal". Section 561 of the WCR
Act specifically provides for the nature of an appeal under the WCR
therefore, at least to the extent of any inconsistency, s
561 would prevail over s 567. However, s 561 of
the WCR Act and s 567 of
equivalents.
[78] Therefore,
on a proper construction of s 561 of the WCR Act, Division 1
of Part 6 of Chapter 11 of the 2016
does not apply to
appeals brought under s 561 of the WCR Act. The purpose of s 557
of the 2016
is to grant a right of appeal. With appeals under
the WCR Act, the right of appeal is bestowed by s 561 of
the WCR Act. Section 561(2)
of the WCR Act operates so
as to apply the provisions of Division 5 of Chapter 11 of the 2016
to appeals launched under s 561(1) of the WCR
[81] An analysis
of the relevant provisions of the
as conducted above, identifies that
with respect to Division 1 decisions, an appeal pathway is created to the
Industrial Magistrates
Court and then to the District Court. Relevantly, in this
respect, the right of appeal is bestowed by 242 of the
. For the reasons
previously identified, no decision has yet been made that would permit an appeal
pursuant to
. Also, for the reasons identified above, the
does not provide an appeal pathway for interlocutory decisions made
during the course of proceedings for appeals made in respect
of a Division 1
[82] It is the
which provides for and limits appeals that arise with respect to
Division 1 decisions made under the
. In this respect, the source of the
statutory right to appeal decisions made with respect to Division 1 decisions is
Section 556
gives a general right of appeal from decisions of the Industrial
Magistrates Court. However,
does not provide a right of
appeal against decisions of an Industrial Magistrates with respect to a Division
1 decision under the
. Accordingly,
concern other appeals.
[84] Indeed, the
purpose of the appeal pathways with respect to a Division 1 decision set out in
would be meaningless if
operated in such a way
so as to provide jurisdiction to the Industrial Court to hear an appeal of a
decision from an Industrial Magistrate
with respect to a Division 1
[85] Consequently,
because the source of the statutory right to appeal with respect to Division 1
is provided for by the
does not provide an
alternative pathway of appeal.
Industrial Court does not have jurisdiction to entertain an appeal from the
Industrial Magistrates decision pursuant to
with respect to
an appeal regarding a Division 1 decision made in accordance with the
Is Mr Romanski able to proceed in this Court by operation of
[87] In the
alternative, Mr Romanski seeks to rely on
as a means for the
appeal to be heard in the Industrial Court.
[88] As noted
above, Mr Romanski filed an application to appeal in the Industrial Registry. Mr
Romanski has not made a formal application
for prerogative relief.
[89] However, it
is apparent on the face of the application to appeal, that Mr Romanski appears
to attempt to identify that he also
seeks to rely on
This was further confirmed
during the course of submissions.
[90] Consequently,
while the grounds of the appeal do not specifically address, in usual terms,
that Mr Romanski applies for relief
by way of prerogative order, the grounds of
appeal do contend that the Industrial Magistrate did not exercise their
according to law and/or the Industrial Magistrate exceeded their
On this basis, the
Court is content to accept that Mr Romanski seeks relief pursuant to
424(1)(e)(i)
and (ii) of the
previously stated, the Industrial Court does not have jurisdiction to hear and
determine an appeal of the Industrial Magistrate's
interlocutory decision as
there is no statutorily provided avenue of appeal. That does not mean, however,
that Mr Romanski is precluded
from seeking a review of the Industrial
Magistrate's decision in this Court.
Section 424
grants jurisdiction and powers to the Industrial Court.
and (ii) relevantly provides for relief by prerogative order in the
following limited circumstances:
(e) if the court is constituted by the president, exercise the jurisdiction and
powers of the Supreme Court to ensure, by prerogative
order or other appropriate
(i) the commission and magistrates exercise their jurisdictions according to
(ii) the commission and magistrates do not exceed their jurisdictions.
Section 424
provides a means for review, including in the absence of an avenue
of appeal provided by statute, as discussed by Davis J in
Australia's constitutional arrangements, decisions of inferior courts (such as
the QIRC) must be amenable to review, at
least where they have acted beyond
that review is conducted
pursuant to the inherent supervisory powers possessed
by the superior court of the relevant jurisdiction.
[14] This Court
is a superior court of record whose President is a judge of the Supreme Court of
Queensland. However, in the absence
of some relevant statutory provision,
the supervisory jurisdiction rests with the Supreme Court of Queensland, not in
judges sitting in some other
operation of
s 424(1)(e)
with respect to decisions of Industrial
Magistrates was considered by this Court in
Nicholson v Carborough Downs Coal
Management Pty Ltd & Ors (No
[96] Chapter 11
establishes this Court, the QIRC and the Industrial Magistrates
Section 424
confers limited jurisdiction upon this Court, including, by
, supervisory powers over the other courts and tribunals in the scheme,
namely the QIRC and the Industrial Magistrates
[95] Consequently,
the Court, when constituted by the President, does have jurisdiction to hear an
application for prerogative relief
pursuant to
s 424(1)(e)
respect to a decision of an Industrial Magistrate. This is the case even when
there is no other statutory basis to appeal the
relevant decision to the
Industrial Court.
[96] In the
circumstances, the Court, when constituted by the President, does have
[97] Consequently,
the Respondent's application in existing proceedings filed 26 March 2024 is
dismissed. The parties are directed
to confer with one another and provide draft
directions with respect to progressing the hearing of the application for
prerogative
relief within 28 days.
[98] For the
reasons set out above, I make the following order:
application in existing proceedings filed 26 March 2024 by the Respondent is
Romanski and Dr Black appealed against the decisions under
to the Industrial Magistrates Court of Queensland. Dr Black is not a party
to this appeal.
Chief Executive
Officer, Resources Safety and Health Queensland, 'Applicant's Outline of
Submissions', Submission in
Romanski v Stone,
C/2024/20, 30 April 2024,
[11] ('The Respondent's Submissions filed 30 April 2024').
In written and oral
submissions, the parties have, interchangeably, adopted the terms
"interlocutory" and "interim" to describe
the decision of the Industrial
Magistrate. Given the nature of the decision, it will be referred to as an
interlocutory decision
within these reasons.
Coal Mining Safety and
Health Act 1999
('CMSH Act').
CMSH Act (n 4) s 7(a).
Ibid s 7(f).
Ibid s 7(g).
Ibid s 7(h).
Ibid s 184.
Ibid s 185, s 193A.
CMSH Act (n 4) s
197D(2)(a).
Ibid s 197D(2)(b).
Ibid s 197D(3).
Ibid s 197D(4)(b).
sets out the hearing procedures for an appeal before the
Industrial Court with respect to a Division 2
Ibid [11]-[12] (emphasis in
original) (citations omitted).
CMSH Act (n 4) s
244(1)(a)-(b).
Transcript of Proceedings,
Romanski v Stone
(Industrial Court of Queensland, Hartigan DP, 30 May
2024) 16 (Boyd).
Industrial Relations Act
s 424(1)(e)(i)
('IR Act').
(2023) 327 IR 282
Gilbert (No 2)
Gilbert (No 2)
21) [48]-[51] (emphasis in original) (citations omitted).
[2017] FCAFC 43
(2017) 249 FCR 154
Central Queensland Services Pty Ltd v CFMEU
Ibid 161-2.
[2021] ICQ 8
Workers' Compensation
and Rehabilitation Act 2003
s 558(1)(a)
('WCR Act').
s 558(1)(b).
s 558(1)(c).
s 558(1)(d).
[43]-[46] (citations omitted).
[2023] ICQ 8
The Respondent's
Submissions filed 30 April 2024 (n 2) [29]-[31] (emphasis in original).
[1967] Qd R 300
Schneider v Curtis
Schneider v Curtis
(n 34) 304-6.
[2002] QCA 353
[2003] 2 Qd R 294
Paulger v Hall
Paulger v Hall
36) 301 (citations omitted).
Section 557
provides that the Minister or another person aggrieved by a decision of the
Commission may appeal against the decision to the court
on the ground of either
error of law or excess, or want, of
[2023] ICQ 13
(n 39) [75]-[78] (emphasis in original) (citations omitted).
See Marek Romanski, 'Form 5
– Application to appeal', Application in
Romanski v Stone
14 February 2024, 3,
See IR Act (n 20) s 424.
[13]-[14] (citations omitted).
[2023] ICQ 5.
Ibid [96] (citations
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (506 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter