URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2003/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Woolshed Chargrill & Saloon Bar [2003] QLAT 30 (10 June 2003)
APPELLANT: Woolshed Holdings Pty Ltd
(APPLICANT)
RESPONDENT: The Chief Executive, Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair
Trading, including Liquor Licensing
APPEAL NO: 30 of
PREMISES: The Woolshed Chargrill & Saloon Bar, 24 Shields
Street, Cairns
DECISION APPEALED
AGAINST: Refusal of trading
hours beyond 3.00 am and the imposition of a "lockout"
HEARING DATE: 23 May 2003
TRIBUNAL: Mr J. Rolls
Dr M. O'Donnell
Mrs J. Harrington
DATE: 10 June 2003
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. On 10 February 2003, an application was lodged by the appellant which sought
extended trading hours to allow it to trade beyond
3.00 am for premises known as
"Woolshed Chargrill & Saloon Bar" ("the Woolshed") situate at 24 Shields
Street, Cairns.
2. The appellant at the time of this application held an on-premises cabaret
with an extended hours
permit which allows it to trade from 10.00 am to 3.00 am Sunday to Thursday and
from 10.00 am to 5.00 am Friday
and Saturday (excluding Christmas Day, Good
Friday and Anzac Day, the trading of hours of which are prescribed in the
Liquor Act 1992
("the Act")). Further, there were management conditions
imposed in respect of the extended hours permit which regulated the manner
which the appellant trades from Thursday to Sunday to 5.00
. An extended hours permit for
trading beyond 3.00 am remains in force only for a maximum period of six months
and may be renewed
application
3. The Chief Executive, with knowledge that the extended hours permits held by
permittees in Cairns were to expire at the end of
March 2003, sought to obtain
"timely police and council
. The Chief Executive
circularised licensees who held extended hours permits for trading beyond 3.00
am seeking submissions with
respect to the management conditions imposed on the
extended hours permit. A submission was received by the Chief Executive dated
18 February 2003 from a group described as the "Cairns Venue Managers'
Association". This submission, on perusal, related to conditions
imposed upon
the appellant but does not appear to have been signed by it.
4. Submissions relating to the granting of extended hours permits were also
received from the Chief Executive, Far North Queensland
Promotion Bureau Limited
supporting the application made not only by the appellant but, so it would
appear, all those licensees who
wish to obtain an extended hours permit. The
local federal member of parliament, Warren Entsch, also voiced his support for
granting of these applications
The Tropical North Queensland Backpackers' Hostels' Association sought retention
of a 5.00 am closing time for venues in Cairns.
5. More significantly, a letter was on sent from the appellant's solicitors
dated 24 February 2003 which indicated that the appellant
had "no issue" with
the management conditions imposed but argued that the restriction of trading
hours to 3.00 am Sunday to Thursday
was for a "trial period only". As that
period was to end on 28 February a "reinstatement" of trading hours from 10.00
am seven days a week was
. This letter, upon receipt,
was the subject of some internal investigation by the
6. On 5 February 2003, a letter was sent by the Chief Executive to the Assistant
Commissioner of Police Far Northern Region seeking
advice as to whether or not
the Queensland Police Service had any objection to "the Cairns premises"
retaining the current management
conditions imposed on their
. Attached to this letter
was a list of the premises which currently held extended hours permits which
were due to expire on 31 March
2003. The appellant was mentioned in this
7. On 4 March 2003, Assistant Commissioner Roberts raised an objection "to the
application at this time in its present format".
In support of the objection a
report under the hand of the officer in charge of the Cairns station was
attached. This report will
be considered in due course.
8. The local authority, the Cairns City Council, indicated that it had no
objection to the renewal of extended hours permits for
trading beyond 3.00 am
for this license with a present permit provided "...that the trial period of
3.00 am closing Sunday to Thursday
be extended for a further six
9. Considering this information, the Chief Executive, on 1 April 2003, granted
the appellant's application for an extended hours
permit to allow trading beyond
3.00 am to 5.00 am on Friday and Saturday nights only, subject to management
conditions. Management
condition 12 provided:
"Patrons must not be permitted entry or re-entry to any part of the
premises after 3.00 am on any day where trading continues beyond
3.00 am, except
where the exit from and re-entry to the premises after 3.00 am is in an
emergency situation".
This condition was in the same terms as that
which previously applied to the appellant's permit.
10. It is from this determination that the appellant appeals.
11. The Chief Executive in reaching his decision acted in accordance with
s.121A(3)(a) in considering the comments or objections
to the application by the
local authority or Assistant Commissioner. The Chief Executive was also
required to consider the matters
mentioned in
s.121(5)(g)
of the Act being:
(i) the previous conduct of the appellant in discharging his duties under the
(ii) the appellant's ability to control the noise and behaviour of the number
of persons who could reasonably expect to be on and
in the vicinity of the
premises; and
(iii) the suitability of the premises as a facility for the purpose for which
the extension is sought.
It does not appear from the material placed before us that the first and third
matters are in issue.
12. Finally the Chief Executive is required to consider the impact on the
amenity of the community
. This matter is also
in issue on this appeal.
A PRELIMINARY POINT
13. At the commencement of the hearing of this appeal, Mr Morzone of Counsel for
the appellant raised a preliminary point. It was
submitted that the comments
and/or objections from the police and local authority had been sought by the
Chief Executive on 5 February
2003, before the appellant lodged its application,
on 18 February 2003. It was submitted that the local authority which tendered
its comment and/or objection on 18 March 2003 and the Assistant Commissioner of
Police who lodged his comment or objection on 4 March
2003 were outside the time
prescribed under the legislation.
14. In order to understand the submission it is necessary to examine s.121A of
the Act which, inter alia, provides:
The local government or Assistant Commissioner may comment on, or object
to, the application by giving written comments or objections
to the Chief
Executive within 14 days of receiving the Chief Executive's advice about the
application."
It was submitted that the comments could not have been about the
application as the comments were sought prior to any application
being lodged.
While this may be so, it is clear that the Chief Executive anticipated that
applications would be received from some
or all of those licensees which
presently held an extended hours permit. It was those anticipated applications
Executive sought the local authority's and Assistant
Commissioner's advice. In our view, nothing turns on the timing of the request
made by the Chief Executive.
15. However, the local authority and/or Assistant Commissioner have, under the
Act, 14 days within which to comment upon or object
to the application. It is
said by the appellant that the submission of such material outside the 14 day
period, means that it cannot
be considered by the Chief Executive. We disagree.
16. The Chief Executive, under his power to consider and decide the application
vested in him in s.121A(3) of the Act, has power
to do what is necessary to be
informed to enable a proper decision to be made. Not only must the Chief
Executive consider the comments
and objections received from the local authority
and the Assistant Commissioner, but must assess the application's impact on the
amenity of the community concerned. For that purpose the Chief Executive must
adequately inform himself to make the assessment required,
and to that end, the
Chief Executive can consider comments, submissions and objections from any
source including the local authority,
police, local tourism authorities, members
of parliament and concerned citizens. The Chief Executive can take all these
into account
17. In making the submission that the material was not to be considered, Mr
Morzone referred the Tribunal to its previous decision
Jimmy's on the
. In this case
comments of the local authority and Assistant Commissioner of Police were sought
in respect of an application governed
of the Act which was for an
application for an extended hours permit to 5.00 am on a regular basis. The
material received from the
local authority in that case was also outside the 14
day time period prescribed by
s.117(3)(b)
of the Act. The council sought to
appear at the appeal as an objector. The Tribunal observed:
"26. In our view, a comment or objection supplied to the Chief Executive
outside the 14 day time limit specified in
s.117(3)(b)
might, at his discretion
and subject to the other provisions of the Act, nevertheless be considered by
the Chief Executive in appropriate
circumstances. However, it is considered
that the purpose of the Act in prescribing a time period within which the
response must
be given, is to limit to those persons responding within the
prescribed time frame, the right to participate in an appeal or to institute
appeal from the Chief Executive's decision.
27. Support for this view is found in the decision of Queensland Court of
Hannaslea Nominees Pty Ltd v. The Liquor Appeals
where the Court determined that an
"objection", "submission" or "application" referred to in
of the Act is
one made pursuant to a right under the Act to be made. In our view, the
expression "made an application, submission
or objection in the proceeding"
where it appears in
of the Act, is to be read as having the same meaning
attributed by the Court in
to that expression where it appears
Reference is also made to the approach as to finality of time
contemplated by the Act in
s.118(2)(c)."
We would agree with this interpretation insofar as it applies to s.121A of the
Act. Thus, the material can be taken into account
by the Chief Executive, but
as the material has been received beyond the time specified under the Act, the
comments made by the Queensland
Police and/or local authority does not render
them submitters or objectors under the Act. Accordingly, those entities, having
participated in the process in accordance with the Act, are denied rights to
appeal the decision, should they so wish. In this case,
no issue as to the
standing of the local authority of the Queensland Police Service arises as those
entities did not seek to appear
and agitate their cause in the appeal.
18. Accordingly, we are of the view that the material from the Queensland Police
Service was rightly considered by the Chief Executive.
19. Further, as the material was therefore validly before the Chief Executive,
it is material which this Tribunal can consider on
A FLAWED APPROACH
20. The appellant submits that the Chief Executive adopted a blanket or catchall
approach with respect to the consideration of all
applications for extended
hours permits to operate in the Cairns district. Accordingly, so the argument
went, as we understood it,
the Chief Executive failed to consider the
individual merits of the appellant's application. It is submitted that this
approach can be gleaned from the "coordinated" request by the Chief
Executive and the collective treatment of all operators as a
group by the
Departmental officers when seeking the views of potential objectors. Reference
is made in this regard to the letters
sent to the Assistant Commissioner of the
Queensland Police Service and the local authority.
21. In this case, it must be recalled, that there are eight licensees operating
in the Cairns region with some form of extended hours
permit. The Queensland
Police Service in its response to the letter sent to it on 4 March 2003
identified each of the premises to
which the report
. In response to the
material received from the Police, the appellant was given an opportunity to
comment upon that material. It
did so in an extensive fashion. Its solicitors
lodged material which takes up in excess of 50 pages in the Appeal
. That submission was
considered, along with all other material the Chief Executive had gathered, by
an acting senior licensing officer,
Mr Reinhold in a report dated 31 March 2003
addressed to a Mr Mark Farrah
This report considered only the appellant's application. Another memorandum
which contained the formal recommendation giving rise
to the decision the
subject of this appeal was also brought into existence by officers of the
Department and bears the date 31 March
. The recommendations were
ultimately approved by the Chief Executive. This memorandum also specifically
referred to the appellant.
22. It is true that where a general policy has been adopted, it may lead the
administrator into administrative error, if the decision-maker
ignores relevant
features of a particular
application
. Further, a
decision-maker may fall into administrative error by blindly following a policy
laid down in advance again, ignoring
the merits of a particular application. In
this case, it is difficult to identify that the Chief Executive has, prior to
the application, articulated any policy. Whilst it is true that there
had been a "trial" of restrictions imposed upon the granting
of extended hours
permits, it could not be said from the material before us that there had been
any pre-articulated policy which
would have precluded consideration of the
appellant's application. Instead, the existing permits, all cease at the same
the Chief Executive, in order to more conveniently administer the
applications for renewal, decided to cluster those applications
Undoubtedly, applications to renew extended hours permits in the same region
will, by virtue of the similarity of the
nature of the application and the
proximity of the area, throw up similar issues for consideration but, the mere
fact that the same
issue arises in eight applications does not mean that the
Chief Executive has not considered each specific application.
23. The Chief Executive has, it appears to us, gone to considerable lengths to
ensure that the applications are individually considered.
The mere fact that
the appellant was able to lodge extensive submissions in response to material
which adversely affected the applicant's
application and the fact that that
material was individually considered by a senior officer, Mr
demonstrates that there
has been a consideration of all of the material relating to the appellant. We
do not find that there has
been any policy which has been applied and which has
caused the Chief Executive to close his mind to the individual merits of the
appellant's application. The mere fact that applications are considered
together, to promote administrative convenience, is not,
in our view, evidence
that there has been a failure to consider the application on its merits. We do
not consider that the approach
of the Chief Executive in disposing of the
applications in the manner in which he chose, could be said to be flawed. On
the contrary,
it appears to us that the process adopted by the Chief Executive
was efficient and fair.
THE MERITS OF THE APPEAL
24. The appellant comprehensively sets out "the detail of the nature and grounds
. However, that
notice of appeal can be distilled to two essential points being:
(i) there was no or no adequate basis to restrict the appellant's trading hours
to a 3.00 am closure Monday to Sunday; and
(ii) there was similarly, no or no adequate basis to refuse to relax the
requirement of a lock-out from 3.00 am to 5.00 am on Saturday
mornings in accordance with clause 12 of the management conditions referred to
25. The granting of a permit to trade beyond 3.00 am is a privilege conferred on
a licensee only if the licensee demonstrates that
he or she is in a position to
discharge the obligations that accompany that privilege and that in exercising
the rights conferred
pursuant to that grant, there will be no adverse impact on
the amenity of the community. One does not need to pause and contemplate
too long to realise that a permit for an extension of trade beyond 3.00 am has
the potential, if not managed responsibly, to
cause considerable harm to the
community by disrupting its amenity. The Tribunal has expressed these
sentiments in previous
. Accordingly, whether
or not an application is granted, one consideration to be taken into account is
the protection of the community
from the adverse impacts which flow as a
consequence of the operation of this permit. It is clear that Parliament has
required considerable
weight to be given to the views of the local authority and
the Queensland Police Service when decisions as to the grant of permits
authority and the Queensland Police Service will
automatically be adopted by the
Chief Executive. There is no suggestion that this has occurred in this
instance. However, the views
of the police, in particular, in this case,
provided they are cogent, ought be given considerable weight and not followed
the clearest of cases.
26. We have had regard to the report of Sergeant B. Kuhn dated 28 February
. Sergeant Kuhn goes to
some considerable effort to marshal statistics obtained from the computer aided
despatch system in order
to identify any "good order problems associated with
extended hours trading"
Sergeant Kuhn after analysis of the statistics, identifies that comparison of
calls for services-disturbances in the period 1/12/2002
to 23/2/2003
demonstrated "a significant behavioural problem in the CBD precincts with a
significant number of calls for service
attributed to alcohol consumption".
Further, calls for services-intoxicated persons (drunk arrests) for the same
period also indicated
a significant number of incidents being the subject of
calls for service. However, it is noted that the Christmas/New Year holiday
period occurred during this time. Sergeant Kuhn observed:
"Although not displayed numerically, offences detected on Friday and
Saturday nights where trading until 5.00 am continues is that
equaled offences
on the other five nights of the week."
Further, Sergeant Kuhn has regard to the results of an audit of City Place
Security which is in an area which, as we understood
Mr Morzone, is where the
appellant's premises operates. Perusal of the material gleaned from this
service indicates, according to
Sergeant Kuhn, that in the period December
2002/January 2003 there has been in the period between 6.00 am and midnight a
in alcohol related disturbances, but it is noted that "...the figures
may be inaccurate" due to a variation of periods.
27. Sergeant Kuhn also referred to "anecdotal evidence" from business operators,
emergency services personnel and security providers
which suggested a decrease
in calls for service and the improvement in behaviour in the city area. It is
clear from perusal of the
material relied on by Sergeant
that there have been
disturbances associated with the appellant's premises identified as such and
also at the "City Place" site within
which the appellant's premises operate.
28. The appellant, as we understood its submission, sought to distance itself
from these statistics which, the Tribunal recognises
are not without some doubt,
by asserting that the market which the appellant services is a separate and
distinct market, being catering
to backpackers. Of that, we have no doubt
having regard to the material contained in the Appeal Book. The appellant has a
nexus with that group of tourists that visit Cairns. Further, the
Tribunal accepts that incidents involving alcohol disturbances
referred to
above, are not likely to be backpackers. However, the acceptance of those two
features does not mean that the appellant
is entitled, as a matter of course, to
a grant of the privilege conferred by an extended hours permit.
29. The mere fact that the appellant markets itself as a venue frequented by
backpackers does not mean that it operates exclusively
for that class of
tourist. One cannot ignore the fact that, if the appellant's premises were the
only premises in Cairns open after
3.00am, then persons who wish to purchase
liquor, after that time could go to the appellant's premises. This would be so
they be backpackers or not. The mere fact that they are not backpackers
or identify themselves as such will not preclude entry to
the appellant's
premises. Thus, in those circumstances this fact, in our view, is of little
weight in the consideration of this
appeal. The premises are open to all the
public, but caters for backpackers. However, that does not preclude others from
and utilising the services offered by the appellant including the sale
of liquor pursuant to its licence.
30. It has been recognised by this Tribunal recently in
Pelligrini & Ors
v. The Chief Executive
the discretion conferred on the Chief Executive pursuant to s.121A was:
"...a wide one, and the proper and efficient administration of the Act will
often require that conditions be imposed with the aim
of preventing harm arising
from misuse of liquor or ensuring ongoing compliance with the Act in the absence
of any evidence of past
non-compliance by licensees. As discussed in the case
of Lanyon Properties Pty Ltd v. The Chief
the imposition of a
lock-out condition could be characterised as a form of regular administrative
monitoring, rather than as a punitive
measure. Further, as also discussed in
Lanyon, if such a condition is to be imposed it should in fairness and for
effectiveness
be imposed on all premises with similar trading hours in a
particular locality. We would add that the only fetter on the Chief
Executive’s
wide discretion is that the imposition of such condition is,
in all the circumstances, reasonable."
31. While we will consider the lock-out provision in due course, it seems to us
that if the trial of restrictions on trade beyond
3.00 am is limited only to
Thursday to Sunday evenings and if that limitation is to be effective and fair,
it must be imposed on
all premises with similar trading hours in the Cairns
region. This includes the appellant, unless the appellant can distinguish
itself in some way so as to demonstrate that the effectiveness of the limits
imposed would not be frustrated by enabling one venue
to continue to trade. In
our view, this has not been demonstrated by the appellant in this case. The
principal point of reference
of the appellant's case is that it focuses on the
backpacker market and that such tourists are not a problem as far as the
Police are concerned. While this may be so, as we have said, the
venue is open to all not just backpackers. This raises the question
effectiveness of the condition. During the course of argument it was not
suggested by the appellant that it would be prepared
to limit itself in such a
fashion as to cater only for backpackers. However, we doubt whether such a
limitation could, in any event,
be effectively imposed.
32. In those circumstances, we are of the view that whilst the statistics are
not beyond contradiction, they nevertheless are, in
our view, indicative of a
decline in disorderly behaviour in the Cairns Central Business District which
has come about, perhaps,
as a consequence of the reduction in trading hours
which permits trade beyond 3.00 am only between Thursday and Sundays. It is for
the appellant to demonstrate, in our view, that the amenity of the community
concerned would not be adversely impacted by the grant
of this application.
That also involves a demonstration that the granting to the appellant will not
undermine the effectiveness
and fairness of the particular condition imposed on
all premises with similar trading hours in the particular locality. It is an
onus which the applicant has, in our view, failed to discharge. It follows,
therefore, that on this aspect of the appeal we find
that there was adequate
material upon which the Chief Executive could make his determination to limit
the permits for extension of
hours in the manner in which he did. It is a
decision with which we agree. Accordingly, the appeal with respect to that
of the matter fails.
33. It is also noted that clause 12 of the management conditions is also subject
to appeal. Whilst lock-out conditions in the same
terms were recently
considered by this Tribunal in
in that case
the Tribunal set aside such a condition but in that case there was extensive
evidence as to the impact of such a condition
in the Townsville entertainment
precinct. No such evidence was adduced in this appeal in respect of this
matter. This is perhaps
not surprising having regard to the fact that the
appellant's solicitor indicated that it had "no issue" with the management
. Each appeal, as
indeed each application, must be considered on its own facts according to the
evidence adduced at that time. Evidence
in one appeal is not evidence in
another. Further, it is even less appropriate, in our view, to take evidence
which concerns one
particular location and seek to apply it to another
geographic area of Queensland.
34. Since 1 July 2001, this Tribunal is required by the Act to conduct a
re-hearing on the evidence that was before the Chief
. New evidence is
allowed only by leave upon the satisfaction of an applicant of conditions set
out in the Act
. Prior to the
amendments of the Act which commenced on 1 July 2001, hearings before this
Tribunal took the form of a re-hearing
. This meant that all
issues were alive on an appeal and parties could adduce fresh evidence
unencumbered by what had been placed
before the Chief Executive. With the
amendments to the Act
system changed. The advent of s.35A means, in our view, that parties are,
absent circumstances giving rise to the successful
invocation of
Act, bound by the manner in which the application is conducted before the Chief
Executive. Thus, where an issue is not pursued
before the Chief Executive, in
the ordinary course, it will be difficult for that issue to be raised anew on an
appeal. This will
be especially so where that particular new issue depends upon
new evidence or, as in this case, involves the revocation of a concession
was made before the Chief Executive that there was "no issue" with the
management conditions. The appellant in this case did
not seek to adduce fresh
evidence on appeal with respect to this matter. Accordingly, this Tribunal
finds it difficult to evaluate
the merits or otherwise of this appeal based upon
the scant evidence that is said to support a contention that the management
with which the appellant formerly had no issue, ought be set aside.
Further, the Tribunal recognises that by virtue of this concession,
Executive has been prejudiced in that an investigation which might have been
undertaken with respect to the efficacy or
otherwise of the management
condition, now sought to be attacked, might have disclosed further information
which would have been
before the Chief Executive and before this Tribunal.
Accordingly, this Tribunal is reluctant to entertain the appeal on these
35. We have examined the references to the Appeal Book identified by Mr Morzone
as supporting a submission that there are negative
consequences of early
closures upon amenity revealed in the results of survey of hostel operators and
tour operators
and in anecdotal
evidence from security
. Whilst we accept
that there may be some patrons who do not understand the provisions and become
disgruntled at being unable to
enter or re-enter premises after 3.00 am on those
evenings where trading is allowed beyond that time, we do not consider that such
evidence is capable of supporting a finding that such a condition ought be set
aside as being unreasonable in all the circumstances.
36. Further, the Tribunal recognises that the Chief Executive has, since 1995,
imposed lock-out conditions as a way of controlling
patrons. Whilst it is clear
from the decision in
that not in every case lock-out
provisions will be able to be justified having regard to all the facts, we are
not, in this appeal,
able to identify any reason why such a condition ought not
be imposed in this instance. Further, it appears to us that if such a
is imposed it ought be, in fairness and for effectiveness, imposed on all
premises with similar trading hours operating
in the locality. For these
reasons, we are of the view that the appeal concerning clause 12 of the
management conditions ought be
Pursuant to s.36(1)(a) of the Act, we order:
(i) Appeal No. 30 of 2002/2003 be dismissed; and
(ii) the decision of the Chief Executive dated 1 April
2003 be confirmed.
................................
Mr J Rolls- Chairperson
For the Liquor Appeals Tribunal
Dr M O’Donnell
Mrs J Harrington
Chairperson
Date: 10 June 2003
hc:E:\Case Management Files\02-03\LAT\30 of 2002-03\Decision\Woolshed Chargrill
02.06.03.doc
No.43301511.
The management
conditions are set out at pp.10 and 11 of the Appeal
See p.14 the Appeal
See p.22 of the Appeal
See p.25 of the Appeal
See p.26 of the Appeal
The full text of the
letter is set out at p.35 of the Appeal
See p.72 of the Appeal
See s.121A(3)(c) of
Nominees v. Liquor Appeals Tribunal
(1996) 1 QdR 486
at 469 per the
President at 437 per Davies JA and Derrington
Jimmy's on the Mall
Pty Ltd & Anor v. The Chief Executive, Liquor Appeals Tribunal,
No.6 of 2002/2003, 19 December
See p.40 of the Appeal
See pp.94-157 of the
Appeal Book which also includes
See pp.159-161
of the Appeal Book.
pp.161-164 of the Appeal
Assignment Pty
Ltd v. Kirby
(1981) QdR 129
at 134 per Macrossan
See pp.159-161 of the
Appeal Book.
See pp.2-3 of
the Appeal Book.
Muras v. The Chief Executive Liquor Appeals Tribunal
, No.68 of 2001/02
(The Shaft, Gympie) 18 July
See pp.40-48 of the
Appeal Book.
See p.42 of
the Appeal Book.
particular, pp.49-55 of the Appeal
Liquor Appeal
Tribunal, Appeal Nos.15, 16, 17 and 18 of 2002/2003, 20 February
Liquor Appeals
Tribunal, Appeal No.19 of 1997/1998, 15 January 1998 at
Referred to in
para.4 of these Reasons.
of the Act.
s.35A of the Act.
ALH Group Pty Ltd v. Dicey's Toowong Pty Ltd
(2002) QSC 396
paras.17-18.
Amendment Act 2001.
See pp.146-149 of the Appeal
See p.136 of the
Appeal Book.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (65.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter