URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/220.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v MEW [2025] QCA 220 (11 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
[2025] QCA 220
(applicant)
CA No 95 of 2025
DC No 53 of 2025
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Sentence Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Brisbane – Date of Sentence: 7 April 2025
(Rosengren DCJ)
DELIVERED ON:
11 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
23 October 2025
Bowskill CJ and Bradley JA and Wilson J
leave to appeal the sentences imposed on counts 1 and 2, only for the
purpose of correcting the form of order.
that the Verdict and Judgment Record for count 1 be amended by substituting
the first paragraph with the following:
“The offender
is sentenced to imprisonment for a period of 6 months. Order that the term of
imprisonment be suspended after
the offender has served 96 days, and the
offender must not commit another offence punishable by imprisonment within
a period of 2
years if the offender is to avoid being dealt with for the
suspended term of imprisonment.”
that the Verdict and Judgment Record for count 2 be amended by substituting
the first paragraph with the following:
“The offender
is sentenced to imprisonment for a period of 9 months. Order that the term of
imprisonment be suspended after
the offender has served 96 days, and the
offender must not commit another offence punishable by imprisonment within
a period of 2
years if the offender is to avoid being dealt with for the
suspended term of imprisonment.”
confirm the sentences imposed for counts 1 and 2 and the declaration of
pre-sentence custody made by the primary judge.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE
– GROUNDS FOR INTERFERENCE – SENTENCE MANIFESTLY
EXCESSIVE OR
INADEQUATE – where the applicant was convicted, on his pleas of guilty, of
two counts of indecent treatment of
a child under 16 (counts 1 and 2) and a
further count of indecent treatment of a child under 12 (count 3) – where
the applicant
was sentenced to nine months’ imprisonment for count 2, and
a concurrent six months’ imprisonment for count 1, with both
terms to be
suspended “forthwith” for an operational period of two years –
where 96 days of pre-sentence custody
were declared as imprisonment already
served for the sentences imposed – where the applicant was a young man
with no prior
criminal history at the time of the offending who had prior
exposure to domestic violence as a child and who had been diagnosed with
paedophilic disorder – where the applicant seeks leave to appeal the
sentence on the ground that the sentences imposed were
manifestly excessive, as
a result of five specific errors, including the sentencing judge’s failure
to ameliorate the sentence
because of the applicant’s youth, mental health
impairments and background as a victim of domestic violence – where the
applicant seeks leave to appeal the sentence on the second ground that the
sentencing judge erred in law by failing to pronounce
partly suspended terms of
imprisonment, rather than wholly suspended terms – whether the sentence
was manifestly excessive,
as a result of any of the five specific errors –
whether the sentence was manifestly excessive as a result of the sentencing
judge failing to pronounce partly suspended terms of imprisonment, rather than
wholly suspended terms
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE
– GROUNDS FOR INTERFERENCE – GENERALLY –
where the applicant
was convicted, on his pleas of guilty, of two counts of indecent treatment of a
child under 16 (counts 1 and
2) and a further count of indecent treatment of a
child under 12 (count 3) – where the sentencing judge mistakenly sentenced
the applicant on the basis that the maximum penalty for counts 1 and 2 was ten
years imprisonment, when it was in fact 14 years imprisonment,
as a result
of a misstatement of the maximum penalty on the agreed statement of facts
– whether the misstatement of the maximum
penalty was material to the
exercise of the sentencing discretion
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
, considered
R v Verdins
(2007) 16 VR 269
[2007] VSCA 102
R v Yarwood
(2011) 220 A Crim R 497
J P Feely for the applicant
A D Anderson for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Rostron Carlyle Rojas Lawyers for the applicant
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Queensland) for the respondent
[1] BOWSKILL
The applicant was convicted, on his pleas of guilty, of two counts of
indecent treatment of a child under 16 (counts 1 and 2) and
a further count of
indecent treatment of a child under 12 (count 3). About a year before his
conviction and sentence, which took
place on 7 April 2025, the applicant had
served 96 days in pre-sentence custody. He was sentenced to nine months’
imprisonment
for count 2, and a concurrent six months’ imprisonment for
count 1, with both terms to be suspended “forthwith”
operational period of two years. The 96 days of pre-sentence custody was
declared as imprisonment already served for the
sentences imposed. In respect
of count 3, the Court made a probation order for three years.
applicant applies for leave to appeal against the sentences imposed on
counts 1 and 2, on the grounds that:
(a) first, the sentences imposed were manifestly excessive, as a result of five
specific errors (ground 1); and
(b) second, the sentencing judge erred in law by failing to pronounce partly
suspended terms of imprisonment, rather than wholly
suspended terms
(ground 2).
[3] The Crown
does not accept the sentencing judge erred in any of those respects, but has
drawn the Court’s attention to another
error, namely, that the sentencing
judge mistakenly sentenced the applicant on the basis that the maximum penalty
for counts 1 and
2 was 10 years’ imprisonment, when in fact it was
14 years’ imprisonment. This error arose as a result of a
misstatement
as to the applicable maximum penalty on the agreed statement of
[4] I am not
persuaded that the sentence was manifestly excessive, on the basis of any of the
applicant’s contended errors.
Nor do I consider that the misstatement of
the maximum penalty was material to the exercise of the sentencing discretion in
circumstances of this case. I do consider, however, that the form of the
order made by the sentencing judge was incorrect. Accordingly,
leave to appeal the sentences imposed on counts 1 and 2, only for the purpose of
correcting the form of order.
that the Verdict and Judgment Record for count 1 be amended by substituting the
first paragraph with the following:
“The offender is
sentenced to imprisonment for a period of 6 months. Order that the term of
imprisonment be suspended after
the offender has served 96 days, and the
offender must not commit another offence punishable by imprisonment within a
period of 2
years if the offender is to avoid being dealt with for the suspended
term of imprisonment.”
that the Verdict and Judgment Record for count 2 be amended by substituting the
first paragraph with the following:
“The offender is sentenced
to imprisonment for a period of 9 months. Order that the term of
imprisonment be suspended after
the offender has served 96 days, and the
offender must not commit another offence punishable by imprisonment within a
period of 2
years if the offender is to avoid being dealt with for the suspended
term of imprisonment.”
confirm the sentences imposed for counts 1 and 2 and the declaration of
pre-sentence custody made by the primary judge.
logical to deal with the error as to the maximum penalty first.
[6] The maximum
penalty is one of the matters a sentencing court must take into account
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
But it does not follow that an error of this kind warrants appellate
intervention. That depends on whether the error is material.
[7] This case is
similar to the recent Court of Appeal decision in
, in which the prosecutor misstated the maximum penalty for the
offence in its written submissions. In that case, the misstatement
higher maximum than applied at the time the offence (trafficking) was committed
(life imprisonment, rather than 25 years).
However, the Court noted that
the maximum penalty was not a matter on which there was any express discussion
during the sentencing
hearing and all comparable authorities that were relied on
related to trafficking when the maximum penalty was still 25 years’
imprisonment. In that case, the Court held that the misstatement was not
material in the circumstances of the sentencing of the
present case, the error was actually favourable to the applicant (because a
lower maximum penalty was referred to) but,
, it was not a
matter that was the subject of any discussion at the hearing, and the main
comparable decision relied on, by both parties
– addressed the correct maximum penalty (and the change to that
maximum which took place in 2003 – see
[9] What is
more, count 3 carried a higher maximum penalty than counts 1 and 2, of
20 years, which was correctly identified by the
prosecutor, and referred to
by the sentencing judge.
[10] In all the
circumstances, this error was not material, and would not warrant any appellate
intervention in the sentence imposed.
[11] Turning
then to the applicant’s first proposed ground. In contending that the
sentences imposed for counts 1 and 2 were
manifestly excessive, the applicant
submits the sentencing discretion miscarried as a result of five specific
errors, namely, that
the sentencing judge:
(a) erred by fettering the sentencing discretion and misconstruing
Penalties and Sentences Act
(b) erred in fact and law in applying the principle of community protection;
(c) failed to give effect to the fact that the applicant was a youthful first
time offender;
(d) erred and failed to ameliorate the sentence because of the applicant’s
mental impairments; and
(e) failed to ameliorate the sentence by reason of the applicant’s
background as a victim of domestic violence.
sentence proceeded by reference to an agreed statement of facts. Counts 1
and 2 involved offending against a young girl,
aged 12, on 27 January 2024.
The applicant did not know her. She was playing on a swing in a park with her
friend. The applicant
was observed to be staring at them, and appeared to take
photographs of them. He walked up to the girl, while she was on the swing,
grabbed her face with his hand and kissed her on the cheek and then with his
hand tried to undo the button on the front of her shorts.
The kiss was
described as a “tongue kiss” by the girl. The girl told him
“no” and pushed him away. That
was count 1. The girl went to leave
with her friend, and the applicant followed her. He approached the girl again,
grabbed her,
touched her on the side and hugged her and tried to kiss her. The
girl said she could feel the applicant’s penis pressing
up against her
body. He held her for about 15 seconds. The girl yelled “no”,
pushed the applicant off and ran away.
That was count 2.
[13] On the same
day, although it is not clear whether it was before or after counts 1
and 2, the applicant was in a men’s toilet
in a nearby shopping
centre. A young boy, aged 8, had just used the urinal and was washing his
hands, when the applicant approached
him from behind. Using both hands on
either side of the boy, the applicant lifted up his shirt and then grabbed
either side of the
boy’s shorts and pulled them up higher. The applicant
said “come with me into the toilets” while at the same time
motioning with one hand towards the toilet cubicle. The boy said
“no”, and ran out of the men’s toilets straight
women’s toilets where his mother was. This was count 3.
applicant was identified through photographs taken of him by the girl’s
sibling, after she was picked up from the park
by her grandmother, and by the
boy’s mother, as the applicant came out of the toilet, as well as from
CCTV footage from the
shopping centre. He was arrested the following day, and
remanded in custody from 28 January 2024 until he was granted bail, 96 days
later, on 2 May 2024.
applicant was a young man, 20 years old, at the time he committed the offences.
He had no prior criminal history, but by
the time he was sentenced he had a
conviction for breaching his bail, in circumstances described as being found
loitering in a public
park without the supervision of his support worker. In a
psychologist’s report tendered at sentence, it was noted that he
diagnosed with a moderate intellectual disability at a relatively young age, and
had been living in supported accommodation
for some time, with a substantial
NDIS support package recently approved. He had a prejudicial childhood, having
been in and out
of foster care since he was five. His parents were both drug
users, and he was exposed to domestic violence until his father left
abuse, by his biological father when
he was five and by a worker in a foster
care house when he was about seven. The psychologist noted that the applicant
had previously
been diagnosed with paedophilic disorder and complex
post-traumatic stress disorder arising from his childhood abuse and neglect.
The psychologist said that the applicant’s “primary criminogenic
treatment need is the elimination of deviant arousal
patterns”, and
recommended that he be referred to specialist treatment for sexual offenders as
paedophilic disorder is indicated.
The applicant told the psychologist that he
had been using drugs since he was about 14. He said that on the day of the
he had been drinking vodka and consumed cannabis, cocaine and MDMA.
The applicant’s mother said he may be “fabricating
use” as he would have limited opportunity to use drugs given his care
regime. The psychologist said this issue warranted
further assessment, noting
that the applicant may be “self-medicating with alcohol”.
[16] Turning
then to the first contended error.
Section 9(4)(c)
Penalties and
Sentences Act
provides that, in sentencing an offender for any offence of a
sexual nature committed in relation to a child, the offender must serve
actual term of imprisonment, unless there are exceptional circumstances.
[17] In the
course of the sentencing submissions, after this provision was referred to by
the prosecutor, the sentencing judge observed
that “he’s served a
period of imprisonment... so that’s really not in contest, is it?”
The prosecutor agreed,
but said he was raising it because of what had been
submitted, in writing, on behalf of the applicant – that a probation order
(only) be made. The sentencing judge repeated “But he’s already
served a period of imprisonment”.
[18] Importantly,
when the applicant’s counsel commenced her submissions, the sentencing
judge asked what her ultimate submission
as to penalty was. The
applicant’s counsel said:
“certainly three years’
probation for that ongoing supervision and support, and I certainly
couldn’t really cavil
with my learned friend’s submission as to nine
months’ imprisonment, but I’d ask that it be served by way of a
wholly suspended sentence...”
followed an exchange about how the 96 days already served could be dealt with.
The applicant’s counsel then said:
“I think probably the
best way to go about it would be nine months’ imprisonment to declare the
96 days ... for an operational
period of three years to match the same duration
as the probation order...”
[20] It is clear
in context that what counsel meant was “nine months’ imprisonment,
to be suspended after 96 days...”,
with those 96 days to be declared as
time already served.
[21] There is no
basis to conclude the sentencing judge fettered the sentencing discretion, by
misconstruing
as requiring that a sentence of imprisonment be imposed.
Her Honour simply made the obvious point that the question whether there
“exceptional circumstances” for the purposes of that provision was a
moot point – because the applicant had
already served an actual period in
[22] As to the
next contended error, the applicant accepts that community protection was
“clearly important” given the
circumstances of the offending as well
as the applicant’s diagnoses of paedophilic disorder. He submits,
however, that this
factor “was not furthered by the imposition of the
suspended terms of imprisonment”, and to the extent this principle
“was used to justify further imprisonment being imposed this was in
[23] No such
error was made. Community protection was, as the sentencing judge correctly
found, the paramount sentencing consideration
in this case. The way in which
that factor is taken into account will vary with the circumstances of each
particular case. Supervision
– on parole, or probation – is one
way. The Damoclean effect of a suspended term of imprisonment is another. The
combination
of both for the offending against two young children, in two
different public places, by this offender was appropriate.
applicant next contends that the sentencing judge erred by failing to take into
account the applicant’s youth. That
argument is not sustainable. It is
clear on the face of the sentencing remarks that the sentencing judge did take
into account the
young age of the applicant. How that factor affects a sentence
will vary from case to case. In this case, although the applicant
was 20 at the
time of the offences, and had no prior criminal history, the offending was
seriously concerning, by a young man with
an apparent diagnosis of paedophilic
disorder, requiring treatment, support and supervision, who had breached his
bail in a troubling
way. His relatively young age could not overwhelm the other
factors in this case, which supported the sentences imposed.
[25] The fourth
contended error is that the sentencing judge failed to ameliorate the sentence
because of the applicant’s mental
impairment. The applicant’s
counsel submitted to the sentencing judge that the applicant’s
disabilities and impairments
of the mind “means that general and specific
deterrence are of less significance in this case”. Before this Court, the
applicant refers to the relevant principles which apply where an offender
suffers from a mental impairment, by reference to the summary
[2024] QCA 151
, and submits that it is not evident from the
sentencing remarks whether the submission below was accepted and, if so, how.
The applicant
also submits that to the extent they had a role to play,
denunciation and deterrence were “imparted” by the pre-sentence
custody, and no further imprisonment ought to have been imposed.
[26] There is a
complexity in this case because, on the one hand, the applicant was said to be
affected by a moderate intellectual
disability, but it was not suggested by the
psychologist that there was any causal connection between that condition, and
the offending.
Telling against that is the psychologist’s record that the
applicant reported feeling sad about his urges (of sexual arousal
to children)
and expressed a willingness to engage in specialised sexual offender treatment.
On the other hand, the psychologist
found paedophilic disorder was indicated,
which was consistent with the reported prior diagnoses of that condition, and
which plainly
was causally connected with the offending. That explains the
psychologist identifying the applicant’s primary criminogenic
need as the elimination of deviant arousal patterns.
useful to keep in mind an aspect of the policy behind the principles established
in cases like
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
– which was captured by
R v Yarwood
[2011] QCA 367
“if ... the public were aware of the extent of his illness they would not
require condign punishment to be
imposed, rather the punishment should be
ameliorated”.
[28] In the case
of a person with a paedophilic disorder, who has offended against two young
children in public places, in a persistent
and brazen manner, it is difficult to
see how it could be appropriate to conclude that denunciation and deterrence
(particularly
deterrence of the applicant) would not remain relevant sentencing
considerations. As already noted, the sentencing judge appropriately
protection of children in the community to be the paramount sentencing
consideration. Her Honour did not err by finding
that general and personal
deterrence were also relevant.
[29] The final
contended error is that the sentencing judge failed to ameliorate the sentence
due to the applicant’s prior exposure
to domestic violence. As the
applicant acknowledges, the sentencing judge did refer to the fact that the
applicant was exposed to
domestic violence as a child, and neither the
prosecutor nor his counsel below made any submissions about this factor, or
the judge to
Penalties and
Sentences Act
Given the express reference to this, and the
applicant’s history of sexual abuse, in the sentencing remarks, it is
Honour did take these matters into account, as required by
s 9(2)(gb).
The reference to exposure to domestic violence was a passing one, in the
psychologist’s report, which was not sufficient to
directly raise the
operation of
This may explain why no reference was made to it by
either counsel.
sentencing discretion was not affected by any of the specific errors contended
by the applicant. This was seriously concerning
offending, by a troubled young
man who posed a risk to the community if not supervised and appropriately
treated. Whilst the physical
acts involved may notionally place this at the
lower end of seriousness for this kind of offending, the circumstances in which
acts occurred – persistent, brazen conduct, in public places,
against two separate children – rendered the offences serious
The sentencing structure gave the applicant the benefit of no further time in
custody, but an appropriate punishment,
together with a long period of
supervision on probation. It was a sentence the applicant’s counsel below
quite reasonably
said she could not cavil with. The sentence was not manifestly
Error in the wording of the sentence orders
[31] It is clear
from the sentencing remarks that the sentencing judge intended to impose
a partially suspended sentence on the applicant
– that is, that the
sentences of imprisonment were intended to be suspended after the period the
applicant had already served
(96 days). The way in which the sentencing orders
were worded is potentially ambiguous, in that it does not refer to suspension
after serving that time, although does include a declaration of the time already
served. It is appropriate that this wording be
corrected, as already
I agree with the reasons of Bowskill CJ and with the orders her Honour
I agree with the reasons of Bowskill
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (192 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter