URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/224.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Coronel [2025] QCA 224 (14 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
R v Coronel
[2025] QCA 224
CORONEL, Jayc
(applicant)
CA No 276 of 2024
SC No 341 of 2024
SC No 1033 of 2024
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Sentence Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane – Date of Sentence: 16 December 2024
(Callaghan J)
DELIVERED ON:
14 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
15 October 2025
Boddice and Doyle JJA and Wilson J
The application for leave to appeal sentence is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE
– GROUNDS FOR INTERFERENCE – GENERALLY –
where the applicant
pleaded guilty – where the applicant was sentenced to 13 years
imprisonment for trafficking in methylamphetamine,
18 months imprisonment
for supplying gamma-hyrdoxybutyryate (“GHB”), 18 months imprisonment
for supplying GHB and 2 years
imprisonment for contravening order about
information necessary to access information stored electronically – where,
time of the commission of the offences, the applicant was subject to a 4
½ year suspended sentence imposed on 16 December 2020
– where all
terms of imprisonment were concurrent with each other, but cumulative upon a
3-year term of imprisonment also imposed
on 16 December 2020 – where
561 days of pre-sentence custody were declared time served under the sentence
– whether the
sentencing judge erred in treating the contingent liability
arising from the operation of
Corrective Services Act 2006
(Qld) as potentially exposing the applicant to a longer sentence, in
circumstances where the extension to the sentence is automatic
the sentencing judge erred by starting from a nominal sentence of 14 years or
Corrective Services Act 2006
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
R v Brutton
(2024) 18 QR 65;
[2024] QSC 24
R v Galeano
[2013] 2 Qd R 464
, distinguished
(2022) 10 QR 451
E D Whitton for the applicant
A D Anderson for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the applicant
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Queensland) for the respondent
[1] BODDICE
I agree with Wilson J.
I have had the advantage of reading in the draft Reasons of Wilson J.
The issues relied on are such that I would have been minded
to grant leave to
appeal but for the Reasons given by Wilson J, I would have dismissed the appeal.
However, in the circumstances
I agree with Boddice JA and Wilson J in the order
dismissing the application for leave.
Jayc Coronel, the applicant, pleaded guilty and was sentenced on
16 December 2024 in the Brisbane Supreme Court to the following
imprisonment:
(a) 13 years imprisonment for trafficking in methylamphetamine;
(b) 18 months imprisonment for supplying gamma- hyrdoxybutyryate
(c) 18 months imprisonment for supplying GHB; and
(d) 2 years imprisonment for contravening order about information necessary to
access information stored electronically (“the
contravening
[4] He was also
convicted and not further punished in relation to:
(a) possessing methylamphetamine in excess of 2 grams;
(b) possessing 4-hydroxybutanoic acid lactone and 1,4-butanediol;
(c) possessing cannabis;
(d) possessing mobile phones that were used in connection with trafficking
dangerous drugs; and
(e) possessing utensils or pipes that had been used.
[5] Further, at
the time of committing these offences, the applicant was subject to a
4 ½ year suspended sentence imposed on
16 December 2020. The
balance of the 4 ½ years was ordered to be served concurrently
with the terms of imprisonment imposed
on 16 December 2024.
[6] All terms of
imprisonment were concurrent with each other, but cumulative upon a 3-year term
of imprisonment also imposed on 16
December 2020.
[7] 561 days of
pre-sentence custody were declared time served under the sentence.
applicant sought leave to appeal his sentence on the basis that it was
manifestly excessive. Subsequently, the applicant
was given leave to add
grounds of appeal that the learned sentencing judge erred in four ways
(a) treating the contingent liability arising from the operation of
Corrective Services Act 2006
(Qld) (“CSA”) as potentially
exposing the applicant to a longer sentence in circumstances where the extension
sentence is automatic (Ground 1);
(b) starting from a nominal sentence of what must have been 14 years or more,
which is not supportable by reference to any comparable
authorities
(Ground 2).
Alternatively,
(c) not moderating the nominal sentence of 13 years to account for totality and
time in custody which could not be declared (ground
Alternatively,
(d) not providing sufficient reasons for determining that a sentence of
13 years with no reduction for totality and time, which could
declared, was appropriate (Ground 4).
[9] The fifth
ground then became the manifestly excessive ground.
Circumstances
of offending
just over 11 months, between 14 December 2021 and 24 November 2022, the
applicant trafficked methylamphetamine at a high-end
street and low-end
wholesale level. The applicant was the principal of his business, sourcing
large quantities of methylamphetamine
from unknown suppliers before on-selling
to sub-traffickers and his own customer base. A unique feature of the
applicant’s
business was the ability for customers to return poor product,
for a refund, or exchange it for a new batch of product.
[11] During the
trafficking period, the applicant carried out at least 98 supplies to a customer
base of at least 27 people and, on
average, the quantities of methylamphetamine
supplied ranged between a ball (3.5 grams) and multiple ounces, with the
following transactions
being identified:
(a) an ounce/multiple ounces (28 grams) – 40 occasions;
(b) half ounce (14 grams) – 16 occasions;
(c) a ball (3.5 grams) – 15 occasions; and
(d) an unknown quantity – 14 occasions.
[12] As can be
seen, a large portion of the applicant’s business was dealing in ounces of
methylamphetamine. Further, it is
noted that the applicant, at one stage,
discussed sourcing a kilogram of methylamphetamine for $140,000.
[13] An insight
into the applicant’s business can be gleaned from three drug supplies to
an undercover police officer who purchased
from the applicant on two occasions,
via a sub-trafficker, and, on one occasion, from the applicant directly.
In total, across three
transactions, the applicant supplied 68.9 grams gross of
methylamphetamine for $16,100.
[14] As the
applicant used encrypted messaging platforms, the full extent of his trafficking
is unknown. However, what is known is
that the applicant’s business was
operating at a sustainable level sufficient to allow him to sell product on
credit. A partial
debt ledger recovered by police recorded debts owed to the
applicant of up to $31,000. Customers and sub-traffickers often sourced
from him on credit and accrued sizeable debts. Customers either paid the
applicant with large sums of cash, ATM deposits,
or by transferring money to
bank accounts controlled by him. During the trafficking period, $490,936 moved
through accounts controlled
by the applicant. Most of this amount is made up of
third-party transfers (which can be traced back to a number of the
applicant’s
sub-traffickers) and deposits into bank accounts controlled by
the applicant. It is not alleged that the applicant made a profit
of $490,936,
but it is a useful barometer of the scale of the applicant’s business,
and, clearly, he would have received a
substantial benefit.
[15] Although
the applicant was a heavy drug user, his business far exceeded feeding his own
habit and was profit driven, with each
supply being organised for financial
consideration.
[16] In addition
to trafficking in methylamphetamine, the applicant had access to, and arranged
to supply, GHB on two occasions whereby
(a) supplied a person (for on-sale) 600ml of GHB for an unknown amount; and
(b) offered and arranged to supply a person (for on-sale) one litre of GHB for
[17] These two
supplies are separate, and in addition, to the applicant’s trafficking
November 2022, police executed a search warrant at the applicant’s house
and found items related to the applicant’s
trafficking business as well as
small amounts of other drugs and drug paraphernalia, namely:
(a) four clip seal bags located throughout the home containing a combined total
of 33.47 grams of methylamphetamine within 69.14
grams of substance;
(b) cutting agent;
(c) a clip seal bag containing 11.52ml of liquid substance in which
4-hydroxybutanoic acid lactone and 1,4-butanediol were detected;
(d) a total of approximately 91 grams of cannabis located through the house;
(e) six mobile phones; and
(f) five glass pipes and one water pipe used to smoke methylamphetamine and
[19] At the
conclusion of the search, the applicant was arrested, declined to be formally
interviewed, and was remanded in custody.
Later that evening, police requested
that the applicant provide access to an encrypted application on his mobile
phone. He refused
applicant only ceased his trafficking business and drug offending upon being
arrested. He did not cease of his own
Antecedents
applicant was born on 28 October 1987 in the Philippines, came to Australia when
he was 12, and is not an Australian citizen.
[22] Although
the applicant started studying a diploma of Nursing, he did not complete this
course due to his partner becoming unexpectedly
pregnant. He now has four
children to two partners and, when he is abstinent from drugs, can obtain
employment. However, drugs
have been a long-term problem in his life.
applicant was introduced to cannabis at the age of 12 and commenced using
methylamphetamine in his early 20s. Ms Fercher-Barrett,
a consultant
psychologist, diagnosed the applicant with a polysubstance use disorder at the
severe level and stated that “his
offending occurred during a relapse into
heavy drug dependency whereby he was using large amounts of methylamphetamine on
applicant undertook drug counselling in the past and again whilst in custody
after being charged with these offences. Such
was the extent of his drug
dependency that, at the time of sentence, the applicant continued to suffer from
cravings despite being
in custody for 25 months.
[25] At the time
of sentence, his counsel submitted that he was motivated to change as he had
grown tired of living a dysfunctional
lifestyle and being incarcerated.
applicant was a mature offender who repeatedly engaged in serious drug activity.
He was aged 34 to 35 at the time of the
offending and was 37 at the time of the
sentence. The applicant had a three-page criminal history commencing in 2006
which is littered
with drug offending. Two entries are of particular
[27] On 25 June
2014, the applicant was sentenced to 2 ½ years imprisonment, with parole
release fixed after serving nine months,
for possessing 67 grams of pure
methylamphetamine with an element of commerciality.
December 2020, the applicant was sentenced for multiple drug and drug-related
offences, including possessing and supplying
dangerous drugs as well as
contravening an order about access information. Applegarth J, the sentencing
judge, characterised the
applicant’s offending in this
“It amounts to a serious case of possessing a dangerous
drug, and it was not simply that you were in possession of dangerous
a potential to supply, as I have indicated, you were supplying dangerous
drugs. A count of trafficking was discontinued
today, and I remind myself
I am not sentencing you for trafficking. However, your offending puts you in a
more serious category
than someone who had a substantial quantity of
methylamphetamine, but was not holding it for a commercial purpose.”
applicant possessed three clip seal bags containing around 60 grams of pure
methylamphetamine and 232 grams of cannabis.
The 6 supply charges involved
methylamphetamine which Applegarth J stated, by themselves, would justify a
2-year sentence.
[30] Ultimately,
Applegarth J structured the following sentence to give the applicant certainty
and supervision:
(a) 4 ½ years imprisonment, partially suspended after serving 195 days
(which was declared as time served under the sentence)
for an operational period
of 4 ½ years, which expired on 15 June 2025;
(b) 3 years imprisonment with parole release fixed after serving 195 days (which
was declared as time served under the sentence).
The full-time expiry of this
component of the sentence was on 3 June 2023; and
(c) lesser concurrent terms of imprisonment for other offences.
[31] About a
year later, the applicant escalated his criminal offending and commenced
trafficking in methylamphetamine (the subject
of this application).
Accordingly, the applicant committed serious drug offences whilst on parole, and
a suspended sentence, for
serious drug offending. All of this had consequences
for the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge on 16 December 2024.
applicant was remanded in custody when charged on 23 November 2022 and had been
in custody for a period of 754 days at the
time of the sentence. However, as
his parole was suspended on 24 November 2022, the applicant served 193 of these
days in relation
to the 3-year sentence imposed on 16 December 2022.
applicant had been solely on remand for this offending for 561 days from
4 June 2023 until 16 December 2024.
[34] Pursuant to
of the CSA, the applicant had a contingent liability of 344 days between
the start of the trafficking (15 December 2021) and his
suspension of parole on
24 November 2022.
The sentence hearing
[35] The Crown
submitted that, taking the
approach, a head
sentence should attach to the trafficking offence and, having regard to the
principles of sentencing and
[2017] QCA 195
[2018] QCA 341
[2022] QCA 57
[2013] QCA 51
, a sentence of not less than 10 years imprisonment was
appropriate to reflect:
(a) the serious nature of this offending;
(b) a personal deterrent to the applicant;
(c) a general deterrent to others; and
(d) the applicant’s plea of guilty.
sentencing judge was referred to
[2013] QCA 335
[2015] QCA 225
by the applicant’s counsel, who submitted that
9 years imprisonment should be imposed for the trafficking offence with parole
eligibility set at 50 per cent. It was submitted that such a sentence would
reflect the applicant’s struggle with addiction
and the fact there were no
threats of violence.
[37] In relation
to the suspended sentence imposed by Applegarth J in 2020, both parties
submitted that, in the circumstances, it
would not be unjust to activate the
whole of the suspended sentence to run concurrently with the other terms of
imprisonment.
sentencing judge found that the applicant was “the principal operator of a
highly commercial drug trafficking operation.”
In describing the
applicant as an “enthusiastic and efficient drug dealer”,
was found that, notwithstanding his drug use during the relevant period, he was
“functioning at a high level.”
[39] His Honour
went on to state:
“[T]he fact that you were operating in this
way puts you into a special class of trafficker. You were not one of the
addicts trading in points of a gram at street level. You were
spreading large quantities of misery to others in the community.”
sentencing judge imposed a sentence of 13 years imprisonment for the trafficking
offence, with lesser terms of imprisonment
for the supply offence and
contravening an order offence. The unserved balance of the suspended sentence
was activated with all
terms of imprisonment being concurrent with each other
but to be served cumulatively
the sentence of three years imprisonment imposed on 16 December 2020.
[41] As the
sentence of 13 years for the trafficking offence was over 10 years
imprisonment, the applicant was subject to the serious
violent offence
and his parole eligibility
is set at 80 per cent of the 13-year term of
imprisonment.
applicant’s sentence calculation undertaken by Queensland Corrective
Services states:
(a) the period of imprisonment is 16
(b) the period of imprisonment commenced on 4 June
(c) the applicant’s parole eligibility is 9 May
(d) the full-time discharge (custodial end date/earliest discharge) is 12 May
2037. This includes the 16 years imprisonment with
the contingent liability of
Ground one – contingent liability
applicant states that the sentencing judge erred in treating the contingent
liability arising from the operation of
of the CSA as potentially
exposing the applicant to a longer sentence, in circumstances where the
extension to the sentence is automatic.
Section 209
provides for the automatic cancellation of the prisoner’s parole order, if
the prisoner is sentenced to another period of imprisonment
for an offence
committed whilst the prisoner was on parole:
“209 Automatic
cancellation of order by further imprisonment
(1) If a prisoner is sentenced to another period of imprisonment for an
offence committed, in Queensland or elsewhere, during the
period of the
prisoner’s parole order, the order is taken to have been automatically
cancelled on the date on which the offence
(2) Subsection (1) applies—
(a) whether or not the prisoner is sentenced to the other period of imprisonment
before or after the parole order has expired; and
(b) subject to
section 205.
(3) However, subsection (1) does not apply if—
(a) the prisoner is required to serve the period of imprisonment mentioned in
the subsection in default of—
(i) paying a fine or another amount required to be paid under a court order;
(ii) making restitution required to be made under a court order; or
(b) the period of imprisonment mentioned in the subsection—
(i) is required to be served under an intensive correction order; or
(ii) is wholly suspended under the
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
(iii) is required to be served until the court rises.”
[45] It is the
imposition of the sentence of imprisonment which acts as the trigger to cause
the automatic cancellation of the parole
order pursuant to
what occurred in the applicant’s case.
Section 211
then sets out the effect of the cancellation of the prisoner’s parole
“211 Effect of cancellation
(1) This section applies if a prisoner’s parole order is
section 205(2)(a)(i)
because the prisoner failed to comply with the
parole order; or
section 205(2)(a)(ii)
because the prisoner posed a serious risk of
harm to someone else; or
section 205(2)(a)(iii)
because the prisoner posed an unacceptable risk
of committing an offence; or
section 205(2)(a)(iv)
because the prisoner was preparing to leave
Queensland, other than under a written order granting the prisoner leave to
travel interstate
or overseas; or
section 205(2)(b)
because the parole board received information that,
had it been received before the parole order was made, would have resulted in
the parole board making a different parole order or not making the parole order;
section 209
because the prisoner was sentenced to another term of
imprisonment for an offence committed, in Queensland or elsewhere, during the
period of the parole order.
(2) The time for which the prisoner was released on parole before one of the
following events happens counts as time served under
the prisoner’s period
of imprisonment—
(a) the prisoner failed to comply with the parole order as mentioned in
subsection (1)(a);
(b) the parole order was cancelled for the reason mentioned in subsection
(1)(b), (c), (d) or (e);
(c) the prisoner committed the offence mentioned in subsection (1)(f).
(3) Despite
section 206(3)(b)
, the parole board may, by written order, direct
that the prisoner serve only part of the unexpired portion of the
period of imprisonment.”
Section 211
provides that the time for which a prisoner was released on parole prior to a
cancellation counts as time served under the prisoner’s
imprisonment.
[48] When parole
is automatically cancelled under
, then the time the prisoner was released
on parole before committing the offence (for which imprisonment was later
imposed) counts
as time served under the term of imprisonment for the original
[49] Ground one
relates to the unexpired portion of the 3-year term of imprisonment imposed on
16 December 2020, which is calculated
from the start of the trafficking period
to when the applicant returned to custody. This period does not count as time
relation to the 3-year term of imprisonment and the applicant has
344 days outstanding. This period is commonly referred to as a
contingent liability is not an additional penalty imposed on top of the 3-year
term. Effectively, the consequences of the
applicant offending on parole means
that the 344 days does not count as time served under the 3-year sentence
and, until the applicant
serves this time, this sentence has not expired.
[51] In this
case, the Crown’s written submissions at the sentence expressly recognised
that the applicant had a contingent
liability of 344 days and counsel for the
applicant referred to the contingent liability in this
“MR LYNCH: He – the other thing that should be said
that because he was on parole, there will be a contingent liability
and 211 from the commencement of the trafficking date, which is 14 December
’21, through to 24 – 23 November,
when he was arrested, which is
another 11 months that he is probably likely to serve on top of whatever your
Honour imposes.
HIS HONOUR: Well, how does that work, then? Because if I order it to be
cumulative – and I have to order it to be cumulative
upon the sentence of
three years, was it?
MR LYNCH: Yes.
HIS HONOUR: Three years’ imprisonment imposed by Justice Applegarth on
16 December 2020. That sentence has expired –
am I following this
MR LYNCH: It – yes. Yep.
HIS HONOUR: I – it’s a question. I’m not – that
sentence has expired, such that I can’t take into account
the pre-sentence
custody he spent serving it up until the 3
of June last year,
and I was working on the basis that whatever sentence I imposed would start, in
effect, from the 4
of June, but I would declare that 561 days
between then and today.
MR LYNCH: Yes.
HIS HONOUR: So what impact does the contingent liability have- - -
MR LYNCH: That adds - - -
HIS HONOUR: - - - on that?
MR LYNCH: If it’s activated – and he won’t know until near
the end of the sentence – that will be added on
to the end of the
HIS HONOUR: He won’t know until the end of whatever sentence
MR LYNCH: It will be close to the end of that when he’ll know whether
they’re adding that on, presumably to see how his
behaviour is and see how
it all proceeds. It might also – they might also take into account what
Border Force are doing.
I don’t know.
HIS HONOUR: Yes. It would have been – could they not have done it
sooner? How many days do you say - - -
MR LYNCH: That’
HIS HONOUR: Eleven months. So about 330, say.
MR LYNCH: And it’s upon conviction, obviously.
HIS HONOUR: Okay. Well, what do I do with that? Just bear it in mind as a
possibility?
MR LYNCH: Just bear it in mind as a possibility. I’m told that it
doesn’t always occur - - -
HIS HONOUR: No.
MR LYNCH: - - - oddly enough – and I’m not sure of what the
features are for the discretion for the department, but it
doesn’t always
occur, apparently.”
applicant states that his counsel’s submissions at sentence were wrong, as
it is an automatic consequence of
of the CSA that this time is added to
the sentence. Further, the applicant states that the sentencing judge acted on
these submissions
when sentencing him, and the difference between the
possibility that this extra 11 months
be served and the
certainty that it
be served is an error.
sentencing judge noted that the applicant faced some speculation as to whether
he would be required to serve the contingent
will declare that and I will take into account the fact that there may be some
contingent liability from that sentence, and
it may be something approaching
another year in prison, some 11 months. It is a bit speculative but it’s
not a very satisfactory
system that leaves you in doubt as to whether or not you
will be required to serve that term. Leaves you in doubt, that is, until
point nearing the conclusion of your sentence.”
[54] However,
the sentencing judge did not proceed on a wrong basis. In my view, reading the
sentencing judge’s remarks as
a whole, he was referring to whether the
applicant would have to serve this period (some 11 months) in actual
applicant acknowledges that the parole regime applies to the unexpired portion
of the 3-year sentence and, accordingly, the
applicant may not serve this period
in actual custody.
applicant was sentenced to 13 years imprisonment cumulative upon 3 years
imprisonment (where he still owed 344 days for the
unexpired portion).
Accordingly, taking into account these periods of imprisonment, the applicant
has a full-time discharge date
of 12 May 2037. However, parole eligibility is
set at 80 per cent of the 13-year term.
[57] Accordingly,
the applicant is subject to the parole regime with a parole eligibility date of
9 May 2035. If the Parole Board
grants parole, then he will be serving the
remainder of the 13-year term and the unexpired portion in the community. If
Board does not grant parole, at any time during this period, then he
will serve the remainder of the 13-year term and the unexpired
[58] It is a
matter for the Parole Board when the applicant will be released on parole, and
of the CSA makes it clear that a prisoner released on parole is taken
to be still serving the sentence imposed on the prisoner.
reference to “speculation” by the sentencing judge was in relation
to whether the applicant will have to serve
the term in custody. The sentencing
judge expressly recognised the applicant may serve “something approaching
another year
in prison.”
sentencing judge did not err by taking the contingent liability into account as
time the applicant could be expected to serve.
[61] It should
be noted that in
[2024] QSC 24
, Bowskill CJ considered
the provisions dealing with cancellation of parole in the CSA confusing and
“[32] There is one curiosity that arises from close
consideration of the words used (and not used) in
Services Act
. It is unnecessary, in the circumstances of this case, to
resolve this, because the defendant has served the whole of the “unexpired
portion” of his period of imprisonment. But in a case where a
prisoner has not, by the time of the later sentence, served
the whole of the
unexpired portion (for example, because they remained in the community for a
period of time, after the breaching
offence) it may be necessary to address the
following issue.”
Section 211
is the only section in subdivision 4 headed “effect of
cancellation”. Whilst
states that the section applies if a
prisoner’s parole order is cancelled either by the board, under
automatically, under
is specifically limited to
s 206(3)(b)
which applies only where the parole board has exercised its power to cancel a
parole order. There is, as I have said, an equivalent
where the cancellation operates automatically under
But there is no
[34] As a matter of construction, if it was intended that the parole board
have a discretion to direct that a prisoner serve only
part of the unexpired
portion, regardless of whether the cancellation was the act of the board or
automatic (following imposition
of a later sentence by the court), one might
have expected
to commence by saying “[d]espite
Section 211(3)
was enacted in essentially its present terms in 2006 (the
only change has been to refer to parole board, rather than Queensland board).
The explanatory memorandum accompanying the Bill, which became the 2006 Act,
does not assist in terms of identifying the legislative
intention, although does
seem to assume that the power conferred on the board by s 211(3) applies
where the parole order is cancelled
by the board or automatically. The relevant
part reads:
‘Clause 211 operates where a prisoner’s parole order has been
cancelled in the circumstances provided for under clause
205(2) or clause 209 of
Subclause (2) of the Bill also provides the circumstances where the time for
which the prisoner was released under parole counts as
time served for the
prisoner’s period of imprisonment.
A prisoner is sentenced to 6 years imprisonment to commence on 15 June 2006
which will expire on 14 June 2012. The prisoner is released
on parole on
15 June 2009. On 30 June 2011 the prisoner is convicted of an offence committed
on 15 June 2010 and sentenced to imprisonment.
The 4 year period from 15 June
2006 (the day the sentence commenced) to 14 June 2010 (the day before the
commission of the new offence)
is taken to be time served in relation to the 6
years imprisonment. This 4 year period incorporates 3 years in custody and
on parole. The 1 year parole period from 15 June 2005 to
14 June 2006 is commonly referred to as “street time”.
The 380 day period from 15 June 2010 (the day the offence was committed) to
29 June 2011 (the day before the prisoner was returned
to prison) is not counted
as time served in relation to the 6 years imprisonment. Effectively the
prisoner has served 4 years imprisonment
and now has to serve the remaining 2
years imprisonment.
The prisoner’s period of imprisonment will now expire on 30 June 2013.
The clause also provides that despite the effect of
clause 206(3)(b) the
Queensland Parole Board may, by written order, direct that the prisoner serve
only a part of the unexpired period
of imprisonment rather than the 9 entire
unexpired portion of their period of imprisonment. Only the Queensland Parole
make such an order.
Clause 206(3)(b) provides for the arrest of a prisoner, and if the order was
cancelled, the prisoner is to serve the unexpired portion
prisoner’s period of imprisonment.
However, referring to the example given for subclause (2) the Queensland
board may order that the prisoner serve 18 months of the
remaining 2 years
imprisonment. The prisoner’s period of imprisonment would then expire on
30 December 2012.’
[36] I did initially consider that there was a rational explanation for the
choice of wording in s 211(3), limited as it is to s 206(3)(b)
relates to the situation where the board cancels a prisoner’s parole
order). That is, that for there to be an automatic
cancellation of a
prisoner’s parole order, a court must have imposed a sentence of
imprisonment for the later offending. In
that context, it might be thought
inappropriate, or at least surprising, for the parole board to retain a
discretionary power to
determine how much of the “unexpired portion of the
prisoner’s period of imprisonment” the prisoner has to serve,
court has exercised its discretion to impose a subsequent term of imprisonment
and to make orders for the time and circumstances
in which the prisoner should
be, or be eligible for, release. However, the complexities continue because
that analysis is only straightforward
when the later term of imprisonment forms
part of the overall “period of imprisonment” and a parole
eligibility date
is fixed. Different considerations would arise where the
periods of imprisonment are not “unbroken”, a parole release
set for the later offending or a partially suspended sentence is imposed.
[37] This particular dilemma remains to be resolved in another case, where it
arises for determination, and so I will say no more
observe that, given these provisions concern the liberty of individuals, it is
unsatisfactory that they are
confusing and unclear.”
[62] Whether s
211(3) empowers the Parole Board to truncate the unexpired portion when parole
is cancelled pursuant to s 209 involves
an exercise of statutory interpretation
which the parties did not undertake. Unfortunately, the issues raised by the
Chief Justice
remain to be considered and determined in another case.
[63] However,
this does not detract from what occurred in this case. Even if the Parole Board
has no power to truncate the unexpired
portion pursuant to s 211(3), the
sentencing judge took into account the contingent liability by recognising that
the applicant may
serve “something approaching another year in
prison”. Accordingly, the sentencing judge recognised the worst-case
for the applicant being that he is not granted parole and has to serve
the entire period in custody.
Ground two – a nominal
starting point of 14 years or more
[64] The parties
provided the sentencing judge with cases which they relied upon to support their
submissions as to sentence.
[65] However,
the sentencing judge sentenced the applicant to a higher sentence than contended
for by the Crown and his counsel.
In sentencing the applicant, the sentencing
judge referred to the cases provided by the parties in this
“I’ve been referred to a number of other cases, all
of which can be compared to yours in one way or another. But, as
observed in exchanges with Crown counsel, I’m guided by the statement made
in the case of
R v Galeano
[2013] QCA 51
as to the width of the
applicable range”.
sentencing judge was referring to
where Gotterson JA
“[31] These cases do suggest a range generally of 10
to 12 years for trafficking in dangerous drugs for substantial gain on
guilty. That range is one that may be exceeded, up to 14 years, where the
offending has been aggravated by trafficking
in a drug as dangerous as heroin on
a large scale as in
or by repeat offending whilst on bail as in
applicant states that the nominal sentence contemplated by the sentencing judge
must have well exceeded that of 14 years
for it to be reduced to 13 years,
taking into account the plea of guilty, moderation for totality, and time served
which could not
be declared.
applicant states that there are no authorities which support such a high nominal
starting point.
[69] Whilst the
applicant acknowledges that the sentencing judge clearly referenced the
cumulative effect of the sentence to be imposed,
the applicant states that there
is no indication as to how the sentence was moderated for totality and the time
spent in prison which
could not be declared.
applicant submits that Gotterson JA’s observations in
more than to suggest
that the nominal range can extend to 14 years in a
combination of various circumstances such as those present in
R v Christensen
[2002] QCA 113
[2001] QCA 135
[2004] QCA 359.
The applicant submits the circumstances in
and each of the cases referred within, were arguably at
least as serious as the applicant’s matter, and none of them ultimately
attracted a sentence of more than 11 years.
, the offender was sentenced to 10 years imprisonment which was
reduced to nine years on appeal, with no parole eligibility date set.
relevant circumstances of the offending in
(a) the offender sold significant quantities of methylamphetamine, and, on
occasions, cannabis and MDMA to a number of customers
over a period of more than
(b) there was a large client base where relatively large or smaller quantities
of the drugs were provided to customers on a regular
(c) the business was cynically commercial and appeared to be expanding over the
course of police surveillance;
(d) drugs with an unsubstantiated value of $390,000 were sold by the offender
over the trafficking period;
(e) the offender supplied about $60,000 to a woman who he lived with in exchange
(f) the offender had a relevant criminal history, including a previous
conviction for trafficking; and
(g) the offending did not breach any court order.
[72] Gotterson
referred to a range generally of 10 to 12 years
imprisonment for trafficking in dangerous drugs for substantial gain on pleas of
guilty and that the offending in
was at, or near, the top of that
[73] However, in
, there were a number of relevant mitigating factors that are not
present in this case, namely that the offender:
(a) provided a moderate degree of co-operation with the police; and
(b) sustained substantial physical and psychological injuries upon his arrest
which contributed to an enduring psychiatric disorder
requiring medication.
[74] Gotterson
JA found that the offender’s time in prison in
more difficult than for an offender without his health problems. Consequently,
Gotterson JA found that the sentence of
9 years imprisonment gave due
allowance for the totality of these mitigating circumstances. Such a sentence
reduced a head sentence
of 12 years by a quarter to 9 years imprisonment.
[75] Gotterson
JA considered the range for trafficking in dangerous drugs for substantial gain
on pleas of guilty could extend to
14 years where the offending occurs on bail.
In this case, the applicant’s offending breached a parole order and a
[76] It must be
noted that a range identified in any one case does not set brick walls as to the
limits of sentencing discretion;
higher or lower sentences may be imposed
depending upon the circumstance of each case. In
Barbaro v The Queen
[2014] HCA 2
(2014) 253 CLR 58
, the plurality described the relevance of comparable
cases to sentencing:
“[41] ... sentencing Judges must have
regard to what has been done in other cases. Those other cases may establish a
sentences which have been imposed. But that history does not establish
that the sentences which have been imposed mark the outer
bounds of the
permissible discretion. The history stands as a yardstick against which to
examine a proposed sentence. What is important
is the unifying principles which
those sentences both reveal and reflect...”
[77] Here, the
applicant’s offending has aggravating features that were not present in
, including additional offences of supplying GHB (that were in
addition to the trafficking enterprise) and the contravention offence.
noted that this was the applicant’s second conviction for contravening an
order about information necessary to access
information stored electronically.
A cumulative sentence could have been imposed for these additional
[78] Considering
the aggravating features of the applicant’s offending with the lack of
significant mitigating circumstances,
the sentence imposed in
of little assistance as a yardstick.
[79] Galeano
does not support that a nominal sentence in excess of 13 years for the applicant
is well outside the permissible range.
Ground three – no
moderation for totality
applicant submits that an alternative to ground 2 is that, if 13 years was a
reduction from the top of the permissible range
of 14 years to reflect
the plea of guilty, then the sentencing judge has overlooked the need to
moderate the overall sentence for totality and the time in
custody which cannot
be declared. Had the sentencing judge done so, and been guided by the
observations of Gotterson JA in
, then the applicant submits that
the nominal sentence should not have exceeded 14 years.
[81] Totality
was the last issue addressed by the applicant’s counsel at the sentence
“So there is also that – there is some totality
involved in terms of that period that is – where he was serving
past sentence. That's – that undeclarable time can be still taken into
account, and that was a significant period
of itself.”
applicant submits that the sentencing judge ought to have looked at the totality
of the criminal behaviour (that is, the
offending for which the applicant was
sentenced in 2020 and the offending before the Court in breach of that sentence
determined what the appropriate sentence for all the offending was in
the circumstances before him.
[83] It is noted
that the applicant places emphasis on the outcome being that “the
applicant is serving an overall sentence
of 16 years and 11 months”
To be clear, the applicant was not sentenced to 16 years 11 months. He was
sentenced to 16 years imprisonment as the 13-year term
was cumulative upon the
3-year term. However, ss 209 and 211 of the CSA precludes the applicant from
being taken as having served
time on parole while he was engaging in a highly
commercial drug trafficking operation.
circumstances where the applicant offended while on parole for a period of
11 months gives rise to a risk of the misapplication
of the totality
principle. By simply crediting that time as essentially ‘time
served’ under the overall period, sight
may be lost of the fact the
further offending was independent and committed in breach of court orders.
sentencing the applicant, the sentencing judge took into account totality issues
and expressly referred to two issues arising
from the sentence imposed by
Applegarth J on 16 December 2020, both of which necessarily relate to the
overall sentence. The first
issue related to the suspended sentence and the
second related to the parole order.
[86] In dealing
with the first issue, it is apparent the sentencing judge considered the effect
of the overall sentence. His Honour
activated the entire balance of the four
and-a-half-year sentence of imprisonment that had been suspended but ordered it
to be served
concurrently. In doing so, his Honour “found that it is not
unjust to require you to serve that term in that way”.
approach tends against the argument no account was given to totality.
[88] As to the
second issue, the sentencing judge specifically addressed the time already spent
in custody, including the time that
could not be
“The other issue arising from his Honour’s
sentence is the consequence of having committed these offences whilst on parole,
or in particular the trafficking offence whilst you were on parole. That means
I must impose a sentence that is cumulative upon
the sentence of three years
imprisonment imposed by his Honour on 16 December 2020. In practical terms that
means that, even though
that sentence expired on the 3rd of June last year you
cannot be given credit for the time spent in custody since your arrest on
charges for which I am now going to sentence you until you reach the point
of 4 June last year, from which time I can declare
the time that you have spent
in custody already.”
[89] The way the
issue was addressed was necessary due to the interrelationship between
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
[90] As already
noted, the contingent liability was also taken into account by his Honour.
[91] This is a
case in which the cumulative nature of the sentence was necessary because of the
commission of further offending while
subject to parole. This offending
breached court orders imposed by Applegarth J that had been structured to
support his rehabilitation.
sentencing judge specifically addressed the issues that affected the overall
sentence. Accordingly, it is not the case that
a relevant issue was not
overlooked or not taken into account.
Ground four –
insufficiency of reasons
applicant submits that, if it was the sentencing judge’s intention to not
moderate the sentence of 13 years for totality,
or for the time spent in custody
that could not be declared, then reasons for this very unusual approach ought to
have been given.
The applicant states this is especially so given the very
lengthy overall period of imprisonment which resulted.
[94] As to the
adequacy of reasons by a judge in the sentencing process, Doyle JA in
[2025] QCA 191
“[20] Judges have a duty arising out of discharge
of their judicial function, to provide reasons for their judgments. The content
and detail will vary according to the nature of the jurisdiction which the court
is exercising and its subject matter. The reasons
must, however, be sufficient
to identify the principles of law applied and the main factual findings upon
which the judge has relied
... It must be recognised, however, that the
of analytical precision ... It is to some extent an instinctive
synthesis process; with the ultimate question the sentencing judge
must consider
being whether the overall sentence is the appropriate one to impose.”
[Citations omitted]
[95] In this
case, there is no demonstrated failure by the sentencing judge to give reasons
which ought to have been given.
sentencing judge set out all relevant matters, including a broad outline of the
relevant facts and the essential grounds
upon which the sentence was based.
sentencing remarks, delivered
, articulated the reasoning for
the sentence imposed and why it was just in all the circumstances.
[98] Critically,
for the purpose of this ground of appeal, the sentencing judge showed he had
taken account of the overall sentence
in explaining how the sentence imposed by
Applegarth J on 16 December 2020 would interact with the sentence to be
imposed for the
further offending.
Ground five – the
sentence is manifestly excessive
applicant submits that, if the other grounds do not demonstrate a specific
error, then a sentence of 16 years and 11 months
is manifestly excessive. The
applicant states that there are no authorities to support a sentence of this
length, even for repeat
offending while subject to a Court order. Again, the
applicant refers to the observations of Gotterson JA in
sentence imposed in that case.
[100] Appellate
intervention on the ground of manifest excessiveness or inadequacy is not
warranted unless, having regard to all of
the relevant sentencing factors,
including the degree to which the impugned sentence differs from sentences that
have been imposed
in comparable cases, the appellate court is driven to conclude
that there must have been some misapplication of
[101] The result
of the impugned sentence must be “unreasonable or plainly unjust”
and the appellate court must infer
“that in some way there has been a
failure to properly exercise the discretion which the law reposes in the court
discretion is governed by the application of relevant legal principles to the
facts of the case.
sentencing judge was correct in considering that the applicant’s offending
fell within the category of cases that
may warrant a sentence of up to, and
beyond, 14 years imprisonment on pleas of guilty. To that end, the
following matters are relevant:
(a) the applicant operated his trafficking business for a period of 11 months
and 10 days, stopping only because he was arrested;
(b) the trafficking was a “high-end street and low-end wholesale level
which involved “sub-traffickers”;
(c) the quantities of methylamphetamine supplied were predominantly in amounts
of an ounce or multiple ounce;
(d) the trafficking business was profit driven and the turnover of money through
bank accounts demonstrates the highly commercial
operation undertaken by the
(e) the applicant also supplied GHB on two separate occasions in circumstances
where what was supplied was going to be on sold to
(f) having previously been convicted of failing to provide police access to his
phone as required, the applicant again refused to
provide access to his mobile
device in contravention of an order directing him to do so;
(g) the applicant was a mature offender with a relevant criminal history; and
(h) the offending occurred during the operation of a suspended sentence and
parole order for significant drug offending.
sentencing judge acknowledged the applicant’s personal circumstances
(including his drug addiction), the psychological
assessment, and the plea of
[2021] QCA 76
a sentence of 12 years imprisonment was not
disturbed on appeal in relation to a mature offender with a relevant criminal
who committed a lengthy and serious trafficking offence.
involved trafficking for 15 months in methylamphetamine in wholesale
amounts but also sometimes in street level amounts. It was
inferred the profit
was in excess of $300,000.00. The trafficking carried on despite encounters
with investigating police.
[105] Ultimately,
McMurdo JA described 12 years as a heavy sentence
not so high
as to indicate some unidentified
However, in this
case, there are distinguishing features that support a higher sentence being
[106] It is
noted that the offender in
breached a suspended sentence of four
months. In this case, the applicant breached a sentence of 4 ½ years and
also a parole
addition to trafficking in methylamphetamine, the applicant supplied GHB on two
separate occasions. The facts in relation
to both supplies make clear that GHB
was going to be onsold to others. Further the contravention offence is an
aggravating factor.
This is the second occasion the applicant committed such an
offence, being one “that strikes at the foundation of the criminal
not insignificant cumulative sentence for these offences could have been well
[108] In my
view, whilst a lower sentence may have been imposed, it cannot be said that the
sentencing judge made some unidentified
error. The applicant was sentenced to
13 years imprisonment cumulative upon 3 years, with a contingent liability
of around 11 months.
The applicant faces a long sentence. However, this
is the product of committing a lengthy and serious trafficking in addition to
supplying GHB and the contravention offence, all whilst on parole and a
suspended sentence.
[109] In this
case, whilst the applicant was sentenced to a heavy sentence, it is not so high
as to indicate some unidentified error.
[110] In all of
the circumstances, the sentence was not manifestly excessive.
[111] None of
the applicant’s five grounds have any bases and the application should be
Penalties and Sentences Act
Penalties and Sentences Act
Corrective Services Act
This takes into account the 13
years cumulative upon the 3 years imposed on 16 December 2020.
This is when the 3-year term
commenced (with the declarable pre-sentence custody taken into account) as
imposed by Applegarth J
on 16 December 2020.
This is 80% of the 13-year
term (with the declarable pre-sentence custody taken into account) as imposed by
the sentencing judge
on 16 December 2024.
Corrective Services Act
s 211(2)(c).
R v Braeckmans
[2022] QCA 25
, 154 at [30] (McMurdo JA).
[2015] HCA 39
(2015) 256 CLR 550
, 559 at [28]
(French CJ, Keane and Nettle JJ).
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
, 538-9 at [58]-[59] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan,
Kiefel and Bell JJ), citing
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
, 535 at [49] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and
Ross v Commissioner of
Police (Qld)
[2019] QCA 96
(2019) 278 A Crim R 159
, at [58] (Wilson J).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (333 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter