URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QADT/2009/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jaiswal v Mulheron & Denraydon Holdings Pty Ltd [2009] QADT 19 (16 November 2009)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL QUEENSLAND
Jaiswal v Mulheron & Denraydon Holdings Pty Ltd
[2009] QADT
INDERJIT PAL SINGH JAISWAL
Complainant
DENIS MULHERON
First Respondent
DENRAYDON HOLDINGS PTY LTD
Second Respondent
PROCEEDING:
Final Hearing
DELIVERED ON:
16 November 2009
DELIVERED AT:
Member Andrew Philp SC
HEARING DATE:
29 October 2007
First and Second Respondents are to pay $50,000.00 to the Complainant for
compensation inclusive of interest.
First and Second Respondents pay the Complainant’s costs of the hearing,
including reserved costs, if any, to be assessed
using the Scale of Costs for
the District Court under the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
First and Second Respondents are jointly and severally liable to pay the amounts
set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 above.
CATCHWORDS:
Discrimination in the goods and services area. Ambit of
s. 46(1)(d).
LEGISLATION CITED:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
REPRESENTATION:
Mr S Cousins of Counsel, instructed by Turnbull Company, solicitors,
appeared for the Complainant.
Mr Denis Mulheron appeared for himself and the
Respondent.
Complainant, Inderjit Pal Singh Jaiswal, is Indian by birth and a follower of
the Sikh religion. He is dark skinned and wears
a turban. He is an Australian
citizen and has lived in Australia for over 35 years. He is and was, at all
material times, a director
of Aussie Irish Investments Pty Ltd which conducted a
restaurant called “The Indian Restaurant” at Robina on the Gold
First Respondent, Denis Mulheron, is and was, at all material times, a director
of the Second Respondent, which traded as United
Sheet Metal and which, inter
alia, supplied and installed kitchen equipment.
late 2004, the Complainant’s company contracted with the Second Respondent
for the latter to supply equipment and fit out
the kitchen in the former’s
restaurant. The work was performed by November 2004. However disputes arose
between the contracting
parties as to the final payment owing by the
Complainant’s company and its allegations of some defects in the work
by the Second Respondent.
complaints arise from the interaction of the Complainant and the First
Respondent in respect of this contractual dispute up to
and including its
resolution in the Magistrates Court at Southport.
Complainant alleges the First Respondent (on his own behalf and on behalf of the
Second Respondent) unlawfully directly discriminated
against him on the basis of
his race and/or his religious belief in the supply of goods and services. The
Respondents deny that
they treated the Complainant less favourably than any
other person in the same circumstances and contest the allegations that any
discrimination fell within the ambit of
of the Act in that the goods and
services had already been provided by the time any alleged discrimination had
The Complaint before the Tribunal
complaint referred to the Tribunal was in respect of racial discrimination in
the area of goods and services. I was informed
that a separate claim for
vilification had been previously dismissed and was not being
The Evidence
review of all the evidence, there are surprisingly few disputed facts. The
Complainant gives evidence of an initial confrontation
with the First Respondent
on or about 4 December 2004 at his restaurant. He also relies on a series of
facsimiles sent by the First
Respondent to the Complainant’s solicitors
and to this Tribunal. The First Respondent admits he wrote and sent each
There is evidence of a second confrontation at the Southport
Magistrates Court in mid-2005. There is some dispute as to what transpired
that occasion. There are also some disputed telephone calls.
propose to set out the First Respondent’s evidence to demonstrate that the
importance of the disputed evidence falls away
when the undisputed evidence is
First Respondent said that he did not have anything to do with the actual
performance of the work under the contract. He was
involved in the collection
of outstanding debts. The Complainant’s company appeared on a
debtor’s list and the First
Respondent went to work. He telephoned the
Complainant (having never met him or spoken to him before). He stated the
conversation
went as follows (transcript p.78):
‘I’m Denis Mulheron. I’m the owner of United Sheet Metal.
I’d like to talk to you about coming to
an arrangement to make payment for
the money you owe us.’
And what was the response? --- ‘I don’t have to talk to you.
I don’t know who you are.’ And then I said
to him, ‘You know
who I am, you lying piece of shit. You owe me money. You’ve been
fart-arsing us about now for over
a month. You asked for time – to give
you time until you’ve got cash flow coming before you paid. That time is
and truly up. I want my money.’
Immediately
after the conversation ended the First Respondent and his then son-in-law, John
Allibone, drove to the restaurant. The
First Respondent describes the events
that followed (transcript p.78-79):
I parked the car, I
walked into the restaurant. I seen him there, Johnny said, ‘That’s
him, dad’, right. I walked
over to him. I stretched out my hand to talk
to him. I said, ‘I’m Denis Mulheron. I’ve got to talk about
money you owe us.’
And what did he say? --- ‘I don’t have to talk to you. I
don’t know who you are.’ I said, ‘You know
who I am, you
lying black cunt.’ I said, ‘You owe me the money and I want the
money and I want it now.’
All right. And what was his response? --- He said, ‘I know the
law. Australian law is stupid. You won’t get anything
All right. And then what happened? --- I called him a lying black
And then what happened? --- He said, ‘You’re a stupid fat
white pig.’
And then is that where the conversation ended, or was there - - - ? ---
Pretty well. I said, ‘I’ll get my money’
above description is not very different from the evidence of the Complainant in
relation to this confrontation. The Complainant
said that there were customers
sitting in the restaurant who witnessed the episode. He was not challenged over
this. He said that
the First Respondent used words of the kind “
fucking black bastard – cunt – you have to pay my bills and you
haven’t paid my money. I want my money
”. He also said that the
First Respondent made derogatory reference of his turban by questioning why he
was wearing a towel
over his head. The Complainant went on to say that the
First Respondent then threw a glass at him. This was denied by the First
Respondent. The Complainant said that he contacted the police and made a
complaint. There is evidence from the police records that
such a complaint was
lodged, but for some reason not explained in the evidence, the police never
questioned the First Respondent
Complainant said that as a result of the abuse by the First Respondent he felt
hurt and frightened. He described the abuse as
something one should
not even utter
thereafter the First Respondent caused a claim to issue by the Second Respondent
against the Complainant’s company for
the money alleged to be outstanding.
The Complainant put the matter in the hands of his then-solicitors, Davorens,
and in particular
a Mr Stephen Picken. Mr Picken gave evidence that on 10
December 2004 his receptionist put through a telephone call from the First
Respondent. The First Respondent in cross-examination agreed he said the
following words “
I got your letter. First of all, he is a lying
cheating black cunt.
” The First Respondent agreed that the words were
a reference to the Complainant and he agreed as a result of that conversation
that he was told by Mr Picken that if he had anything to say to put it in
a result, the First Respondent commenced to send facsimiles. The first
facsimile is on the letterhead of the Second Respondent
and is dated
15 December 2004. It is addressed to Stephen Picken and contains the
We will get paid. But let me make it
clear we do not fuck around with solicitors. We catch and kill our own. We
demand payment
before the end of the week or we at some time will repossess
goods as it is still our property and still seek payment from that lying
of shit. PS: What is his residency status. I will check with immigration. The
time for fucking around is over.
second facsimile is again on the letterhead of the Second Respondent and is
dated 19 December 2004. It is again addressed to
Stephen Picken. It
Your fax stating that Indian cunt is coming in
Friday. So what. Ring and let me know by 12pm today ... or I let the dogs
this piece of shit. I will get my brass.
PS: Why does he call co Aussie Irish. He is neither. I have never seen
a black Irish man. As for Aussie is he an abo.
remaining facsimiles written on the Second Respondent’s letterhead contain
more of the same vitriolic and degrading comments.
The First Respondent
acknowledged that the references in the facsimiles were about the Complainant.
He also acknowledged that he
was an authorised agent and director of the Second
Respondent.
a facsimile to the Complainant’s solicitors, signed by the First
Respondent, but this time not on the Second Respondent’s
letterhead,
contains the following observations:
This drawn out
confrontation with this lying piece of shit is really boring me. I’ve
more to do than waste time in court or
have bullshit at equal opportunity
talking to left wing public servant fuckwits. I am also hard to contain myself
when I see that
cunt with his tea towel on his head.
The facsimile goes on to propose that a way of settling the matter would be
for the Complainant and he “
to stand toe to toe and have a fight
– whoever yields first loses and if I lose he does not have to pay
a similar facsimile (ie, sent to the Complainant’s solicitors but not on
the Second Respondent’s letterhead) the First
Respondent sent a list of
jokes about Indians. The jokes are crass and disgusting, eg “
they have a bucket of shit at Indian weddings? A To keep the flies off the
”. The First Respondent agreed that each of those jokes were
made pointedly at the Complainant being an Indian.
in a similar facsimile, the First Respondent states:
that stinken filthy black cunt thinks by telling a lot of bullshit he can get
out of paying he better think again. He is a piece
of shit from a dirty filthy
race of rat eaters. He is lying. We did the work. He thinks he can lie to not
pay us. How are you
going to get paid. Why would a white go so low as to work
for a stinken unwashed filthy piece of shit Indian. I am now very
First Respondent, when quizzed on the reference to a “
race of rat
”, tried to justify the comment by reference to a documentary
that he had seen.
First Respondent accepted that the correspondence referred to was generated by
his perception that the Complainant was trying
to cheat him (and his company)
and that it arose out of his company’s supply of goods and services.
a hearing of the claim by the Second Respondent and the counterclaim by the
Complainant’s company some time in mid-2005 the
Complainant and the First
Respondent again came into contact as they waited outside the courtroom for
their hearing. The First Respondent
claims that the conversation was of short
compass and consisted of him commenting to the Complainant “
countrymen have been busy killing people
” (in a reference to Indians
blowing up trains in London) and then saying “
What God says, you have
to wear that towel on your head
”. He said the Complainant answered
back that his (the First Respondent’s) ancestors were convicts to which
Respondent replied “
Well they ruled your country for 200
”. The Complainant denies that conversation and says that
instead he was subject to persistent abuse from the First Respondent
period of about 15 or 20 minutes.
accept the evidence of the Complainant as it is fully corroborated by the
evidence of Mr Rodney Bruce Martin, a completely independent
witness who
overheard the conversation between the First Respondent and the Complainant on
the day in question and was so offended
by the comments made by the First
Respondent that he volunteered his name and contact details to the Complainant
after the incident.
Mr Martin described the conversation as a “
of abuse lasting between 15 and 20 minutes
” with the First Respondent
using racially derogatory terms towards the person being
”. Mr Martin described the tone of the First
Respondent’s conversation as loud, aggressive, designed for all to hear
and designed to infuriate and create a response from the Complainant.
First Respondent disputes a telephone call taken by a staff member of the
Complainant’s company at the restaurant, one Peter
John Heemskerk.
Mr Heemskerk testified that in early December 2004 he answered a telephone
call where the first words uttered were
Where’s my money, you
”. When the caller realised that it was not the Complainant
answering the phone he asked “
Why are you working for that black
”. Mr Heemskerk said that it was the First Respondent who made
the call. The contents of the call are consistent with contemporaneous
made directly to the Complainant by the First Respondent. For that reason I
accept the evidence of Mr Heemskerk. This particular
phone call hardly
makes much difference to the uncontested evidence.
Respondents Unlawfully Discriminate Against the Complainant?
my opinion the evidence is overwhelming that the First Respondent, on his own
behalf, and on behalf of the Second Respondent, directly
discriminated against
the Complainant on the basis of the attributes of race and religious belief or
religious activity. The First
Respondent’s defence to this point is based
upon the proposition that he would treat anybody who did not pay his company in
the same fashion. There is no doubt that the First Respondent has an anger
management problem. He admitted same. There is no doubt
that he would be
likely to become abusive with and angry at any debtor. However the racial slant
of his abuse of the Complainant
comfortably meets the criteria that the
Complainant was treated less favourably than another person who was not dark
skinned, Indian
or wearing a turban. The racial references were crude,
repugnant and vile and were designed to intimidate, frighten and upset the
Complainant. They added another dimension and level of abuse that would not
have been utilised by the First Respondent against a
white, Christian male. The
discrimination on racial and religious grounds by the First Respondent was
persistent and designed to
further his and the Second Respondent’s own
ends. There has been no remorse shown at all. I find therefore that the
Complainant
has met his onus in establishing the requirements of
of the Act.
Did the Respondents Discriminate Against
the Complainant in the Supply of Goods & Services?
of the Act provides:
(1) A person who supplies
goods or services (whether or not for reward or profit) must not discriminate
against another person –
(d) by treating the other person unfavourably in any way in connection
with the supply of goods and services.
its terms, the sub-section is designed to apply to a wide range of activities.
What needs to be proved is that the unfavourable
treatment is “
connection with
” the supply of goods and services. That supply must
necessarily include all aspects of the contract including its performance
the settlement of disputes arising under it whether such settlement is by
negotiation or litigation. In other words, the First
Respondent’s aim in
getting his brass
” must fall within the supply of goods and
services as payment for those services is an integral part of any contract for
supply. Therefore if the unfavourable treatment occurs in the negotiating
of a dispute in payment for supply it must be in connection
with such supply.
In the present case the unlawful discrimination was not committed in a vacuum.
It was designed to elicit payment
from the Complainant’s company and as
such fell within the ambit of the sub-section.
Is the Second
Respondent Liable?
is no doubt that
provide a basis for a finding against the Second
Respondent. No attempt was made to demonstrate that the Second Respondent took
any steps let alone reasonable ones to prevent the First Respondent from
contravening the Act. On the contrary, the First Respondent’s
were solely designed to benefit the Second
Respondent.
find therefore that the Complainant has made out his case against both
Respondents. The most appropriate order to make is pursuant
an award of money as compensation for the Complainant’s loss and damage
caused by the Respondents’ contravention
of the Act.
Complainant has suffered considerable hurt as a result of the actions of the
Respondents. He has been subjected to persistent
and serious discrimination in
the exercise of his legal rights to have a tribunal determine a dispute between
citizens. The First
Respondent has shown no contrition and his attempts to
justify his behaviour are pathetic and self-serving.
all the circumstances I think an award of $40,000.00 against both Respondents is
called for. The Respondents will be jointly and
severally liable for the
award interest on $40,000.00 at 5% per annum for five years, totalling
$10,000.00.
order that the Respondents pay the Complainant’s costs of the hearing,
including reserved costs, if any, to be assessed using
the Scale of Costs for
the District Court under the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (376 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter