URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/217.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
G8 Education Ltd v Hutson [2025] QCA 217 (7 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
G8 Education Ltd v Hutson
[2025] QCA 217
G8 EDUCATION LTD (ACN 123 828
(appellant)
JENNIFER JOAN
(respondent)
Appeal No 176 of 2025
SC No 12263 of 2024
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
General Civil Appeal
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane –
[2024] QSC 319 (Wilson
DELIVERED ON:
7 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
19 March 2025
Mullins P, Gotterson AJA and Bradley J
allowed in respect of paragraphs (b) and (c) of order 1 made on 19 December
aside paragraph (b) of order 1 made on 19 December 2024.
paragraph (c) of order 1 made on 19 December 2024 so that it becomes paragraph
(b) and the words “not be contrary to”
are substituted for the words
“be consistent with”.
otherwise dismissed.
appeal dismissed.
no submissions on the costs of the appeal and the cross appeal are filed on or
before 10 days after the delivery of these reasons,
there will be no order as to
the costs of the appeal and the cross appeal.
at least one of the parties files submissions on costs on or before 10 days
after the delivery of these reasons, the costs of the
appeal and the cross
appeal will be reserved to be determined on the papers.
CATCHWORDS:
CONTRACTS – GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES – CONSTRUCTION AND
INTERPRETATION OF CONTRACTS – where the respondent
was a former director
of the appellant – where there was a deed of access, insurance and
indemnity (the deed) between the parties
– where the deed provided the
appellant would indemnify the respondent in respect of liabilities and legal
costs incurred by
the respondent during her time as director of the appellant
and each related body corporate and for seven years after she ceased
director – where the deed provided the appellant would indemnify the
respondent “to the extent permitted by law”
against all legal costs
incurred by the respondent in defending an action – where in
clause 4.3 of the deed provided for the
appellant to advance to the
respondent any legal costs reasonably incurred or expected to be incurred by the
respondent in defending
an action – where the respondent was being
prosecuted for criminal offences which were alleged to have been committed when
the respondent was a director – where the appellant argued before the
primary judge that clause 4.3 incorporated a requirement
that the legal costs
incurred or expected to be incurred be reasonable – where the primary
judge rejected the appellant’s
argument and declared that the
appellant’s obligation under the deed was not limited to or dependent on
the reasonableness
of the legal costs incurred or expected to be incurred
– whether the primary judge erred in the construction of the
appellant’s
obligations under clause 4.3(a)
CONTRACTS – GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES – CONSTRUCTION AND
INTERPRETATION OF CONTRACTS – where the respondent
was a former director
of the appellant – where there was a deed of access, insurance and
indemnity (the deed) between the parties
– where the deed provided the
appellant would indemnify the respondent in respect of liabilities and legal
costs incurred by
the respondent during her time as director of the appellant
and each related body corporate and for seven years after she ceased
director – where the deed provided the appellant would indemnify the
respondent “to the extent permitted by law”
against all legal costs
incurred by the respondent in defending an action – where clause 4.3 of
the deed provided for the appellant
to advance to the respondent any legal costs
reasonably incurred or expected to be incurred by the respondent in defending an
– where clause 4.3(a) of the deed provided for the timing of
the appellant’s advances on account of legal costs after
the respondent
provided to the appellant invoices or other relevant evidence of the costs
incurred or expected to be incurred –
where clause 4.3(b) provided that
advances of funds under clause 4.3 were to be on terms which the appellant
determined to be reasonable
in the circumstances – where the primary judge
declared that any term imposed by the appellant under clause 4.3(b) must be
consistent with its obligations under clause 4.3(a) – where the
appellant argued this declaration was premised on an incorrect
conclusion as to
the appellant’s obligation, failed to read the clauses 4.3(a) and (b)
together and failed to give effect to
the express term conferring power on the
appellant to impose terms – whether the primary judge erred in the
construction of
the deed – whether clause 4.3 required consistency
between the terms imposed under clause 4.3(b) and the appellant’s
obligations under clause 4.3(a)
CONTRACTS – GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES – CONSTRUCTION AND
INTERPRETATION OF CONTRACTS – where the respondent
was a former director
of the appellant – where there was a deed of access, insurance and
indemnity (the deed) between the parties
– where the deed provided the
appellant would indemnify the respondent in respect of liabilities and legal
costs incurred by
the respondent during her time as director of the appellant
and each related body corporate and for seven years after she ceased
director – where the deed provided the appellant would indemnify the
respondent “to the extent permitted by law”
against all legal costs
incurred by the respondent in defending an action – where clause 4.3 of
the deed provided for the appellant
to advance to the respondent any legal costs
reasonably incurred or expected to be incurred by the respondent in defending an
– where clause 4.3(a) of the deed provided for the timing of
the appellant’s advances on account of legal costs after
the respondent
provided to the appellant invoices or other relevant evidence of the costs
incurred or expected to be incurred –
where the appellant sought to impose
three proposed terms under clause 4.3(b) on advances for legal costs to be
where the primary judge found that it was not open to the
appellant to impose two of the proposed terms under clause 4.3(b) –
where the primary judge declared that those two proposed terms were inconsistent
with the appellant’s obligations under clause
4.3(a) – where the
primary judge refused to find that the third proposed term was inconsistent with
clause 4.3(a) – whether
the primary judge erred in making the declaration
in respect of two of the proposed terms and refusing to make a declaration in
of the third proposed term – whether primary judge erred in the
construction of the deed
Corporations Act 2001
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld), r 766
Hannover Life Re of Australasia Ltd v Jones
[2017] NSWCA 233
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
256 CLR 104
[2015] HCA 37
Note Printing Australia Ltd v
(2015) 50 VR 44
[2015] VSCA 105
A M Pomerenke KC, with S D McCarthy, for the appellant
O’Higgins KC, with K T Grimshaw, for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Allens for the appellant
RHR Legal for the respondent
[1] MULLINS
The respondent is a former director of the appellant who was being
prosecuted for criminal offences alleged to have been committed
directorship. Issues arose as to the construction and application of the deed
of access, insurance and indemnity made
on 24 March 2010 between the parties
(the deed) in respect of the funding of the respondent’s legal costs for
defending the
criminal charges. Those issues were determined by the primary
Hutson v G8 Education Ltd
[2024] QSC 319
(the reasons).
declarations made by the primary judge on 19 December 2024 (the declarations) as
to the construction and the application of
the deed, substituting the
parties’ designations on this appeal, were as
“1. The Court declares that on the proper
construction of the Deed of Access, Insurance and Indemnity dated 24 March 2010
the [appellant] and the [respondent] (the ‘Deed’):
to clauses 4.3 (b) and 4.5, under clause 4.3 (a) the [appellant] must advance to
the [respondent] any amount that the [respondent]
reasonably expects to be
incurred for legal costs:
defending an action for a Liability (as defined in the Deed) incurred or
allegedly incurred by the [respondent] as an officer of
the [appellant];
five Business Days (as defined in the Deed) after the [respondent] provides the
[appellant] with invoices or other relevant
evidence of the legal costs
reasonably expected to be incurred;
obligation of the [appellant] to make an advance to the [respondent] under
clause 4.3 (a) is not limited to or dependent on the
reasonableness of the legal
costs incurred or expected to be incurred by the [respondent]; and
term imposed by the [appellant] under clause 4.3 (b) must be consistent with its
obligations under clause 4.3 (a).
Court declares that the following proposed terms are inconsistent with the
[appellant]’s obligations under clause 4.3 (a):
existing advances must first be exhausted (in the payment of reasonable costs)
before any further advance will be considered;
further advance will only be considered on a month to month
[3] When the
primary judge heard the application and made the declarations, the trial of the
respondent on the first of two indictments
was pending. By the time of the
hearing of the appeal, the respondent had been advised that the Commonwealth
Director of Public
Prosecutions was discontinuing both indictments. That
occurred the day following the hearing of the appeal. Both parties urged
there remained utility in the appeal being heard as the deed remained on foot
and it could not be said that, as a theoretical
possibility, there would be
no further requests for funding under the deed. The court therefore heard the
appeal, though without
the same urgency that had applied when the trial on the
first indictment was imminent.
Grounds of appeal
[4] The grounds
of appeal are:
primary judge erred in finding that, on the proper construction of the deed
between the appellant and the respondent:
appellant is obliged to advance to the respondent, under clause 4.3(a), any
amount that the respondent reasonably expects to be
incurred for legal
appellant’s obligation under clause 4.3(a) is not limited to or dependent
upon the reasonableness of the legal costs incurred
or expected to be incurred
by the respondent.
primary judge erred in finding that, on the proper construction of the deed,
clause 4.3(b) does not permit the imposition of terms
that change or are
inconsistent with the appellant’s obligation under clause 4.3(a).
primary judge erred in finding that, on the proper construction of the deed, the
terms imposed by the appellant (as set out in
[204](a) and [204](b)(i) of the
reasons) (respectively proposed terms 1 and 2) were not open to it to impose
under clause 4.3(b).
appellant seeks an order on the appeal that paragraphs 1 and 2 of the
declarations be set aside and does not seek any alternative
declarations. The
respondent seeks to maintain the declarations and cross appeals the primary
judge’s failure to declare that
proposed terms 1 and 2 were not reasonable
and were inconsistent with the express terms of clause 4.3(b) of the deed. The
also cross appeals the primary judge’s failure to declare that
the additional term proposed to be imposed by the appellant
under clause 4.3(b)
of the deed (as set out in [204](b)(ii) of the reasons) (referred to as proposed
term 3) was unreasonable and
inconsistent with the appellant’s obligations
under clause 4.3(a) and the express terms of clause 4.3(b).
[6] Proposed
terms 1, 2 and 3 that the appellant sought to impose pursuant to
clause 4.3(b) were set out at [204] of the reasons as
follows (to which
identification of each of the proposed terms has been added in
“(a) all existing advances must first be exhausted (in
the payment of reasonable costs) before any further advance will be considered
proposed term 1
(b) any further advance will only be considered:
(i) on a month-to-month basis [
proposed term 2
(ii) when a specific request for funding is made and that request is accompanied
(A) a detailed explanation of the tasks to be carried out that month, why
those tasks must be carried out, by whom and for what cost;
(B) a reconciliation against the previous estimates of costs that have been
proposed term 3
[7] The main
issues to be determined on the appeal and cross appeal can be summarised as:
paragraph 1(b) of the declarations properly construe clause 4.3?
clause 4.3 require consistency between any term imposed under clause 4.3(b)
and the appellant’s obligations under clause
it open to the appellant to impose proposed terms 1 and 2 under
clause 4.3(b)?
clause 4.3(b) allow the appellant to impose proposed term
[8] The deed
provides for the appellant to indemnify the respondent in respect of liabilities
and legal costs incurred by the respondent
during the time she held office as a
director of the appellant and each related body corporate of the appellant and
for seven years
after she ceased to be a director on terms that endeavour to
avoid infringing
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) (Act).
That provision precludes a company or related body corporate from indemnifying a
person against legal costs incurred
in defending an action for a liability
incurred as an officer of the company if the costs are incurred in defending or
criminal proceedings in which the person is found guilty.
[9] The critical
clauses of the deed for the purpose of addressing the grounds of appeal are set
out in full below. The recitals
to the deed are under the heading
“Background” and set out in [18] of the reasons. Relevantly, as
recorded in clause
B, the appellant agreed to indemnify the respondent “to
the extent permitted by law” against certain liabilities (as
defined) and
legal costs incurred by the respondent as an officer of a group company
(which is defined in the deed to mean the appellant
and each related body
corporate of the appellant). An extensive selection of clauses of the deed is
set out in the reasons at [21]‑[26],
[31]-[63] and [91], as some arguments
before the primary judge not pursued on the appeal had regard to clauses of the
than the critical clauses.
of the deed is concerned with the indemnity for liabilities and legal costs.
Clause 2.1 confers the general indemnity to the extent
permitted by law
against all liabilities (other than for legal costs referred to in clause 2.2
incurred by the director in connection
with or as a consequence of the director
acting in any capacity as director of a group company).
application before the primary judge concerned the costs indemnity found in
clause 2.2 which provides:
“Subject to:
(a) clauses 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 and 8; and
(b) the prohibitions in
section 199A
Corporations Act
the Company indemnifies the Director to the extent permitted by law against
any and all legal costs:
(c) incurred by the Director in defending or resisting (or otherwise in
connection with) an action;
(d) for a Liability incurred or allegedly incurred by the Director in connection
with or as a consequence of the director acting
in any Capacity; or
(e) incurred by the Director in instigating proceedings to protect the interests
of the Company or the Director in relation to acts
undertaken in his or her
Capacity with a Group Company.”
[12] None of
clauses 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 and 8 is relevant to the construction issues raised on the
appeal. Clause 2.2 provides for a full
indemnity in respect of “all legal
costs” incurred in any of the circumstances set out in paragraphs (c), (d)
of clause 2.2 and subject to paragraphs (a) and (b) of clause 2.2.
of the deed is concerned with advances and payments in respect of the indemnity.
Clause 4.1 relevantly provides:
“Any monies payable by the
Company to the Director under this indemnity must ... be paid within ten
Business Days after the
Director provides evidence satisfactory to the Company
that the Director is entitled to be indemnified under this document for that
[14] Clause 4.2
makes it clear that it is not necessary for the director to make any payment
before enforcing the director’s
rights under the deed.
[15] Clause 4.3
which is headed “Advance defence costs”
“(a) Subject to clause 4.5 and without prejudice to
clause 8, the Company must advance to the Director any legal costs reasonably
incurred or expected to be incurred by the Director in defending an action for a
Liability incurred or allegedly incurred by the
Director as an officer of a
Group Company, within 5 Business Days after the Director provides the Company
with invoices or other
relevant evidence of the costs incurred.
(b) Advances of funds under this clause 4.3 are to be on terms which the Company
determines to be reasonable in the circumstances
and are to be unsecured and
free of interest (unless the Director ceases to [be] entitled to be indemnified
for the amount under
this document).”
[16] Clause 4.5
deals with repayment where
of the Act applies on the determination of the
“(a) If the Company (or any of its Subsidiaries)
advances moneys to the Director under clause 4.3 or otherwise pays or reimburses
the Director (or any other person) for costs in accordance with this document
Relevant Costs
’) and upon the final determination of the
Claim the Relevant Costs become costs in respect of which the Director is not
to be indemnified under this document, the Director must repay the
amount and any accrued interest to the Company (or its Subsidiaries
as the case
may be) within 60 Business Days after a written request by the Company.
(b) If the Director also receives payment in respect of some or all of the
Relevant Costs under:
(i) the D&O Policy or any other insurance policy; or
(ii) an indemnity given by a Subsidiary of the Company,
then the Director must, within ten Business Days after receiving payment
under the relevant insurance policy or indemnity, pay to
the Company an amount
equal to the amount recovered by the Director under the insurance policy or
indemnity in respect of the Relevant
[17] Section
199A(3) of the Act provides for when indemnity for an officer or auditor of
a company for legal costs is not allowed:
“A company or
related body corporate must not indemnify a person (whether by agreement or by
making a payment and whether directly
or through an interposed entity) against
legal costs incurred in defending an action for a liability incurred as an
officer or auditor
of the company if the costs are incurred:
(a) in defending or resisting proceedings in which the person is found to have a
liability for which they could not be indemnified
under subsection (2); or
(b) in defending or resisting criminal proceedings in which the person is found
(c) in defending or resisting proceedings brought by ASIC or a liquidator
for a court order if the grounds for making the order are
found by the court to
have been established; or
(d) in connection with proceedings for relief to the person under this Act in
which the Court denies the relief.
Paragraph (c) does not apply to costs incurred in responding to actions taken
by ASIC or a liquidator as part of an investigation
before commencing
proceedings for the court order.”
[18] The second
note at the foot of s 199A(3) refers to s 212 of the Act. Section 208
of the Act provides that a public company cannot
give a financial benefit to a
related party (as defined in s 228) of the public company without member
approval unless the benefit
falls within an exception set out in s 210 to
s 216. Section 212(2) provides an exception for the company being able to
director a loan or advance in respect of legal costs. The terms of
s 212(2) are:
“Member approval is not needed to give a
financial benefit if:
(a) the benefit is for a related party who is an officer of the public company
or entity; and
(b) the benefit is the making of, or an agreement to make, a payment (whether by
way of advance, loan or otherwise) in respect of
legal costs incurred by the
officer in defending an action for a liability incurred as an officer of
the public company or entity;
(c) either:
(i) section 199A does not apply to the costs; or
(ii) if section 199A applies to the costs—the officer must repay the
amount paid if the costs become costs for which the company
must not give the
officer an indemnity under that section; and
(d) to give the benefit would be reasonable in the circumstances of the public
company or entity giving the benefit.”
The reasons
appellant’s submission before the primary judge (recorded at [101] of the
reasons) was that there was no prospective
element to clause 4.3(a) and that it
was only obliged to pay legal costs that were both reasonable and had been
incurred. This was
based on the deed operating as a loan agreement between the
appellant and the respondent. It was the appellant’s alternative
before the primary judge that, if clause 4.3(a) of the deed did require payment
to be made to the respondent in advance
of the costs being incurred, there was
still a requirement for such costs to be reasonable.
[20] There is no
challenge to the orthodox principles of interpretation of the provisions of a
commercial contract set out by the
primary judge at [131] of the reasons.
[21] The primary
judge applied (at [136]-[137] of the reasons) the approach of the Victorian
Court of Appeal in
Note Printing Australia Ltd v Leckenby
[2015] VSCA 105
to the construction of a deed of indemnity between a
company (referred to as NPAL) and its chief executive officer Mr Leckenby in
respect of legal costs and expenses which he might incur as an officer of NPAL
in defending an action for a liability incurred as
such an officer.
[22] The primary
judge found (at [136]-[145] of the reasons) that the deed was an agreement that
provided for the appellant to pay
the legal costs of the respondent in defending
the criminal prosecution up until, and unless, there was a guilty verdict
case there was an obligation to repay any such payments together with
any accrued interest. The primary judge concluded (at [140])
structure and content of the deed involved the type of transaction that
s 199A(3)(b) of the Act permits.
[23] The primary
judge noted (at [147] of the reasons) that once a criminal proceeding was
commenced, there were limited options as
to how it could conclude and (at [149])
that the parties to the deed would therefore have anticipated that the
respondent’s
legal representation for the criminal proceeding would more
than likely continue up to verdict. The primary judge concluded (at
[149]) that
“the parties deliberately ensured that the Deed had a prospective element
to ensure that the [respondent] had legal
representation up until a
verdict”. The primary judge considered (at [154]) that this was
reinforced by clause 4.3(a) expressly
using the term “expected to be
conclusion of the primary judge on the construction of clause 4.3(a) reflected
in paragraph 1(b) of the declarations is set
out at [159]-[163] of the
“[159] The plain words of clause 4.3 (a) require the
[appellant] to advance to the [respondent] an amount reflecting any legal
reasonably incurred or expected to be incurred.
[160] That is, the adverb ‘reasonably’ applies to that which is
‘incurred’ or that which is ‘expected’.
In the present
circumstances, it is the expectation of the incurring of those costs which must
be reasonable.
[161] That does not require an assessment of the reasonableness of the costs
(to be incurred) but rather, the reasonableness of the
[respondent]’s
expectation that those costs will be incurred.
[162] Clause 4.3 (a) contemplates, by use of the past tense
‘incurred’ and the use of the future phrase ‘expected
incurred’, both retrospective and prospective incurring of legal
[163] The use of the disjunctive ‘or’ in the phrase
‘reasonably incurred or expected to be incurred’ should
understood as presenting two alternative situations where the [appellant] is
required to make an advance to the [respondent].
(a) the [appellant] must advance to the [respondent] any legal costs reasonably
incurred by the [respondent]; or
(b) the [appellant] must advance to the [respondent] any legal costs reasonably
expected to be incurred by the [respondent].”
[25] The primary
judge noted (at [164] of the reasons) that there was no ambiguity in clause
4.3(a) about the two alternative situations
that are contemplated by the
provision. It was the second of the alternative situations that was the focus
of submissions before
the primary judge (as reflected by the terms of paragraph
1(a) of the declarations). The key finding for the purpose of ground 1
at [166] is that for the prospective situation “it is the expectation of
incurring the costs that must be reasonable”
and “[n]othing in the
wording requires an assessment of the reasonableness of the amount of the costs
to be incurred”.
The primary judge found (at [168]-[172]) that there
was support for that construction of clause 4.3(a) by the adoption of a
businesslike
approach to the interpretation of a commercial contract. In
particular, the primary judge noted (at [169]) that, unless there was
agreement for ongoing legal costs to be paid prior to, and up to, a verdict, the
respondent could incur significant liability
for those costs in a manner that
could potentially compromise her defence. The primary judge also accepted (at
[171]) that a reasonable
businessperson in the position of the parties would
know that it was highly likely that, in defending serious criminal charges, it
was necessary for funding to be provided well in advance of the services being
rendered and that failing to do so would seriously
prejudice the conduct of the
defence. The primary judge noted (at [172](a)) that the deed “was
designed to secure an indemnity
as wide as possible for the [respondent],
providing for protection against ‘Liabilities’ defined in almost the
possible terms and ‘to the extent permitted by
[26] A further
key finding was made at [173]:
“Accordingly, it is in that
context that clause 4.3 (a) provides that the [appellant] ‘must
advance’ the legal costs
reasonably expected to be incurred by the
[respondent]. The condition of ‘reasonableness’ is applied to the
expectation
that the identified legal costs will be incurred, and that condition
objectively
appellant had expressed a concern before the primary judge that an estimate
could be provided for “a relatively simple
and minor matter which included
excessive engagement of legal services” which the primary judge addressed
(at [174] of the
reasons) by noting that “such an estimate could not
support an objectively reasonable expectation of costs to be incurred in
defending the action”. The primary judge observed (at
“Requiring only that the reasonableness condition be
applied to the expectation (and not the costs themselves) is consistent
funding of costs in advance and with the broad indemnity in clause 2.2
(which is not subject to a reasonableness condition)
and the need to ensure that
proper funding is advanced so as not to compromise the defence of the criminal
[28] The primary
judge accepted (at [177] of the reasons) that “in all the circumstances,
and reading the Deed as a whole”,
this construction that applies the
reasonable condition to the expectation that the costs will be incurred and not
the costs themselves
produced a commercial result for the reasons set out as:
“(a) clause 4.3 (a) operates to require the respondent to
advance funds for any legal costs
reasonably expected
to be incurred;
(b) the reasonableness of the expectation to incur legal costs can be
objectively and easily assessed (for example, by reference
estimate from a reputable legal advisor) in a relatively short timeframe to
allow funds to be advanced and the defence
conducted without delays;
(c) the respondent’s rights to seek an assessment of costs once incurred
would not be affected; and
(d) insofar as any advance is not completely exhausted by legal costs, clause
4.5 (a) of the Deed operates to require the respondent
to repay the balance of
the advance to the respondent, on request.”
clause 4.3(a) the timing of the advance on account of “any legal costs
reasonably incurred or expected to be incurred”
is specified as
“within 5 Business Days after the Director provides the Company with
invoices or other relevant evidence of
the costs incurred”. The
respondent’s contention that the reference to “evidence of the costs
should be construed to mean “evidence of the costs
incurred or expected to be incurred” consistent with the first part
clause 4.3(a) was accepted by the primary judge (at [180] and [185]) and that
finding was not challenged on the appeal. It is
obvious that clause 4.3(a)
should be read as if those words “or expected to be incurred” were
inserted at the conclusion
of paragraph (a).
[30] The primary
judge resolved the parties’ different constructions of clause 4.3 by
finding that the proper construction was
that contended for by the respondent,
stating at [190] of the reasons:
“Prima facie, there is no
‘apparent inconsistency’ between clauses 4.3 (a) and clause 4.3
(a) clause 4.3 (a) is expressed in mandatory terms and requires the [appellant]
to advance to the [respondent] any legal costs reasonably
incurred or expected
to be incurred by the [respondent]. This must be done within five business days
after the [respondent] has provided
the [appellant] invoices or other relevant
evidence of the costs incurred; and
(b) clause 4 .3 (b) then has the effect of entitling the [appellant] to impose
terms in relation to advances made under clause 4.3
[31] The primary
judge noted (at [191] of the reasons) that any terms imposed by the appellant
pursuant to clause 4.3(b) could not
change the obligation or be inconsistent
with the obligation to make the advances as set out in clause 4.3(a). The
primary judge
provided (at [192]) examples of the terms that in certain
circumstances might reasonably be imposed under clause 4.3(b). They were
requirements for advances to be paid directly to the respondent’s
solicitor’s trust account and all invoices rendered
in relation to the
advanced funds to be in a particular form or to be rendered at specified
intervals or provided to the appellant
within a prescribed period to facilitate
prompt consideration of the costs actually incurred and the options for seeking
an assessment
Legal Profession Act 2007
[32] As noted by
the primary judge (at [194] of the reasons), the declarations in
paragraph 1 were made at the request of the appellant
to reflect the proper
interpretation of clause 4.3 of the deed.
[33] The primary
judge dealt with proposed term 1 at [209]-[212] of the reasons. The primary
judge was of the view (at [210]) that
proposed term 1 was inconsistent with
clause 4.3(b) of the deed as it entitled the appellant to limit how, and
when, it considers
advances under clause 4.3(a) which is inconsistent with the
appellant’s obligation under clause 4.3(a) to advance any legal
reasonably expected to be incurred. The primary judge therefore did not
consider the alternative bases advanced by the respondent
for seeking a
declaration to the effect that proposed term 1 was not permitted by the
[34] The primary
judge dealt with proposed term 2 at [213]-[215] of the reasons. As proposed
term 2 sought to limit the appellant’s
obligation to make advances
“on a month-to-month basis”, the primary judge found (at [214])
that there was no temporal
limitation under clause 4.3(a) in relation to the
expectation of legal costs. The primary judge therefore found (at [215]) that
term limiting advances to a month-to-month basis was inconsistent with the
appellant’s obligations under clause 4.3(a).
The primary judge did not
consider the alternative bases on which the respondent sought the declaration in
relation to proposed term
[35] The primary
judge considered (at [217] of the reasons) that proposed term 3 was not
necessarily inconsistent with clause 4.3(a)
and refused to make the declaration
sought by the respondent.
The appellant’s
submissions
[36] Ground 1(a)
of the notice of appeal was directed at paragraph 1(a) of the declarations that
resolved the appellant’s contention
before the primary judge (set out at
[101] of the reasons) that the appellant was not obliged to advance an amount on
prospective legal costs. That contention was not pursued on the
appeal. No argument in writing or orally was addressed to ground
1(a) which is
therefore treated as abandoned.
[37] Ground 1(b)
of the notice of appeal was directed at paragraph 1(b) of the declarations.
There are two aspects of the challenge.
First, the appellant asserts the
reasonableness of the legal costs incurred or expected to be incurred is
relevant to the assessment
under clause 4.3(a) of the deed that the legal costs
incurred by the director or the director’s expectation of the legal costs
to be incurred is reasonable.
[38] It is an
essential step in the appellant’s submissions that clause 4.3 operates
separately from the indemnity for legal
costs in clause 2.2 and is therefore
characterised as an interim measure by way of advance and not indemnity. The
appellant submits
that it has an interest in ensuring that it is not exposed to
an unconstrained obligation to make unsecured advances to a director
who may not
ultimately be entitled to any indemnity and who may not have sufficient
resources to repay the amounts advanced. That
is why the appellant argued for
the constraint of the reasonableness of the costs for any advance under clause
4.3(a). The appellant
concedes that this asserted interest of the appellant
must be balanced with the respondent’s interest in obtaining advances
be assured of legal representation to conduct the defence to the conclusion of
[39] Second, the
appellant complains that paragraph 1(b) of the declarations expresses in
absolute terms that the obligation of the
appellant to make an advance under
clause 4.3(a) “is not limited to or dependent on the reasonableness
of the legal costs incurred
or expected to be incurred” by the director
which unduly constrains the operation of the term “reasonably” in
4.3(a). The appellant submits that the reasonableness of the costs will
often be a “key factor” in determining whether
the incurrence or
expectation is reasonable: the question whether costs were “reasonably
incurred” or “reasonably
... expected to be incurred” will
extend to whether the costs incurred or the subject of the expectation
“were exorbitant
or involved the deployment of extravagant
resources”. The appellant also submits that the primary judge wrongly
treats clause
4.3 as reflecting the purpose and extent of the indemnity in
clause 2.2, when clause 4.3 operates differently as an interim measure,
seeking to balance the interests of the respondent and the appellant pending the
outcome of the prosecution for a criminal offence.
The appellant’s last
complaint about the declaration in paragraph 1(b) is that it was premised on an
erroneous application
appellant’s complaints about paragraph 1(c) of the declarations are that
it is premised on an incorrect conclusion
as to the appellant’s
obligations under clause 4.3(a), fails to read clause 4.3(a) and clause
4.3(b) together, with clause
4.3(b) qualifying the whole of clause 4.3
(including clause 4.3(a)), and fails to give effect to the express term that
confers upon
the appellant the power to impose terms which it “determines
to be reasonable in the circumstances”.
appellant’s complaint about paragraph 2 of the declarations is that it is
premised on the same erroneous construction
of clause 4.3 that resulted in
paragraph 1(c) of the declarations. The appellant also submits that, in any
case, the declaration
is incorrect in asserting that the proposed terms 1 and 2
were inconsistent with clause 4.3(a).
appellant supports the primary judge’s rejection of the declarations
sought by the respondent in respect of proposed
term 3 on the basis that the
quantum sought by the respondent to defend the criminal proceedings and the
anticipated length of the
criminal trials with the likelihood of ongoing
requests for legal costs justified the respondent seeking to impose proposed
3. The appellant submits that proposed term 3 was reasonable for the
appellant to impose to protect its interests without detracting
obligation to advance legal costs reasonably expected to be incurred by the
respondent. The appellant submits that clause
4.3(b) permits a term affecting
the nature, timing and content of the relevant evidence which is anterior to any
obligation to advance
under clause 4.3(a).
The respondent’s
submissions
[43] There was
no error in the primary judge’s approach of construing clause 4.3 in the
context of “the broad indemnity
in clause 2.2 (which is not subject to a
reasonableness condition)”. To the extent that the appellant asserts the
judge wrongly adopted the reasoning in
, the differences
between the deed in
and the subject deed do not affect the
correctness of those elements of
that the primary judge applied
to the construction of the subject deed.
respondent seeks to uphold the primary judge’s conclusion (at [173] of the
reasons) that the condition of “reasonableness”
in clause 4.3(a) is
applied to “the expectation that the identified legal costs will be
incurred, and that condition is to
objectively
conclusion embraced the respondent’s submission to the primary judge
where, in response to the appellant’s example
of a costs estimate for a
minor matter which contemplated the engagement of multiple silks and juniors
with solicitors performing
excessive preparatory tasks, involving significant
overlap and double handling, the respondent had submitted at paragraph 22 of its
written submissions in reply:
“Putting aside the likelihood of
such a costs estimate being produced by a reputable legal advisor, such an
estimate in that
context could not support an objectively reasonable expectation
of costs to be incurred in defending the action.”
respondent argues that the appellant’s contention that the reasonableness
of costs will often be a key factor in determining
whether the incurrence or
expectation of incurring legal costs is reasonable should be rejected as
conflating reasonableness of costs
with the true test imposed by clause 4.3(a)
of the reasonableness of the incurrence or expectation of incurring costs.
[47] As to the
terms of paragraph 1(b), the respondent argues that it does not exclude the
possibility of reasonableness of costs
being a relevant factor in a particular
case for determining whether the expectation of incurring costs was reasonable
and the declaration
makes it clear that the reasonableness of costs is not the
criterion in all cases.
respect to paragraph 1(c) of the declarations, clause 4.3(b) applies only if
clause 4.3(a) has been triggered to impose
an obligation on the appellant
to make an advance for legal costs and clause 4.3(b) does not contemplate terms
that postpone or circumscribe
the obligation to make an advance under clause
[49] In relation
to [214] of the reasons, the respondent accepts that circumstances may suggest a
temporal element to the relevant
reasonable expectation for the purposes of
clause 4.3(a). The respondent submits, however, that the observation by
the primary judge
at [214] to the effect that there is no temporal limitation
under clause 4.3(a) was made in response to the term proposed by the
which would limit its obligations to consider paying advances under clause
4.3(a) to a month-to-month consideration. The
respondent therefore suggests
that the observation should be understood to mean there was no express temporal
limitation imposed
by clause 4.3(a) prohibiting a reasonable expectation of
costs extending beyond one month in advance and should not be understood
rejection in all circumstances of any temporal limitation under clause
respondent disputes the appellant’s entitlement to impose a term under
clause 4.3(b) before the relevant advance is
made. The respondent submits
that a term imposed under clause 4.3(b) applies only to an advance once the
obligation to make the
advance has arisen (which only arises on provision of the
relevant evidence). It is therefore an error to construe clause 4.3(b)
permitting a term to be imposed on the appellant’s consideration of the
relevant evidence.
Supplementary submissions
[51] At the
request of the respondent at the conclusion of the hearing of the appeal, the
parties were given leave to file supplementary
submissions on any suggested
amendments to paragraphs 1(b) and (c) of the declarations.
[52] Consistent
with the respondent’s approach before the primary judge and on the appeal,
the respondent acknowledges in the
supplementary submissions that “there
is no real dispute that exorbitant costs or costs that involve the deployment of
extravagant
resources are not (or are unlikely to be) reasonably incurred or
expected to be incurred”. The respondent’s primary
position is that
paragraph 1(b) of the declarations is not so rigid as to not admit the
possibility of exorbitant or extravagant
costs being relevant to the obligation
to advances to costs reasonably incurred or reasonably expected to be incurred
by the director.
The respondent submits that if the Court concludes that it is,
it would be open to the Court to vary the declaration to reflect
possibility so that paragraph (b) would be in the following terms (where the
additional words have been italicised):
“the obligation of the
respondent to make an advance to the applicant under clause 4.3(a)
include an obligation to advance legal costs that are exorbitant or that involve
the extravagant deployment of resources
but otherwise
is not limited to or
dependent on the reasonableness of the legal costs incurred or expected to be
incurred by the applicant; and”
[53] In respect
of paragraphs 1(c) and 2 of the declarations, the respondent submits that
paragraph (c) could be amended so that rather
than using “must be
consistent with”, those words be substituted with “must not be
contrary to”. A similar
amendment is suggested to paragraph 2 by
substituting “contrary to” in lieu of “consistent
appellant contends that, if the declarations made by the primary judge are set
aside, this Court should not make the alternative
declarations proposed by the
respondent. The appellant argues that the alternative declarations would put an
“impermissible
gloss” on the contractual text and be divorced from
the circumstances of the case. The appellant submits that the proposed
alternative paragraph 1(b) of the declaration retains the awkward
extra-contractual language and only carves out the example that
was conceded by
the respondent on the appeal where the proposed exception is not based on any
dispute between the parties.
Does paragraph 1(b) of the
declarations properly construe clause 4.3(a)?
[55] Paragraph
1(b) of the declarations reflects the primary judge’s determination of the
dispute that arose between the parties
as to the criterion to be applied under
clause 4.3(a) of the deed to determine whether the respondent’s
request for an advance
for prospective legal costs was for legal costs
“reasonably expected to be incurred” in defending the criminal
proceeding.
[56] The rights
and liabilities of parties under a commercial contract must be determined
objectively, by reference to its text, context
(including the terms of the
entire contract) and purpose and having regard to what a reasonable
businessperson would have understood
the terms of the contract to mean:
Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 37
(2015) 256 CLR 104
indemnity clause for legal costs and expenses in the deed in
subject to an exception in respect of costs and expenses incurred in defending
or resisting criminal proceedings in which the
officer was found guilty. Mr
Leckenby was charged with Commonwealth and Victorian criminal offences arising
from alleged bribery
of foreign officials. Prior to the charges being heard, he
called on the indemnity. The question to be determined was whether
199A(3)(b) of the Act precluded NPAL from indemnifying the officer while
the criminal proceedings were continuing. There was no
clause in the deed in
equivalent to clause 4.3 of the subject deed. The deed in
did include a clause that where it was established that the
officer was not entitled to be indemnified under the indemnity clause,
relieved from its obligation in respect of that claim and the officer was
required to refund to NPAL all amounts incurred
by NPAL under the deed in
respect of that claim. The decision at first instance upheld Mr
Leckenby’s present entitlement to
be indemnified by NPAL for his ongoing
legal costs, as s 199A(3)(b) did not deal with the question of indemnity in
respect of costs
prior to verdict. That decision was upheld on appeal.
[58] It was held
(at [66]) by Tate JA (with whom Whelan and Ferguson JJA
agreed) that it would have been apparent to a reasonable person in the
of NPAL and Mr Leckenby, at the time of entering into the deed, that,
in the eventuality of a criminal prosecution, unless there
was an agreement for
ongoing legal costs to be paid prior to verdict, Mr Leckenby could incur
significant liability for those costs
in a manner that could be potentially
compromising of his defence. From the language of the indemnity clause and the
was intended to secure, Tate JA observed (at [67]) that adopting
a business like approach to the language of the indemnity clause
and the objects
it intended to secure, “the parties to the Deed are to be taken to have
intended to make an arrangement which
conferred upon Leckenby the maximum
protection available while respecting, in particular, the prohibition in
s 199A(3)(b)”.
It was also observed (at [69]) that without the
obligation to refund in the event of a guilty verdict, an agreement to make
for the legal costs incurred in defending criminal proceedings would
have violated the prohibition in s 199A(3)(b) of the Act.
inclusion of clause 4.3 in the deed made clear that the respondent was entitled
to receive payments for her legal costs in
defending the criminal proceedings
prior to a guilty verdict. The appellant’s approach on the appeal to
the construction of
clause 4.3 does not reflect the terms of the deed or
its purpose which is gleaned from clause B under the heading
“Background”
and the content of the deed. The operative provisions
as to the entitlements of a director are set out in
of the deed.
Relevantly, apart from the prohibitions in s 199A of the Act, the
respondent is entitled under clause 2.2 of the deed
to a full indemnity from the
appellant against “all legal costs” incurred by the respondent in
respect of defending or
resisting an action for a liability (as defined in
the deed) incurred by the respondent in connection with, or as a consequence of,
acting in the capacity of a director of a group company. There is no limitation
of reasonableness in respect of the indemnity for
legal costs under
clause 2.2. Subject to the prospect of future repayments under clause 4.5,
clause 4.3 provides a specific mechanism
for the appellant to advance to
the respondent “any legal costs reasonably incurred or expected to be
incurred by the Director
in defending an action for a Liability incurred or
allegedly incurred by the Director as an officer of a Group Company”.
4.3 would only operate as an interim measure for advancing funds for
legal costs, if there were ultimately a guilty verdict. If
there were not a
guilty verdict, a shortfall between the advances under clause 4.3 and the full
indemnity to which the director is
entitled under clause 2.2 would be paid under
clause 4.1 of the deed. Clause 4.3 is the means to give effect to the
indemnity under
clause 2.2 while the defence of the proceeding for the
liability that is the subject of the claim for indemnity is unresolved.
[60] The terms
of clause 4.3 in conjunction with clause 4.5 ensure that the full indemnity that
is otherwise provided by the appellant
to the respondent under clause 2.2
complies with the prohibitions found in s 199A and
of the Act on
a company’s paying for its director’s legal costs in circumstances
such as where the director may ultimately
be found guilty of the relevant
criminal offence when the prohibition against providing that indemnity and
requirement for repayment
of the amount paid on account of the director’s
legal costs must then be given effect.
[61] Even though
the appellant accepts that the respondent has an interest in obtaining advances
to conduct any criminal defence,
it submits it has an interest in ensuring that
it is not exposed to an unconstrained obligation to make any unsecured advances
a director who may not ultimately be entitled to an indemnity and that
the balancing of these interests has been struck in clause
[62] The deed
was drafted to ensure compliance with s 199A and
of the Act and
to that end does not provide for any security for advances of funds for legal
costs under clause 4.3 and for no interest
to be payable unless the event
occurs which disqualifies the director from the entitlement to be indemnified
for legal costs under
the deed. At the time of entry into the deed, the
appellant accepted the risk of the potential exposure which is the subject of
the appellant’s concern in this proceeding by its agreement to make
unsecured advances to the respondent by the express terms
of the deed. It is
also relevant to the interpretation of clause 4.3 that the obligation on the
respondent to advance funds to the
appellant for legal costs reasonably incurred
or expected to be incurred in defending the criminal charges must be made within
short time period specified of five business days after the director
provides the company with invoices or other relevant evidence
of the costs
incurred or expected to be incurred. The parties’ agreement embodied in
the terms of the deed reflects how their
respective interests were balanced.
There was no error in the primary judge’s construction of clause 4.3(a) of
the deed set
out at [172], [173] and [176] of the reasons. The agreement by the
company to advance funds on a progressive basis under clause
4.3 for the
director’s legal costs of defending the criminal proceeding while the
proceeding was on foot and before a verdict
of guilty to which the indemnity
under clause 2.2 of the deed applied favoured the director to the full extent
permitted by s 199A
of the Act.
apparent from the respective interpretations given by the parties to
paragraph 1(b) of the declarations that there is some
ambiguity in how the
declaration was expressed. It was intended to dispose of the appellant’s
argument that the reasonableness
of the expectation of incurring costs was
dependent on the reasonableness of the costs expected to be incurred. It is
arguable that
the terms of paragraph 1(b) do not preclude the reasonableness of
the expectation being affected by the reasonableness of the costs
expected to be
incurred as one of the factors affecting the reasonableness of the
respondent’s expectation of the legal costs
to be incurred. It is also
arguable that the declaration precludes the reasonableness of the legal costs
expected to be incurred
to be considered solely by reference to the
reasonableness of the costs.
[64] In the
example of costs expected to be incurred that were exorbitant or extravagant on
the face of the claim, a reason the expectation
of incurring those costs might
not be reasonable might simply be the unreasonableness of the quantum of the
costs (rather than the
reasonableness of the step in the litigation proposed to
be undertaken by the director). Even though the question of reasonableness
would still apply to the respondent’s expectation of incurring those costs
(as recognised at [174] of the reasons), the view
that the respondent’s
expectation was unreasonable might be solely due to the unreasonableness of the
quantum of the costs
expected to be incurred. The application of clause 4.3(a)
of the deed to that example would not conform with the terms of paragraph
of the declarations. In that example, the obligation under clause 4.3(a)
would not arise because the respondent’s expectation
of incurring those
costs would not be reasonable because the costs expected to be incurred were so
unreasonable. This example illustrates,
as the appellant submits, that the
absolute terms in which the declaration is expressed are too wide. No doubt the
declaration was
made to reinforce the proper interpretation of clause 4.3 that
was denied by the appellant before the primary judge (but is now accepted
appellant) that the criterion was the reasonableness of the respondent’s
expectation of the costs to be incurred rather
than simply the reasonableness of
the costs themselves. This has resulted in paragraph 1(b) of the declarations
being wider than
the proper interpretation of clause 4.3 warrants. In other
words, paragraph 1(b) does not reflect the proper interpretation of clause
[65] The issue
then arises whether paragraph 1(b) of the declarations should be amended or set
aside. This Court has the power to
amend the declaration made by the primary
judge pursuant to r 766(1)(a) or (d) of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
the Court considers amendment is required and that it is appropriate to exercise
the discretion to make the declaration
in amended terms. The modification to
paragraph 1(b) proposed by the respondent in the supplementary submissions
is merely to reflect
the one example that was the subject of submissions on the
appeal that showed why the terms of the declaration were too wide. The
amendment is not required for resolving any dispute between the parties as to an
extravagant or exorbitant claim for prospective
legal costs expected to be
incurred by the respondent. The main contention between the parties before the
primary judge on the construction
of clause 4.3(a) that the advance must be made
for legal costs reasonably expected to be incurred by the director was resolved
the declaration made in paragraph 1(a) of the declarations. Paragraph 1(b)
should therefore be set aside rather than amended to
deal with hypothetical
scenarios not the subject of any current dispute between the
Does clause 4.3 require consistency between any term
imposed under clause 4.3(b) and the appellant’s obligations under
[66] Clause
4.3(a) of the deed provides for the timing when the appellant must advance the
amount on account of legal costs sought
by the respondent after the respondent
provides the appellant with invoices or other relevant evidence of the costs
reasonably incurred
or reasonably expected to be incurred that are the subject
of the indemnity under clause 2.2. The subject matter of clause 4.3(b)
advance of funds under clause 4.3 which refers to the advance of funds
which the appellant is obliged to make under clause
4.3(a). Clause 4.3(b) is
concerned merely with the mechanics of the advance of funds made under clause
4.3(a) and does not in its
terms qualify the obligation under clause 4.3(a).
The obligation to advance the amount of legal costs under clause 4.3(a) is
implemented
by the making of the advance under clause 4.3(b) on terms
determined by the appellant to be reasonable in the circumstances but which
not detract from the obligation under clause 4.3(a). Apart from the examples of
terms that the primary judge considered might
reasonably be imposed under
clause 4.3(b) (set out at [192] of the reasons), an important term that
might be considered under clause
4.3(b) is the interest to be paid on any
advance, if repayment under clause 4.5(a) were required.
possible for a term to be imposed under clause 4.3(b) on the advance which is
not covered by the scope of the obligation
under clause 4.3(a) but is determined
by the appellant to be reasonable in the circumstances of making the advance of
funds which
the appellant is obliged to do under clause 4.3(a). The example
given above of a term imposed under clause 4.3(b) specifying the
rate of the
interest to be paid on any advance, if repayment under clause 4.5(a) were
required, illustrates the point. The language
used in paragraph 1(c) of the
declarations which suggests that any term imposed by the appellant under clause
4.3(b) must be consistent
with its obligations under clause 4.3(a) is not
entirely apt to reflect the relationship between the obligation under clause
to advance funds and the imposition of terms under clause 4.3(b) on
the advance of those funds. Where the proposed term is covered
by the scope of
the obligation under clause 4.3(a), it would be more accurately expressed that
any term was not contrary to the obligation
under clause 4.3(a). A small
amendment only is required to paragraph 1(c) to reflect the circumstance that
consistency between the
term imposed under clause 4.3(b) with the obligation
under clause 4.3(a) is not required where the proposed term is not covered by
the scope of, and does not otherwise detract from, the obligation under clause
4.3(a). This can be achieved by deleting the words
in paragraph 1(c) of
“be consistent with” and replacing them with “not be contrary
to”. The conclusion of
the primary judge (at [190]-[191] of the reasons)
as to the relationship between clause 4.3(a) and clause 4.3(b) remains intact
the slight tweaking of the wording suggested above. Because the amendment
is minor, it is appropriate to exercise the discretion
to make the amendment and
otherwise leave paragraph 1(c) of the declaration in place.
it open to the appellant to impose proposed terms 1 and 2 under
clause 4.3(b)?
[68] For the
reasons given by the primary judge (at [210] and [213] of the reasons), both
proposed terms 1 and 2 detract from the
obligation under clause 4.3(a). The
construction of clause 4.3 set out above means that if the subject matter of the
term proposed
under clause 4.3(b) is within the scope of the obligation imposed
under clause 4.3(a) and qualifies that obligation, the term cannot
be imposed.
It was appropriate for the primary judge to make a declaration in relation to
proposed terms 1 and 2.
[69] As the
subject matter of proposed terms 1 and 2 is within the scope of the obligation
under clause 4.3(a), the use of the words
of “are inconsistent” in
paragraph 2 of the declarations is accurate. The appellant does not succeed on
ground 3 of
its appeal against paragraph 2 of the
declarations.
Did clause 4.3(b) allow the appellant to impose
proposed term 3?
criterion for the imposition of a term under clause 4.3(b) is that the appellant
determines the term “to be reasonable
in the circumstances”. Where
a contract requires one party to form an opinion as to whether something is
reasonable, the obligation
on the party is to form the opinion acting reasonably
and fairly on the material before it:
Hannover Life Re of Australasia Ltd v
[2017] NSWCA 233
, [9] and [64].
[71] The issue
of construction raised by the parties’ submission is whether terms
proposed under clause 4.3(b) of the deed for
anticipated advances can be
notified by the appellant to the respondent before the obligation to pay the
advances under clause 4.3(a)
arises. The primary judge did not directly
address this issue but implicitly did so in [192] of the reasons. The examples
given in [192] that in certain circumstances could be reasonably
imposed by the appellant are ones that could be specified as applying
future advances. The example given at
above of the interest to be paid on
an advance, if repayment were required, is one that could have been notified in
anticipation
of any advance being made as one that would apply to all
[72] Apart from
this construction issue, the other arguments raised by the parties in dealing
with proposed term 3 were done so in
the context of the particular requests made
by the appellant for legal costs expected to be incurred in anticipation of the
commencement
of two lengthy criminal trials. As those trials are now no longer
proceeding, there is no utility in giving any further consideration
5-7 of the cross appeal.
Other issues on the cross appeal
[73] Grounds 1-4
of the cross appeal which concern the respondent’s complaint that the
primary judge did not deal with her alternative
arguments for why the appellant
was not entitled to impose proposed terms 1 and 2 can be disposed of
[74] The effect
of paragraph 2 of the declarations was to preclude the imposition by the
appellant of proposed terms 1 and 2 under
clause 4.3(b) of the deed for
inconsistency with clause 4.3(a). That declaration has been maintained on this
appeal. It was not
necessary for the primary judge to deal with other reasons
put forward by the respondent for making a declaration that would have
effect of precluding the imposition of proposed terms 1 and 2. It is also not
necessary in those circumstances to deal
with the respondent’s alternative
arguments in respect of proposed terms 1 and 2 on this
appellant’s notice of appeal seeks an order against the respondent for the
costs of the appeal and the proceeding before
the primary judge. The
respondent’s notice of cross appeal seeks an order for the costs of the
appeal and the cross appeal.
[76] The parties
provided written submissions to the primary judge on the question of the costs
of the proceeding after the reasons
were published. The primary judge’s
decision on costs was reserved when this appeal was heard. On 23 May 2025, the
judge ordered the appellant pay 85 per cent of the respondent’s
costs of the proceeding on the standard basis to be assessed:
Hutson v G8
Education Ltd
[2025] QSC 107.
There has been no appeal filed in respect of
that order for costs. The order for costs made by the primary judge cannot be
with on this appeal.
[77] The parties
did not foreshadow in their written submissions for the appeal or at the hearing
of the appeal that they were seeking
leave to make submissions on costs after
the hearing of the appeal. The usual course would be for the Court to deal with
of the appeal and the cross appeal at the same time as disposing of
the appeal and the cross appeal.
[78] Even though
the appellant has succeeded in its argument that paragraph 1(b) of the
declarations should not have been made in
absolute terms, the respondent has
remained largely successful on her approach to the interpretation of clause
4.3(a) of the deed.
The parties have had mixed success on the remainder of the
issues in the appeal. The respondent was unsuccessful in her cross appeal
respect of proposed term 3 and little time was spent on the other matters
raised in the cross appeal.
[79] In the
circumstances and without having the benefit of submissions from the parties by
reference to the Court’s conclusions
on the various issues, I am inclined
to make no order as to costs in respect of both the appeal and the cross appeal.
If either or
both parties wish to seek a different order, directions can be made
to facilitate that opportunity.
[80] The orders
which should be made are:
allowed in respect of paragraphs (b) and (c) of order 1 made on 19 December
aside paragraph (b) of order 1 made on 19 December 2024.
paragraph (c) of order 1 made on 19 December 2024 so that it becomes paragraph
(b) and the words “not be contrary to”
are substituted for the words
“be consistent with”.
otherwise dismissed.
appeal dismissed.
no submissions on the costs of the appeal and the cross appeal are filed on or
before 10 days after the delivery of these reasons,
there will be no order as to
the costs of the appeal and the cross appeal.
at least one of the parties files submissions on costs on or before 10 days
after the delivery of these reasons, the costs of the
appeal and the cross
appeal will be reserved to be determined on the papers.
[81] GOTTERSON
I agree with the orders proposed by the President and with her
Honour’s reasons for them.
[82] BRADLEY
I agree with the reasons of the President and with the orders her Honour
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (308 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter