URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2003/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
VGM, Re [2003] QGAAT 22 (21 November 2003)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL,
VGM, Re [2003] QGAAT22
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
The Appointment of a Guardian and Administrator for Mr VGM.
Leave for Mrs ACM to withdraw as Attorney
In the Matter of Mr VGM
MATTER NUMBER:
2003/2718, 2003/2380, 2003/2381
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, Brisbane
DATE OF HEARING:
14 October 2003
DATE OF ORDER:
14 October 2003
DATE OF REASONS:
21 November 2003
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
J Allen, Presiding Member
R Stafford, Member
J Ford, Member
CATCHWORDS:
ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY-IMPAIRED CAPACITY-LEAVE TO RESIGN AS
ATTORNEY-ADMINISTRATORS-GUARDIANS-STATUTORY HEALTH ATTORNEY -elderly
appointed an attorney under EPA while resident in Victoria-adult now resident in
Qld-attorney ill and unable to continue-Tribunal’s
leave for attorney to
resign-need for administrator-no need for guardian.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Attorney Act
Instruments Act
GUARDIANSHIP
That the application for guardianship for
Mr VGM is dismissed.
ADMINISTRATION
That the Public Trustee of Queensland is
appointed administrator for Mr VGM for all financial
That the administrator will provide a
financial management plan to the Tribunal within four (4)
The Tribunal directs the administrator to
provide accounts to the Tribunal as requested.
Unless the Tribunal orders otherwise,
this order remains current for one (1) year.
WITHDRAW AS ATTORNEY
The Tribunal gives Mrs ACM leave to
resign as attorney for Mr VGM.
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
Mr VGM is 84 years old and until
recently was resident in Victoria.
Mr VGM granted an enduring power of
attorney for financial matters to his daughter-in-law, Mrs ACM on 4 July
Mrs ACM had been assisting Mr VGM
informally with his financial affairs for some time and commenced acting under
the enduring power
of attorney in February 2003 due to Mr VGM beginning to
suffer the effects of Alzheimer’s disease.
Mr VGM moved to Queensland at around the
same time as the enduring power of attorney was activated and now resides at a
Village at Rothwell.
Mrs ACM is experiencing her own health
problems and as Mr VGM is now in Queensland she has requested leave to withdraw
as attorney
for Mr VGM.
Mr VGM has three children living in
Queensland and one of them, Mr DGM has made application to the Tribunal for
himself and his sister,
Mrs MAH to be appointed as guardians and administrators
for their father
THE PARTIES
Active parties present at the hearing
were Mr VGM, Mr DGM and Mrs MAH.
The Tribunal was satisfied that notice
section 118
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Act) was given to all relevant parties.
THE ISSUES AND THE LEGISLATION
These applications are made under
of the act, which provides that:
12 Appointment
The tribunal may, by order, appoint a guardian for a
personal matter, or an administrator for a financial matter, for an adult if
tribunal is satisfied—
(a) the adult has impaired capacity for the matter; and
(b) there is a need for a decision in relation to the matter or the adult
is likely to do something in relation to the matter that
involves, or is likely
to involve, unreasonable risk to the adult’s health, welfare or property;
(c) without an appointment—
(i) the adult’s needs will not be adequately met; or
(ii) the adult’s interests will not be adequately protected.
The appointment may be on terms considered appropriate
by the tribunal.
The tribunal may make the order on its own initiative or
on the application of the adult, the adult guardian or an interested
In accordance with
section 14(1)
the Act the Tribunal may only appoint a person as guardian or administrator for
a matter if the Tribunal considers the person
appropriate for appointment having
regard to the matters mentioned in
section 15(1)
which provides
15 Appropriateness considerations
In deciding whether a person is appropriate for
appointment as a guardian or administrator for an adult, the tribunal must
the following matters
(“appropriateness
considerations
(a) the general principles and whether the person is likely to apply
(b) if the appointment is for a health matter—the health care
principle and whether the person is likely to apply it;
(c) the extent to which the adult’s and person’s interests are
likely to conflict;
(d) whether the adult and person are compatible including, for example,
whether the person has appropriate communication skills or
appropriate cultural
or social knowledge or experience, to be compatible with the adult;
(e) if more than 1 person is to be appointed—whether the persons are
compatible;
(f) whether the person would be available and accessible to the
(g) the person’s appropriateness and competence to perform functions
and exercise powers under an appointment order.
In accordance with
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
an enduring power of attorney made in another
State, Victoria, which complies with the requirements of the legislation in the
State is treated as an enduring power of attorney made under and in
compliance with that Act. The relevant legislation for Victoria
Instruments Act 1958
If the Tribunal decides that Mr VGM has impaired
capacity then his attorney may only resign with the leave of the Tribunal in
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Tribunal jurisdiction to give leave to resign is given in
section 109A
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
The issues for the Tribunal are
therefore as follows:
Whether Mr VGM has impaired capacity for
personal matters and financial matters and if
Whether the attorney for Mr VGM should
be given leave to resign as attorney and if
Whether there is a need for decision
in relation to personal matters and financial matters and if
Whether without appointment of a
guardian or administrator Mr VGM’s needs will not be adequately met and
protected and if so;
Who is the most
appropriate person to be appointed guardian and or administrator taking into
account the general principles and the
appropriateness considerations under the
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL
The Tribunal relied upon the following
Application for Guardianship and
Administration received 6 July
Enduring power of attorney dated 4
Letter from proposed
administrator dated 16 July 2003;
heath professional – Dr Peter Buchanan dated 28 June
Letter from Dr John Lazdins dated 19
February 2003;
received 11 August 2003;
Mrs ACM dated 2 August 2003;
requesting leave to withdraw as attorney dated 2 August
Report form Account Plan dated 19
Financial Management Plan from
Mrs MAH dated 28 July 2003;
Management Plan from Mr DGM dated 30 July 2003.
The Tribunal heard oral evidence from
Mr VGM, Mr DGM and Mrs MAH.
Mr VGM was able to advise the Tribunal
that he now lived in Queensland but could not remember the name of the nursing
living in. He did not think he had to pay anything to live in the
nursing home though he had money. He stated that he does not go
out as he does
not have a car because the government told him he could not
Mr DGM and Mrs MAH made statements to
the following effect in regard to Mr VGM’s
Mr VGM has trouble naming things
and where they go.
Mr VGM also forgets
peoples names and introduces his children to people
repeatedly;
While in Melbourne Mr VGM had
paid the same account 3 times and has trouble counting
Mr DGM stated that his
father’s conversation has dropped out and he only talks about those things
around him but that Mr VGM
is in good physical
They both supported the
doctor’s reports in regard to Mr VGM’s lack of
The parties made statements to the
following effect in regard to the need for a
Mr VGM confirmed that he was
happy where he was living now and gets on well with the staff and
Mr DGM stated that he was happy
with the nursing home and that he works at a school close by which is run by the
same church group
as the nursing home;
MAH stated that she is happy with the care and accommodation provided by the
nursing home;
Mrs DGM and Mrs MAH were
nominated as next of kin at the nursing home and were comfortable with their
role as statutory health attorney
for Mr VGM.
There were no other guardianship issues
raised by the parties.
The parties made statements to the
following effect in regard to the need for and appropriateness considerations in
respect of the
appointment of an administrator:
Mr DGM and Mrs MAH confirmed that they
had received all of the financial information in respect of Mr VGM from the
attorney some weeks
before the hearing and that they were satisfied with the way
she acted as attorney for Mr VGM;
and Mrs MAH confirmed that the nursing home bond in the amount of $107,000 had
been paid from the Bank of Melbourne account
and that the balance in that
account was now approximately $16,000;
also confirmed that the Accountplan investment recommendations had been followed
and a Challenger Life annuity had been purchased
by Mrs ACM acting under the
enduring power of attorney;
Mr DGM and Mrs
MAH were unable to give details in regard to the fees charged by the investment
company or the annuity provider in
respect of the annuity and whether or not
there was a residual payment in respect of the death of Mr VGM and how an
annuity worked;
Mr DGM advised that Account
Plan was recommended to them by the manager of the nursing
Mr DGM stated that he thought there
was loan by Mr VGM to Mrs MAH’s husband Mr EH in the amount of
Mrs MAH after conferring with her
husband by telephone advised the Tribunal that the loan was in the amount of
$50,000, it was at
7% interest and was repaid in the amount of $292 per month.
She also thought that it may be secured over her and her husband’s
Mr DGM confirmed that Mr VGM made a
loan of $4,000.00 to Mr DGM’s son and that due to his son currently being
unemployed there
were no repayments being made in respect of the
Mr DGM and Mrs MAH advised the
Tribunal that they did not know the current amount of pension payable to Mr
Mr DGM and Mrs MAH were able to
confirm that the nursing home fees were paid by direct debit out of the bank
account but they were
not able to advise the amount of the nursing home
Mr DGM and Mrs MAH were both
concerned in regard to the fees, which the Public Trustee of Queensland would
charge if they were appointed.
DISCUSSION OF EVIDENCE
The Tribunal has carefully examined all
of the written medical evidence in relation to Mr VGM’s capacity for
decision-making.
Dr John Lazdins in his letter stated that Mr VGM suffers
progressive Alzheimer’s dementia. Dr Gunaratnam stated in his report
Mr VGM’s presentation was not incompatible with Alzheimer’s disease
and Dr Buchanan stated that the cause of Mr
VGM’s impaired capacity was
dementia. Drs Buchanan and Gunaratnam both indicated that Mr VGM has no
short-term memory. This
was evident from Mr VGM’s results on the Mini
Mental State Examination performed by Dr Gunaratnam on 23 January 2002 where
scored 22/30 and the doctor commented that Mr VGM’s short-term memory was
non-existent. Dr Buchanan also performed a Mini
Mental State Examination and the
result was 24/30 and in his report he stated that Mr VGM does not retain
information on which to
base decisions, at all.
The oral evidence from Mr DGM and Mrs
MAH supported the medical evidence and they stated that they agreed with the
conclusions that Mr VGM did not have decision-making capacity.
The Tribunal therefore accepts the medical evidence in respect of
capacity to make decisions.
In regard to the need for a guardian
there was agreement among the parties that Mr VGM’s current accommodation
was appropriate
and the only personal decisions, which would need to be made,
are those relating to health matters. There was no evidence that there
conflict within the family in regard to Mr VGM’s health care, the feedback
forms provided by Mrs ACM and Ms CC both
supported Mr DGM and Mrs MAH, and the
Tribunal was impressed with the caring manner towards Mr VGM displayed by Mr DGM
and Mrs MAH
at the hearing. Both of them displayed to the Tribunal that they
took an active interest in their father’s care and that they
appropriate decisions in regard to his future care.
Mr VGM’s financial affairs have
been managed until now by his attorney, Mrs ACM. Mrs ACM has made a request for
approval to
resign as attorney for Mr VGM due to her own ill health and the fact
that he is now residing in Queensland while she continues to
live in Victoria.
It is clear that Mr VGM has a need for
management of his financial affairs, he has substantial funds, which require
investment, and
is also in receipt of a pension and has commitments to the
nursing home, which need to be met. Mr VGM has also made loans to family
in particular one of $50,000 to Mrs MAH’s husband and one of $4,000 to Mr
In relation to the most appropriate
appointment for administrator the Tribunal was concerned about the lack of
knowledge that Mr DGM
and Mrs MAH displayed about their father’s financial
affairs in particular they did not know how much he received for the pension
the current fee he was paying to the nursing home. They were also unable to
advise the Tribunal of the details in regard to the
loan to Mr EH. Further the
interest payable on the loan to Mr EH has not been disclosed on the financial
management plan nor to the
financial advisors, Accountplan. This information may
have affected the advice which Accountplan gave and may have an effect on Mr
VGM’s entitlement to the pension. There is no suggestion that this
information was deliberately withheld only that its importance
may not have been
realised and that the details were not known by those persons who should know
them if they are going to be able
to competently manage Mr VGM's financial
affairs. Mr DGM and Mrs MAH were also not able to give the Tribunal any details
to the annuity product in which the bulk of Mr VGM’s available
funds had been invested.
The fact that substantial loans have
been made to family members also raises the issue of possible conflict
transactions in respect
of the repaying or forgiveness of the
The Public Trustee of Queensland is an
independent professional administrator with experience in dealing with the
financial affairs
of people with the financial position of Mr
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Tribunal made the following
findings of fact:
Mr VGM is 84 years old
and has progressive Alzheimer’s disease with particular short term memory
Mr VGM lacks insight, has no
learning ability and no decision making
Mr VGM executed an enduring power
of attorney while resident in Victoria appointing his daughter-in-law Mrs ACM as
his attorney for
financial matters;
has moved to Queensland from Victoria and is a permanent resident at the
Retirement Village;
Mrs ACM is suffering
from cancer and is unable to continue as Mr VGM’s
Mr VGM’s family are not in
conflict in regard to decisions which may need to be made for Mr VGM and Mr DGM
and Mrs MAH are nominated
as next of kin at Mr VGM’s nursing
Mr VGM has made loans to family
members, in the amount of $50,000 to his son-in-law, Mr EH and $4,000.00 to the
son of Mr DGM;
Mr VGM is in receipt of the
pension and has substantial assets which he is unable to
APPLICATION OF THE LAW
Section 12(1)(a)
of the Act requires
that the Tribunal in considering whether or not to appoint either a guardian or
administrator for an adult must
first be satisfied that the adult lacks capacity
for the matter. Having regard to the finding of fact that Mr VGM has progressive
Alzheimer’s disease the Tribunal is satisfied that Mr VGM lacks capacity
for both personal and financial maters.
Having been satisfied that Mr VGM lacks
capacity the Tribunal must then satisfy itself in respect of whether there is a
need for the
appointment of a guardian and or administrator under
of the Act.
The Tribunal notes that there is
currently an attorney acting for Mr VGM and the need if any for an appointment
in respect of financial
matter arises because the attorney wishes to resign. The
Tribunal having examined the enduring power of attorney executed by Mr VGM
July 1999 is satisfied that the document complies with the requirements of
section 114
Instruments Act 1958
and that it must be
recognised in accordance with
Powers of Attorney Act
8 as an enduring power of attorney made under and in compliance with the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Having regard to the findings of fact
that Mrs ACM is suffering ill health and resides in Victoria whereas Mr VGM now
resides in Queensland,
the Tribunal acting in accordance with its jurisdiction
section 109A
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
, will grant approval for
Mrs ACM to resign as attorney for Mr VGM.
In respect of personal matters the
Tribunal has found that Mr VGM’s accommodation needs are being met and
that the only personal
decisions, which will be required to be made, are in
regard to health matters. Having regard to the finding of fact that Mr DGM and
Mrs MAH are nominated as next of kin at the nursing home and there is no
conflict within the family the Tribunal is satisfied that
the statutory health
attorney powers available under the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
appropriately in respect of Mr VGM. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that
there is no need for the appointment of a
guardian as Mr VGM’s personal
needs are being met appropriately by his family acting informally and as
statutory health attorneys.
The decision not to make an appointment in these
circumstances is in accordance with the principle set out in
Act that the right of an adult with impaired capacity to make decisions should
be restricted to the least possible extent.
As there is no need for the appointment
of a guardian for Mr VGM that application will be
In respect of financial matters the
Tribunal is satisfied that there is a need for the appointment of an
administrator as Mr VGM has
investments, which require management and a pension
and nursing home fees, which need to be maintained.
Having found that there is a need for
the appointment of an administrator the Tribunal must then decide which of the
available appointees
should be appointed to that role. The tribunal in
considering this question must have regard to the matters set out in
of the Act.
In particular here paragraph 15(1)(g)
requires that the Tribunal must consider the persons appropriateness and
competence to perform
functions and exercise powers under an appointment order.
The Tribunal was unable to be satisfied by Mr DGM and Mrs MAH that they
requisite level of competence to mange their father’s financial affairs.
They were unable to display an adequate knowledge
of his current position in
regard to his pension and nursing home fees. They did not know the details in
respect of such things as
the fees payable in respect of or the residual value
of the annuity in which the bulk of Mr VGM’s funds had been invested.
were also not able to provide details in respect of a loan to a family member
without consulting third parties and they have
not taken into account payments
of interest under the loan when giving instructions to financial advisors and
this may have resulted
in a pension overpayment.
The Tribunal is satisfied having regard
to the above that a professional administrator is required to be appointed for
the Tribunal is further satisfied that the Public Trustee will act in
accordance with the General Principles in accordance with
section 11(1)
Act and in Mr VGM’s best interest.
The Tribunal therefore appoints the
Public Trustee as Mr VGM’s administrator.
The appointment of the Public Trustee
as administrator for Mr VGM will be for a period of one year on the basis that
the family will
then have a chance to increase their level of knowledge in
regard to Mr VGM’s financial affairs and those matters which need
taken into account to enable proper advice to be obtained in respect of his
financial affairs and necessary matters for disclosure
to organisations such as
the Department of Veteran’s Affairs. Then when upon a review of the
appointment at the end of the
one year period family members may be able to be
considered favourably by the Tribunal for appointment as administrator for Mr
The Tribunal has made this document available to you because you have a
sufficient interest in the proceedings to receive it. The
Guardianship and
Administration Act
contains provisions to protect the privacy of people involved
in the Tribunal’s proceedings. You are requested to respect this
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (123 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter