URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRAT/2009/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:50:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stewards of Queensland Racing Limited v Stephenson [2009] QRAT 16 (8 August 2009)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
NOTICE OF DECISION
: 5 August 2009
Mr Wade Birch, Chief Steward of Queensland for and
on behalf of the Stewards of Queensland Racing Limited
: Mr Richard William Stephenson
APPEAL FROM
: Appeal from the decision of the First Level Appeals
Committee to uphold an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of the
Appellant that the Appellant breached AR175 (a) and the imposition of a penalty
of 2 months suspension.
BREACH OF RULE
: AR175 (a)
: Appeal dismissed.
APPEARANCES
: A J MacSporran SC, instructed by Patrick Murphy Solicitor
appeared on behalf of the Appellant.
J E Murdoch SC, appeared on behalf of the Respondent.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Mr Leo Williams AO - Chairman
Mr Brock Miller - Deputy Chairman
Mr Dennis Standfield - Member
The Notice of Appeal filed on 9 April 2009 stated the Appellant as Queensland
Racing Limited. Section 167(2) of the
Racing Act 2002
Act”) requires that it be a Steward that appeals to the Tribunal. The
Tribunal grants leave for Mr Wade Birch,
Chief Steward of Queensland for and on
behalf of the Stewards of Queensland Racing Limited to be substituted as the
Appellant in
the Appeal.
The Appeal in this matter is against the decision of the First Level Appeals
Committee “the First Level” delivered on
26 March 2009 to uphold the
Appeal of the Respondent against the finding by the Stewards on 9 February 2009
that the Respondent had
breached AR175(a) with respect to improper behaviour and
the imposition of a 2 month suspension as penalty.
The First Level has provided detailed reasons “First Level
Reasons” for their decision and the Tribunal commends the First
members for providing their reasons explaining the basis of their decision.
In this Appeal however, as in any Appeal, it is incumbent on the Tribunal
pursuant to Section 172(3) of the Act to give its decision
unaffected by the decision appealed against, on the material before
the entity that made the decision and any further evidence allowed
AR 175(a) provides:-
AR175. The Committee of any Club or the Stewards may
(a) any person who in their opinion has been guilty of any dishonest,
corrupt, fraudulent, improper or dishonourable action or practice
in connection
with racing.”
The particulars provided by the Stewards at their Inquiry when alleging the
Respondent breached AR175(a) reads:-
“The particulars of the charge are, that you Mr Stephenson, a
licensed trainer with Queensland Racing Limited, did act improperly
in relation
to the sale of a thoroughbred race horse “Cotton Candy”, in that you
failed to disclose a fee received for
your part in the sale of that horse, and
furthermore deceived part owner Mr Dennis Curran when questioned in relation to
received for “Cotton Candy”.”
The factual matters relating to the particulars are set out in detail in the
First Level Reasons and can be summarised as:-
Mr Stephenson was in April 2008 the licensed trainer of the horse Cotton
Candy which had a number of owners of which Mr Dennis Curran
had a one eighth
share. The owners decided to sell the horse and asked Mr Stephenson to do
so on their behalf. Mr Stephenson sold
the horse to interests in Mount Isa. The
sale monies received for the horse was $5,000.00 of which Mr Stephenson
accounted $4,000.00
to the owners and kept $1,000.00 for himself which he did
not disclose to the owners.
After the sale, Mr Dennis Curran became aware that the horse was sold for
more than $4,000.00 and on 29 October 2008 faxed a letter
of complaint to
Queensland Racing stating that the “secret commission” received by
Mr Stephenson should be investigated.
The Stewards carried out investigations and commenced and Inquiry on 12
January 2009 which concluded on 9 February 2009 when they
found that Mr
Stephenson had breached AR175(a).
At the Stewards Inquiry and at the First Level Appeal, Mr Stephenson
submitted both through written submissions and through his Counsel
SC, that the Stewards did not have jurisdiction to investigate the matter and
lay a charge against Mr Stephenson under
the Australian Rules of Racing.
The First Level decided the Stewards did not have jurisdiction and upheld the
Appeal. The jurisdiction
issue considered by the First Level will be referred
to later in these reasons.
In view of the First Level decision that there was no jurisdiction, the First
Level did not propose to deal with deciding on the factual
matters which were in
dispute but did comment in the 10
paragraph on page
18 of their decision as follows:-
“Had we ruled the Stewards had jurisdiction to deal with the
matter, we would have had difficulty in resolving the
without having the benefit of seeing the witnesses give evidence
in chief and under cross examination.”
The Appellant’s grounds of appeal on the Notice of Appeal are stated
“The Committee erred in its interpretation of AR10 and AR175(a) in
concluding that the sale of the horse by Mr. Stephenson as
agent for the owners
was not a “matter or incident related to racing” nor a matter
“in connection with racing”
such that the Stewards had no
At the Tribunal hearing on 5 May 2009 Mr MacSporran SC for the Appellant
provided an Outline of Submissions with respect to the jurisdiction
issue and in
the Outline of Submissions referred to the Australian Bloodstock Code of
Practice (“the Code”). This was
not referred to at the First Level
Appeal. The Appellant’s Outline of Submissions with regard to that Code
“4. The Appeal Committee did not have regard to the
“Australian Bloodstock Code of Practice” published by the Australian
Racing Board in 2005.
5. The Code deals with the obligations of agents such as the respondent
in acting in the course of the sale of horses.
6. By virtue of AR7(s), Queensland Racing Limited is given power
“to investigate alleged breaches of a code of practice published
Australian Racing Board and to warn-off or punish any person who it finds to
have committed a breach of such a code of practice.”
7. Specific power is therefore given to the appellant to investigate
matters the subject of this appeal and the question of jurisdiction
decided in favour of the appellant.”
At the hearing on 5 May 2009 Mr Murdoch SC for the Respondent did not accept
that the Code has application.
The Code is stated to be adopted and published by the Australian Racing Board
and is specifically referred to in the Australian Rules
of Racing in AR7 and
AR175 which state respectively:-
“AR.7. A Principal Racing Authority shall have the control and
general supervision of racing within its territory. Such Principal
Authority, in furtherance and not in limitation of all powers conferred on it or
implied by these Rules, shall have power,
in its discretion:-
(s) To investigate alleged breaches of a Code of Practice published by
the Australian Racing Board to warn-off or punish any person
it finds to have
committed a breach of such a Code of Practice.
[added 1.5.05]
AR.175 The Committee of any Club or the Stewards may punish:
(v) Any person who commits a breach of a Code of Practice published by
the Australian Racing Board.
[added 1.5.05]”
The purpose of the Code is set out in the document itself under the heading
“Introduction” which states:-
Introduction
The Code of Practice sets out the principles which apply to all sales of
bloodstock and sales of stallion shares and nominations,
be they private sales
or sales at public auction, ensuring that sales of bloodstock in Australia will
set and maintain a high standard
of integrity and transparency, which will
safeguard the interests of vendors, consignors, bloodstock agents, owners,
trainers and
the sales companies.”
As the Appellant was now relying on the Code and putting aside the issue of
whether the conduct of the Respondent could be within
the scope of the Code, the
Tribunal did seek submissions from the parties in the following terms:-
“(a) The process adopted by Queensland Racing for the
implementation of policies and rules made by the Australian Racing
(b) The legislative basis therefore;
(c) In particular, the procedures followed for the adoption of “The
Australian Bloodstock Code of Practice” and the legislative
basis for the
adoption of same; and
(d) any other issues of and incidental to the above
The Appellants submissions are dated 5 June 2009 (Appellant’s
are dated 9
June 2009 (Respondent’s Jurisdiction Submissions).
Following the receipt of each party’s Jurisdiction Submissions the
Appellant sought the opportunity to present further oral
submissions which the
Tribunal acceded to and the oral submissions from both the Appellant and
Respondent were heard on 5 August
2009. At this hearing the Appellant presented
further written submissions (“Appellant’s Further Jurisdiction
Submissions”).
The issue which the Tribunal has been asked to determine is essentially
whether the Stewards have jurisdiction to adjudicate on a
Licensee for
activities associated with the sale of a racehorse.
If jurisdiction for the Stewards to deal with the matter exists, it has to be
based on powers conferred on the Stewards pursuant to
the provisions of the
The Stewards are employees of Queensland Racing Limited (“QRL”)
which is the control body in Queensland and pursuant to
Chapter 2 of the Act
manage the code of Thoroughbred Racing in Queensland. QRL’s functions and
powers can be found in Part
3, Division 1 of the Act. Section 34 gives various
specific powers to QRL for its control of racing. Chapter 3, Part 1 of the Act
sets out the provisions by which a control body performs its functions with
Section 78(2) of the Act specifically stating:-
“78(2) Generally, the control body performs its functions
especially about its licensing scheme for controlling activities relating to the
clubs, participants and venues and about the way in which races are to
be held for its code of racing; and
(b) making rules of racing about things dealt with in a policy;
(3) A control body’s
ensure there is guidance for
persons involved in the code of racing and transparent decision-making relating
to matters dealt with
by the policies.”
The reference to policies is underlined for emphasis but it can clearly been
seen that a control body must have a policy on which
to base its management for
its particular code.
As the Code was introduced into the Australian Racing Rules with effect from
1 May 2005 it is difficult to see how QRL can rely on
its licensing scheme
policy to substantiate those rules as the licensing scheme policy took effect
from a date subsequent to the
introduction of the Code being 7 March 2008. The
Appellant’s Further Jurisdiction Submissions submit that the Code is
when the now repealed Racing and Betting Act 1980 (“the 1980
Act”) is considered. As the Tribunal understands it, the
Appellant’s submissions are that when considering the definitions under
the 1980 Act and the evolution of QRL as the control
body, any adoption by the
Australian Racing Board Limited (“ARBL”) of any changes to the
making of new rules to the Australian
Rules of Racing are binding on QRL’s
licensees. This is because the predecessors to QRL (as a member of the ARBL) are
by that company’s Constitution, and the need to ensure uniform rules
of racing throughout Australia. Furthermore, if it was
considered that there
was any invalidity by there not being a supporting policy, then QRL’s
licensing policy of 7 March 2008
can still be relied upon relating to the Code
as the particulars of the conduct of the respondent occurred after 7 March 2008.
It is clear from the requirements of Section 78 of the Act that a policy
needs first to be in effect before there can be a Rule. Indeed,
Section 93 of
the Act provides for urgent Rules of Racing in circumstances where there is not
a policy but there is the need for
urgency with the limitation that the rule is
not of effect for a period of longer than six months. This is not the position
respect to the rules which relate to the Code.
While Section 377(1) of the Act specifically authorises that Rules of Racing
prior to the commencement of the Act on 1 July 2003 are
Rules of Racing, this
authorisation has to be read with Section 378(2) which gave power to a control
body to amend the rules or repeal
the rules. The Tribunal is of the view that
new rules must be underpinned by a policy of a control body. It is simply not
to say that because QRL or any of the previous control bodies of
racing in Queensland were members of ARBL that rules introduced
by ARBL to the
Australian Rules of Racing are effective in Queensland. The Rules of Racing and
the policies that underpin have immense
power over persons who are bound by
them. Indeed, a person can lose his or her livelihood as a consequence of a
breach of the Rules.
Section 79 of the Act states that policies and rules of
racing made by a control body are statutory instruments and have the force
law in Queensland.
As the Rules of Racing have the force of law, it seems inconceivable that
Parliament when introducing the
Racing Act 2002
intended that it be that the
making of rules can be vested with a body such as ARBL without the strict
requirements concerning the
making of rules being adhered to. Indeed if this
was the intention of Parliament, there should have been clear provisions in the
Act that such a power can be given to an outside body. A policy must precede
the application of a Rule. In the absence of a policy,
AR209 which adopts the
Code is not applicable and unable to be adjudicated upon by the Stewards.
As the Tribunal has found that the Code is not in force, there is no need to
consider whether if it was in force, whether it would
be applicable to the
circumstances of the sale of the horse by the Respondent and the Tribunal makes
no finding in that regard.
The other aspect of the jurisdictional issue is the matter considered by the
First Level being whether within the Rules of Racing
as at 1 July 2003 or
subsequent rules which have been underpinned by a policy of QRL there is power
for the Stewards to adjudicate
on the matter.
The general powers of QRL are found enumerated in AR1, AR7 and AR7A and
powers of the Stewards in AR8A, AR8B, AR8C, AR8D and AR9.
AR1 defines the terms in the Rules and states:-
““Participant in Racing” includes
(a) a trainer;
(f) any person who provides a service or services connected with the
keeping, training or racing of a horse.”
AR10 and AR10A provide respectively:
AR.10. The Stewards may at any time inquire into, adjudicate upon
and deal with any matter in connection with any race meeting or
any matter or
incident related to racing.”
“AR.10A.(1) The Stewards may inquire into, and adjudicate upon, any
incident or occurrence arising at any organised trial or
(2) Without limiting the provisions of subrule (1) of this rule, the
Stewards may:-
(a) inquire into and adjudicate on any misconduct occurring at any trial,
trackwork or associated activity;
(b) inquire into and adjudicate upon any suspected breach of the Rules or
of any regulations, by-laws or conditions established by
a race club or other
responsible body for the conduct of organised trials or the use of any training
(c) take any action deemed necessary in respect of any
For the Stewards to have jurisdiction to determine the matter as they have
claimed the only possible power that supports such a claim
could be that
contained in AR.10. This general power has two limbs, the second of which in
essence is:
the Stewards may at any time inquire into, and adjudicate upon
and deal with... any matter or incident related to racing
The question is whether this general power is wide enough to confer
The Stewards did not deal with the preliminary issue of jurisdiction in their
findings on 9 February 2009 and merely assumed the power
by stating that they
were “... satisfied that this matter falls within the provisions of
In the First Level Reasons, the First Level were of the opinion that AR.10
was not wide enough to support jurisdiction of the Stewards
in this matter,
stating (page 17 of the First Level Reasons):-
In our view, the words
‘in connection with any race
meeting or any matter or incident related to racing’
as used in AR.10
and the words ‘
in connection with racing’
AR.175(a) are subject to the context in which they are used, to the words with
which they are associated and to the object
and purpose of the statutory
provision in which they appear
(Hatfield v HIC).
Both phrases gather meaning from the context in which they appear and it
is that context which determines the matters to which they
Technical Products)
The meaning to be attributed to the words ‘
in connection with
race meeting or any matter or incident related to racing’
‘in connection with racing’
as used in AR.175(a)
must be derived from the context in which they are used.
In our view, nothing in the Australian Rules of Racing would extend the
meaning of those words to include the sale of a horse by
a licensed trainer in
these circumstances.
In our view, the Australian Rules of Racing provide for the proper
conduct of thoroughbred racing and its related activities, for
instance, the
training, stabling and keeping of thoroughbred horses and the conduct of
licensees on or off a racecourse when engaged
in such matters.”
The First Level further stated (at page 18 of the First Level Reasons):
In our view, if a licensed trainer happens to regularly or
irregularly engage in other racing industry activities (i.e. other than
keeping, training and racing of horses under his care) those activities do not
necessarily have a connection with racing simply
because the trainer is a
In our view, the sale of the horse by Mr Stephenson as agent for the
owners was not a matter or incident relating to racing within
the meaning of the
term as used in AR.10. In the circumstances, we consider the Stewards did not
have the power to inquire into
and adjudicate upon the matter.”
Issues as to whether a particular matter is or is not a matter or incident
related to racing can raise difficult questions. Page 17
and 18 of the First
Level Reasons sets out examples where the First Level considered there could be
a distinction between “activities
which have a connection with the racing
industry” and “any matter or incident related to racing”. The
is of the view that it is the former that applies in this matter.
The Tribunal concurs and accepts the reasoning of the First Level that the
sale of a racehorse in the circumstances of this matter
is not a matter which is
within the scope of AR10 and the Stewards did not have the power to deal with
the matter.
The Appeal is dismissed.
Mr Leo Williams
AO ............................................................
Miller ............................................................
Standfield ............................................................
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (109 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter