URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2025/280.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NT and Anor v Department of Families, Seniors, Disability Services and Child Safety and Anor [2025] QSC 280 (29 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
NT and Anor v Department of Families, Seniors, Disability Services and
Child Safety and Anor
[2025] QSC 280
(first applicant)
DEPARTMENT OF FAMILIES, SENIORS, DISABILITY
SERVICES AND CHILD SAFETY
(first respondent)
DIRECTOR OF CHILD PROTECTION LITIGATION
(second respondent)
Trial Division
PROCEEDING:
Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
29 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
20 October 2025
originating application filed by Ms NT on 26 August 2025 is dismissed.
material which is the subject of this application, including the originating
application and affidavit material of the applicants
and respondents, be placed
in a sealed envelope marked “Not to be opened unless by Order of the
to any contrary order of the Court, the court file must not be made available
for search or review to any person who is not
a party to the proceeding or the
legal representative of a party to the proceeding.
anonymised reasons for judgment and orders shall be released by the Court to
non-parties without further contrary order of the
audio recording of these proceedings is not to be published or made available
except to the transcriber for the purposes of making
a transcript or to the
transcript of the proceedings may only be made available to the parties, the
parties’ legal representatives or to the Court.
identity of IT, EH & JH is supressed such that the full names of the child,
the child’s family members and any other
fact or matter that may identify
the child must not be published in any way.
there be no order as to costs.
CATCHWORDS:
FAMILY LAW AND CHILD WELFARE – CHILDREN IN NEED OF CARE AND
PROTECTION – JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE – where children
applicant are the subject of temporary custody orders made under the
Protection Act 1999
(Qld) – whether the Supreme Court should exercise
parens patriae
to courts with specialist jurisdiction
Child Protection Act 1999
-H, 10, 54, 104,
, Chapter 3
Carseldine v Director of Department of Children’s Services
[1974] HCA 33
(1974) 133 CLR 345
Department of Community Services v Priestley
[2004] NSWSC 639
JH v Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
[2021] NSWSC
, considered
Re Abigail and Oliver
[2016] NSWSC 370
, considered
Re Victoria
[2002] NSWSC 647
(2002) 29 Fam LR 157
Secretary, Department of Health and Community Services v JWB and SMB
(Marion’s Case)
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218
Self-represented first applicant
M McLennan for the first
I Gagic-Pavlica for the second respondent
SOLICITORS:
Self-represented first applicant
Department of Child Safety for the
first respondent
Director of Child Protection Litigation for the second
Introduction
[1] Ms NT has
three children, IT (aged 7), EH (aged 4) and JH (aged 2). She cares for them
very much but she has had issues with using
drugs and has been in domestically
violent relationships. As a result, the Chief Executive of Child Safety
Chief Executive
) obtained an order for temporary custody of the children
from the Children’s Court at Beenleigh. Ms NT alleges the children
been harmed whilst in the care of the Chief Executive and has applied to the
Supreme Court in its supervisory jurisdiction for
an order for the return of the
[2] The issue in
this case is whether the Supreme Court should exercise its jurisdiction to
overturn a decision made by a court in
a specialist jurisdiction.
[3] For the
reasons which follow, it is determined that whilst the Supreme Court does have a
supervisory jurisdiction in this matter,
it should only be exercised in
exceptional circumstances. This is not such a case and the courts referred to in
Children Protection Act 1999
) should continue with
their management of this matter.
February 2025, the Chief Executive applied to the Childrens Court at Beenleigh
for a child protection order pursuant to
s 54 of the CPA, granting custody of
the children to the Chief Executive for two years.
alleged in the material relied on that each of the children was at an
unacceptable risk of harm. Mr AH, the father of EH
and JH, was in custody. The
children were in general foster care and had been the subject of earlier orders.
Temporary custody orders
and temporary assessment orders had been made. It was
alleged by the Chief Executive that the children had been exposed to domestic
violence against Ms NT by Mr AH and other partners. It was also alleged that Ms
NT was a drug user and had tested positive to drugs
and had used drugs in
February 2025. It was alleged that Ms NT was willing but unable to meet the
needs of the children.
[6] An affidavit
of Kristine Schmidt of the Department was relied on. It set out the alleged
violence to which the children were exposed
to, including alleged home
[7] A temporary
custody order was made at that time which continues until the present time. The
matter was listed for hearing on 9
May 2025. It was adjourned and listed for
hearing on 26 June 2025.
[8] On 2 June
2025, Ms NT filed an application to revoke the existing children protection
order made on 9 May 2025 and for an order
that the children be returned to her
care. She alleged the children were experiencing emotional, psychological,
physical, and sexual
harm. She said that she had stable housing, and the
children were suffering more harm in the Chief Executive’s custody. In
supporting affidavit she said that she had made substantial changes to her
situation. She had left the violent relationships
and had escaped one in January
2025. She had participated in domestic violence and drug counselling. She also
said that the department
had provided misleading information to the Court and
gave particulars on how each of the children had not been looked after.
Rutherford of the Department filed an affidavit on 25 June 2025 which set out
her involvement in the matter and in particular
drug testing of Ms NT in May and
Department filed an outline of submissions at the hearing on 26 June 2025. The
submissions pointed out that an officer from
the Department had met with Ms NT
on 12 June 2025 to discuss her concerns. It was submitted that the children
remained in need of
protection and were at risk of harm if retuned to the
[11] Magistrate
Mac Giolla Ri, who had been managing the matter, heard the matter on 26 May
2025. His Honour made an order for continuing
custody in favour of the Chief
Executive until 1 July 2025 and then 26 August 2025.
August 2025, Ms NT filed a statutory declaration with the Court in which she
explained the events of 16 July 2025 when
a man called McDougal threatened she
and her partner.
August 2025, Ms NT sent an email to the Department raising several concerns
regarding the care of the children. She raised
allegations of sexual abuse,
physical abuse, injuries, assault on the children, not being fed as punishment
and the children acting
in a sexualised manner.
[14] The matter
came on for hearing before Magistrate Mac Giolla Ri on 26 August 2025. Ms
NT’s name was called over the loudspeaker
system. She was at the Court but
did not appear. She then spoke to the duty lawyer and the matter was arranged to
be re mentioned.
Her name was called again but she did not appear, and the
temporary custody order was extended by Magistrate Mac Giolla Ri until
October 2025.
[15] Unfortunately,
the representative of the Department failed to tender the email from Ms NT. Ms
NT understandably is concerned
that all relevant matters were not brought to the
Court’s attention.
consequence, Ms NT on 26 August 2025 made an application to the Supreme Court
for an order for the return of the children
to her care.
[17] She filed
an affidavit dated 18 September 2025, in which she says:
(a) She is the primary caregiver for the children.
(b) She is a survivor of domestic violence.
(c) She was the subject herself of failures by the Department of Child Safety as
a child which led to physical and sexual abuse.
(d) She has used drugs at times, but she voluntarily disclosed this to the
Department.
(e) She has mental health conditions.
(f) She has obtained a domestic violence order as protection.
(g) She escaped from her violent partner with the children in January 2025.
(h) The children have been suffering ongoing harm whilst under the interim
protection order.
[18] The matter
first came before the Supreme Court on 19 September 2025. The respondents sought
to strike out the application. The
matter was adjourned to enable Ms NT to
appeal the decision made on 26 August 2025 to the Childrens Court of Queensland.
This appeal
was heard in the Children’s Court on 29 September 2025. Judge
Balic understandably expressed concerns that the Magistrate had
informed of the allegations of Ms NT in her email dated 22 August 2025. However,
her Honour dismissed the appeal on the
basis that Ms NT could raise these issues
before the Magistrate on the next occasion.
September 2025, Ms NT filed a further application to revoke the protection order
on the grounds that evidence was not presented
to the Magistrate and this
evidence would have altered the decision. The matter came on again before the
Supreme Court on 3 October
2025 and again it was adjourned to enable the
Magistrate to make a decision on all of the material. Affidavits of Ms Hill
Department) and Ms NT were relied on.
[20] Magistrate
Mac Giolla Ri heard the matter over three days on 9, 10 and 16 October 2025. All
the relevant evidence was placed
before the Court. A reunification plan was
agreed between the parties with Ms NT’s contact increasing.
October 2025, the Magistrate continued the interim protection order. The
children were to be returned to the care of the
mother on a 24/7 contact order
on and from 4 November 2025, with Ms NT to undertake weekly drug screens. The
matter was listed for
further hearing on 20 November 2025.
[22] The Court
was informed that, at that time, Ms NT did not oppose the interim protection
order continuing.
[23] The Court
was also informed that the sexual abuse allegations were referred to the police
by the Chief Executive but they do
not meet the threshold required for further
investigation.
Applicant’s submissions
submits that the Department’s actions since removal have caused her
children serious and lasting harm. She says that
in one month her son JH was
moved 11 times. His sisters have been moved more than eight times. The
disruption is profoundly harmful
and inconsistent with their developmental and
emotional needs. The two girls have consistently expressed their desire to
return home.
They have disclosed to Ms NT and to the Department multiple forms
of abuse yet remain in the care of the people they have identified
them. Ms NT submits that the Supreme Court has supervisory jurisdiction to deal
with this matter and should intervene
in this case.
Respondents’ submissions
respondents submit that the
parens patriae
Court should not be enlivened in this case. The respondents submits that Ms NT
is seeking to reventilate
matters which have been decided in the
Children’s Court and her appeal has been dismissed. It is submitted in
reliance on a
number of authorities that
parens patriae
should not be exercised in a case such as this, namely where there is a
statutory regime to be considered, unless the
case is exceptional. It is
submitted this is not an exceptional case and that the specialist
Children’s Courts should deal
with the matter.
[26] This is
particularly so when the case is not straight forward and indeed complex.
The Statutory regime of the CPA
[27] There is a
specific statutory regime which deals with the custody and guardianship of
children in Queensland. The CPA sets up
this regime. Section 4 of the CPA notes
that the Act’s purposes are:
(a) To provide for the protection of the children.
(b) To promote the safety of children.
(c) To the extent that it is appropriate to support families caring for
[28] Section 5A
of the CPA notes that the main principle is that the safety, wellbeing and best
interests of the children are paramount.
Sections 5B to 5H of the CPA deal with
other relevant principles.
[29] Importantly,
s 104 of the CPA requires a Children’s Court to have regard to the
principles stated in ss 5A to 5C of the
[30] Section 10
of the CPA provides as to when a child is in need of protection. Chapter 2 deals
with the protection of children.
Part 3AA of the CPA deals with temporary
custody orders. Section 54 of the CPA deals with child protection orders and s
CPA deals with the making of child protection orders. There are also
rights of appeal to the Childrens’ Court of Queensland
under Chapter 3
[31] The Court
has been informed that Magistrate Mac Giolla Ri is very experienced in this area
of the law and takes a keen interest
in the matters before him.
[32] Despite the
existence of the CPA, there is no doubt that the Supreme Court does have a
general supervisory jurisdiction in its
parens patriae
children. It has been said that the
responsibility of the Crown as “parent of the country” for those
people who because
of legal disability cannot look after
themselves.
Inherent jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and its limits
inherent jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is not abolished by the CPA.
Carseldine v Director of Department of Children’s
the High Court
specifically found that the inherent jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to make
an order for the custody of an infant
was not displaced by the
Services Act 1965
(Qld). Mason J noted:
“In considering
whether there is a necessary implication that the inherent jurisdiction is
displaced, it must be kept firmly
in mind that in accordance with tradition the
guardianship and custody of infants has been the subject of judicial
determination.
Hitherto curial orders have been central to the entire concept of
guardianship and custody.”
was followed in
where McPherson J noted
at page 424 that the Supreme Court retained it general equitable jurisdiction
over infants, notwithstanding
the provisions of the
Childrens Services Act.
[36] However, it
has been said that even though such jurisdiction survives and can be employed to
reduce a result contrary to legislation
such as the CPA, this will only occur in
exceptional circumstances.
Palmer J considered
this point. In that particular case, the Department had applied for the Supreme
Court to exercise its inherent
Magistrate in the Childrens Court. At [31] his Honour said:
“It is true that the 1998 Act does not limit the
, or wardship jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. Nevertheless, I
would think it highly inappropriate for appeals from decisions of
Magistrates in
the Children's Court to be made as a matter of course to this Court under the
guise of invoking the wardship jurisdiction.
When a contest concerning a child
has been fought in the Children's Court and a party is dissatisfied with the
decision, an appeal
should be made to the District Court under s 91 of the 1998
Act, and any application for a stay of the Magistrate's order should
that Court pending determination of the appeal. It would only be in the most
extraordinary circumstances that this Court
should be asked, in the exercise of
parens patriae
of a Magistrate in the Children's Court.”
[38] His Honour
had regard to the fact that the 1998 Act provides for the operation of a
specialist jurisdiction within the Court
system of the state. His Honour stated
at [36] “Matters concerning the welfare of the children are to be dealt
with by a Children’s
Court consisting of Magistrates highly experienced in
the determination of such issues. The 1998 Act also specifically provides the
appeals in the Childrens Court in light of the District Court...” At [37]
“I do not think that there should be encouraged
a procedure whereby
persons who have fully contested a matter in the Children's Court and wish to
appeal can by-pass the appeal provisions
of the 1998 Act and come straight to
this Court seeking to invoke its inherent wardship jurisdiction.”
[39] His Honour
at [39] stated the Supreme Court should not encourage such a process, although
his Honour noted at [40] that there
may be exceptional circumstances in a
particular case which justifies a Court in departing from the general approach.
Abigail and Oliver,
spoke of the “well-understood reluctance on the part of the Supreme Court
to exercise the
parens patriae
are before the Children’s Court.”
[41] Likewise,
Young CJ in Eq in
Department of Community Services v
accepted that it is
only in the most extraordinary circumstances that the Supreme Court should
interfere with the decision of a Magistrate
in a Children’s Court where
the party is dissatisfied with the decision. His Honour noted that specialised
magistrates in a
specialised jurisdiction are dealing with these decisions.
[42] It has even
been said that applications which invoke the
parens patriae
whilst proceedings are on foot in the Children’s Court may become an abuse
of process.
the Supreme Court exercise its jurisdiction?
particular case is not an easy one. There is no doubt Ms NT cares for her
children and is very concerned as to their welfare.
Ms NT is to be commended for
her concern for her children.
[44] On the
other hand, one can understand the Department’s concerns for the children
bearing in mind the violent relationships
which Ms NT has had previously and her
struggle with drug use. In this particular case, allegations have been made by
Ms NT which
remain to be established.
[45] As noted
earlier, Magistrate Mac Giolla Ri is regarded as being an experienced Magistrate
in this area and takes a keen interest
in such matters. He has given much
consideration to this case and is aware of the issues. It is obviously of
concern to Ms NT and
indeed the Court that the Department did not place
relevant written evidence before the Magistrate on 26 August 2025. That is not
to be encouraged. Indeed, it had the hallmarks of an
application
and full disclosure is necessary in such application, particularly by a
government department which is to act as a model
litigant. The representative of
the Department did mention the email of 22 August 2025 to the
Magistrate.
There was no deliberate
concealment of the information provided by Ms NT by the representative of the
Department.
[46] In light of
the history of this matter, the factual complications associated with it and the
diligence with which the Magistrate
in the Childrens Court is approaching this
matter, I am not persuaded this is an exceptional case in which the Supreme
Court should
exercise its jurisdiction. The matter should take its course in the
Magistrates Court on the relevant evidence to be considered at
the material
[47] The matter
is progressing well with the parties working together towards a beneficial
[48] In the
circumstances, the applicant’s application should be dismissed.
[49] I make the
following orders:
originating application filed by Ms NT on 26 August 2025 is dismissed.
material which is the subject of this application, including the originating
application and affidavit material of the applicants
and respondents, be placed
in a sealed envelope marked “Not to be opened unless by Order of the
to any contrary order of the Court, the court file must not be made available
for search or review to any person who is not
a party to the proceeding or the
legal representative of a party to the proceeding.
anonymised reasons for judgment and orders shall be released by the Court to
non-parties without further contrary order of the
audio recording of these proceedings is not to be published or made available
except to the transcriber for the purposes of making
a transcript or to the
transcript of the proceedings may only be made available to the parties, the
parties’ legal representatives or to the Court.
identity of IT, EH & JH is supressed such that the full names of the child,
the child’s family members and any other
fact or matter that may identify
the child must not be published in any way.
there be no order as to costs.
Secretary, Department of
Health and Community Services v JWB and SMB (Marion’s Case)
(1992) 175 CLR 218
at 258-259.
[1974] HCA 33
(1974) 133 CLR
[1986] 1 Qd R 422.
[2002] NSWSC 647
Fam LR 157.
[2016] NSWSC 370
[2004] NSWSC 639
JH v Secretary, Department
of Communities and Justice
[2021] NSWSC 1539
Exhibit 11.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (227 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter