URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2022/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Guilfoyle v Kouzoukas [2022] QDC 8 (31 January 2022)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Guilfoyle v Kouzoukas
[2022] QDC 8
AARON JOHN GUILFOYLE
(Appellant)
CONSTANTINOS
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Appeal pursuant to
section 222
Justices Act 1886
ORIGINATING COURT:
Magistrates Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
31 January 2022
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
9 December 2021
1. The order made by the magistrate is confirmed.
2. I will hear the parties on the question of costs of the
CATCHWORDS:
COSTS- MAGISTRATES COURTS- Complaint- Dismissal- Discretion to award costs
to the respondent- relevant considerations-
Section 158A
Justices Act
CRIMINAL LAW- PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE- Where defence conferred with
prosecution expert- whether defence obliged to disclose expert
prosecution- whether section 590B of the
Criminal Code 1899 (Qld)
in summary proceedings
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Criminal Code 1899 (Qld)
Criminal Law Amendment Act
Criminal Law Amendment Bill 1996
(Qld) explanatory
Electrical Safety Act 2002
Justices Act 1886
Benson v Matthews (No 2)
[2005] QDC 56
Environment Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR 477
Harmony Shipping Co SA v
[1979] 3 All ER 177
[2021] HCA 36
(2021) 95 ALJR 937
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
Murray v Radford
[2003] QCA 91
R v De Voss
[1995] QCA 518
, discussed
[2004] QCA 211
[1983] 1 All ER 929
[1994] 4 All ER 260
(1956) 73 WN (NSW) 539
Rowe v Kemper
[2008] QCA 175
[2009] 1 Qd R 247
185 A Crim R 526
Lurgi (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 6
(2001) 205 CLR 304
Vakauta v Kelly
[1989] HCA 44
(1989) 167 CLR 568
Mr J Underwood for the appellant
Ms K Riedel for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Office of the Work Health Safety Prosecutor for the appellant
Nilsson for the respondent
Introduction
[1] This is an
appeal pursuant to
section 222
Justices Act 1886
(“JA”) against a Magistrate who on 8 July 2021 ordered the
complainant to pay the respondent’s costs after an unsuccessful
prosecution.
December 2021, I allowed the appeal on the grounds that insufficient reasons had
been given for this decision. The parties
agreed that this Court rehear the
matter and this is my decision upon the
On such an appeal the
judge is required to make his or her own determination of the facts giving due
deference and weight to the
magistrate’s
[3] In order to
answer the question, it is necessary for me to consider the material which was
before the Magistrate.
Charge and the law
complaint alleged:
“That on or about 6 February 2017 at
Annerley in the State of Queensland the respondent was a person in control of
equipment and held a health and safety duty namely a duty pursuant to
Electrical Safety Act
to ensure that the
electrical equipment was electrically safe and failed to comply with that duty
contrary to
Electrical Safety Act 2002
Section 40D
Electrical Safety Act 2002
“40D Failure to comply with electrical safety
duty—category 3
A person commits a
category 3 offence
(a) the person has an electrical safety duty; and
(b) the person fails to comply with that duty.
(a) for an offence committed by an individual, other than as a person conducting
a business or undertaking or as an officer of a
person conducting a business or
undertaking—500 penalty units; or
(b) for an offence committed by an individual as a person conducting a business
or undertaking or as an officer of a person conducting
a business or
undertaking—1,000 penalty units; or
(c) for an offence committed by a body corporate—5,000 penalty
of the ESA provides:
38 Duty of person in control of
electrical equipment
(1) This section applies to a person who is in control of electrical
(2) The person must ensure that the electrical equipment is electrically
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person in control of electrical
equipment to the extent that the electrical equipment—
(a) is located at premises in which the person lives; or
(b) forms part of the works of an electricity entity.”
of the ESA defines “the person in control” of electrical
equipment as “the person who controls the electrical equipment”
of the ESA provides “in this section “control”,
electrical equipment includes having responsibility for the maintenance
repair of the electrical equipment.”
[8] Electrical
equipment is defined in
of the ESA.
[9] The primary
duty of care is provided for in
of the ESA which states “a person
conducting a business or undertaking must ensure the person’s business or
undertaking
is conducted in a way that is electrically safe”.
(2)(a) of the ESA provides “Electrically safe” means “for a
person or property that the person or property is free
from electrical
risk.” Further
section 10(4)
ESA provides “free from electrical
risk” for a person or property means that “electrical risk to the
property has been eliminated so far as is reasonably
practicable”.
of the ESA sets out what is reasonably practicable.
What is reasonably practicable in ensuring electrical safety
In this Act, reasonably practicable, in relation to a duty to ensure
electrical safety, means that which is, or was at a particular
time, reasonably
able to be done in relation to ensuring electrical safety, taking into account
and weighing up all relevant matters
(a) the likelihood of the hazard or the risk concerned happening; and
(b) the degree of harm that might result from the hazard or the risk; and
(c) what the person concerned knows, or ought reasonably to know, about—
(i) the hazard or the risk; and
(ii) ways of eliminating or minimising the risk; and
(d) the availability and suitability of ways to eliminate or minimise the risk;
(e) after assessing the extent of the risk and the available ways of
eliminating or minimising the risk, the cost associated with
available ways of
eliminating or minimising the risk, including whether the cost is grossly
disproportionate to the risk.”
[12] Gaudron J
Slivak v Lurgi (Australia) Pty
noted that three
propositions emerge from the decided cases:
(a) The phrase “reasonably practicable” is narrower than
“physically possible” or “feasible".
(b) What is “reasonably practicable” is to be judged on the basis of
what was known at the relevant time.
(c) To determine what is reasonably practicable it is necessary to balance the
likelihood of risk occurring against the cost, time
and trouble necessary to
avert that risk.
[13] The trial
commenced on 1 February 2021. The prosecutor informed the Magistrate that the
respondent was the owner of a property
in Annerley. He leased out the property
but retained control over its electrical equipment. In particular, a blue
compressor in the
basement of the property. The prosecution alleged that the
compressor was not electrically safe. The issue in the trial was whether
electrical equipment was electrically safe.
[14] A list of
admissions was tendered as Exhibit 1. They were that the respondent was the
owner of the commercial property. He was
the lessor pursuant to the registered
lease. The lease was assigned to Zen Morris Propriety Limited in November 2014.
The respondent
engaged property managers to act as his agent for the management
of the property. The basement of the property contained electrical
equipment as
defined in the ESA s 14. The blue compressor was part of the electrical
equipment and was under the accused’s
control. The respondent had a duty
pursuant to s 38 ESA.
prosecution informed the Magistrate that Mr Kevin Sparks, an electrical safety
inspector, would give evidence that the compressor
was not electrically safe and
would give his reasons for this opinion. An interview with the respondent would
be played. The investigation
was instigated due to a fatality in the basement of
a Mr Stephen Viner but because of the nature of the charge it was not alleged
that there was a causal link between the offence and the death. Finally, the
prosecution would call Professor Chris Andrews, an Associate
Professor in
Medicine. He was being called at the request of the defence for
cross-examination. It was conceded by the respondent
that the issue was whether
the blue compressor was electrically safe at the time and whether the respondent
took all necessary action
to ensure it was safe.
Sparks gave evidence that he was a principal electrical safety inspector. On 6
February 2017, he became involved in this
investigation and attended the
property at 36 Palmerston Street, Annerley. There was an extension lead running
down the stairwell
to a submersible water pump and as he went down the stairs
there was a blue coloured refrigeration compressor in the middle of the
Exhibit 2 was the plan he prepared. He could see wiring coming out of the top of
the switchboard running up the wall, across
the ceiling towards the blue
compressor unit and then down the wall to an isolator switch and a timer which
then ran through a conduit
to the electrical equipment down to the blue
refrigeration unit. The circuit for the blue compressor was in three phases
which meant
there were three active
conductors.
It needed the three to
work. For electricity to be in the blue compressor it was necessary for the
isolator to be switched on and
continuity in the middle fuse but if the
compressor.
[17] The witness
removed a white plastic cover covering wires running to the compressor and water
He measured the
continuity from the switchboard to this apparatus with the isolator on and there
was a non-compliant low-test
The rules require a minimum
of one megohm. It was right on the borderline of where they would disconnect.
Any lower it would be considerably
dangerous, but the result did not comply with
the wiring rules and was a defect that had to be
He recorded the result in
[18] He tested
the interconnection insulation between the basement cold room and the power
circuits and found that it did not comply
with the wiring rules as it measured
point one of a megohm.
[19] He also
tested the earth continuity from the main earth at the main switchboard to the
metal frame of the blue refrigeration
unit and this indicated a loose or bad
connection which was a serious defect with the
[20] Also, a
post under the white terminal enclosure was not effectively earthed and did not
comply with the requirements.
his opinion this defect had an immediate electrical
In his opinion, there
could be a risk of death but it was hard to say without taking measurements but
it was a serious risk under
guidelines.
[21] He said
there was serious risk of injury with the floor being wet as well, i.e., a high
risk of electrical shock.
opinion, the blue compressor including the white plastic area and the terminal
enclosure were not electrically safe and were
not free from electrical
[22] There were
two ways of removing or minimising the risk. Firstly, there was isolation. The
switch had to be turned off, locked
out, tagged out and isolation proven by a
competent person. There is also elimination, which is disconnection, and the
to be stripped out.
Any tagging of the switch doesn’t prevent it being turned on, but it is a
Disconnection would be
a better option for
cross-examination, the witness accepted that the isolator switch (which worked)
turned off electricity going through the
He agreed that there
might be reasons why the wiring was set up in the manner he
What he referred to as a
“fault” meant the insulation was breaking down or there was a
leakage to earth.
He agreed that
the testing of the insulation of the cold room circuit was
borderline.
He agreed that when
he was talking about insulation he couldn’t say for certain what the risk
was like without measurements.
[24] He was then
shown some photographs and he agreed that the refrigeration compressor was an
old piece of machinery. They looked
like old, abandoned refrigeration units and
the equipment appeared to be decommissioned and disconnected from the
switchboard.
He said there was
still a risk of shock path to
He didn’t run any
testing on the earthing on those pieces of
With regard to the
blue refrigeration unit, he agreed the equipment didn’t appear to be in
working order.
[25] He agreed
that tests he conducted were in accordance with the Australian Standard 3000 of
2007 and that he was assessing things
He said it was a very old
installation and did not know what it was wired to at the time it was installed
as there was no record.
[26] He agreed
that he conducted the verification tests in accordance with the wiring rules
(Exhibit 4). He agreed there were different
versions of the wiring rules
The witness explained
that they try and inspect as per the standard it was wired to. From his
knowledge back then two ohms earthing
continuity result was a satisfactory test
from the main earth to any point on the electrical installation. The one megohm
test had not changed too
He agreed that the
building was old as was the switchboard and, was probably installed when an
earlier version of the particular
standard was in
He agreed that previously
rewireable fuses which they saw in the basement were permitted as they act as a
protector device for the
[27] He agreed
that the 2007 version of the wiring rules was probably not in force when the
basement switchboard was installed. He
agreed that you only need to comply with
the 2007 standards if there was an alteration or repair to the installation
because the
standards generally are not
retrospective.
[28] He agreed
that if the basement switchboard had been left in situ and with no work done to
it for many years there was no need
to install a residual current device or
newer technology.
there was no evidence of sparking or arcing on the
switchboard.
[29] He also
agreed that the testing he conducted was conducted with the power off so there
was no electricity flowing through any
confirm the continuity of the basement submain fuses to the main switchboard but
Hewitt did.
He agreed he
didn’t see any of the equipment while they were energised because it
wasn’t safe to do so.
Despite this, he was totally satisfied there was continuity and the tests they
did measured continuity, and the reading they got
was very low so there was
negligible resistance.
[30] He never
saw any evidence that upstream of the basement the electrical circuit had been
disconnected.
He agreed the
isolator switch worked.
was no indication that switch had been turned
He agreed it was possible
for the cold room circuit to be disconnected upstream but still have other
circuits running active through
switchboard.
[31] He agreed
that in order for a person to sustain an electrical shock from the blue
refrigeration unit or the white terminal enclosure
next to it, a number of
circumstances needed to materialise. Firstly, the isolator switch needed to be
turned on; the electricity
needed to flow from the basement switchboard through
the isolator switch down to the refrigeration unit and there needed to be a
fault or defect taking electricity from its usual
Then the person needs to
touch the conductive part of the equipment to receive the
[32] The witness
said there were pipes running into the water and there could have been a shock
from the pipes. He disagreed with
the proposition that if the cold room circuit
had been disconnected it wouldn’t need a lockable isolator switch on
If he’d been told the
blue refrigeration unit had been decommissioned and the wires disconnected and
it was not going to be
used again it wouldn’t necessarily have a lockable
isolator switch.
If a competent
person stated the system had been disconnected there would be no need to lock
the isolator.
re-examination, the witness said the wiring rules required two forms of
protection. Firstly, insulation so the wires are always
in an enclosure so there
were no exposed live conductors and the other form of protection is earthing. It
was a dangerous defect
for this piece of equipment to be submersed while it was
connected to supply or connected to a circuit. The other defect was to do
fault protection or the earthing
decommissioning one would expect the wiring to be removed from the switchboard
and that was not the case here.
[35] The wiring
rules were tendered as Exhibit 4 and the relevant photographs tendered as
Ronald Hewitt
[36] Ronald
Hewitt gave evidence that he was also an inspector under the ESA. On 6 February
2017, he went to the premises at 36 Palmerston
Street, Annerley and measured the
continuity of the submains and submain fuses. He found they were continuous on
all three conductors.
cross-examination, he agreed that this continuity testing was done when the
circuits were deenergised.
Stephen Underwood
[38] Stephen
Underwood, a workplace health and safety inspector, gave evidence of an
interview he conducted with the respondent, that
was played to the court and
tendered as Exhibit 6.
respondent told Mr Underwood that at the address there was a catering business
kitchen run by Zen Catering. The building
was about 50 to 60 years old and he
had owned it for about 20 years. He knew the deceased person as he was related
to him. The deceased
man went around and did little odds and ends for him for
example cleaning out gutters. He said he didn’t get many calls from
property managers and he’d never been called in respect of an electrical
problem with the property. Asset Management managed
the properties for him.
respect to the incident on 6 February 2017, back in June there was water in the
well. The underground water rises when it
rains from the ground up. He had the
property for 20 years and in June this was the third time this had happened. The
pumps stopped
and he gave Steve a ring. He evacuated the water out and told
Steve to get some pumps. His advice was to put one pump in the pit
and an extra
one outside on the concrete. Basically, the water was stormwater and the pump
pumped it out. The pumps were plugged
into the power point on the wall which was
live. Back in the day there were condensers as they use to run the cold room
When he bought the place they were decommissioned, partly pulled apart
and apparently all of the electricity had been disconnected
and they were always
there. The only thing live down there was the power point. He’d only been
downstairs a handful of times
in the last 20 years. There was no reason for
anybody to go down there. On 6 February the property managers contacted him and
there was water downstairs. So he asked Allen to go and check this and he
reported back to him that there was water there and he
said, “don’t
worry I’ll take care of it I’ve got a pump here I’ll pump it
out.” Allen works at
the mechanical shop in the carwash area next door. He
told Steve there was water down there and asked him to go and investigate it
he’d previously been in the basement. He’d never previously had
electrical problems with the basement over the past
20 years. He had replaced
the pumps three times perhaps four times. When the property manager told him
there was a problem, he acted
on it. Over the years a few different electricians
had been used. He was never aware of anyone receiving an electrical shock at the
property. When he bought the property, the equipment was decommissioned he
thought. There were no issues or faults identified with
Underwood said that when he saw the basement the water level was between 30 and
50 centimetres.
cross-examination, the witness confirmed he had attended the premises on 6
February 2017 and investigated the death of Mr
Viner. He arranged for the
electrical safety officer to attend the building and to advise of any faults or
issues. He spoke with
Mr Sparks who subsequently provided a statement of his
findings. During the course of this investigation, he spoke with eight people
including representatives of Queensland Fire and Rescue. He was advised that
everything had been left in situ and nothing was turned
on or off and nothing
disconnected. He agreed that representatives from the Brisbane City Council
confirmed that plumbing officers
attended the premises and that there was no
evidence of ingress of water into the basement as a result of a plumbing or
drainage problem.
agreed that he investigated this incident extensively and prepared an
investigation report dated 27 October 2017 which contained
[43] The defence
sought to tender the investigation report. The prosecution objected to this. The
report ultimately was admitted as
Investigation
investigation report found there was insufficient evidence to indicate the
respondent or his wife had failed in their duties
under the ESA or the
Health and Safety Act
. The report noted that the safety switch was operating
correctly, and a cord was unlikely to be a source of the shock path; the
submersible
pump was unlikely as a source of shock path, as to the double
adaptor outlet device, no electric shock path was identified and no
shock path was identified from the work
In summary there was no
clear evidence of a shock path from the equipment supply.
[45] As to the
incident, Mr Viner had been found at about 9am on 6 February 2017 floating on
his back in the water. He’d attended
the premises to ascertain why a
submersible pump had stopped working. There were no witnesses to the incident.
Arrangements were
made for electrical safety officers to attend the scene and
conduct a full investigation of the electrical safety of the building
equipment. They were tasked to provide advice as to whether there were
electrical faults with the equipment and shock paths.
The cause of death was not
determined by the coroner. The inspector noted that a working safety switch was
installed at the time
of the incident and the pumps used were under six months
old and still under warranty. There had been no previous electrical incidents.
witness did hear a sound and saw sparks coming from a power point where a cord
that the deceased was using was plugged in. The
cord was tested and had nil
issues. No shock path was identified and no fault found in the equipment. It was
noted finally that the
cause of death had not been determined and there was
insufficient evidence to implement a prosecution.
[46] In further
cross-examination with reference to the report, Mr Underwood agreed that under
his findings there was a working safety
switch installed at the time of the
incident and no previous electrical incidents. He said the initial investigation
report was conducted
by him but he had left workplace health and safety some
years prior and there might be other information he wasn’t privy
So there was a caveat there
could have been other information coming to light at a later stage.
re-examination he agreed that the main focus of the investigation was to
ascertain the circumstances which caused Mr Viner’s
Professor Andrews
[48] Professor
Christopher Andrews gave evidence that in 2018 he had been approached by Work
Health and Safety to provide a report
with respect to the death of Mr Viner and
potential cause of death. He didn’t find the blue compressor relevant to
of Mr Viner.
cross-examination the witness conceded he had qualifications as an electrical
engineer. With respect to the terms “verified
continuity” or
‘verifying continuity” if there are two electrical points in a
circuit he is able to measure the
resistance between the two points and a low
resistance signifies they are connected in some way. This enables him to
determine whether
the circuit will hold an electrical current. Insulation
resistance is that if there are two conductors travelling side by side at
different voltages and there’s a requirement, that they do not interfere
with each other one needs a substantial resistance
between the two conductors so
there’s no transfer of current between them. Insulation resistance
measures the degree of isolation
between those two
conductors.
continuity with any electrical installation there’s an active conductor, a
neutral conductor and an earth conductor.
Earthing continuity measures the
continuity of the earthing continuity between various points of the circuit. A
low insulation continuity
would indicate there’s a hard well-established
continuity between two points. A fault in the electrical circuit implies there
is some form of path that electricity or electric currents can flow on which is
unintended.
[51] It would be
unwise to energise the circuit to do testing as the tester might expose
themselves to potential risk. However, energisation
may well be required to
verify the integrity of particular
connections.
Whether or not
connections or no connections pose a risk can only be established with
energisation.
Measuring at the
switchboard with an energised switchboard would let us go as far as knowing what
it was connected to that
switchboard.
He agreed that
conducting de-energised testing doesn’t prove how various electrical
circuits are going to behave when electricity
is flowing through
De-energised testing on
the cold room circuit here would not establish completely whether or not
electricity can flow through the
He did not consider
insulation tests conducted while an installation is de-energised as adequate for
the purpose of determining whether
or not electrical equipment and electrical
installation in the basement poses an electrical
[52] In the
absence of energised testing, one could not rule out the possibility that an
electrical supply to the cold room had been
disconnected or decommissioned
This is because if
energised cables have been disconnected there can be no energising of the whole
downstairs circuitry.
and middle blocks were not connected to any
[53] He said
that if power was connected to the left hand fuse the supply would not become
unstable or overburdened under normal
[54] He agreed
it was a very old switchboard and agreed it had become mandatory to fit RCDs
since the switchboard had been
With reference to Exhibit
8, the witness said there was at least two switches that turned the power
The witness said it was not
a requirement for the respondent to lock off the isolator switch under
regulation and it was not necessary
at the time. In other words, if the blue
refrigeration unit had been decommissioned there’d be no need to lock an
switch attached to it.
[55] There were
a number of reasons to regard the equipment as decommissioned. When he
investigated the death, he questioned people
closely and was told the equipment
in basement had been decommissioned and was informed the isolator switch was in
the off position.
Also, the fuse which supplied the switch had blown and
therefore there would be no current supply to this particular
In order for someone to
sustain a shock from the blue refrigeration unit it would be necessary for the
rotary switch to be on and
a fault to exist, and finally a person to touch the
conductor part of the equipment.
He believed the fuse blew a substantial time before Mr Viner entered the
underground area.
prosecutor indicated to the Court the evidence given by Professor Andrews went
well beyond what she foresaw and she needed
to obtain instructions.
[57] The defence
informed the Court
they asked for Professor Andrews to be called, they indicated to the prosecution
they would be asking him questions relating
to his electrical expertise and he
gave evidence in that regard during the inquest and the transcripts were part of
the prosecution
[58] After a 30
minute adjournment the prosecutor re-examined. The witness said that he had
visited the location twice, once in early
February 2018 and once more recently
at the end of 2020.
he visited much of the wiring had been removed. There was certainly wiring on
the first visit, but he cannot recall on
the second. He didn’t inspect the
wiring. With respect to conducting testing in an energised state he would have
step by step.
energised testing would not necessarily establish that live or energised
electricity would be supplied from one point to
It was unlikely there
could still be a power supply to the compressor if the isolator was turned
His experience of electrical
installations involved 400 to 450 electrically injured
respondent gave evidence that he worked in the automotive industry but cannot
undertake any electrical works or testing.
He purchased the property in 1994.
There were two buildings on the property, one of which houses the kitchen area.
There is also
a basement on the property. He estimated the buildings had been
erected for about 50 to 60 years. Initially, the building was used
meat overseas and had a cold room. He was told this by the real estate agent.
The only purpose of the basement is to have
a submersible pump to extract water
from underground seepage.
were decommissioned compressors and wiring in the basement. These compressors
and wiring originally were used to operate the
cold rooms on the upper
When he first purchased
the property the real estate agent showed him around and pointed out where the
wiring was cut, disconnected
and capped off. The same with the piping to the
compressors. There were various compressors which had parts missing. They were
apart. Not only did the real estate agent tell him this but he had it
confirmed thereafter.
had been replaced about three
On one occasion the pump
stopped working and the water was about one metre deep which covered the
compressors. He entered the water
and threw the pumps in to expel the
He thought it was safe to
walk in there because it had been verified that everything had been
decommissioned. In 2017, the basement
was only used for the pump to expel water.
The only person who could access the basement was him and he always had it
[60] In 1994 he
inspected the basement with the real estate agent Michael Paternis and he was
told things had been disconnected. He
also arranged for Roloff Schumacher, an
electrician, to inspect the area.
[61] Straight
after he bought the property Energex came out to turn on the electricity because
it had been switched off. Within a
month or two they started renovations and he
engaged Mr Schumacher to do some major works at the front and he asked him to
whether the basement was safe and decommissioned. He confirmed that was
Mr Schumacher has
since passed away. Other electricians had visited the basement to do work there
and none had reported any
Mr Con Papademos did
some work on flood lights and checks and went to the basement and he never
reported anything wrong. Other electricians
visited the premises in
At no stage between
his first purchase of the property in 1994 and February 2017 did he make any
changes to the basement, the switchboard
or the electric circuitry or the blue
compressor.
There was no other
incident of anyone being electrocuted at the
cross-examination, he confirmed he was told by the real estate agent it had been
decommissioned. He engaged the electrician
Rudy as he wanted peace of mind. When
he purchased the building there was no
electricity.
He agreed that the
equipment was old and he had a duty of care to actually know it had been
decommissioned.
He engaged Rudy
within two months of purchasing the
He accepted he did not
tell Mr Underwood in his interview about these
electricians.
The reason he
didn’t mention them to Mr Underwood is he didn’t ask him the
didn’t look at the switches and the connections he was advised by a
qualified electrician that everything was decommissioned
[63] The defence
in written submissions referred to the evidence and pointed out that what was in
dispute was whether the Court could
be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the blue compressor and the white plastic terminal enclosure were not
electrically safe
and whether the respondent breached the duty owed under s 38
of the ESA.
[64] The defence
referred to
Slivak v Lurgi (Australia) Pty
on the meaning of what
is “reasonably practicable”. It was pointed that reliance on a
person with specialist skills or
knowledge is a relevant consideration. It was
pointed that the onus was on the prosecution to prove the offence and the
of proof was proof beyond reasonable doubt. It was for the prosecution
to prove that the blue compressor posed a risk of electric
shock to a person and
the precautions identified in the statement of facts and particulars were
reasonably practicable and should
have been taken by the respondent and the
respondent failed to take them.
[65] As to the
first question, it was submitted that the Court could not be satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that the blue compressor
posed a risk of electric shock. The
reason for this was the testing by Mr Sparks and Mr Hewitt was de-energised. The
defence relied
on Professor Andrews’ evidence that energisation verified
the integrity of particular connections, and whether they posed a
only be established from energisation. He also gave evidence that de-energised
testing would not establish whether or
not electricity would flow through
certain circuits including the cold room circuit. In the absence of energised
testing, one could
not rule out the possibility that electricity supplied to the
cold room circuit had been disconnected or decommissioned behind the
switchboard. It was submitted that Professor Andrews’ evidence gave rise
to a number of doubts. It was submitted that where
neither Mr Sparks nor Mr
Hewitt performed any energise testing at the property. It was not possible to
resolve these issues.
[66] It was also
emphasised that the wiring to the blue compressor and white plastic terminal
enclosure was connected to an isolator
switch which was tested and found to be
effective. This means when the switch was turned off it removed any electrical
risk. At all
relevant times the isolator switch had been turned off and there
was no indication it had been turned on.
[67] As to the
question of reasonable precautions it was noteworthy that no one had been
electrocuted at the property in 23 years
nor had there been previous electrical
incidents. The likelihood of any risk was lessened by the fact that access to
the basement
was restricted by a gate locked with a padlock. At all material
times prior to February 2017 the respondent believed the basement
equipment therein was electrically safe and engaged electricians to confirm
[68] As to the
cross-examination by the prosecutor of the failure to mention this to the
investigator, at paragraph 70 the defence
pointed out the respondent was never
asked how he knew the equipment in the basement had been decommissioned or who
gave him this
information.
[69] In the
circumstances, there should be a finding of not
Prosecution address
appellant in its written submissions alleged that the respondent did not ensure
the electrical equipment he was in control
of was electrically safe in that he
failed to ensure the blue compressor was free of electrical risk.
prosecution case is that the respondent did nothing to ensure it was safe.
appellant relied on the evidence of Mr Sparks. The respondent referred to
Professor Andrews’ evidence and criticised
it because in only a small
proportion of cases he was involved in investigating electrical equipment. It
was pointed out that he
held no other electrical qualifications other than a
Bachelor of Engineering and a Master of Engineering
It was pointed out that
the Professor did not inspect the isolator switch accepting he had not inspected
the fuse. He admitted he
didn’t attend the property until February 2018,
one year after the offence date and by the time he had attended much of the
wiring had been removed.
[73] It was
submitted that the evidence of Mr Sparks should be preferred over Professor
Andrews. Mr Sparks had over 30 years experience
and physically attended the
premises. It was submitted the test results conducted by Mr Sparks remained
unchallenged. It was submitted
the faults identified by him represented a risk
of death or serious injury as a result of electric shock.
[74] On the
question of whether the respondent discharged his duty, reference made to the
respondent’s record of interview and
his evidence at trial. It was
submitted that his evidence regarding the engagement of electricians should be
rejected and should
be put to one side. It was also submitted his evidence
concerning engaging Mr Schumacher was a lie and was relied on as demonstrating
consciousness of guilt. It was submitted the respondent did nothing with the
equipment for 23 years and was aware the basement
flooded and knew Mr Viner had
access to the basement. It would have been reasonably practicable for him to
strip out the wires completely
from the compressor. It was submitted the
respondent did not ensure the compressor was electrically safe and failed in his
Reasons for decision
Magistrate referred to the complaint and the particular sections of the Act. He
referred to the background and the various
[76] He then
referred to the written submissions. He noted with respect to the difference
between Mr Sparks, Mr Hewitt and Professor
Andrews said:
difficulty with that [the prosecution] submission is it is not supported by
clear, cogent or consistent evidence. The
Court must be satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that the prosecution have proved each element of the offence
before it could find
the respondent guilty. Where such a significant
inconsistency exists within the prosecution’s own case and that
inconsistency
remains an issue after all the evidence is adduced, that conflict
must be resolved in favour of the respondent.”
Magistrate considered the respondent answered the questions of Mr Underwood in a
frank manner. He found the respondent’s
oral evidence consistent with the
record of interview. There was nothing which suggested any consciousness of
guilt on the part of
the respondent. The Magistrate accepted his evidence that
he did engage electricians to ensure the basement was electrically safe.
not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the complainant had proved the
respondent failed to comply with the electrical
safety duty under s 40D of the
[78] He found
the respondent not guilty.
[79] After the
decision was given directions were given as to the filing of submissions of
costs as to costs and the costs argument
was heard on 9 July 2021. The
respondent sought an order for costs in the order of $95,000. It was submitted
that such an award would
be just and reasonable because of the special
difficulty, complexity and importance of the
Respondent’s costs submissions below
respondent referred to the various factors mentioned in s 158A(2) of the JA. It
was submitted the complainant failed to take
appropriate steps to investigate
the matter and failed to investigate the offence in a proper way. This was
evidenced from the fact
that at the hearing there was a conflict in the evidence
given by the complainant’s own witnesses namely whether or not the
de-energised testing demonstrated the basement area was electrically unsafe.
This was a critical part of the complainant’s
case. It was pointed out
that the charge was dismissed on the basis that the prosecution had failed to
prove beyond reasonable doubt
the respondent failed to comply with his
electrical safety duty. During the investigation he cooperated and voluntarily
participated
in a record of interview and answered his questions in a frank and
forthright manner. At trial he gave evidence that electricians
had inspected the
basement and told the Court he had not mentioned those matters because
he’d not been asked the question.
The property was fitted with a door that
was locked with a padlock and access was restricted. It was also submitted that
exceeding the scale should be
Appellant’s costs submissions below
appellant’s submissions were that the prosecution could not be said to be
not brought in good faith and there was no
failure to take appropriate steps to
investigate the matter. It was pointed out that the respondent took part in a
record of interview
where he made no reference to a number of matters that were
raised in his evidence. The Prosecution had expert evidence which stated
compressor was not electrically safe and there was evidence the respondent had
done nothing in 20 years to ensure it was.
[82] It was not
until the trial commenced that the prosecution was aware there was a challenge
to the expert evidence of Mr Sparks.
There was no information provided to the
prosecution which suggested that the expert evidence was to be challenged prior
to the trial
nor was expert material provided by the defence for the prosecution
to consider its position and no submission was received in this
regard. As to
Professor Andrews, there was a conference with the prosecution and he did not
disclose his evidence to the prosecution.
[83] Ultimately,
the respondent was found not guilty for two key reasons:
(a) Inconsistency in the prosecution case;
(b) The evidence that the respondent was honest and reliable including the fact
he had engaged an electrician to ensure the basement
[84] Both of
these matters were not within the knowledge of the prosecution prior to
affidavits of Stewart Boland were relied on by the respondent below. In his
first affidavit filed 18 June 2020 he states
that the prosecution brief of
evidence was delivered to his office on 3 July 2021 on a USB and was voluminous.
A copy of the index
to the prosecution brief is at pages 11 to 14 of his
affidavit. Crucially at page 14 the prosecutor disclosed “email chain
between Stephen Reynolds
Professor Chris Andrews dated 1 January 2020 forwarded to our office in response
to enquiries (4 pages).”
[86] The email
exchange is attached to Mr Boland’s second affidavit dated 5 July 2020
together with a report and Professor Andrews’
qualifications.
[87] In the
dated 18 February 2018
to Work Health and Safety, Professor Andrews stated there was no evidence to
rule in that Mr Viner’s
death was caused by electric shock. At page 2 he
noted that the machines had not been used for many years, they were not in
order. He had been informed none of the electrical connections were
operational.
[88] Professor
Andrews graduated with Honours in Electrical Engineering and a Master of
Engineering Science. He was now practising
as a medical doctor.
[89] In the
email to Mr Reynolds dated 27 December
Professor Andrews
“For example, a non-fatal shock from thigh contact
with an old machine is postulated earthing in waters. There does not seem
account taken of the advice that the electricity to that machine had been
disconnected and even if not, a second fault would
have to exist in the machine
to make it live. I gave this opinion earlier and to check this and the
connections to the submersible
pump are part of my reasons for revisiting.
To suggest that a switch was turned on and a shock was received and then the
switch turned off rather stretches likelihood even if
power had not been
disconnected. It is hard to postulate any fatal non-electrical event which would
have caused death after shock
... My memory is that fuse wedges have been
removed and that there were exposed terminals at the empty fuse sockets. There
scenarios to consider. First if the power had been removed to these
sockets and I understand this to be the case there would be no
risk to anyone
standing in water who have touched them. Nonetheless there seems to have crept
into the discussion a thought that
power had not been fully removed to the
socket. In that case there would be a high risk to everyone standing in water
and touching
the metal teeth on the sockets ... Danger of electric shock when a
rewireable fuse wedge is inserted to a socket if the person inserting
design of the rewireable wedge is generally
quite robust and steps are taken so
this physically cannot occur by its design intent. While it would be cavalier to
say this could
never occur it is highly unlikely ...”
opinion, this ought to have placed the prosecution on notice that Professor
Andrews was questioning the possibility that
electricity had contributed to the
death of Mr Viner. In my opinion, this directly related to any electrical risk
involved with the
blue compressor. It certainly put the defence on notice and
that is no doubt why they conferred with the Professor prior to trial.
[91] Interestingly,
Mr Boland points out in paragraph
that the prosecution had
written to the Magistrates Court noting that there were to be 18 witnesses
called by the prosecution and
that the technical evidence of at least two
expert/professional witnesses would be lengthy. This must have referred to Mr
and Professor Andrews. The agreed trial length was four days.
[92] In his
second affidavit
, Mr Boland
responded to the appellant’s submissions on the question of costs. Mr
Boland repeated the fact that the prosecution’s
brief of evidence was
delivered to his office on 3 July 2020 which included a transcript of the
evidence given by Mr Reginald Neale,
Mr Sparks and Professor Andrews at the
inquest. It also included the email chain. He expected the prosecution to call
Professor Andrews
as a witness at the hearing.
January 2021, the prosecution advised that it intended to call only three
witnesses not including Professor Andrews.
[94] On Monday
25 January 2021, the respondent’s counsel, via email, advised the
prosecution that the defence required Professor
Andrews to be called. Crucially,
counsel asked “as you would be aware Professor Andrews has electrical
engineering qualifications
and I would like to ask him some questions arising
from that experience.”
[95] Mr Boland
believes that the prosecution was put on notice about the breadth of Professor
Andrews experience for a number of reasons.
1. Up until 22
January 2021, prosecution intended to call Professor Andrews as a witness.
2. On 29 January 2021, counsel instructed by the prosecution conferred with
Professor Andrews.
3. In the report prepared by Professor Andrews dated 18 February 2018 it was
noted that he graduated with Honours in Electrical Engineering
and then a Master
of Engineering Science and Diploma of Computer Science.
4. Evidence at the coronial inquest confirmed his qualifications.
5. Professor Andrews in the email to Mr Reynolds, Professor Andrews detailed
his opinion as to whether the equipment posed a risk
of electrocution.
[96] Mr Boland
points out that there were two teleconferences with Professor Andrews and he
attended the premises on one occasion.
He was paid for his time. At no stage was
Professor Andrews told he was not to tell the prosecution he spoken with the
respondent’s
legal representatives nor was he prohibited from disclosing
to the prosecution the nature of his discussions.
principal prosecutor with the Office of Work Health and Safety, also swore an
affidavit. In this she confirmed that the
brief was delivered to the defence.
On 18 August 2020, she spoke with the respondent’s counsel who advised she
indicate what the issue at the trial was or what would be
admitted by the respondent. On 17 September 2020, she received an email
respondent’s counsel which set out what was in dispute in the trial.
November 2020, counsel was engaged by the complainant as counsel for the trial.
On 18 January 2021, prosecuting counsel
in response to an email enquiry by Ms
Riedel emailed her and confirmed that only Mr Morris, Mr Sparks and Mr Underwood
[99] She also
confirmed that Ms Riedel on 25 January 2021 wrote to prosecuting counsel asking
for Professor Andrews to be called noting
that she would like to ask him
questions arising from the experience as to his electrical experience.
[100] There was
a conference on 29 January 2021 with prosecuting counsel and Professor Andrews
and no disclosures were made by him
he had been called by the defence to give
evidence or the opinion he would give when called. At no stage had submissions
by the respondent nor had there been any notification the respondent
had engaged electrical contractors nor as to the content of
Andrews’ evidence.
submissions proceeded before the Magistrate on 9 July 2021. No oral evidence was
parties repeated these submissions made in
Appellant’s submissions to this Court
appellant submits that the Magistrate erred in concluding it was proper to award
costs to the respondent. It is alleged
the Magistrate failed to take into
account relevant circumstances namely:
(a) He failed to take into account that the prosecution was brought and
continued in good faith;
(b) He failed to take into account the respondent did not give notice of the
intended expert evidence from Professor Andrews;
(c) He failed to take into account that the witness Professor Andrews did not
disclose his opinion to the prosecution;
(d) He failed to take into account the fact that Professor Andrews had accepted
an engagement from the respondent to give a finding
or opinion when the witness
had already been engaged by the prosecution.
[104] It is
submitted that the Magistrate erred in concluding the matter had not been
properly investigated where the respondent had
been interviewed prior to charge
and failed to disclose his full version which he gave in evidence at the
[105] It is
submitted that the matter was properly investigated by the taking of witness
statements from potential and relevant witnesses
and there was careful
consideration as to the appropriate charge. Evidence was obtained which
supported the charge against the respondent
that he had a duty to ensure the
blue compressor was electrically safe. It was not a matter where there were no
prospects of success
particularly with what the prosecution knew prior to the
[106] It is
submitted that by reason of s 148 of the JA, s 590B of the
Criminal Code 1899
applies and the defence was required to inform the prosecution of the
details of Professor Andrews opinion. But irrespective of the
application of
this section the failure to give advance notice of the expert evidence was a
relevant circumstance to be taken into
appellant accepts there is no property in a witness but there was no breach of
any legal professional privilege for Professor
Andrews or the defence to
disclose to the prosecution the details of his evidence and opinion prior to
trial. The prosecution was
unaware there would be a challenge to their expert
evidence prior to trial.
[108] As to the
respondent’s version, it is submitted that during the interview he did not
disclose that electricians had inspected
the equipment. This was a relevant
circumstance to be taken into account under the section.
[109] In all of
the circumstances, the appeal should be allowed.
[110] There was
also oral argument on the part of the appellant before me. The appellant
stressed that costs do not ordinarily follow
the event in this sort of case. It
was for the respondent to prove the exercise of the
discretion.
It is submitted
that this was not a proper case to award costs against the prosecution.
[111] The issue
is a narrow one and the respondent was aware of facts nearly fatal to the
success of the prosecution but instead of
informing the prosecution as to this
they chose to proceed to trial and revealed them in evidence. Had these facts
been drawn to
the prosecution’s attention before trial they would have
been considered and the prosecution may not have proceeded. The appellant
not fail to take appropriate steps to investigate this matter. The mere fact of
acquittal is not a reason for the exercise of
the discretion in the
respondent’s favour. The respondent failed to provide exculpatory evidence
to the prosecution prior to
trial. The appellant at all times acted in good
faith in bringing this prosecution and in the circumstances the appeal should
Respondent’s submissions to this court
[112] It is
submitted the Magistrate did not err in awarding costs in favour of the
respondent. It is accepted there is no suggestion
made that the prosecution was
brought and continued in anything other than good faith. What must be borne in
mind though is that
is one of but several circumstances to consider under s 158A
of the JA. As to the allegation the respondent failed to disclose the
of Professor Andrews, the respondent makes the following points:
(a) Up until five days before the hearing the respondent believed the appellant
would call Professor Andrews as a witness at the
(b) When the appellant advised it was not calling Professor Andrews the
respondent’s legal representatives wrote to the appellant
asking for this
to occur and indicating he held electrical qualifications and he would be asked
questions arising from that expertise.
(c) The appellant was in possession of the email trail to which I have referred
to earlier.
(d) The witness did not produce an expert report for the respondent.
(e) The appellant was on notice as to whether the blue compressor was
electrically safe and as to the true outcome of testing on
appellant called Professor Andrews by choice and it could have been refused. It
is disputed that a respondent must give
advance notice of expert witness topics
from the prosecution’s own expert. The appellant’s counsel was
granted an adjournment
to confer with its experts after Professor Andrews’
cross examination but instead chose to proceed with the hearing. As to
allegation that Professor Andrews failed to disclose in conference the fact he
had been engaged by the respondent, the only evidence
on this point is a hearsay
statement made by the Principal Prosecutor in her affidavit and there is no file
note or evidence from
the prosecutor as to what was discussed.
[114] As to the
allegation that the respondent did not raise until his trial the fact he had
engaged electricians to inspect the equipment,
it is pointed out that at the
time of the interview he had not been charged. The Magistrate accepted the
respondent was frank and
cooperative. The fact is he was never specifically
asked why he believed the equipment in the basement was electrically safe. It
cannot be said he unreasonably declined an opportunity to explain his
[115] In all of
the circumstances, the appellant has failed to disclose a palpable error here
and the appeal should be dismissed.
[116] After
having considered all of the submissions and evidence, I reach the conclusion
that the Magistrate was correct in making
the order he did and I would make the
same order as His Honour for the following reasons.
[117] Sections
158 and 158A of the JA provide:
158 Costs on dismissal
(1) When justices instead of convicting or making an order dismiss the
complaint, they may by their order of dismissal order that
the complainant shall
pay to the respondent such costs as to them seem just and reasonable.
(2) When a complaint is before a Magistrates Court which the court has not
the complaint to be
struck out for want of jurisdiction and may order that the complainant pay to
the respondent such costs as to
the court seem just and reasonable.
158A Exercise of discretion in relation to an award of costs
(1) Despite section 158(1), justices who dismiss a complaint may make an
order for costs in favour of a respondent against a complainant
who is a police
officer or public officer only if the justices are satisfied that it is proper
that the order for costs should be
(2) In deciding whether it is proper to make the order for costs, the
justices must take into account all relevant circumstances,
including, for
(a) whether the proceeding was brought and continued in good faith; and
(b) whether there was a failure to take appropriate steps to investigate a
matter coming to, or within, the knowledge of a person
responsible for bringing
or continuing the proceeding; and
(c) whether the investigation into the offence was conducted in an appropriate
(d) whether the order of dismissal was made on technical grounds and not on a
finding that there was insufficient evidence to convict
or make an order against
the respondent; and
(e) whether the respondent brought suspicion on himself or herself by conduct
engaged in after the events constituting the commission
of the offence; and
(f) whether the respondent unreasonably declined an opportunity before a charge
(i) to explain the respondent’s version of the events; or
(ii) to produce evidence likely to exonerate the respondent; and the
explanation or evidence could have avoided a prosecution; and
(g) whether there was a failure to comply with a direction given under section
(h) whether the respondent conducted the defence in a way that prolonged the
proceeding unreasonably; and
(i) whether the respondent was acquitted on a charge, but convicted on another.
[118] Prior to
the introduction of section 158A of the JA the ordinary rule was that an order
for costs should be made in favour of
a successful
Section 158A of
the JA altered this position and this section limits the exercise of the
discretion.
It must be proper
to award costs and the circumstances to be considered in determining whether it
is proper are listed in section
158A(2) of the JA.
[119] I first
wish to turn to the issue of the respondent conferring with Professor Andrews
prior to trial. It must be born in mind
that there is no property in a
it was said the
prosecution cannot be prevented from approaching or calling a witness previously
consulted by the defence.
[120] In light
of the material disclosed to it by the prosecution the respondent was perfectly
entitled to consult Professor Andrews.
[121] The next
issue though is whether the respondent was obliged to disclose Professor
Andrews’ opinion to the prosecution.
If he was then this would be a
relevant consideration against him on the question of costs.
[122] At common
law by reason of the adversarial nature of our system and the requirement for
the prosecution to prove its case the
prosecution cannot compel an accused
person to assist the prosecution’s
[123] But a
statute may interfere with this general rule.
[124] In 1996
the Queensland Parliament introduced section 590B of the
Criminal Code 1899
This section
590B Advance notice of expert evidence
(1) If an accused person intends to adduce expert evidence in relation to an
issue in the person’s trial, the person must—
(a) as soon as practicable—give the other parties to the trial written
notice of the name of the expert, and any finding or
opinion he or she proposes
to adduce; and
(b) as soon as practicable before the trial date—give the other parties to
the proceeding a copy of the expert report on which
the finding or opinion is
(2) The directions judge under section 590AA or trial judge may fix times
for compliance with subsection (1).”
[125] In my view
this section does apply to summary prosecutions by reason of section 148 of the
JA which provides:
“The practice before justices upon the
hearing of a complaint of a simple offence or breach of duty shall, in respect
examination and cross-examination of witnesses and the right of
addressing the justices upon the case in reply or otherwise, be in
accordance as
nearly as may be with the practice for the time being of the Supreme Court upon
the trial of an issue of fact in an
action at law.”
section 590B require the defence to disclose the opinion of Professor Andrews to
the prosecution? In my view it did not.
It is my view that the best purpose of
the section is to prevent the prosecution being taken by surprise by a defence
expert of which
the prosecution is unaware being called at
[127] First, I
accept that the “adduce” could include cross examination of a
witness by the defence. However, the wording
of section 590B specifically notes
that it is mandatory to give written notice of the name of the expert. This to
my mind more supports
the contention that the expert referred to in the section
is a defence expert.
[128] Second it
regularly happens in criminal trials that the defence cross examines a crown
expert at committal and uses that to
elicit opinion evidence favourable to the
defence at trial. There is no need for written notice to be given by the defence
a situation.
[129] Third it
also regularly happens in criminal trials that defence counsel confers with the
prosecution expert outside the court
during the trial before they give evidence
(e.g., with pathologists in murder trials). There is no need for the defence to
give written
notice under the section in that situation.
[130] Four in
this case section 14B (1)(a) and/or (c) of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
apply and this allows me to consider extrinsic evidence on the point.
[131] Section
590B according to the explanatory notes to the
Criminal Law Amendment Bill
was introduced in light of the decision of
for the fair and
efficient conduct of criminal proceedings:
“This section will
ensure that there will be advanced notice of expert evidence by disclosure of
reports on either side.”
[132] R v De
itself concerned the
exchange of psychiatric evidence on the issue of diminished responsibility. At
page 7 it was noted:
“It seems unsatisfactory that such
reports are not exchanged in advance of the trial, as they must be in some other
... Rebuttal evidence is hardly likely to be necessary if any
relevant reports are exchanged at a time conveniently in advance of
trial date.”
the Court of Appeal
noted that section 590B was introduced as a legislative response to the remarks
present case is not an exchange of expert report case.
[135] Therefore,
for the reasons above the defence did not need to disclose Professor
Andrews’ opinion to the prosecution. The
fact is the prosecution was
already aware of the expert because Professor Andrews was a prosecution witness.
[136] The other
aspect to be mentioned is the prosecution did not object to this evidence on the
basis there had been non-compliance
with section 590B. Although a failure of
counsel to object may not be fatal to the issue being dealt with on appeal it
has a bearing
on whether the party who failed to object was
prejudiced.
The fact is the
prosecution was granted an adjournment, was able to obtain instructions,
re-examine the witness and make submissions
on the evidence. It may also be that
the prosecution has waived it right to now object to the evidence on these
grounds because it
cannot be the position that a party can wait to see the
outcome of the case is favourable to him or her before raising the
[137] Over and
beyond this on my assessment of the evidence, the prosecution was put on notice
that Professor Andrews had particular
views as to the electrical evidence in
this case. The prosecution was in possession of both the report and the email to
Mr Reynolds
which raised concerns about the electrical issues. One would have
thought the Professor would have been asked about his views in
light of that
material at the conference on 29 January 2021. I do not know what occurred at
the conference because of the absence
of evidence on this point from the
appellant. It can be inferred though that the Professor was not asked about his
opinions in light
of the surprise expressed by the prosecutor at the trial.
addition, the respondent’s counsel specifically advised that the witness
was to be asked about electrical issues at
[139] It seems
to be an oversight that the prosecutor did not ask questions of Professor
Andrews about electrical matters in light
of that which was contained in the
report, the email trail and that which was contained in the email from the
respondent’s
regardless of all of this, the prosecution was apprised of Professor
Andrews’ evidence at the end of day one of the
trial. It could have
decided to discontinue the prosecution at that stage but they chose to proceed
with it, noting that no objection
was taken to his evidence. I consider this to
be a weighty issue on the question of costs.
[141] As to the
contentions concerning the appellant’s evidence, I accept the
respondent’s submissions which is consistent
with the Magistrate’s
finding and I have to give due weight to this finding. The respondent fully
cooperated with the investigators.
It is noteworthy he was not charged at the
time and was being asked to recall matters from many years prior. It was only
charge that his mind was directed to evidential matters including the
fact that electricians had inspected the equipment. I do note
respondent in the interview at page 30.10 disclosed he had used a few different
electricians over the years. He was not
asked further about that by the
investigator.
[142] Another
factor to be thrown into the mix was the opinion contained in exhibit 7 that
there was insufficient evidence to proceed
with the prosecution.
[143] It may be
that the prosecution was initially brought and continued in good faith but I do
consider there was a failure though
to properly investigate the matter in light
of the notice to given to the prosecution about the potential opinion of
Professor Andrews.
[144] Further,
there was a failure to take appropriate steps once the prosecution was aware of
the evidence of Professor Andrews at
the end of day one. When one considers the
failure to enquire of Professor Andrews as to his opinion it cannot be said that
investigation was conducted appropriately.
dismissal was not made on technical grounds and not simply on a finding there
was insufficient evidence.
respondent fully cooperated in the interview and did not bring any suspicion
upon himself by his conduct. He did not unreasonably
decline any interview.
[147] There was
no failure to comply with a direction under s 83A and the respondent did not
conduct the defence in a way that prolonged
the proceeding unreasonably.
[148] In my
view, the balance of the factors leans in favour of the respondent here.
[149] In all of
those circumstances, it is my opinion the respondent has established that this
is a proper case where costs should
be awarded against the prosecution.
satisfied that the order made by the Magistrate was the correct one.
[151] Pursuant
Justices Act 1886
I confirm the order made by the
Magistrate in this matter. I will hear the parties on the question of costs.
Section 223
Rowe v Kemper
[2009] 1 Qd R 247
185 A Crim R 526
[2001] HCA 6
(2001) 205 CLR
Transcript day 1
Transcript day 1 p 16.45.
Transcript day 1 p 17.6.
Transcript day 1 p 17.37.
Transcript day 1 p 18.10.
Transcript day 1 p 19.42.
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p 39.
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p 42.
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Exhibit 7 p 3.
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p 61.30.
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Trinity day 1 p 72.35.
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 1 p
Transcript day 2 p
Transcript day 2 p
Transcript day 2 p 9.7.
Transcript day 2 p
Transcript day 2 p 10.
Transcript day 2 p
Transcript day 2 p
Transcript day 2 p
Transcript day 2 p
Transcript day 2 p
Transcript day 2 p 15.
Transcript day 2 p
Transcript day 2 p
Transcript day 2 pp 18 and
Transcript day 2 p
Transcript day 2 p
[2001] HCA 6
I note the prosecutor did
not object to the Professor’s evidence before the Magistrate.
From Work Health and
SJB2 pages 1-4.
SJB2 page 10.
Affidavit of Stewart
Boland filed 18 June 2021 [24].
Affidavit of Stewart
Boland filed 5 July 2021.
Benson v Matthews (No
[2005] QDC 56.
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
Murray v Radford
[2003] QCA 91
Harmony Shipping Co
[1979] 3 All ER 177
at p 180-181;
[1983] 1 All ER
[1994] 4 All ER 260
Environment
Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
[2021] HCA 36
(2021) 95 ALJR 937
Section 107 of the
Criminal Law Amendment Act 1997 (Qld).
Section 14A(1)
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
[1995] QCA 518.
[1995] QCA 518.
[2004] QCA 211
73 WN (NSW) 539.
Vakauta v Kelly
[1989] HCA 44
(1989) 167 CLR 568
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (404 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter