URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTBCCM/2009/37.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hostlands Pty Ltd v Body Corporate for The Reserve CTS 31561 [2009] QCCTBCCM 37 (2 September 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
HOSTLANDS PTY LTD V BODY CORPORATE FOR THE RESERVE CTS 31561
CCT KC013-09
HOSTLANDS PTY LTD
BODY CORPORATE FOR THE RESERVE CTS 31561
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
2 September 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
26 August 2009
DECISION OF:
Mr K D Dorney QC
CATCHWORDS:
Application for interlocutory injunction – whether power in Tribunal
to give relief – what factors are relevant if power
REPRESENTATION:
Mr Wayne Cochrane of Counsel
RESPONDENT:
Mr Chris Carrigan of Counsel
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
original application in this proceeding was filed on 20 July 2009. It sought
relief relating to a claimed contractual matter
pursuant to
section 149B
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
Act”), as facilitated by
Commercial and Consumer
Tribunal Act 2003
(“CCT Act”).
applicant is the caretaking service contractor for the community titles scheme
known as The Reserve Community Titles Scheme 31561
(“CTS”). The
respondent is the Body Corporate for the CTS.
its application, the applicant sought, in accordance with the terms used in the
standard form Statement of Claim, “
injunction relief/interim
an application in a proceeding filed 17 August 2009, the applicant specifically
(a) an order
restraining the Body Corporate from holding an Extraordinary General Meeting
(“EGM”) scheduled for 1 September
(b) an order
restraining the Body Corporate from considering or voting on any motion with the
effect of terminating the Management
Agreement between the applicant and the
respondent;
pursuant to section 279(1) of the BCCM Act, the respondent refrain from any
further action in reliance on any or all of
the Remedial Action Notices each
dated 15 May 2009 until such time as the order expires or the application upon
which the order is
made is finally determined, whichever occurs first.
26 August 2009, both parties appeared, by Counsel, at the hearing of the
interlocutory application.
hearing oral submissions by counsel representing both parties, and considering
the evidence filed to that time, the Tribunal
made an order dismissing the
application for injunctive relief concerning the EGM scheduled. The applicant,
by its counsel, accepted
that that form of that order was sufficient, without
the need to consider the other two orders sought.
Consequently,
as indicated at the time of making the order, the Tribunal now publishes its
reasons for the order that it then made.
Legislation
section 279(1) of the BCCM Act was referred to in the interlocutory application,
it was, quite correctly, not relied upon
during oral argument. This is because,
in its terms, it applies only to an adjudicator. But because it arguably has
some role to
play in the proper interpretation of the power given to the
Tribunal, it is appropriate to consider what the provision involves.
279(1) of the BCCM Act states that the adjudicator may make an interim order if
satisfied, on reasonable grounds, that an
interim order is necessary because of
the nature or urgency of the circumstances to which the application relates.
Statutory examples
given include that the adjudicator may stop a General Meeting
deciding or acting on a particular issue until it has been investigated
resolved. Section 279(2) states, among other things, that an interim order has
effect for a period (not longer than 1 year)
stated in the order [paragraph (a)]
and that, if it does not lapse or is not cancelled earlier, it lapses when a
final order is made
by an adjudicator to whom the application is referred
[paragraph (d)(iii)]. It is of some interest, if not moment, that there is
nothing stated in section 279 which deals with the terms on which such an
interim order is made. Also, it does not purport to deal
with the range of
factors that are normally brought into consideration when a court whose power to
order injunctive relief is based
upon a statute is involved.
149B of the BCCM Act merely states, by section 149B(1)(a), that it applies to a
dispute about a claimed or anticipated contractual
matter about the engagement
of a person as a caretaking service contractor for a community titles scheme
and, by section 149B(2)(b),
that a party to “
” dispute may
apply under the CCT Act for an order of the Tribunal to
” the dispute: see paragraph (b). If a party to
such dispute does apply, alternatively, for an order of a specialist adjudicator
to resolve the dispute, then that is done under Chapter 6 of the BCCM Act. It
is in Chapter 6 that section 279 resides.
then, to the CCT Act, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is dealt with in section
8. Section 8(1) states merely that the Tribunal
has jurisdiction to deal with
the matters it is empowered to deal with under the CCT Act or an empowering Act.
By the force of section
5 and Schedule 2, an empowering Act includes the BCCM
powers of the Tribunal are dealt with in section 9 of the CCT Act. By section
9(1) the Tribunal may do all things “
necessary or convenient
to be done “
for exercising its jurisdiction
”. Section 9(2)
states that, without limiting section 9(1), the Tribunal has the powers
conferred on it by the CCT Act or an
empowering Act.
50 of the CCT Act deals with directions and orders that the Tribunal may make.
By section 50(1) the Tribunal may make orders,
give directions and do whatever
necessary for the just, fair, informal, cost efficient and speedy
” of a proceeding. Rather importantly, section 50(3) states
that, without limiting section 50(1), the Tribunal may at an time
(a) set time
limits for the completion of anything to be done in relation to a proceeding;
(b) require a
party to the proceeding to give the Tribunal either or both of the following, if
the Tribunal considers it may be relevant
to the proceeding
(i) a document in the party’s possession or
(ii) any other information or evidence.
with respect to the exclusive jurisdiction, section 229(2) of the BCCM Act
states that the “
only remedy
” for a complex dispute is,
relevantly, the “
” of the dispute by an order of a
specialist adjudicator under Chapter 6 or an order of the Tribunal under the CCT
the force of section 5 and Schedule 6 of the BCCM Act, a complex
dispute means, amongst other things, a dispute mentioned in section
149B of the
is no dispute between the parties that the applicant is a caretaking service
contractor, that it has a Management Agreement
with the relevant Body Corporate,
that Remedial Action Notices have been given, that an EGM is scheduled for 1
September 2009 and
that included in the motions for consideration is a motion
for the termination of the Management Agreement.
Accordingly,
the real dispute between the parties in this interlocutory application is as to
the legal basis of the Tribunal’s
power to grant injunctive relief, if
any, and if such power exists, how the various tests that are applied by courts
exercising inherent
or statutory power apply, if at all, to the Tribunal’s
to the determination of the power of the Tribunal to exercise injunctive relief
Sandmoon Pty Ltd v Body Corporate for South Pacific Noosa Apartments CTS
[2008] QCCTBCCM 27
, a decision of Mr J. Thomas AM QC. Although not
directly concerning injunctive relief, Thomas M did canvass the same relevant
contained in the relevant legislation of both relevant Acts and did
canvass the bases upon which courts, and tribunals, of limited
able to exercise “
Importantly
for present purposes,
considered sections 8, 9, and 50 of the
CCT Act and section 229 of the BCCM Act. It was urged, by counsel for the
applicant, that
the consideration of sections 8 and 9 was not thorough and was
not, quite obviously, undertaken in the context of granting injunctive
While the second aspect is undoubtedly true, there is no escaping from the
conclusion that
did carefully consider both the jurisdiction and
powers of the Tribunal. The determination that was made was that the relevant
legislation
did not invest the Tribunal with a power to grant the equitable
remedies of relief against penalty or relief against forfeiture:
Although the relief here is different, for the reasons which will be canvassed,
the Tribunal here reaches the same conclusion
with respect to the legislation
and the power, and the relief (even though by way of injunction). To the extent
that section 50
needs to be considered, the Tribunal determines that it is
limited to procedural matters, and does not concern power or jurisdiction
they are properly understood referable to relief.
mentioned in
Startune Pty Ltd v Ultra-Tune Systems
(Aust) Pty Ltd
[1991] 1 Qd R 192
Matelot Holdings Pty Ltd v Gold
Coast City Council
[1993] 2 Qd R 168
show the extent to which it is
necessary to demonstrate a clarity of conferral of power when dealing with
statutory forms of what
is termed “
equitable relief
referred to the power of common law courts to restrain the
repetition of the continuance of torts and breaches of contract (see,
example, at [32]), the power so conferred was a statutory power and not
something that was inherent in the power of common law
courts. As explained by
Meagher, Gummow and Lehane’s
Equity – Doctrines &
ed), there was no inherent
The two points that the
text notes about the effect of the legislation that
conferred on the common law courts a power to grant injunctions was, first, that
it did not entail the partial disappearance of the old equitable auxiliary
the jurisdiction so
conferred was both narrower and wider (being obviously narrower in not
empowering the common law courts to issue
injunctions to protect equitable
rights or exercise any purely
injunction; and being wider in
that it did not incorporate many of the old equitable conditions precedent to
the grant of an injunction,
such as whether the plaintiff was relying on a
proprietary right): also at [21-060].
the end, as
recognised, it is a matter of construing the
relative legislative provisions. The task of the courts, and tribunals, is to
what is meant by the words used, not to determine what may have been
intended: see
[1999] NSWCCA 166
(1999) 46 NSWLR 681
at 686 (per Spigelman CJ).
Upon doing so, the Tribunal agrees with the conclusions reached in
that, while it is curious that specialist adjudicators should
have powers such as that given in section 279 of the BCCM Act, there
failure to confer such special power and jurisdiction upon the Tribunal, even
though this appears to have occurred “
simply (as) the result of
oversight ... (and) is indeed a matter that should be seriously considered by
the legislature
”: at [37]. As
clearly recognises,
this is most unsatisfactory; although the Tribunal adds here that where it is,
as noted in
a highly complex and difficult relief for which the
boundaries are unclear and which has a tendency to confound lawyers (at [37]),
it is a very blunt instrument that has in fact been granted pursuant to section
279 of the BCCM Act and therefore would strongly
suggest that in the absence of
even that blunt power being given expressly to the Tribunal, it is impossible to
imply what limits,
if any, would attend on the power contended for here by the
applicant, derived from, say, section 9(1) of the CCT Act.
Consideration of relief were it available
the Tribunal be in error in concluding that it lacks power to grant relief, even
of the kind set out in section 279 of the
BCCM Act, it would be necessary to
consider the way in which such relief would be considered in this
proceeding.
will involve a consideration of a number of different factors that either a
common law court granted statutory power or a court
of equity would need to
consider in granting an injunction of this kind.
Right to relief
there would be no need to consider either the existence of a proprietary right
or the restriction upon granting
injunctions, the right to
relief, should it be in the form of section 279(1) of the BCCM Act
depends simply on the satisfaction (unsurprisingly on “
”) that an “
because of the nature or urgency of the
circumstances
”. Since the statutory example that is given is stopping
a General Meeting from deciding or acting on a particular issue until
been investigated and resolved, it might be thought that such a right
undoubtedly exists in circumstances such as in this
proceeding.
the problem seems to be in determining what is encompassed by the use of the
”. In contrast, section 69 of the
Court Act 1967
, when dealing with the power to grant relief, states, in
section 69(2)(b), that the District Court shall, in any proceedings in which
injunction, whether interim, interlocutory or final, in the
”. Conferred in that way, all of the learning and
understanding concerning injunctions in general can be brought into play.
such guidance – because clearly section 279 does not apply - the potential
exists for the use of an injunctive power
that is wider than that which the
Supreme Court itself in its unlimited jurisdiction would have. In consequence,
the Tribunal would
have decided that, subject to the exceptions already
canvassed, the guiding factors should be those that apply in the granting of
injunctions by the Supreme Court when exercising its statutory jurisdiction as a
common law court.
will, therefore, be necessary to consider such factors as are relevant here.
prima facie
is fundamental to the endorsed approach applicable to courts considering
interlocutory injunctions that a “
prima facie
” case must be
established by the applicant: see, for a recent example,
Communications Australia Pty Ltd v Telstra Corporation Limited
that both parties, through their counsel, have either submitted, or not really
contended otherwise, that there was a “
prima facie
be tried, it would have been unnecessary for the Tribunal to investigate this
issue further. Nevertheless, in its
own right the Tribunal would have been
satisfied on the material presently before it that there was such a sufficient
of success to justify, in the circumstances, preservation of the
status quo pending a final hearing.
Damages as an adequate remedy
Dickson Property Management Services Pty Ltd v Centro Property Management
(Vic) Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 1742
, Ryan J in the Federal Court of Australia
refused an application for an interlocutory injunction
principally
” on the basis that damages would be an adequate
remedy: at [12]. The claim for the interlocutory injunction was to restrain
the respondent from terminating a contract for the cleaning of a shopping
centre. Both parties were corporations and it was noted
that there was a
considerable body of evidence tending each way on the question of whether the
applicant had satisfactorily performed
cleaning services: at [7]. In that
case, the measure of damages was held to be the remuneration which the applicant
derived had the cleaning contract run its full term, less the costs
which it would have incurred in performing the contract over
that term: at
other factors are important, it seems to the Tribunal in this proceeding that
damages for wrongful termination would be able
to be satisfactorily measured,
either by the process discussed in
or, as agitated in this
hearing, by the mechanism of obtaining a valuation, or by some combination of
the two methods of assessment.
should it have mattered, the Tribunal would have found that this ground would
have been a persuasive factor in refusing any
interlocutory injunction.
Balance of convenience
this proceeding it might well have been considered that the balance of
convenience may have favoured the granting of the injunctive
relief because the
preservation of the
would have been less disruptive than the
event of potential wrongful termination.
Nevertheless,
there are some complications which would cause concern as to whether that would
be the correct conclusion. First, as
, any injunction
that has the potential to involve the court to an unacceptable extent in
supervising the performance of a detailed
contract equivalent to a contract for
personal services by a party, in whom the other party asserts, not totally
unbelievably, that
it has lost confidence (such as maintaining “
satisfactory standard of cleaning
”), is a consideration that would
negatively affect the convenience favouring the applicant.
Furthermore,
since it is almost inevitable that such relief is not given unless there were to
be an undertaking offered by an applicant
as to damages to compensate for any
consequential loss from the grant of such relief, there may well be seen to be
difficulties in
how a Tribunal with such limited jurisdiction would set about
determining the damages that flowed from any breach of such an undertaking.
But, if it were to be held that the power to grant relief was dependent upon
applying the relevant factors applicable by the common
law courts granted
statutory injunctive power, it must be assumed that Parliament, given the
exclusive jurisdiction provisions of
section 229 of the BCCM Act, had confidence
that a Tribunal such as this could discharge that task. Of course, the lost
holding the EGM, alleged to be some $2,500.00, are important but
ultimately would not have determined the balance of convenience
as they could
have been incorporated into such damages.
last factor that the Tribunal considers that might have relevance here is that
alluded to by Dowsett J of the Federal Court of
Australia in
City Pacific Ltd
[2009] FCA 687
(2009) 72 ACSR 418.
There, the application was to prevent the
convening of a meeting of members of a managed investment scheme which was to be
for the purpose of considering and, if thought fit, passing, a resolution
that the applicant be removed as the responsible entity
and that another
corporation be appointed as the replacement responsible entity. In considering
the balance of convenience, Dowsett
J noted that he had expressed reservations
he concluded that, no doubt, members would be invited to take those
matters into account and that, hopefully, appropriate legal advice
available to them as to the extent to which his concerns might be justified: at
[31]. He then determined that since the
decision of the members was largely a
commercial one and that they could be acquainted with the dangers of a change of
responsible
entity at the stage in question, as well as the advantages, it was
for them to weigh up those matters and decide upon a course to
be followed, with
the consequence that the balance of the convenience favoured leaving the members
to determine the matter: also
this Tribunal were to be considering the grant of injunctive relief, given that
no termination can occur until the Body Corporate
decides in General Meeting
that it will terminate an agreement such as the Management Agreement and since
the parties have not convinced
the Tribunal that there are fundamental
deficiencies in the calling of the EGM or in the material to be presented to it
(particularly
bearing in mind the consideration by McGill DCJ in
Corporate for Palm Springs Residences CTS 29467 v J Patterson Holdings Pty
[2008] QDC 300)
, the Tribunal would have been inclined to allow the
members to hold a vote in General Meeting, once the Tribunal was – as it
was – assured that relevant information would be given at the EGM about
the advantages and disadvantages, both factually and
legally, in passing such a
resolution at this time. Hence, the Tribunal would have decided that the
balance of convenience was against
granting relief.
the Tribunal had decided that it had power to grant injunctive relief and if it
had decided that it was unnecessary to consider
the factors that would influence
a court exercising either inherent jurisdiction in its auxiliary manifestation
or statutory jurisdiction,
the Tribunal might have been inclined to grant the
injunction.
the Tribunal has concluded that the Tribunal has no power legislatively granted
to it to grant the relevant relief and that, even
if it had such power, it would
determine that those factors that are otherwise applicable to the granting of
such relief would apply
and therefore would not have justified relief in this
proceeding.
order refusing the application for interlocutory relief was made on 26 August
2009. It is, therefore, unnecessary to make any
further orders apart from
giving both parties leave to file submissions as to costs within 14 days of
these Reasons being published.
______________________________
MR K D DORNEY QC
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (811 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter