URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2025/301.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CYB v Health Ombudsman [2025] QSC 301 (11 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Health Ombudsman
[2025] QSC 301
(applicant)
HEALTH OMBUDSMAN
(respondent)
BS No 1524 of 2025
Trial Division
PROCEEDING:
Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
11 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
28 October 2025 and 6 November 2025; Further submissions received 29
October 2025, 31 October 2025, 5 November 2025, 6 November 2025
and 10 November
The further, further amended application for a statutory order of review
filed 10 November 2025 is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – JUDICIAL REVIEW – REVIEWABLE DECISIONS AND
CONDUCT – GROUNDS OF REVIEW – FAILURE TO OBSERVE
STATUTORY PROCEDURE
– where the applicant is a general practitioner – where a
complainant made a health service complaint
respondent – where the respondent decided to accept the complaint and
undertake an assessment and
investigation of the complaint – where the
respondent decided to withhold notice under
Ombudsman Act 2013
(Qld) – where the applicant has applied for a
statutory order of review under
Judicial Review Act
(Qld) and seeks declarations and injunctions in respect of the
respondent’s assessment and investigation of the complaint –
the application is concerned with a decision proposed to be, but not yet, made
Health Ombudsman Act 2013
(Qld) – where the
applicant alleged that the respondent has failed to observe procedures required
by law to be observed in
relation to conduct for the purpose of making the
decision proposed to be made under
– where conduct engaged in for the
purpose of making a decision extends to the doing of anything preparatory to the
of the decision – where the conduct must be shown to be reasonably
proximate to the proposed making of the decision –
whether the procedures
particularised by the applicant’s grounds of review are properly described
as procedures that were required
by law to be observed in relation to conduct
for the purpose of making the proposed decision under
– whether, if
the procedures were required by law to be observed, the respondent has failed to
observe those procedures
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – JUDICIAL REVIEW – POWERS OF COURTS UNDER
JUDICIAL REVIEW LEGISLATION – GENERALLY – where
the principal claims
the subject of the application are injunctions permanently restraining the
respondent from continuing to conduct
the investigation and from dealing with
the complaint – where the injunctions are sought in circumstances where
the applicant
complains that he was not given notice of decisions made under the
Health Ombudsman Act 2013
(Qld) and was not provided with notice of the
progress of the investigation – where non-observance of a condition
bearing upon
the exercise of a statutory power would work to the material
disadvantage of individuals for whose protection the condition exists,
considerations of justice and convenience tell strongly in favour of holding
invalid acts done in neglect of the condition –
whether the applicant has
established any actual prejudice or inferred prejudice suffered as a result of
any non-compliance with
the notice requirements – whether the applicant
has established a basis for the permanent restraints sought by the application
– whether the claimed declarations would lack utility – whether the
court should grant the injunctions and make the declarations
sought by the
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act
Health Ombudsman Act 2013
Judicial Review Act 1991
Bauxite Development Pty Ltd v Queensland
[2016] QSC 263
(2016) 222 LGERA 107
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
(1990) 170 CLR 321,
Australian National University v Lewins
(1996) 68 FCR 87
Braun v Health Ombudsman
[2021] QSC 209
Clayton v Heffron
[1960] HCA 92
(1960) 105 CLR 214
Dysart v Hammerton & Co
[1914] UKLawRpCh 34
[1914] 1 Ch 822
[1916] 1 AC 57
EHF17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] FCA 1681
272 FCR 409
, considered
Forrest & Forrest Pty Ltd v Wilson
[2017] HCA 30
262 CLR 510
Fuller v Lawrence
[2024] HCA 45
(2024) 99 ALJR 103
Griffith University v Tang
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99
Ombudsman v Braun
(2022) 11 QR 125, cited
Karmakar v Minister for
[2021] FCA 916
(2021) 177 ALD 83
Module2 Pty Ltd v
Brisbane City Council
(2006) 153 LGERA 120
New South Wales
Aboriginal Land Council v Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission
(1995) 59 FCR 369
, considered
Our Town FM Pty Ltd v Australian
Broadcasting Tribunal
[1987] FCA 301
(1987) 16 FCR 465
, considered
Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Schlaepfer v ASIC
[2017] FCA 1122
Sydney CC v Waker
[1974] ACLD 74, cited
A Scott KC, with K Slack, for the applicant
S Robb KC, with N Derrington, for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers for the applicant
Clayton Utz for the respondent
applicant (“the doctor”) is a general practitioner. A complainant
(“the complainant”) made a complaint
of the respondent (“the Ombudsman”). The complaint was a
“health service complaint”
within the meaning of
Health Ombudsman Act 2013
(“the HO Act”).
The doctor has applied
for a statutory order of review under
Judicial Review
(Qld) (“the JR Act”) and seeks declarations and
injunctions in respect of the Ombudsman’s assessment and investigation
the complaint. Ms J Baker (“Ms Baker”) was joined to the proceeding
“in her capacity as an authorised person”
under the HO Act. By
an order dated 11 November 2025, she was removed from the
proceedings.
The Ombudsman deals with a complaint without giving
notice to the doctor
[2] On Friday 1
March 2024, the office of the Ombudsman received a telephone call from the
complainant. During that call, the complainant
made separate complaints about
the doctor and a hospital. As to the doctor, her complaints were broadly as
follows. The complainant
had begun receiving treatment from the doctor in 2007
for various health concerns. In 2015 or 2016, the doctor had prescribed her
“copious amounts of codeine and lexotan”. In 2018, she had
telephoned the doctor to make an appointment. He had told
her that he could
visit her home and suggested they might engage in sexual intercourse. In 2020,
the complainant had arranged a
and calf pain. The doctor arrived at her home inexplicably, and without
performed a breast examination and then left. The complainant later
arranged an appointment at the doctor’s practice. She
had been told by
the doctor to “make sure she was the last appointment”. During that
appointment, the doctor put gloves
on and had inserted part of his hand into the
complainant’s vagina and had moved his hand quickly in a thrusting way.
complainant was speechless and in shock. Six months later she had made
an appointment with the doctor. During this appointment
they discussed having
sex and she had performed oral sex on the doctor in a bathroom at his practice.
The doctor said to the complainant
that he had “done this with a few other
women”. After relating that complaint about the doctor, the complainant
that her desired outcome was for the Ombudsman to “charge the
[doctor]”. As to the hospital, her complaint was broadly
as follows. She
had been admitted to the hospital at the beginning of 2023 for a period of seven
weeks during which she had been
diagnosed with bipolar disorder, placed on a
treatment authority and been advised that she was required to take a regular
olanzapine 20ml medication. She complained that she had been
“held” at the hospital for more than seven days.
[3] During the
telephone conversation on 1 March 2024, the complainant advised that she was
“suffering with memory loss”,
did not have any support and had been
“stuck in the house for 10 years”. The written record of the
complaint notes that,
during the telephone conversation, the complainant
“would often flit between life events, dates would be second guessed and
incidences confused”. She said that she suffered with amnesia, was
illiterate and believed she needed counselling. She had
said that she
“[was] not insane”, mentioned that her daughter was pregnant and
trying to kill her baby and that her husband
had committed suicide. In respect
of the house visit, she had initially said she did not know why the doctor was
at her house, but
later said that he had been there for an appointment.
convenient at this point to set out in full ss 3 and 4 of the HO Act which deal
with the main objects and paramount guiding
principle for administering the Act.
Those sections provide as follows:
3 Main objects
(1) The main objects of this Act are—
(a) to protect the health and safety of the public; and
(b) to promote—
(i) professional, safe and competent practice by health
practitioners; and
(ii) high standards of service delivery by health service
organisations; and
(c) to maintain public confidence in the management of complaints and
other matters relating to the provision of health
(2) The objects are to be achieved mainly by establishing a transparent,
accountable and fair system for effectively and expeditiously
dealing with
complaints and other matters relating to the provision of health services,
including by—
(a) establishing the health ombudsman with the functions set out in
section 25; and
(b) providing for the effective and efficient interaction of this Act
and the National Law; and
(c) providing for the system to be effectively monitored by the
Minister and the parliamentary committee.
4 Paramount guiding principle
(1) The main principle for administering this Act is that the health and
safety of the public are paramount.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the health and safety of the public
is the main consideration for—
(a) the health ombudsman, when deciding what relevant action to take to
deal with a complaint or other matter; and
(b) the director of proceedings, when deciding whether to refer a
matter to QCAT; and
(c) QCAT, when deciding a matter referred to it under this
[5] Section
35(1)(a) of the HO Act required the Ombudsman, within seven business days after
receiving the complaint, to decide to
act in one of three ways. The Ombudsman
could decide “to accept the complaint and take particular relevant action
to deal with
the matter of the complaint”, “to accept the complaint
and take no further action in relation to it” or “not
to accept the
complaint”. Section 38 specified the relevant actions that might be taken
for dealing with a health service
complaint. Section 38(1) described
“relevant action” as follows:
“(1) Each of the
following is a relevant action for dealing with a
health service complaint—
(a) assessing the complaint under part 5;
(b) facilitating local resolution of the complaint under
(c) taking immediate action under part 7;
(d) investigating the subject matter of the complaint under
(e) issuing a prohibition order under part 8A;
(f) referring the complaint to the National Agency or an
entity of the State, another State or the Commonwealth
under part 9;
(g) for a health service complaint concerning a registered
health practitioner, referring the complaint to the
director of proceedings under part 10, division 2 for
decision about whether to refer the complaint to QCAT;
(h) conciliating the complaint under part 11;
(i) carrying out an inquiry into the subject matter of the
complaint under part 12.”
[6] Section
35C(1) of the HO Act required the Ombudsman, as soon as practicable after
accepting the complaint, to notify the National
that the complaint had been
accepted and to provide a copy of the complaint, or the Ombudsman’s record
of the details of the
complaint, to the National Agency, together with any other
information the Ombudsman had that was relevant to the complaint. Under
35C(2), within five business days of being notified of the complaint, the
National Agency might give the Ombudsman the National
Agency’s preliminary
view about how to deal with the complaint.
Ombudsman was entitled to delegate his or her functions under the HO Act to an
appropriately qualified staff member of the
Ombudsman’s
Ms B Mackenzie,
a senior complaints officer employed by the
Ombudsman, was delegated the Ombudsman’s function to make the decision
by s 35(1)(a) of the HO Act.
[8] Ms Mackenzie
was aware that a decision under s 35(1)(a) to accept a complaint had to be
notified to the National Agency and the
National Agency might provide its view
as to how to deal with the complaint. On 4 March 2024, for the purpose of
complying with s
35C, she notified the National Agency that she had decided to
accept the complaint and provided her preliminary view that it was
appropriate for the Ombudsman to deal with the complaint by undertaking an
assessment. She requested that the National Agency
respond to her preliminary
view. On 5 March 2024, she received notification from the National Agency to the
effect that the National
Agency agreed that the Ombudsman should retain the
complaint. On 6 March 2024, she “completed the s 35(1)(a)
[9] The record
of Ms Mackenzie’s decision made under s 35(1)(a) is in evidence. Under a
heading “Decision Details”,
the record states that the s 35(1)(a)
decision was “Accept the complaint and take particular relevant action s
35(1)(a)(i)”.
The relevant action is then described as “Assess
under Part 5”. Under a heading “Reason for decision”,
following appears:
“The complainant has raised allegations of
sexual assault against the [doctor] pertaining to a number of incidences during
treating relationship, together with prescribing concerns. The complainant
appears vulnerable and may have history of mental health
concerns. The [doctor]
has some prior notifications history in relation to prescribing and conduct
concerns but no regulatory action
to date. The allegations are serious and the
matter is considered suitable for retention by the [Ombudsman] to progress to
gather further information.”
[10] Section
35(1)(b) of the HO Act required the Ombudsman, again within seven business days
after receiving the complaint, to give
notice of the decision made under s
35(1)(a) to the complainant and the doctor. The notice to be given was notice
278”. Section 278(1) relevantly provided that the notice
under that provision was to state “the decision” and,
Ombudsman had decided to take “relevant action”, the particular
relevant action and “the reasons for the
decision”. Section 284
then provided:
“A requirement under this Act for the health
ombudsman to give notice of a decision or other matter to a health service
does not apply to the extent that the health ombudsman considers that
doing so may—
(a) put at serious risk a person’s health or safety; or
(b) put a complainant or other person at risk of being
harassed or intimidated; or
(c) prejudice an investigation or inquiry.”
Mackenzie was delegated the Ombudsman’s function to make any decision
under s 284 of the HO Act. The record of Ms Mackenzie’s
decision reveals
that on 4 March 2024 she made a decision under s 284 to withhold notice from the
doctor. In making that decision,
Ms Mackenzie relied on s 284(c), namely that
giving notice of the s 35(1)(a) decision in her consideration “may
prejudice an
investigation or inquiry”. Under a heading “Reason(s)
to withhold notice under s 284”, the record states “Notice
under s 284(c) to avoid prejudicing investigation of the concerns raised”.
complaint then proceeded to what was described as “the assessment
phase”. The assessment of complaints is dealt
with by Part 5 of the HO
Act. The purpose of an assessment is to obtain and analyse information relevant
to the complaint and decide
the most appropriate way to deal with the
The assessment may be
made in the ways the Ombudsman considers appropriate. By way of example, the
Ombudsman may, during the assessment,
analyse information provided with the
consider submissions
which the Ombudsman may invite under s 47 from a complainant or the
analyse information
obtained by the Ombudsman under s
communicate with the
complainant or the doctor
consult with an entity with relevant technical expertise about the
The Ombudsman is to
complete any assessment within 22 business days after deciding to carry out the
assessment.
Section 50(a) of the
HO Act provided that after completing an assessment, the Ombudsman was required
to make one of two decisions,
namely “to take particular relevant action
to further deal with the complaint” or “to take no further action in
relation to the complaint”. Section 50(b) required the Ombudsman to give
notice of the decision under s 50(a) to the complainant
and the doctor. The
notice was to be given “under s 278”.
[13] During the
assessment phase of the complaint, the Ombudsman:
(a) requested information from Medicare;
(b) issued a notice under s 48(1) to the Chief Executive of Metro North Hospital
and Health Service;
(c) issued a notice under s 48(1) to the Monitored Medicines and Compliance
(d) sent a letter to the National Agency requesting information under s 206B of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (Queensland)
[14] On 2 April
2024, the Ombudsman received a response from the Monitored Medicines and
Compliance Unit and the National Agency.
On 9 April 2024, the Ombudsman received
a response from the Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital. On 11 April 2024,
the Ombudsman
received a response from Medicare.
a senior complaints and operations officer
employed by the Ombudsman, was delegated the Ombudsman’s function to make
any decision
under ss 50(a) and 284 of the HO Act. On 10 May 2024, Mr Robinson
made a decision under s 50(a) to take particular relevant action.
The relevant
action was to investigate under Part 8 of the HO Act. The record of that
decision contains a section headed “Reason
for decision”. The
section relevantly reads as follows:
“Issue 2: Prescribing
Further, the complainant advised in 2015 and 2016, the practitioner
prescribed her copious amounts of Codeine and Lexotan (120 tablets
Issue: Sexual misconduct
The complaint relates to the practitioner ... allegedly sexually assaulting
the complainant (a patient when the practitioner was in
sole practice ...) over
an extended period of time (2007-2021). The complainant noted that she had
breast cancer in 2004 caused by
silicone implants and calcification forming.
The complainant stated she had amnesia previously but is now able to remember
everything which happened to her. Initially the complainant
reported the
practitioner over prescribed her codeine in 2015-6, however upon a further
follow-up phone call with the complainant
due to lack of information being
found, the complainant stated this was in relation to the over prescription of
valium and other
relaxant medication between 2012 and 2014.”
[16] On 10 May
2024, Mr Robinson made a decision that he considered that giving notice under s
278 might prejudice an investigation
or inquiry. That decision was made in
reliance upon s 284(c). The record of that decision contains a heading
“Reason(s) to
withhold notice under s 284”. Under that heading the
following appears:
“The [Ombudsman] has only obtained a
statement at this time. Providing notice of decision to the practitioner [at]
could prejudice the [Ombudsman] investigation.”
investigation of a complaint is dealt with by Part 8 of the HO Act. An
“authorised person” has the function to
carry out the activities for
the purpose of an investigation by the Ombudsman under Part
The Ombudsman may, by
instrument in writing, appoint an appropriately qualified person, including an
appropriately qualified staff
member of the Ombudsman’s office, as an
authorised person.
that may be exercised for the purpose of conducting an investigation are dealt
with by Part 15 of the HO Act. A relevant
power conferred upon an authorised
person by s 228(3) is to give a notice to a person to give information or attend
to answer questions
where, inter alia, the authorised person reasonably believes
that the person may be able to give information about the matter being
investigated. An investigation is to be conducted as quickly as is reasonable in
all the circumstances and, in any case, by one year,
or any extended time
decided under s 85(2), after the decision to carry out the
investigation.
Under s 85(2),
the Ombudsman may extend the period of one year if the Ombudsman reasonably
considers that, in all the circumstances
(including, for example, the size and
complexity of the matters being investigated), it is not possible to properly
complete the
investigation within the
The Ombudsman may extend
the period more than once under s 85(2) but each extension may not be for more
than three months.
completing an investigation, the Ombudsman may prepare a report on the
investigation containing information, or recommendations
[18] There are
two notice provisions that arise in the context of an investigation. Section 82
applies if an investigation concerns
a particular health service provider and
notice of the decision to carry out the investigation has not been given to the
under s 278. In that case, s 82(2) requires the Ombudsman to notify
the provider about the investigation “before or when it
is started”.
Section 84 relevantly provides that the Ombudsman must, at not less than three
monthly intervals, give a notice
of the progress of an investigation to any
health service provider being investigated and the complainant.
[19] On 20 May
2024, Ms A Ward, an investigations officer employed by the Ombudsman as an
authorised person under s 188 of the Act,
was appointed as the investigator for
the complaint. Ms Ward subsequently left the employment of the Ombudsman and Ms
Baker, a senior
investigations officer employed by the Ombudsman, was allocated
the complaint and appointed as the investigator of the complaint.
[20] Between 10
May 2024 and 6 December 2024, the following steps were undertaken as part of the
investigation:
(a) on 29 May 2024, the Ombudsman issued a notice pursuant to s 228 of the
HO Act to a Dr Z requesting documents;
(b) on 29 May 2024, the Ombudsman issued a notice to a Dr D requesting
(c) on 5 June 2024, Dr D responded to the s 228 notice;
(d) on 9 September 2024, Ms A Ward interviewed the complainant;
(e) on 12 September 2024, the Ombudsman issued a s 228 notice to the
Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital;
(f) on 2 October 2024, the Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital responded
to the notice;
(g) on 14 October 2024, the Ombudsman issued a s 228 notice to a medical
(h) on 17 October 2024, the medical practice responded to the notice;
(i) on 29 October 2024, a s 228 notice was issued to a Dr P;
(j) on 6 November 2024, Dr P responded to the s 228 notice.
December 2024, a Mr P Bergin, an employee in the Ombudsman’s office,
rescinded the decision to withhold notice from
the doctor under s 284 and
directed that the doctor be notified of the complaint. The material does not
reveal the position held
by Mr Bergin. The record of that decision relevantly
As delegate for the [Ombudsman], I rescind the decision to withhold notice
from the practitioner under s 284 and direct that the provider
now be notified
in accordance with the Act.
Can you please ensure investigators set relevant reminders to comply with our
notification obligations pursuant to s 84.
6.12.2024 Paul, decision please to rescind 284(c) decision as no longer
applies, and to progress the investigation. Steve M
5.12.24 – Steve, the medical records relating to the treatment provided
by the [doctor] to the consumer have now been obtained.
The [doctor] has closed
his own clinic and at the beginning of 2024 he commenced work at [another
practice]. It has been confirmed
with the clinic manager that the consumer has
never attended the clinic. As such s 284(c) no longer appears to apply and the
to withhold notice should be rescinded. Thanks. Jane.”
reference to “Jane” is to Ms Baker. The reference to
“Paul” is to Mr Bergin. The reference to “Steve”
another employee of the Ombudsman, Mr S Martin. The material does not reveal the
position held by Mr Martin.
The doctor is notified of the
complaint and subsequent material events
December 2024, the doctor received correspondence from Ms Baker notifying him
that on 1 March 2024 the Ombudsman had received
the complaint, a delegate of the
Ombudsman had assessed the complaint and, on 10 May 2024, had decided to
investigate the complaint.
Notably, the 6 December 2024 letter stated in terms
that the Ombudsman had received a complaint from the complainant “about
health service [the doctor] provided to her between 2015 and 2021”.
December 2024, Ms Baker gave notice to the doctor under s 228(3)(a) which sought
information about the details for all
staff working at the doctor’s clinic
during the period of 1 January 2020 to 31 December 2021, including their full
name, telephone
number(s), residential address, email address, their role at the
medical practice and their commencement and cessation date. The
notice also
sought information about the appointment time for each appointment attended by
the complainant during the period 1 January
2020 to her final appointment with
the doctor. The 10 December 2024 notice stated that the “matter”
related to “the
allegation that you failed to maintain professional
boundaries with [the complainant] and prescribed her excessive amounts of
and lexotan”.
January 2025, Ms Baker gave a further notice under s 228 to the doctor which
required him to attend to answer questions
related to “the matter”
on 29 January 2025 at 12.30pm at the Ombudsman’s office. The notice
described the matter
as relating to “the allegation that you failed to
maintain professional boundaries with [the complainant] and prescribed her
excessive amounts of codeine and lexotan”.
January 2025, the doctor’s lawyers wrote to Ms Baker and contended that
the doctor was “unable to properly
understand the nature of the allegation
that has been made against him, or the basis upon which it is alleged that he
has committed
an offence under the HO Act because he does not know what conduct
he is alleged to have engaged in.” The letter incorrectly
stated that an
unknown person had made the complaint. The letter went on to variously state
that the “nature of the alleged
boundary violation is unclear” and
it was “also unclear how it is alleged that [the doctor] has prescribed
the patient
excessive amounts of codeine and lexotan”. The letter
requested a copy of the complaint.
January 2025, Ms Baker sent an email to the doctor’s lawyers which
referenced a telephone conversation between Ms
Baker and one of the
doctor’s lawyers that morning. The email refused to provide a copy of the
complaint or of any complaint
material but confirmed that on the allegations
made by the complainant and the information gathered, the proposed interview
cover these allegations:
“1. [The doctor] conducted a
breast examination on [the complainant] without consent
a vaginal examination, [the doctor] inserted his whole hand into [the
complainant’s] vagina
doctor] and [the complainant] engaged in oral sex during a clinical appointment,
doctor] offered to engage in sexual intercourse with [the
complainant].”
[28] The 24
January 2025 email went on to state that whilst the complainant was understood
to be a “complex patient”,
the Ombudsman was obliged to put the
allegations made by her to the doctor to provide him with an opportunity to
respond. The letter
noted that during the interview, Ms Baker intended to refer
to clinical records created and maintained by the doctor which related
complainant and offered to provide copies of those records to the doctor’s
January 2025, by agreement reached between Ms Baker and the doctor’s
lawyers, the notice given on 7 January 2025
was rescinded. A decision was made
not to interview the doctor, however it was understood, as between Ms Baker and
the doctor’s
lawyers, that a new notice would be issued in due course
which would require a written response from the doctor.
January 2025, the doctor’s lawyers sent a letter to Ms Baker which
materially contended that, by reason of the nature
of the allegations proposed
to be covered in the abandoned interview, the doctor had been misled about the
seriousness of the allegations.
The 29 January 2025 letter described those
allegations as not being “mere breaches of professional boundaries”
“allegations of very serious criminal offences”. The 29
January 2025 letter observed that the allegations were “so
detail” as to render them impossible to properly understand and requested
particulars of each allegation. The 29
January 2025 letter asserted that the
notices issued pursuant to s 228 were liable to be set aside.
February 2025, Ms Baker issued a further notice under s 228 of the HO Act which
required the doctor to answer 10 written
questions by reference to “the
matter”. The matter was described as involving these
allegations:
“Between 2015 and 2021, [the doctor] prescribed
excessive amounts of codeine and lexotan to [the complainant].
Between 2018 and 2021, [the doctor] failed to maintain professional
boundaries with [the complainant].
In 2020, [the doctor] conducted a breast examination without [the
complainant’s] consent.
In 2020, [the doctor] conducted a vaginal examination in an inappropriate and
sexual manner.”
February 2025, Ms Baker sent an email to the doctor’s lawyers which was in
the following relevant terms:
Progress report
As you are aware, the [Ombudsman] is investigating a complaint about the
alleged conduct of [the doctor] ...
Under section 84 of the [HO Act], we must provide a progress report every
three months.
Should you not wish to receive progress reports please let me know and our
records will be amended accordingly. You may change your
mind and request
progress reports be provided again at any stage.
The investigation remains in the evidence gathering stage and we intend to
complete the investigation as soon as possible.
If you have any questions about the investigation, please contact me by phone
... or by email ...”
February 2025, the doctor’s lawyers wrote to Ms Baker in relation to the
7 February 2025 notice. The 27 February
2025 letter contended that the
notice was defective because it failed to provide sufficient particulars of the
matter being investigated
and also failed to identify documents or information
sought with sufficient particularity so that the doctor might see that those
documents or information related to the relevant investigation. The 27 February
2025 letter contended that the four points identified
as comprising the
“matter” being investigated were inconsistent with the 6 December
2024 letter and the earlier s 228
notices. The 27 February 2025 letter repeated
the request for the doctor to be provided with a copy of the complaint.
[34] On 7 March
2025, Ms Baker sent a letter to the doctor’s lawyers which asserted that
the doctor had received sufficient
information to understand the allegations and
the nature of the matter being investigated. The 7 March 2025 letter stated
Ombudsman did not “consider it appropriate, or required, to
provide your client with the full complaint at this investigation
[35] On 15 April
2025, the doctor filed an application for a statutory order of review. On 7 May
2025, consent orders were made which
effectively stayed the investigation. On
27 June 2025, the doctor filed an amended application for a statutory order of
On 7 November 2025, he filed a further amended application for a
statutory order of review. On 10 November 2025, he filed a further,
amended application for a statutory order of review (“the
application”).
The doctor applies to review the
Ombudsman’s conduct under s 21(2)(b) of the JR Act
application seeks to review “the conduct of [Ms Baker and the Ombudsman]
in undertaking and conducting an assessment
and investigation of a complaint
under Part 8 of the [HO Act]” (“the
investigation”).
language is inapt as it is only the investigation which is being conducted under
Part 8 of the HO Act. The assessment was conducted
under Part 5 of the HO Act.
The doctor’s submissions made it plain that for the purposes of the
application, the “only
relevant ‘decision to which the Act
applies’ is the decision to be made following the investigation of the
under s 90 of the HO
That is, the
application is concerned with a decision proposed to be, but not yet, made under
s 90. The application does not rely
upon s 20 of the JR Act. The doctor did not
seek to review the decisions in fact made by the Ombudsman’s delegates
35(1)(a) and 50(a) of the JR Act. Nor did the doctor seek a statutory
order of review in respect of any consideration made by the
Ombudsman’s
delegates under s 284 that giving notice might prejudice an investigation or
inquiry within the meaning of s 284(c),
to the extent that any such
consideration might be regarded as “a decision” to which the JR Act
[37] The grounds
of the application are described by paragraphs 6, 7 and 8 of the
application.
[38] Paragraph 6
of the application alleges that a procedure that was required by law to be
observed in relation to “the assessment
of the complaint” was not
observed within the meaning of s 21(2)(b) (“the first ground”).
The particulars of the
first ground are as follows:
(a) ss 35 and 278(1) of the HO Act required the Ombudsman, as soon as
practicable and no later than five business days after making
a decision to
accept and assess a complaint, to give notice to the complainant and the doctor
stating the decision and the reasons
for the decision;
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(Qld) (“the
Interpretation Act”) required the reasons for the decision to set out
findings on material questions of fact
and refer to the evidence or other
material on which those findings were based;
(c) no notice complying with s 278(1) has been given to the doctor;
(d) in failing to give notice under s 278(1), the Ombudsman “unlawfully
relied on a belief” that the Ombudsman was excused
by s 284(c) from giving
the notice because notice would “prejudice an investigation or
(e) contrary to the Ombudsman’s belief, the
Ombudsman was not excused from giving notice under s 284 because:
(i) there was, at the time, no “investigation or inquiry” that was
capable of being prejudiced by complying with the
notice requirements;
(ii) accordingly, on its proper construction, s 284(c) did not excuse the
Ombudsman from the notice requirements;
(iii) further and alternatively, there was “no apparent basis for [the
Ombudsman’s] belief” that complying with
the notice requirements
would prejudice an investigation or inquiry.
[39] Paragraph 7
of the application alleges that a procedure that was required by law to be
observed in relation to “the making
of the investigation of the
complaint” was not observed within the meaning of s 21(2)(b) of the JR Act
(“the second ground”).
The particulars of the second ground are as
(a) ss 50 and 278(1) of the HO Act required the Ombudsman, as soon as
practicable and no later than five business days after assessing
and making a
decision to investigate a complaint, to give notice to the complainant and the
doctor stating the decision and the reasons
for the decision;
(b) s 27B of the Interpretation Act required the reasons for the decision to set
out findings on material questions of fact and refer
to the evidence or other
material on which those findings were based;
(c) no notice complying with s 278(1) has been given to the doctor;
(d) in failing to give notice under s 278(1), the Ombudsman “unlawfully
relied on [a] belief” that the Ombudsman was
excused from giving notice
because it would prejudice an investigation or inquiry;
(e) contrary to the unlawful belief of the Ombudsman, the Ombudsman was not
excused from the notice requirements because there was
“no apparent basis
for the Ombudsman’s belief” that complying with the notice
requirements would prejudice an investigation
or inquiry.
[40] Paragraph 8
of the application contends that a procedure that was required by law to be
observed in relation to “the conduct
of the investigation” has not
been, and is not being, observed within the meaning of s 21(2)(b) of the JR Act
(“the third
ground”). The particulars of the third ground are as
(a) s 84(1) of the HO Act required the Ombudsman, at not less than three monthly
intervals, to give notice of the progress of the
investigation to the doctor;
(b) the doctor has never waived his right to be given a progress report;
(c) since the Ombudsman decided to investigate the complaint on 10 May 2024, the
doctor has only been provided with one purported
progress report and that was
not until 10 February 2025;
(d) in failing to give the doctor any progress reports between the period from
10 May 2024 and 10 February 2025, the Ombudsman has
failed to observe a
procedure in relation to the conduct of the investigation;
(e) the purported progress report of 10 February 2025 was not a progress report
for the purposes of s 84(1) of the HO Act because
it did not “meaningfully
inform [the doctor] of the progress of the investigation”.
[41] By way of
final relief, the application seeks declaratory relief and injunctions. As to
the declaratory relief, declarations
are sought in terms that the
Ombudsman’s “conduct” in failing to comply with the
requirements that the doctor be
given notice of the decision to accept and
assess the complaint and be given notice of the decision to investigate the
has been contrary to law. A further declaration is sought to the
effect that the “conduct” of Ms Baker and the Ombudsman
failing to notify the doctor of the investigation before or when it started and
to provide him progress reports at least every
three months from that time was
contrary to law. In terms of the injunctive orders, an order is sought that the
Ombudsman and Ms
Baker be permanently restrained from continuing to conduct
the investigation and permanently restrained from dealing with the
application makes no complaint about any breach of the rules of natural justice.
The application makes no complaint about
any breach of s 82(2).
[43] Each of the
first to third grounds are framed by reference to s 21(2)(b) of the JR Act.
Reading ss 21(1) and 21(2)(b) together,
s 21(2)(b) is directed to procedures
required by law to be observed in relation to conduct, not being observed. The
conduct is conduct
engaged in “for the purpose of making a
decision”. The relevant decision is “the decision to be made
the investigation of the complaint under s 90 of the HO
[44] As to that
decision, s 90(a) provides that after completing an investigation under Part 8,
the Ombudsman must make one of two
decisions, “to take particular relevant
action to further deal with the matter” or “to take no further
relation to the matter”. Section 90(b) provides that notice of
a decision under s 90(a) is to be given to the complainant
and the doctor under
s 278. According to the instrument of delegation of the Ombudsman’s
powers, the decision contemplated
by s 90(a) of the HO Act is a decision which
might be delegated to the Executive Director Investigations or Executive
Director Assessment
and Resolution. The function of giving notice contemplated
by s 90(b) is a function which might be delegated to Executive Director
Investigations, Executive Director Assessment and Resolution, Director
Investigations, Director Compliance, Principal Investigations
Principal Systemic Investigations Officer (Lead). Ms Mackenzie, Mr Robinson and
Ms Baker did not hold any of these positions.
As will be apparent, the
doctor’s essential contention is that delegates of the Ombudsman have
failed to observe procedures
required by law to be observed in relation to
conduct for the purpose of making the decision proposed to be made under s 90 of
Is the decision proposed to be made under s 90, a
decision to which the JR Act applies?
[45] Section 4
of the JR Act relevantly defines a “decision to which this Act
applies” as meaning “a decision of
an administrative character made,
proposed to be made, or required to be made, under an enactment (whether or not
in the exercise
of a discretion)”. The Ombudsman submitted that the
decision yet to be made under s 90(a)(i) would “lack the necessary
of finality and impact on legal rights” to be a decision to which the JR
Act applies. That submission was explained
in terms that a decision made
“under s 90(a) to take relevant action under s 38(1) [is a finding] along
the way to any ultimate
decision that may affect [the
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v
“... a reviewable ‘decision’ is one for
which provision is made by or under a statute. That will generally, but
always, entail a decision which is final or operative and determinative, at
least in a practical sense, of the issue of fact
falling for consideration. A
conclusion reached as a step along the way in a course of reasoning leading to
an ultimate decision
would not ordinarily amount to a reviewable decision,
unless the statute provided for the making of a finding or ruling on that point
so that the decision, though an intermediate decision, might accurately be
described as a decision under an enactment.
Another essential quality of a reviewable decision is that it be a
substantive determination. With the exception of s 3(2)(g), the
instances of
decision mentioned in s 3(2) are all substantive in character ... In this
context the reference in s 3(2)(g) to ‘doing
or refusing to do
other act or thing
’ (emphasis added) should be read as referring to
the exercise or refusal to exercise a substantive power.”
[47] Mason CJ
was referencing
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review)
(Cth) (“the ADJR Act”). At the time of
, s 3(2) of the ADJR Act was in the following
“In this Act, a reference to the making of a decision
includes a reference to:
(a) making, suspending, revoking or refusing to make an order, award or
determination;
(b) giving, suspending, revoking or refusing to give a certificate, direction,
approval, consent or permission;
(c) issuing, suspending, revoking or refusing to issue a licence, authority or
other instrument;
(d) imposing a condition or restriction;
(e) making a declaration, demand or requirement;
(f) retaining or refusing to deliver up an article; or
(g) doing or refusing to do any other act or thing;
and a reference to a failure to make a decision shall be construed
accordingly.”
Griffith University v
“The determination of whether a decision is
‘made ... under an enactment’ involves two criteria: first, the
must be expressly or impliedly required or authorised by the enactment;
and, secondly, the decision must itself confer, alter or
otherwise affect legal
rights or obligations, and in that sense the decision must arrive from the
enactment. A decision will only
be ‘made ... under an enactment’
if both these criteria are met. It should be emphasised that this construction
statutory definition does not require the relevant decision to affect or
, rights or obligations, and it
will be sufficient that the enactment requires or authorises decisions from
which new rights or obligations
arise. Similarly, it is not necessary that the
relevantly affected legal rights owe their existence to the enactment in
Affection of rights or obligations derived from the general law of
statute will suffice.”
earlier passage, the plurality
decision so required or authorised must be ‘of an administrative
character’. This element of the definition
casts some light on the force
to be given by the phrase ‘under an enactment’. What is it, in the
course of administration,
that flows from or arises out of the decision taken so
as to give that significance which has merited the legislative conferral of
right of judicial review upon those aggrieved?
The answer in general terms is the affecting of legal rights and obligations.
Do legal rights or duties owe in an immediate sense
their existence to the
decision, or depend upon the presence of the decision for their enforcement? To
adapt what was said by Lehane
, does the decision in question
derive from the enactment the capacity to affect legal rights and obligations?
Are legal rights and
obligations affected not under the general law but by
virtue of the statute?”
Fuller v Lawrence
the High Court noted that the criteria stated by the joint judgment in
for determining whether a decision of an administrative character is
made under an enactment have been applied by numerous Australian
construing statutory judicial review regimes.
plurality in
made reference to
In that case,
the University had promulgated a statement on policy and procedures in the
exercise of general powers of administration
conferred by the
National University Act 1991
(Cth). The statement provided for criteria to
be applied in determining applications for promotions and established procedures
dealing with such applications. The procedures involved applications being
considered by a series of committees and if a committee
determined not to
support an application, the application advanced no further. Mr Lewins had
applied for promotion and been recommended
by the first committee, but a later
committee had resolved not to support his application. He applied under s 13 of
the ADJR Act
for a statement of reasons for the decision not to promote him.
The Full Federal Court found that the decision was not a decision
“under an enactment” because the statement on policy and procedures
did not contain terms and conditions of employment
to which the relevant Act
gave the capacity to affect legal rights and obligations.
decision proposed to be made under s 90(a)(i) is clearly a decision expressly
required by the enactment. By s 90(a)(i),
the Ombudsman is required to decide
“to take particular relevant action to further deal with the matter”
take no further action in relation to the matter”. A number
of provisions of the HO Act make it clear that the subject of a
heath service
complaint is “a
circumstances of this case, the decision contemplated by s 90(a)(i) is a
decision which will fall to be made in circumstances
where the Ombudsman has
already decided to accept the complaint and to take relevant action comprising
an assessment and investigation
of the complaint.
[53] In respect
of the contemplated decision under s 90(a)(i), a decision to “take no
further action in relation to the matter”
would be a decision which brings
the taking of relevant action under the HO Act in relation to “the
matter” to an end.
That decision, once made, would become the source of
substantive rights.
not to take no further action but to deal further with the matter by taking
relevant action is a decision which itself
would be capable of affecting or
altering the doctor’s rights, not just by derogating from those rights but
also by imposing
new obligations on the doctor. Notably, the decision maker
under s 90(1) is invested with power to interfere with the registration
A relevant action to
“further deal with the matter”, might involve taking immediate
action under Part 7. Section 57 defines
“immediate registration
action” in relation to a registered health practitioner to mean
suspending, or imposing a condition
on, the practitioner’s registration or
accepting an undertaking from the practitioner. The Ombudsman may take
immediate registration
action in relation to a registered health practitioner if
the Ombudsman reasonably believes because of the practitioner’s conduct,
the practitioner poses a serious risk to persons and it is necessary to take the
action to protect public health or
If the Ombudsman
proposes to take immediate registration action in relation to a registered
health practitioner, other than action
that is accepting an undertaking from the
practitioner, the Ombudsman must give the registered health practitioner a
notice stating
the proposed immediate registration action and inviting the
practitioner to make a submission within a period of at least five business
Ombudsman is required to have regard to any submissions made by the practitioner
before deciding whether to take immediate registration
action in relation to the
practitioner.
However, if the
Ombudsman is satisfied it is necessary to do so to ensure the health and safety
of an individual or the public,
the Ombudsman may take immediate registration
action without complying with the show cause
requirement.
contemplated decision under s 90(a)(i) might conceivably involve a decision to
take immediate action under Part 7 involving
accepting an undertaking from the
doctor or immediately suspending or imposing a condition on his registration.
All these features
of the decision contemplated by s 90(a)(i) are sufficient to
indicate that the contemplated decision is a substantive decision with
necessary degree of finality.
conclusion in this regard is consistent with the more general observations of
Jackson J in
Braun v Health
After having
conducted a detailed consideration of the provisions of the HO Act, his Honour
relevantly observed that the Act provides
for a process of making a complaint by
a person about the provision of a health service, confers power on a statutory
office holder
to investigate the complaint and to exercise investigative powers
and “leads to a decision that will affect the rights, powers,
and status of a health service provider who is subject to a complaint”.
Ombudsman sought to emphasise that any decision under s 90(a)(i) which involved
immediate registration action would, when
made, under s 63 confer a right upon
the doctor to apply to the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
for a review of that decision. The availability of the
right to apply to QCAT in that circumstance to review the decision, does
mean that the proposed decision under s 90 is not properly characterised as a
decision made under an enactment. The Ombudsman
also made reference to s 13 of
the JR Act. That provision requires a court to dismiss an application made under
s 21 of the JR Act
if provision is made by a law, other than the JR Act, under
which the applicant is entitled to seek a review of the matter by another
or tribunal and the court is satisfied having regard to the interests of justice
that it should so dismiss the application.
Section 13 is not engaged in the
circumstances of this case and in any event does not deprive the proposed
decision under s 90 of
its character as a decision made under an enactment.
Are the procedures in relation to conduct for the purpose of
making the decision proposed to be made under s 90?
[56] The doctor
has confined his application to reliance upon procedures, which he contends were
required by law to be observed in
relation to the assessment or ongoing
investigation and which he says have not been observed. The doctor styles the
assessment and
ongoing investigation as the relevant conduct for the purpose of
making the decision proposed to be made under s 90(a). In those
circumstances,
the doctor submits that both the “assessment of the complaint and the
investigation of it”
comprise conduct preparatory to the making of any decision under s 90(a) and,
hence, conduct engaged in for the purpose of making
that decision. The real
issue is whether the procedures particularised by the first to third grounds are
properly described as procedures
in relation to conduct for the purpose of
making the decision proposed to be made under s 90.
[57] In its
setting in s 21, the word “conduct” points to action taken, rather
than a decision made, for the purpose of
making a reviewable
CJ relevantly said:
“In other words, the concept of conduct looks to the way in
which the proceedings have been conducted, the conduct of the proceedings,
rather than decisions made along the way with a view to the making of a final
determination. Thus, conduct is essentially procedural
and not substantive in
character. Accordingly, s.3(5) refers to two examples of conduct which are
clearly of that class, namely,
‘the taking of evidence or the holding of
an inquiry or investigation’. It would be strange indeed if
were to extend generally to unreviewable decisions which
are in themselves no more than steps in a deliberative or reasoning process.
Accordingly, there is a clear distinction between a ‘decision’
and ‘conduct’ engaged in for the purpose of
making a decision. A
challenge to conduct is an attack upon the proceedings engaged in before the
making of the decision. It is
not a challenge to decisions made as part of the
decision-making process except in the sense that if the decisions are procedural
in character they will precede the conduct which is under challenge. In
relation to conduct, the complaint is that the process of
decision-making was
flawed; in relation to a decision, the complaint is that the actual decision was
erroneous”.
[58] Mason J was
referring to s 3(5) of the ADJR Act. Section 8 of the JR Act is in similar
terms to s 3(5) of the ADJR Act and extends
what is “conduct engaged in
for the purpose of making a decision” to the doing of anything preparatory
to the making
of the decision including the taking of evidence or the holding of
an inquiry or investigation. Section 8 does not extend the meaning
“conduct engaged in for the purpose of making a decision” to conduct
which does not form part of the process for making
the decision by the decision
There must be some degree
of proximity and nexus between the impugned procedural conduct and the decision
to which it is said to
The conduct must be shown to be reasonably proximate to the making of the
decision or the proposed making of the
I accept the
doctor’s submission that, in the factual circumstances of this case, the
Ombudsman’s conduct involving
the investigation of the complaint is
conduct reasonably proximate to the making of the proposed decision under s 90.
I do not accept
that in the circumstances of this case, the Ombudsman’s
conduct involving the assessment is conduct reasonably proximate to
of the proposed decision under s 90.
, Mason CJ went on to observe that “substantive decisions,
findings of fact and inferences from findings of fact generally are
not capable
of review as ‘conduct’ unless what is alleged is some breach of
procedural requirements in the course of
the conduct involved in reaching the
relevant conclusion ...”.
was concerned with the review of a decision of a Tribunal rather
than with the review of a decision of a decision maker in a less
formal context.
It was also concerned with a challenge to what was a finding of fact. The
finding was not one which the Tribunal
was required by the legislation to make.
It was rather a step in a process of the Tribunal making an intermediate finding
required by the statute to be made as to the fitness of a licensee. It
has been said that where a question arises as to conduct
of a Tribunal leading
to the decision of the Tribunal, it is perhaps easier to differentiate between
the substantive decision and
the procedural process pursuant to which the
decision was reached than it might be in other less formal
South Wales Aboriginal Land Council v
Hill J, after
referring to
relevantly said:
decision-maker is not a Tribunal it will ordinarily be easy to determine what
the decision is which is capable of
review under the ADJR Act. In the present
case, as I have said, it would be the decision to make a grant or to refuse to
grant to a particular applicant. The conduct in which the decision-maker
engages for the purpose of making that decision may be referred
decision-making process, just as the Tribunal's hearing was the decision-making
process of the Tribunal in
In my view, and consistently with what the Chief Justice said in
the conduct which then is reviewable is the procedure which the decision-maker
engages in for the purpose of making the relevant
decision. This has two
implications for the present case. The first is that it is necessary, before
there can be review of conduct
under s 6(1) of the ADJR Act, that there be able
to be identified decisions of the relevant kind, not yet made, in circumstances
where the Tribunal has embarked upon, or proposes to embark upon, the
decision-making process leading up to the making of these decisions.
matter is that the review must be concerned with the procedure adopted by the
decision-maker as the decision-making process
leading up to the making of the
relevant decision, the making of a decision in the course of the process not
being, conformably with
, relevant conduct.”
[61] It may be
accepted that the words “in relation to” as they appear in s
21(2)(b) of the JR Act are words of wide import.
Our Town FM Pty Ltd v
Australian Broadcasting
considered that the expression “in connection with the making of the
decision” as contained in s 5(1)(b) of
the ADJR Act, the ADJR Act’s
equivalent provision to s 21(2)(b), did “not import any particular
temporal relationship”
and “may cover the relationship between some
present event and a contemplated sequel of that event”. His Honour then
“In its s 5(1)(b) context, I think that the words extend
to any procedure required by law to be followed as part of the decision-making
process; and whether that procedure is required, or happens, to precede or to
follow the actual making of the decision. Questions
of degree may arise; but if,
in a particular case it can be seen that a particular procedure is part of the
decision-making process
prescribed by law, it must be regarded as a procedure
required ‘in connection with’ that decision.”
Minister for Immigration v
appears to have doubted
that a procedure following the actual making of the decision could be considered
a procedure to be observed
in connection with the decision. The joint judgment
relevantly said that it “may greatly be doubted that an obligation to
findings could be said to be a procedure which is to be observed
in connection with the
of the decision in question, as the setting
out the decision and reasons assumes that the decision has already been
[63] When regard
is had to the particulars of the first to third grounds of the application, the
“procedures” called in
aid by the doctor’s case are the
notification requirements contained in ss 35(1)(b), 50(b) and 84.
requirement in s 35(1)(b) is a requirement to give notice of “the
decision”, being the decision made under s
35(1)(a). That decision is a
decision to “accept the complaint and take particular relevant action to
deal with the matter
of the complaint”, “to accept the complaint and
take no further action in relation to it” or “not to accept
complaint”.
In this case, the decision made
under s 35(1)(a) was to accept the complaint and assess the complaint under Part
5. That decision
was not made as part of the assessment which was to follow.
Section 46 of the HO Act provided for how the assessment was to be made.
requirement to give notice of the s 35(1)(a) decision was not a procedure
required by law to be followed as part of the assessment.
Further, the
requirement to give notice under s 35(1)(b) is not any part of the procedure
adopted by the decision maker under s
90 as the decision-making process leading
up to the making of a decision under s 90. It is not part of the decision-making
prescribed by law.
requirement in s 50(b) is a requirement to give notice of “the
decision”, being the decision made under s 50(a).
A decision made under s
50(a) is made after the assessment has been completed. It is not made as part of
the assessment. The decision
is “to take particular relevant action to
further deal with the complaint” or “to take no further action in
to the complaint”. In this case the decision under s 50(a) was
to investigate the subject matter of the complaint under Part
8. That decision
was not made as part of the investigation which was to follow. The decision to
investigate was not made by an “authorised
person” with powers to
conduct the investigation. The requirement to give notice of the s 50(a)
decision was not a procedure
required by law to be followed as part of the
investigation. The requirement to give notice under s 50(b) is not any part of
procedure adopted by the decision maker under s 90 as the decision- making
process leading up to the making of a decision under s
90. It is not part of the
decision-making process prescribed by law.
requirement under s 84 is a requirement to give “notice of the progress of
an investigation” at not less than
three monthly intervals. The function
of giving the notice under s 84, though occurring in the context of an
investigation under
Part 8 being on foot, is a function which is not required by
the Act to be performed by the authorised person carrying out the activities
the purpose of the investigation under Part 8. The requirement to give notice
under s 84 does not involve exercising powers for
the purpose of an
investigation and is not a procedure required to be observed in relation to the
exercise of those powers for the
purpose of conducting the investigation. The
requirement to give notice under s 84 is not properly described as any part of
the procedure
adopted by the decision maker under s 90 as the decision- making
process leading up to the making of a decision under s 90. It is
not part of the
decision-making process prescribed by law.
[67] Fundamentally,
none of the notice requirements relied upon by the doctor are properly described
as forming part of the procedure
which a decision maker engages in for the
purpose of making a decision under s 90. They are not procedures that were
required by
law to be observed in relation to conduct for the purpose of making
the proposed decision under s 90. It could not be said that the
non-observance
of any of the procedures meant that the process of decision-making under s 90
was flawed.
Have the procedures been observed?
[68] If it were
to be assumed, contrary to my findings, that the notice requirements relied upon
by the doctor are properly described
as forming part of the procedure which a
decision maker engages in for the purpose of making a decision under s 90, the
doctor failed
to establish that the procedures were not observed.
[69] The first
and second grounds of the application each contend that the Ombudsman
“unlawfully relied on a belief” and
that there was “no
apparent basis for the belief”.
[70] As to the
first ground, a particular of the unlawful belief is that on 4 March 2024, when
Ms Mackenzie considered that giving
notice may prejudice an investigation or
inquiry, there was no extant investigation or inquiry in relation to the
complaint. That
submission was directed to the proper construction of s 284 and
involved construing “an investigation or inquiry” as
an existing
investigation or inquiry concerning the complaint.
[71] I reject
the doctor’s suggested construction of s 284 for the following
(a) The HO Act
contemplates that
the functions of the Ombudsman include taking relevant action to deal with
health service complaints, which action
might include conducting an
investigation or inquiry, and also dealing with health service issues by
undertaking investigations and
inquiries. The Minister may give a direction to
the Ombudsman to undertake an investigation or
The Ombudsman may
decide to carry out an investigation or
The Ombudsman is an
authorised person to carry out activities for the purposes of an investigation
under Part 8, investigating compliance
with the Act and investigating the
activities of a person the subject of immediate registration action or an
interim prohibition
order while the action or order is in
Hence, the HO Act
contemplates a wide variety of investigations or inquiries that might be
conducted by the Ombudsman for a variety
of purposes. Section 284(c) does not
contain words which demand the conclusion that the expression “an
investigation or inquiry”
refers to an investigation or inquiry being
undertaken in respect of a matter comprising a health service complaint or a
health service
complaint concerning the particular health practitioner the
subject of the complaint.
(b) Section 284(c) contains no words of limitation as to the specific type of
investigation or inquiry encompassed by the expression
“an investigation
or inquiry”. The absence of such words may be contrasted with the
presence of words of limitation
in other sections of the HO Act. By way of
example, other provisions of the Act speak in terms of “an investigation
“inquiry under Part
(c) Section 284(c) contains no words of temporal limitation. There are no words
which suggest that “an investigation or inquiry”
investigation or inquiry which has started, commenced or is being conducted. The
absence of such words may be contrasted
with the presence of such words of
temporal limitation in other sections of the HO Act. Relevantly, one section of
the HO Act refers
to a situation where the Ombudsman “starts an
investigation”.
sections of the HO Act refer to a matter “being
investigated”
(d) The proposed construction is not warranted by reference to the paramount
guiding principle in s 4(1) or the main objects of the
Act as referenced in s 3.
[72] I find that
on the proper construction of s 284(c), the expression “an investigation
or inquiry” contemplates any
investigation or inquiry which might be
conducted by the Ombudsman under the HO Act and is not limited to an existing
investigation
or inquiry. The HO Act contemplates that relevant action for
dealing with a health service complaint may evolve to include an investigation
in the period during which the Ombudsman deals with the complaint. Having regard
to the HO Act’s implicit recognition of evolving
relevant action, the
paramount guiding principle of the health and safety of the public does not
warrant limiting the expression
“an investigation or inquiry” to an
existing investigation or inquiry.
[73] Apart from
that construction argument which forms part of the first ground, the first and
second grounds of the application maintain
that the Ombudsman “unlawfully
relied on a belief” and that there was “no apparent basis for the
The reference to “belief” is to the state of mind of
the Ombudsman contemplated by s 284(c), namely a state of mind by
Ombudsman “considers that [giving notice] may ... prejudice an
investigation or inquiry”. That is, the doctor
submits that the
Ombudsman’s consideration under s 284 was unlawful because there was no
apparent basis to consider that giving
notice under ss 35(1)(b) or 50(b) would
prejudice an investigation or inquiry.
v Minister for Immigration
Derrington J comprehensively explained the nature of subjective jurisdictional
fact review and observed that the scope for this kind
of review is necessarily
more limited. The following matters may be discerned from his Honour’s
reasons. A subjective jurisdictional
fact may be ethereal or incorporeal, so
that its actual existence is incapable of being accurately assessed. The
various states
of mind on which powers are frequently conditioned are concerned
with matters which contain inherent value judgments and, necessarily,
judgments are matters on which reasonable minds might differ and may include a
not insignificant subjective element. There
may not be an absolute conclusion or
state of mind which might be reached in every case, a range of views might be
held. Derrington
J considered that “the permissible grounds for
subjective jurisdictional fact review should be reasonably limited by clear
definition and not be left open to a wide range of unfortunate arguments
claiming invalidity”. After having conducted a detailed
review of the
authorities, his Honour then said:
“Thus, in conformity with
the manner in which the legislature has granted power, any review by the Court,
as to the existence
of a subjective jurisdictional fact must be limited to
determining whether the state of mind actually reached is one within the range
which the legislature intended to be formed as a pre-requisite to the exercise
of power. If there are errors in the process by which
a state of mind is
reached, such as by considering extraneous or irrelevant considerations or by
excluding relevant considerations,
the state of mind will not be that which the
legislature impliedly requires. Similarly, if, in reaching the state of mind,
the repository
of power has asked themselves the wrong question as a consequence
of a mistake of law, the state of mind is not that on which the
exercise of
power is conditioned. It might also be noted that the Parliament implicitly
intends the requisite state of mind should
be one which has been formed
logically and rationally upon findings of fact which are logically formed upon
probative evidence. Further,
even if it cannot be detected that an error
occurred in the application of law or consideration of the correct matters, if
the conclusion
is one which is wholly unreasonable, it can, nevertheless, be
inferred that one of the identified error has occurred. In [
Avon Downs Pty
Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1949] HCA 26
(1949) 78 CLR 353]
at 360, Dixon J
identified the range of errors which might vitiate a claimed state of mind on
which a power is conditioned in the
following manner:
If he does not address himself to the question which the [statute]
formulates, if his conclusion is affected by some mistake of law,
if he takes
some extraneous reason into consideration or excludes from consideration some
factor which should affect his determination,
on any of these grounds his
conclusion is liable to review. Moreover, the fact that he has not made known
the reasons why he was
not satisfied will not prevent the review of his
decision. The conclusion he has reached may, on a full consideration of the
that was before him, be found to be capable of explanation only on the
ground of some such misconception. If the result appears to
be unreasonable on
the supposition that he addressed himself to the right question, correctly
applied the rules of law and took into
account all the relevant considerations
and no irrelevant considerations, then it may be a proper inference that it is a
false supposition.
It is not necessary that you should be sure of the precise
particular in which he has gone wrong. It is enough that you can see that
some way he must have failed in the discharge of his exact function according to
is no requirement under the HO Act for the Ombudsman to give reasons for the
state of mind reached under s 284(c). By
reason of the doctor having proceeded
under s 21(2)(b) of the JR Act, there has been no request for a statement of
reasons in respect
of the formation of the Ombudsman’s consideration or
state of mind. In this case it is unnecessary to decide whether the
consideration
called for by s 284(c) is a decision to which the JR Act applies.
The statutory language in s 284(c) is significant. There is no
requirement that
the Ombudsman “reasonably considers”. By way of contrast, the
language “if the [Ombudsman] reasonably
considers” appears in s
85(2). Section 284(c) also speaks in terms of “may” not
“will”. Hence, the
language of s 284(c) merely requires the
Ombudsman to consider that giving notice may prejudice an investigation or
inquiry. The
language references a state of mind or consideration which is the
result of an evaluative judgment, does not involve or require an
conclusion and contemplates a range of views.
[76] The doctor
sought to impugn the subjective opinions variously formed by Ms Mackenzie
and Mr Robinson. I am not satisfied that
on a full consideration of the
material before each respective delegate that their respective opinions are
capable of explanation
only on the ground of some misconception as described by
. The record reveals that the complaint was made
orally by a complainant who advised that she suffered “memory loss”.
The complainant’s oral account was confused and in parts contradictory.
It was apparent from the content of the oral complaint
that the complainant was
isolated, vulnerable and might have had a history of suffering from mental
health issues, including bipolar
disorder. The complaint made very serious
allegations of criminal conduct against the doctor. The complainant advised that
outcome she wanted the Ombudsman to “charge the doctor”. It is
apparent from the record that Ms Mackenzie’s state
of mind was directed to
an investigation of the complaint. The record relevantly speaks of
“prejudicing investigation of the
concerns raised”. At the time of
the s 35(1)(a) decision, Ms Mackenzie considered an assessment was necessary to
further information”. It is apparent from the record that
Mr Robinson’s state of mind was directed to the investigation
8, the subject of his decision made on the same day under s 50(a). Mr Robinson
had noted that the Ombudsman had “only
obtained a statement at this
time”, being the time of the s 50(a) decision. At that time, the
complainant was stating that
she had previously suffered amnesia but was now
able to remember everything. The complainant had previously said that she had
over prescribed codeine but had later changed her account to having been
over prescribed valium. Mr Robinson had noted in relation
to what had been
prescribed a “lack of information being found”. In all of these
circumstances there could well have
been many valid reasons why the
Ombudsman’s delegates considered that notifying the doctor of the
complaint at the times of
the decisions under ss 35(1)(a) and 50(a),
“may” have prejudiced an investigation or inquiry. On the face of
the record,
obtaining the complainant’s medical records and then
conducting an interview with the complainant appear as prudent steps to
facilitate the provision of further information to reveal or clarify the
particulars of the complaint so that the complaint
could be understood and
intelligibly communicated to the doctor. On the face of the record, a plausible
reason for delaying notice
was because the complaint was yet to be fully and
accurately explained by the complainant to the Ombudsman. It may well have been
thought that it was important to any fair investigation that the doctor was only
given notice of accurate details of the complaint.
[77] The doctor
submitted that it could be confidently inferred from the record that the
Ombudsman’s delegates considered that
giving notice would put records at
risk. It was submitted that there was no basis for that reason as there was
nothing to suggest
that the doctor was likely to destroy records if given notice
of the complaint. I reject these submissions which relied upon a statement
the record made by Ms Baker on 6 December 2024 to the effect “the medical
records relating to the treatment provided by
the [doctor] to the consumer have
now been obtained”. That statement was not made by Ms Mackenzie or Mr
Robinson. In any event,
it is consistent with a desire to obtain further
information and detail about the complaint to ensure that, when notified of the
complaint, the doctor was provided with accurate details of the complaint.
[78] I find that
the doctor failed to discharge his onus of demonstrating that on a consideration
of the material before Ms Mackenzie
and Mr Robinson, their respective
considerations that notice may prejudice an investigation or inquiry are
explicable only on the
ground that they acted on the basis of some misconception
as described by Dixon J in
. The doctor has failed to establish
that the states of mind of Ms Mackenzie and Mr Robinson were not within the
range which the legislature
intended to be formed as a prerequisite to the
exercise of the power conferred by s 284.
[79] As to the
third ground, it appeared to be accepted by the doctor that if he failed to
impugn the states of mind of Ms Mackenzie
and Mr Robinson, he could not complain
2024. The doctor contended that the progress report of 10 February 2025
did not provide “notice of the progress of [the investigation]”
within the meaning of s 84(1). That contention is without merit. The 10
February 2025 notice relevantly stated that the investigation
“remains in
the evidence gathering stage and we intend to complete the investigation as soon
as possible”. The notice
ended by stating “if you have any
questions about the investigation, please contact me by phone ... or by email
At the time of the 10 February 2025 notice, the doctor was aware
that three days earlier he had been provided with the allegations
comprise the matter and with 10 questions which he had been asked to answer in
relation to the matter. He had refused to
answer those questions. The 10
February 2025 notice was sufficient to provide notice of the progress of the
investigation. In my
consideration it was not incumbent upon the Ombudsman in a
progress report under s 84(1) to give notice of the steps taken and powers
exercised by the Ombudsman in the course of the investigation. The statement
that the investigation was in the “evidence gathering
accurate and indicated that the investigation was ongoing, that no investigation
report had been prepared and the
matter was not yet before the decision
No case for permanent injunctions and no utility in the
declarations
[80] The doctor
has not established that any procedure required by law to be observed in
relation to conduct engaged in for the purpose
of making the proposed decision
under s 90 was not observed. He has no entitlement to relief under the JR Act.
Had the doctor established
that procedures required by law to be observed in
relation to conduct engaged in for the purpose of making the proposed decision
under s 90 had not been observed, as particularised by the first to third
grounds of the application, I would not have been prepared
to grant him the
relief sought by the application.
[81] An issue
would have arisen as to whether the effect of the non-compliance was to
invalidate the conduct engaged in for the purpose
of making the proposed
decision. In
Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting
provided the following
statement of principle:
“An act done in breach of a condition
regulating the exercise of a statutory power is not necessarily invalid and of
Whether it is depends upon whether there can be discerned a
legislative purpose to invalidate any act that fails to comply with
condition. The existence of the purpose is ascertained by reference to the
language of the statute, its subject matter and objects,
and the consequences
for the parties of holding void every act done in breach of the condition.
Unfortunately, a finding of purpose
or no purpose in this context often reflects
a contestable judgment. The cases show various factors that have proved
decisive in
various contexts, but they do no more than provide guidance in
analogous circumstances. There is no decisive rule that can be applied;
is not even a ranking of relevant factors or categories to give guidance on the
[82] Later, the
plurality observed that:
“A better test for determining the issue for validity is to
ask whether it was a purpose of the legislation that an act done
in breach of
the provisions should be invalid ... In determining the question of purpose,
regard must be had to ‘the language
of the relevant provision and the
scope and object of the whole statute’.
the plurality noted
“... commonly no express declaration is to be found in
the statutory powers as to the effect on validity of departures from
procedure laid down. The question is then determined by reference to the nature
of the power conferred, the consequences which
flow from its exercise, the
character and purpose of the procedures prescribed.”
non-observance of a condition bearing upon the
exercise of a statutory power would work to the material disadvantage of
individuals
for whose protection the condition exists, considerations of justice
and convenience tell strongly in favour of holding invalid acts
done in neglect
of the condition.
Ultimately,
the question is always one of statutory construction; whether the
legislative purpose was to invalidate any act that
failed to comply with the statutory
requirements.
[85] The HO Act
does not expressly provide for the consequence of any contravention of the
procedures identified by the doctor. In
Braun v Health
was careful to note that s 3 of the HO Act has more objects than just the object
of protecting the health and safety of
the public. His Honour noted that the
objects as contained in s 3 “do not aways pull in the same
direction,” a matter
which is expressly recognised in s 4 which identifies
the main principle for administering the HO Act as being that the health and
safety of the public are paramount. One of the objects of the Act is
establishing a transparent, accountable and fair system for
effectively and
expeditiously dealing with health service complaints. On the appeal, in
Health Ombudsman v
recognised that there was a need to “balance the different objects and
interests affected by the operation of the
[86] It may be
observed that the requirement to give notice under s 278 is not absolute.
Section 278(3) provides that the requirement
to give notice does not apply if
the relevant decision is to take no further action in relation to the matter and
the Ombudsman has
not previously given a notice to or otherwise communicated
with the relevant health service provider about the matter. Further,
already apparent, s 284 provides that any requirement under the Act for the
Ombudsman to give notice of a decision or other
matter to a health service
provider does not apply to the extent that the Ombudsman considers that doing so
may put at serious risk
a person’s health or safety, put a complainant or
other person at risk of being harassed or intimidated or prejudice an
investigation
or inquiry. Hence, the transparent, accountable and fair system
for effectively and expeditiously dealing with complaints and other
contemplated by the objects of the HO Act is a system which, in certain
circumstances, countenances notice not being given
to a health practitioner
transparent, accountable and
fair system are more absolute. For example, in
circumstances where an investigation is started, the investigation is to be
within certain
and the Ombudsman
“must keep a register on a publicly accessible website of ...
investigations that have not been completed
within one year after the decision
to carry them out”.
register must list the general nature of the matter being investigated, the day
on which it was decided to carry out the investigation,
the current due day for
completing the investigation and the reason for each extension of the due
The register must not
include information that identifies a complainant, health service provider or
individual to whom a health service
Further, the state of
mind required to exempt notice, “the ... Ombudsman considers that doing so
may” is not expressed
“reasonably considers” and does not
require any conviction as to outcome beyond “may”.
[87] Having
regard to the language of the relevant provisions, the scope and objects of the
HO Act, in my consideration, the legislative
purpose discernible from the HO Act
was not to invalidate any further act in consequence of a failure to comply with
the requirements
to give notice under ss 35(1)(b), 50(b) and 84(1).
principal claims the subject of the application are
injunctions permanently restraining the Ombudsman from “continuing to
the investigation” and from “dealing with the
complaint”. The injunctions are sought in circumstances where the
complains that he was not given notice of decisions made under the HO Act to
accept the complaint, to assess the complaint
and to investigate the complaint
and was not provided with notice of the progress of the investigation. The HO
Act conferred no
express right on the doctor to participate in an assessment or
in an investigation of a complaint. The assessment was to be made
in the way the
Ombudsman considered appropriate. The Ombudsman might consider it appropriate,
but was not required, to invite submissions
from the doctor. The investigative
powers conferred upon an authorised person are wide and varying but there was no
express requirement
to interview a doctor or to require a doctor to attend upon
or participate in steps undertaken during the investigation. The doctor
no complaint about breach of procedural fairness of natural justice. The doctor
has not established any actual prejudice or
inferred prejudice suffered as a
result of any non-compliance with the notice requirements. There was no
submission that by reason
of the effluxion of time, relevant documents have been
lost or that a fair investigation is no longer possible. The doctor has not
established any basis for the permanent restraints sought by the application.
In those circumstances, the claimed declarations would
lack utility and I would
have refused to make the declarations on that
[89] The orders
I make are as follows:
(a) The further, further amended application for a statutory order of review
filed 10 November 2025 is dismissed.
(b) I will hear the parties as to costs.
A term defined by Schedule 1
of the HO Act by reference to s 5 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Queensland)
s 285(1) of the HO Act.
s 46(1) of the HO Act.
s 46(2)(a) of the HO Act.
s 46(2)(b) of the HO Act.
s 46(2)(c) of the HO Act.
s 46(2)(d) of the HO Act.
s 46(2)(e) of the HO Act.
s 49(1) of the HO Act.
s 186(a) of the HO Act.
s 188 of the HO Act.
s 85(1) of the HO Act.
s 85(2) of the HO Act.
s 85(3) of the HO Act.
s 86 of the HO Act.
Application [2].
Applicant’s Further
Outline of Submissions dated 29 October 2025 [4].
Applicant’s Further
Outline of Submissions dated 29 October 2025.
Respondents’ Second
Further Outline of Submission dated 6 November 2025 [25].
(1990) 170 CLR 321 at
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99
Gummow, Callinan and Heydon
Griffith University v
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99
[2024] HCA 45
(2024) 99 ALJR 103
(1996) 68 FCR 87.
Braun v Health
[2021] QSC 209
Karmakar v Minister for Health (No 2)
[2021] FCA 916
Unlike the position of the
“Director” in
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Hill
[2022] NSWCA 270
s 58(1) of the HO Act.
s 59(2) of the HO Act.
s 59(4) of the HO Act.
s 59(5) of the HO Act.
[2021] QSC 209
Applicant’s Further
Outline of Submissions [4].
Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal v Bond
(1990) 170 CLR 321 at 341-2.
Ibid at 342.
Aurukun Bauxite Development Pty Ltd v
[2016] QSC 263
(2016) 222 LGERA 107
Schlaepfer v ASIC
[2017] FCA 1122
Ibid at [57].
Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal v Bond
(1990) 170 CLR 321 at 343.
New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council v
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission
(1995) 59 FCR 369
(1995) 59 FCR 369
[1987] FCA 301
(1987) 16 FCR 465
(2001) 206 CLR 323 at
McHugh, Gummow and Hayne
ss 25(a) and (b) of the HO
s 28 of the HO Act.
For example, ss 35(1) and
38 of the HO Act.
s 186 of the HO Act.
ss 90AA(1)(a)(ii),
90C(1)(a), 275(1)(b) and
320C(3)(b) of the HO
ss 275(1)(b) and 285(2)(c)
of the HO Act..
s 140(3) of the HO Act.
ss 203(1)(a), 203(2)(c),
212(2)(a), 213(2)(a), 213(4)(a), 228(2)(a) and 320A(1) of the HO Act.
[2019] FCA 1681
(2019) 272 FCR 409
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1960] HCA 92
(1960) 105 CLR 214
Forrest & Forrest Pty Ltd v Wilson
[2017] HCA 30
(2017) 262 CLR 510
Module2 Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council
at 123 [12].
[2021] QSC 209.
(2022) 11 QR 125 at 142 [49].
ss 85(1), (2) and (3) of
the HO Act.
s 85(4) of the HO Act.
s 85(5) of the HO Act.
s 85(6) of the HO Act.
A court will usually
decline to grant a declaration where the proposed claim to an injunction fails:
Earl of Dysart v Hammerton & Co
[1914] UKLawRpCh 34
[1914] 1 Ch 822
[1916] 1 AC 57
64-5; P W Young,
Declaratory Orders
ed, Butterworths,
1984) at [704];
Sydney CC v Waker
[1974] ACLD 74.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (467 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter