URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2002/68.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Shaft [2002] QLAT 68 (18 July 2002)
Mr W. J. Muras
Chief Executive of the Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading
APPEAL NUMBER
68 of 2001/02
The Shaft, 173 Mary Street, Gympie
HEARING DATE
21 JUNE 2002
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST
Refusal of extended hours permit (on a regular basis) to allow trading
beyond 3.00am
Mr J Rolls (Chair)
Mrs J Harrington
DECISION DATE
18 JULY 2002
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. Wayne John Muras and Jason Paul Beaumont hold an on-premises (cabaret)
licence in respect of premises known as “The Shaft”
at 173 Mary
Street, Gympie. Mr Muras and Mr Beaumont became licensees as and from the 29th
of November 2001. The licence which
the licensees acquired, had the benefit of
an extended hours permit attached. This permit expired on the 31st of March
2. On the 13th of February 2002 Mr Muras applied to renew the extended hour
permit. The Chief Executive, as he was required to do, informed the local
government for the area to which the application relates
(the Cooloola Shire
Council) and the Assistant Commissioner of Police for the locality to which the
application relates
of the application.
3. The Cooloola Shire Council objected to the granting of an extended hours
permit in respect of these premises. In doing so it
supported “the Gympie
police in their objection to the extended trading
4. Sergeant B.J. Teys prepared a memorandum to the officer in charge, Gympie
station, dated 10 March 2002 which formed the basis
of the objection made by the
Assistant Commissioner of Police, North Coast Region on the 18th of March 2002.
Sergeant Teys in his
memo refers to the 11 point Management Plan operative in
respect of the extended hours permit. This Management Plan was formulated
the 28th of September 2001. Mr Muras at the hearing of the appeal indicated his
familiarity with this document and its contents.
He had become aware of it at
the time he acquired the licence in respect of these premises. Sergeant Teys
observes, inter
“6. The licensees of “The Shaft” nightclub have failed to
adhere to the Management Plan
despite numerous warnings from myself regarding shortfallings (sic) of the
management of these premises and poor control of its patrons.
7. I have attached a copy of the Management Plan I have referred to and I
firstly make reference to Provision 2. I made observations
as recently as the
9th of March 2002 of patrons leaving the nightclub between 3am and 4am who do
not have the capability to traverse
the dozen steps at the front of the premises
who are obviously intoxicated. This is not a one off occasion...
7.1 These Intoxicated patrons then walked to the cab rank, where the police
have been called to attend numerous calls from the cab
operations manager re
disturbances.
7.2 A liquor Seton was issued on the 9th of March 2002 for non exempt minor
on licensed
8 In relation to Provision 4 of the Management Plan I had repeatedly asked
the managers to ensure a record is kept on the numbers
of patrons currently
within the premises. Adherence to Pro.4 cannot be monitored if the patronage
numbers are not known. Most clubs
have persons adjacent to the front door with
a simple counting device.
9. In relation to Provision 10. This is not being complied with at all.
After 3am the security or manager close the door, and no
security providers are
present outside the door. They simply open the door to allow patrons to leave
and quickly close the door....
10. In relation to Provision 5. No security provider is maintaining
surveillance outside the premises for at least 30 minutes after
the premises
have ceased trading...
11. In relation to Provision 9. At no time has the licensee ensured the taxi
rank is properly controlled or monitored by a licensed
5. Sergeant Teys considered that the licensee has not complied with the
Management Plan. Security for the premises has been “inept
insufficient” to enable proper control to be exercised over the premises.
Intoxicated persons are leaving the premises
and not being monitored. Patrons
are also still being allowed into the premises after 3.00am which demonstrated,
according to Sergeant
Teys, an inability to exercise proper management in
respect of the premises whilst operating under an extended hours permit.
6. The licensees had an opportunity to respond to these
In summary, the licensees
asserted that they take the management conditions “very seriously”.
The licensees pointed
to the fact that at the relevant time a competitor,
“The Freemasons Hotel”, promoted discount beer and spirits.
we were told during the course of this appeal that that practice has
now ceased, nevertheless, persons leaving the Freemasons Hotel
after having
consumed a number of drinks made it difficult for the licensees to properly
assess the sobriety or otherwise of people
intending to enter the licensed
7. It appears that the licensees accept that there was an under aged person on
the premises but say this was described as a “mistake”
been addressed to ensure it does not happen again. With respect to the
allegations of not keeping proper counts, it was
said that the evening before
the night that Sergeant Teys had visited the place, the counters had gone
missing. New counters were
ordered on the next available working day.
8. After considering this material, the Chief Executive determined to refuse the
application. On the 28th of April 2002, Mr Muras
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
9. Pursuant to
Liquor Act 1992
(“the Act”),
an extended hours permit to trade beyond 3.00 am remains in force for a maximum
period of six months but
may be renewed on application by the Chief Executive.
That renewal is governed by s.121A of the Act. In considering the application,
the Chief Executive must have regard to:
● the comments and objections of the local government authority and the
Assistant Commissioner of Police;
● the impact on the amenity of the community;
● the previous conduct of the applicant in discharging any duties under
the Act, especially in relation to the subject premises;
● the applicant’s ability to control noise and behaviour of the
number of persons that could reasonably be expected to
be on or in the vicinity
of the premises if the extension was granted; and
● the suitability of the premises and its facilities for the purposes for
which the extension is
10. During the course of the hearing Mr Tennison, for and on behalf of the Chief
Executive, conceded that no issue arose with respect
to the suitability of the
premises, nor was there contained in the appeal book any evidence that the
operation of the subject premises
had any direct adverse impact upon the amenity
of the community concerned.
11. The other issues required to be considered under the Act remained to be
considered. It is clear from the scheme of the Act to
which we have referred
that considerable weight is to be given to the views expressed by the police and
local authority, both of
whom object to the granting of this
application.
That material clearly
demonstrates, in our view, that there is a legitimate concern as to the manner
in which the licensees have
discharged their duties under the Act. An extended
hours permit is a privilege which is conferred on a licensee only if the
demonstrates that he or she is in a position to discharge the
obligations that accompany the privilege.
12. In this case, the licensees seem to concede that, at least in some respects,
there had been breaches of the Management Plan although,
these were explained
away as having arisen as a consequence of unforseen events such as the
disappearance of the counters or due
to bad luck. In particular, Mr Muras
referred to an example where a security guard was not standing outside the
premises monitoring
the entrants on the basis that he had been called to attend
a scuffle inside. Mr Muras urged the Tribunal to consider that there
endeavours to comply with the Management Plan. After hearing Mr Muras and Mr
Beaumont make their submissions, the Tribunal
considers that their submissions
cannot displace the weight which must be given to the objections made by the
local authority and
the police. Further, the response to the Management Plan
demonstrates in our view that the conduct of the applicant in discharging
duties under the Act has fallen below what could reasonably be expected of
reasonably competent licensees. For example, dealing
with the issue of the
requirement to monitor the number of patrons in the premises. This obviously is
an important requirement.
If counters are misplaced then there are other means
by which a count could be kept and these must be put in place. Further, the
issue of the taxi ranks identified at paragraphs 8 and 9 of the Management
was dealt with by the
licensees by requesting the relocation of the taxi rank to outside the licensed
premises via simple informal
requests of the local cab operators. No endeavour
was made to approach the Department of Transport. Further, upon specific
questioning
by the Tribunal, it did not appear that the licensees or any of
their staff were aware of or have undertaken any of the courses offered
department with respect to the responsible service of alcohol. The Tribunal
finds this ignorance on the part of the licensees
to be an important issue.
13. In listening to the applicants it appears that the licensees are
inexperienced in the operation of a nightclub and, some of the
difficulties
which have been reported by Sergeant Teys may, with further experience, be
rectified. However, a legitimate endeavour
must be made by the licensees to
demonstrate an awareness of their obligations under the Act and a demonstrated
ability to discharge
those obligations. At the least, all staff and the
licensees ought to have undertaken the responsible service of alcohol course
undertaken by the Department. Alternative systems should be put in place to
deal with contingencies which could readily be expected,
such as removal of one
security guard to deal with a scuffle inside.
14. The premises continues to trade until 3.00am. There is ample opportunity
for the licensees to demonstrate an ability to discharge
their obligations under
the Act. A clearly demonstrated ability ought be apparent before an extended
hours permit can be granted.
The granting of such a permit is, as we have
noted, a privilege which, if not managed responsibly, has the potential to cause
considerable
harm to the community by disrupting its amenity. Accordingly, in
determination of whether or not such an application is granted,
part of the
consideration is the protection of the community from the adverse impacts which
flow as a consequence of the operation
of this permit. It is for that reason
that Parliament has clearly placed considerable weight upon the decisions of the
the local authority in the decision making
15. In those circumstances, it is our view that this appeal ought be dismissed.
However, this does not preclude, at any later stage,
the licensees renewing
their application for an extended hours permit once they can demonstrate an
appreciation of the obligations
cast upon them.
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
16. The appeal by W.J. Muras filed on the 28th of April 2002 against the refusal
by the Chief Executive to grant an application for
an extended hours permit in
respect of premises known as the “Shaft” situated at 173 Mary
Street, Gympie, is dismissed.
See page 19, Appeal
See page 44-45, Appeal
See pages 23-25, Appeal
See sections 121A(3) and
Liquor Act 1992
Frenelle Pty Ltd
v. Chief Executive (Wilkinsons Tavern)
(1996) QLAT
See page 45, Appeal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (47.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter