URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2003/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bullwinkles Cabaret & Bar & Others [2003] QLAT 15 (20 March 2003)
FIRST APPELLANT:
(APPLICANT)
(APPLICANT)
(APPLICANT)
(APPLICANT)
Gregorio Pellegrini
Reelaw Pty Ltd
Cayneston Pty
Thomas Hunting Pty Ltd
RESPONDENT:
The Chief Executive, Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading,
including Liquor Licensing
APPEAL NUMBERS:
15, 16, 17 & 18 of 2002/03
Bullwinkles Cabaret & Bar,The Bank Nightclub
Molly Malones Irish Pub
and Mad Cow Tavern
Flinders Street East
TOWNSVILLE QLD 4810
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST:
Imposition of Lock-Out Condition
HEARING DATE:
20 February 2003
Mrs G Spender (Chair)
Mrs J Harrington
DECISION DATE:
20 March 2003
Background to these Appeals
1 In November 2002, Gregorio Pellegrini, Reelaw Pty Ltd, Cayneston Pty and
Thomas Hunting Pty Ltd (“the appellants”)
lodged applications
pursuant to s.109A of the
Liquor Act 1992
(“the Act”)for extended
hours permits to allow trading to 5a.m. at their respective premises,
Bullwinkles Cabaret and
Bar, The Bank Nightclub, Molly Malones Irish Pub and Mad
Cow Tavern, all situated in the Flinders Street East entertainment precinct
the Townsville Central Business District. The appellants’ current extended
hours permits for 5 a.m. trading had been granted
for a two month period
expiring on the 30 November 2002, in order to facilitate further investigation
of a police report dated 3
September 2002 which had recommended that all
existing 5a.m. extended hours permits in Townsville, which were due to expire on
September 2002 pursuant to
, not be renewed.
2 Prior to considering whether existing six month permits should be renewed as
from 1 October 2002, the Chief Executive had sought
comment from the police and
the Townsville City Council (“the Council”) in accordance with
s.121A of the Act. The Council
advised that it had no objection to the renewals
but, as noted above, the police did object and submitted a detailed report in
of the objection.
3 On 28 November 2002, the Chief Executive determined to renew the 5a.m. permits
for the four premises in question, and all other
premises in Townsville having
current 5a.m. permits, for the period 1 December 2002 to 30 March 2003. A number
of new management
conditions relating to 5a.m. trading were imposed on all these
premises. Those management conditions included a condition 5 (“the
lock-out condition”)in the following terms:
“ Patrons must not be permitted entry or re-entry to any part of the
premises after 3am on any day where trading continues beyond
3am, except where
the exit from and re-entry to the premises after 3am is in an emergency
situation”.
4 The extended hours permits granted allowed Bullwinkles Cabaret and Bar and the
Bank Nightclub to trade to 5a.m. seven days per
week; Mad Cow Tavern’s
permit allowed trading to 5a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights; and Molly Malones
Irish Pub was permitted
to trade to 5 a.m. from Thursday to
5 On 2 December 2002 the appellants lodged appeals against the imposition of the
lock-out condition and applied for a stay of the
imposition of that condition.
At a hearing which took place on 4 December 2002, the Tribunal found that the
balance of convenience
favoured the granting of a stay and ordered that the
imposition of the lock-out condition be stayed until the determination of the
6 At a directions conference on 17 January 2003, the appellants were granted
leave under s.35A(3)(b) to adduce new evidence relating
to the effects of the
imposition of the lock-out condition upon the operation of their respective
premises. The Tribunal was of the
view that the appellants had not been afforded
proper notice of the proposed imposition of the lock-out condition and had not
given an opportunity to express their concerns about such a condition
before its imposition. The Tribunal also granted leave to the
Chief Executive to
adduce new evidence in response to the new evidence adduced by the
appellants.
7 At this directions conference, counsel representing the appellants sought
leave to cross examine at the forthcoming appeal hearing
Senior Sergeant Last,
Officer in Charge of the Townsville Police Station. The new evidence to be
relied upon by the appellants included
a newspaper report of recent statements
which Senior Sergeant Last was alleged to have made with respect to the
operation of the
Townsville nightclubs over the recent Christmas/New Year
period. These alleged statements appeared to be inconsistent with views
expressed in the police report dated 3 September 2002 which the Chief Executive
had relied upon in imposing the lock-out condition.
8 The Tribunal granted leave to counsel for the appellants to make oral
enquiries of Senior Sergeant Last at the hearing of the appeals
as to policing
matters relevant to the imposition of the lock-out, and in particular as to any
relevant policing matters which had
occurred since the date of the police report
of the 3 September 2002. The Tribunal granted leave because it considered it
of assistance to the Tribunal to explore the apparent discrepancy
between new evidence as to relevant policing matters and the evidence
appeal books which had been before the Chief Executive at the time of his
decision of 28 November 2002.
Relevant Statutory
9 The power to impose conditions derives from s.107AA which provides that:
“The Chief Executive may impose conditions on licences and
ensure appropriate compliance with this Act; or
to give effect to an agreement about the
management of premises that has resulted from a conference held under
or a decision of the Tribunal;
to minimise harm caused by alcohol abuse
and misuse and associated violence; or
minimise alcohol related disturbances, or public disorder, in a
10 The statutory framework for the renewal of permits for extension of hours
beyond 3 a.m. is contained in section 121A, and
section 121(5)(g)
Section 121A provides as follows:
“(1) As soon as practicable after the Chief Executive receives an
application for renewal under
section 121(6)
of a permit for extension of hours
beyond 3 a.m., the Chief Executive must tell the following about the
application-
local government for the area to which the application
the assistant commissioner for the
locality to which the application relates.
local government or assistant commissioner may comment on, or object to, the
application by giving written comments or objections
to the Chief Executive
within 14 days of receiving the Chief Executive’s advice about the
application.
(3)In considering the application, the Chief Executive must have regard to
(a) comments and objections received under subsection (2); and
(b) the matters mentioned in
section 121(5)(g)
(c) the impact on the amenity of the community
concerned.”
Section 121(5)(g)
and (6) provides as follows:
“(5) Also, in deciding whether to grant the application, the Chief
Executive must have regard to-.........
(g) for an extended hours permit for extension of hours beyond 2
(i) the previous conduct of the applicant in discharging any duties under this
Act previously placed on the applicant, especially
for the premises for which
the extension is sought; and
(ii) the applicant’s ability to control the noise and behaviour of the
number of persons that could reasonably be expected
to be on and in the vicinity
of the premises if the extension were granted; and
(iii) the suitability of the premises and its facilities for the purpose for
which the extension is
the Chief Executive grants an extended hours permit for extension of hours
beyond 3 a.m., the permit remains in force for a
maximum period of 6 months and may be renewed only on application to the Chief
Executive.”
Issues for Determination
11 Counsel for the appellants argued two main grounds for appeal, firstly that
the Chief Executive had no power to impose condition
5 because none of the
preconditions for exercise of that power as specified in section 107AA were
satisfied; and secondly, that if
the Chief Executive did have the requisite
power, the power had been improperly exercised in the circumstances because
no reasonable justification for the imposition of a condition of this
12 With respect to the first issue, counsel for the appellants argued that in
order to impose a condition there must firstly be evidence
of a breach of the
Act and secondly, the imposition of the condition must be in order to ensure
compliance with the provision which
has been breached. In other words there must
be a direct link between a breach and the subsequent imposition of a condition
condition imposed is to be valid.
13 We do not agree that the Chief Executive’s discretion to impose
conditions on licences and permits is so narrowly confined.
We are of the view
that the discretion is a wide one, and the proper and efficient administration
of the Act will often require that
conditions be imposed which aim at preventing
harm arising from misuse of liquor or ensuring ongoing compliance with the Act
absence of any evidence of past non-compliance by licensees.As discussed
in the case of
Lanyon Property Developments Pty Ltd –v- Chief Executive
the imposition of a lock-out condition should be characterised
as a form of regular administrative monitoring, rather than as a punitive
measure. Further, as also discussed in
, if such a
condition is to be imposed it should in fairness and for effectiveness be
imposed on all premises with similar trading
hours in the particular locality.
We would add that the only fetter on the Chief Executive’s wide discretion
is that imposition
of such a condition is in all the circumstances
reasonable.
14 Even if, contrary to our view, sub-section (a) of s.107AA should be given a
narrow interpretation which would preclude its use
as the source of power for
the patron lock-out condition imposed here, we consider that sub-section (d) of
s.107AA provides a clear
source of power. There is evidence of the occurrence of
alcohol related disturbances in Flinders Street East as patrons walk between
venues in the period 3 a.m. to 5 a.m., and the lock-out condition has the
capacity to minimise such street movement and in our view
the capacity “to
minimise alcohol related disturbances in a locality”.
15 With respect to the merit of imposing a lock-out provision in the Flinders
Street East precinct, it was argued by Mr Reinhold
on behalf of the Chief
Executive that it was appropriate to impose the condition because it helps
maintain a safe environment within
the precinct. Entertainment precincts such as
Flinders Street East have a dynamic of their own and in all such precincts
the State generic problems of public drunkenness, disorderly conduct,
vandalism and noise disturbances occur as patrons move between
16 In his statement tendered at the hearing, the Executive Director of the
Liquor Licensing Division (‘the Division”),
Mr M Tolhurst, informed
the Tribunal as to the circumstances in which a similar lock-out provision had
recently been imposed in the
Caxton Street entertainment precinct in Brisbane.
He said that the restrictions were in place for a period of 4 months from 1 June
2002 to 30 September 2002. The objective of the restrictions was to improve the
amenity of the Caxton Street and Petrie Terrace locality
in the early hours of
the morning. Noise and patron behaviour were of consistent concern to residents,
and police also had expressed
concerns in respect of the number of incidents in
the precinct.
(LAT) Appeal No. 19 of 1997/98, 15
January 1998 at page 8
17 Mr Tolhurst said that the use of lock-out provisions had proved useful in
reducing amenity problems in a range of locations including
Mackay, Mooloolaba,
Yeppoon, Dubbo and Orange. The provision requires licensees to exercise more
detailed management of their premises
and ensure procedures are in place and
security provided to ensure compliance with lock-out provisions. He said that
this provision
reduced the movement of patrons between premises and provided for
a more gradual flow of patrons out of a locality. This in turn
disturbance to amenity in a locality.
18 Mr Tolhurst said that during the 4 month period when the lock-out provisions
in Caxton Street were in place, residents reported
a marked improvement in
respect to amenity issues in the locality. Police also advised that there had
been a general improvement
in patron behaviour in the precinct. At a meeting
with licensees of Caxton Street premises on 13 September 2002 to discuss the
of the lock-out provision, it was acknowledged by licensees that there
had been a marked improvement in patron behaviour in the precinct.
It was also
acknowledged by licensees that they had put in place effective management plans
and house policies to better control
patron behaviour. Mr Tolhurst reached the
conclusion that the lock-out provision had motivated and necessitated licensees
manage their premises to ensure compliance with the lock-out
provisions. On this basis, the Division had removed the lock-out provisions.
flow-on effect was that licensees acknowledged that internal management
procedures that remained in place after the removal of
lock-out provisions were
an improvement on those that existed prior to restrictions being imposed.
19 Mr D Tennison, a Senior Liquor Licensing Officer with the Division who was
employed as the Regional Licensing Officer in the North
Coast Region between
1994 and 1997, told the Tribunal that in mid 1995 there had been a series of
complaints lodged by residents
in the Mooloolaba area concerning noise,
vandalism and unruly behaviour from patrons of the four late-trading venues in
the central
township area. After investigation of the problem it was decided to
impose a 1.30a.m. lock-out on the late trading premises concerned,
closing hours of 3 a.m. He said the effect of this provision was immediate and
substantial. Between the hours of 1.30a.m.
and 3a.m. there was a ninety percent
reduction of persons on the streets and around the licensed premises. Those
persons that were
either ejected or had left the premises for whatever reason,
dispersed from the area as there was nothing to attract them to staying
area. As a consequence there was a lessening of noise and behaviour problems in
the streets adjacent to the licensed premises.
He maintained that the
introduction and maintenance of this lock-out has been a major and effective way
of controlling patrons from
1995 to the present time.
20 The evidence before us indicates that the Flinders Street East late night
entertainment precinct is a discrete area separated
from residential areas,
which makes it a different sort of precinct from Caxton Street and Mooloolaba
central township, where there
are significant numbers of residents living in
close proximity to the nightclubs. There is thus no evidence, except for
of the operators of a motel, of any complaints from residents about
patron movement on the streets between the nightclub venues in
the Townsville
Central Business District. There was strong complaint from the owners of the
Downtown Motel at 121 Flinders Street
East in July 2002, but more recent
evidence in a statement dated 13 January 2003 from the new operators of that
motel, indicates
that the crowds over the recent Christmas/New Year period were
well behaved, and the motel received no complaints from motel guests
or objectionable behaviour in the vicinity of the motel.
21 In its response to the Division dated 4 September 2002 with respect to
current renewals of 5 a.m. permits, the Council in raising
no objection to the
renewals said as follows:
“• Council notes Police concerns but seeks to work with police and
Venue Managers to address the issues in a proactive,
and mutually beneficial
• The success of the original Safety Action Project, which won a national
award, and the setting up of the voluntary code of
conduct, had the following
results (from surveys conducted by Griffith University which took place in 1994
and 1996, at the start
and end of the
assaults fell by 51.5% inside clubs. Police Statistics showed that minor
assaults fell by 72% in Flinders Street
High to medium rowdiness in males went
down by 25%.
High drunkenness of males
dropped by 48%.
In 1994 51% of venues had no
publicity about the laws relating to consumption of alcohol. In 1996 all venues
had such notices.
Requests by doormen to see
ID rose by 300%.
Food was available in 14.3%
of nightclub visits in 1994, and in 65.7% in
More taxis were available in 1996
compared to 1994.
• Thus the track record shows that the concerns raised in regards to
Flinders Street East can be addressed effectively by proactively
together with all stakeholders.
• Council notes the immediate action taken by Venue Managers to address
the concerns in the short term (e.g. increased on-street
security and promotion
of cab share)
• Council agrees to work with the Venue Managers, Liquor Licensing and the
Police to revise the code of conduct to make it
more effective in addressing
concerns on the street.”
22 The Tribunal notes that the Division’s Regional Supervisor, Mr J.
Wratten, recommended the renewal of 5 a.m. permits and
it appears that he was
not asked for his views upon the imposition of a lock-out provision.
23 Mr Reinhold, in a departmental memorandum dated 15 November 2002, analysed
the material provided by the Police in support of their
objection and the
response made by the venue operators to that material, and reached the following
conclusions:
“...It appears that the aggregate problem (despite Codes of Practice,
RSA and $800,000 per annum security) is that general patron
behaviour in and
around the Flinders Street area is unacceptable and has the potential to
substantially effect the health and wellbeing
of patrons in the vicinity. The
police data does show a course of incidents and drunk arrests that simply cannot
be explained away
by the activities of ‘restaurants’ and
‘football stadiums’. Patrons are getting substantially inebriated
in the premises subject to the current review and creating situations in the
Flinders Street locality.
However, there is support for the venues from council. The local authority
is an important stakeholder and its views should be given
considerable weight.
Associated businesses have provided evidence that the Code of Practice works and
eases patron departure concerns.
An analysis of police statistics shows
promising trends in lower arrest rates from 2001 that cannot be ignored. The
situation is
not perfect, but certainly superior by all accounts to say, Caxton
Street and the Cairns CBD. According, a case exists to adopt
recommendations in a modified format.”
24 The Tribunal’s analysis of the Police data leads us, too, to the
conclusion that there was a steady improvement in the level
disturbances over the 18 months period surveyed from January 2001 to July 2002.
There was in particular in our view a
significant decrease in liquor incidents
in the seven (7) months from January to July 2002, when that period is compared
previous twelve (12) month period. There is evidence before us that
that pleasing trend continued over the recent Christmas/New Year
period. Senior
Sergeant Last said however in his oral evidence before the tribunal that there
had been an atypical spike in the
rate of liquor incidents in January and
February 2003.There had been an increase in the number of street offences and
assaults, when
compared with the number of incidents which were occurring in
late 2002. There was no direct evidence however that a lockout would
any effect upon the occurrence of the recent street offences and assaults.
25 We accept the uncontroverted evidence of the appellants that the Townsville
Venue Managers Association has been pro-active in
establishing self-regulatory
management systems and that this has resulted in a safer and more secure
nightclub precinct. The association
has established management plans,
implemented them, enforced them and financed them. We accept the
appellants’ evidence that
the systems imposed upon the operators in Caxton
Street after recent problems are all systems that were self-administered by the
traders in Townsville six years ago. The venue operators are presently
cooperating in employing a security officer to manage the
street situation at
considerable cost to themselves. We find that this is a measure that directly
addresses the issue of a safe environment
for patrons moving between venues in
the early hours of the morning. The evidence before us suggests that additional
on-street security
provided by the Venue Managers’ Association in
accordance with their Code of Practice may have been instrumental in minimising
street disturbances over the recent busy Christmas/New Year
26 The appellants are concerned about the financial impact upon them of a
lock-out provision. However where 5a.m. trading is concerned,
the amenity of
the locality concerned must always take precedence over licensees’
economic concerns. The granting of a permit
to trade to 5a.m. is not a right but
a privilege, and that privilege, as the operators are well aware, is reviewed
every six months
and they are always aware of the possibility that the privilege
may be withdrawn if there are serious amenity concerns as a result
27 We do accept however the evidence of Mr Pellegrini that the proposed lock-out
would reduce his income for the period between the
hours of 3.00a.m. to 5.00a.m.
by some 60% because his is an average sized venue, and his venue would be
disadvantaged in comparison
to the largest venue in the town. We accept that
patrons, when choosing a venue to be locked into for the remainder of the
will pick a venue with the capacity to hold a larger group of people.
Mr Pelligrini says that from his experience this is what occurs
in Mackay where
the largest venue in that town attracts people from other venues prior to their
lock-out time. Because there is
this economic impact, a lock-out provision
should not be imposed in our view unless it is justified in terms of improving
the amenity
of a locality where patron behaviour is of serious
28 The appellants argue that a lock-out provision actually has an adverse impact
upon the amenity of a locality. We think there is
some substance in the evidence
put before us by the appellants that, with a lock-out, patrons are likely to
stay longer for fear
of leaving, with the result that there may be larger
numbers of patrons on the street at 5a.m. We were told by Mr Tolhurst however
that a lockout leads to a more gradual flow of patrons out of a locality, and in
the end we are unable to express a concluded view
on this aspect of the
evidence. We do give weight however to the appellants’ concerns that there
may be an increase in violent
incidents where patrons are frustrated by being
refused entry to their desired venue after 3 a.m. This concern is re-iterated by
Mr D Jones who gave evidence with respect to the effect of the Caxton Street
lock-out upon residents in that locality.
29 We find that another disadvantage of a lock-out provision is the possibility
that younger patrons who rely on transport from other
patrons may not be able to
find the person who will provide their transportation home. The enforced
separation that a lock-out creates
might see young people having to walk home
alone, putting themselves at risk, because they are unable to reunite with
friends prior
to the end of the
30 Having carefully examined all the evidence before us, we are not persuaded
that the imposition of the lock-out condition is justified
in the circumstances
as they exist in the Townsville entertainment precinct at the present time.
There are certainly some ongoing
concerns about the level of street
disturbances, as there are in all late night entertainment precincts where there
is a significant
movement of patrons between venues. However we are not
satisfied on the evidence before us that street disturbances between 3 a.m.
5 a.m. in Flinders Street East as a result of movement between venues are at a
high or unacceptable level.
31 Furthermore we are not satisfied that the lock-out is necessary where there
is evidence of a satisfactory level of cooperation
between venue operators, the
Police, the Council and the Division in addressing the issue of street
disturbances caused by 5 a.m.
trading. In our view the most effective way to
address the patron movement problem is by way of cooperative strategies
implemented
by operators which directly address that particular issue. We are
satisfied that the appellants and other operators of late night
Townsville are committed to implementing such strategies.
32 The specific conditions endorsed on each of the appellants’ licences,
and on the licences of all other venues in Townsville
which have extended hours
permits allowing 5 a.m. trading, include the following conditions which have
been imposed with the agreement
of the operators:
The provision of a security officer in Flinders Street
East (collectively financed by licensed premises) to contribute to street
Two-way radios are to be used by the front door staff of
your licensed premises, the street security officer and the Police so as
the front door staff of licensed premises of persons who have been refused entry
at other licensed venues.
The street security officer is to give a report at each
meeting of the representatives from the licensed premises, Police and Townsville
City Council (those meetings to be held at least once every month) giving
details of those Licensees not complying with the provisions
and contravening the Code of Practice.
33 The Tribunal is satisfied that the internal management procedures which have
been adopted and implemented by the appellants are
of a satisfactory standard
such as was accepted by Mr Tolhurst as warranting the removal of the lock-out
condition in the Caxton
Street precinct.
34 These management plans and house policies aim to better control patron
behaviour and there is evidence of a marked improvement
in patron behaviour in
the precinct over a two year period from January 2001 to the present time. The
reasons which have justified
the imposition of lock-out provisions in other
regions in the State do not in our view exist in the Flinders Street East
at the present time. In these circumstances we find that the
imposition of the lock-out condition is not justified at the present
Order of the Tribunal
35 The Tribunal orders that the decision of the Chief Executive of 28 November
2002 to impose Management Condition 5 on the appellants’
extended hours
permits to trade to 5 a.m. be set
..................................................
G SPENDER- CHAIR
Liquor Appeals
Glenice Spender David Stitt Jessica
Chairperson Member Member
h:L:\WPDATA\TRIBUNAL\Decisions\Townsville Cabarets
6-3-03(2).doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (117 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter