URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2009/70.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:38:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TAC, Re [2009] QGAAT 70 (22 September 2009)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL
[2009] QGAAT 70
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Requested Review of the Appointment of an Administrator on the Tribunal's
In the matter of TAC
MATTER NUMBERS:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal.
DATE OF HEARING:
18 August 2009
DATE OF ORDER:
18 August 2009
DATE OF REASONS:
22 September 2009
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
J Gallagher Presiding Member
J Cowdroy Member
A Brands Member
CATCHWORDS:
ADMINISTRATORS-Where appointee had acted appropriately-Where applicant
found to have a sufficient and continuing interest in the adult.
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Schedule 4.
ADMINISTRATION
the appointment of The Public Trustee of Queensland as administrator for TAC for
all financial matters is continued
Tribunal dispenses with the requirement for the administrator to provide a
financial management plan.
Tribunal directs the administrator to provide accounts to the Tribunal when
appointment remains current until further order of the Tribunal.
NOTICE OF INTEREST IN LAND
the administrator shall within three (3) months:
by way of a search of the records held by the Registrar of Titles or other
means, any interest in real property registered
in the name of TAC (“the
with the Registrar of Titles a copy of this order and a notice notifying the
Registrar of any interest in land held by the adult
which is subject to this
administration order.
to the Tribunal:
(i) a copy of the search of records held by the Registrar
of Titles referred to above and;
(ii) a copy of the lodgement summary with the dealing number showing
lodgement of the order in respect of any interests in land held
by the adult
which is subject to this administration order.
if any change is made in an interest in land held by the adult which is the
subject of this administration order or if there
are any further dealings in
land on behalf of the adult by the administrator, the administrator shall lodge
with the Registrar of
Titles within 14 days of the finalisation of such interest
a copy of this order and a notice (in a form prescribed by the Registrar
Titles), concerning such changes or dealings.
the administrator pay, from the adult’s funds, any fee associated with the
above notices.
REASONS FOR DECISION
INTRODUCTION
[1] TAC is an 86 year old woman who resides in her home at the Gold Coast. She
has been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease
and is cared for at her home
by her daughter, TJ.
[2] On 29 April 2008, the Tribunal made an order declaring that TAC does not
have capacity for all complex personal and financial
matters. It appointed The
Public Trustee of Queensland as administrator for TAC for all financial matters
and ordered that the appointment
remained current until further order of the
[3] On 3 July 2009, BC filed an application with the Tribunal requesting a
review of the appointment of The Public Trustee of Queensland
and proposing the
appointment in its place of ANZ Trustees Limited. At the same time, she filed an
application to be joined as an
active party. On 5 August 2009, FP, another
daughter of TAC, filed an application to be joined as an active party. On 7
August 2009,
a Deputy President of the Tribunal granted both applicants to be
joined as active parties.
[4] The review of the appointment of an administrator was heard on the Gold
Coast on 18 August 2009. TAC did not attend the hearing,
nor did her carer, TJ.
Both BC and FP attended as active parties. TAC’s grandson, FW, and her
son-in-law, FF, also attended.
TAC’s nephew, TN attended as well along
with his wife, TK. MS and AM attended on behalf of ANZ Trustees Limited (ANZ
GP and KM attended on behalf of The Public Trustee of Queensland
(Public Trustee).
[5] SP of L & G, Solicitors, sought leave at appear as the legal
representative of FP. The Tribunal granted leave for him to
represent her.
[6] At the commencement of the hearing, SP submitted that BC had no standing to
make the application to the Tribunal, on the grounds
that she was not an
“interested person” for the purposes of
section 115
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(the Act). In support, he argued
that it was not clear in what capacity BC was appearing. He submitted that she
could not be appearing
as a legal representative for TAC because TAC’s
incapacity meant that she could not give instructions. He argued that the Public
Trustee would have to authorise her appointment as TAC’s legal
representative.
[7] In reply, BC stated that, due to TAC’s incapacity, she was not
appearing as her solicitor. She pointed out, however, that
she used to be her
solicitor. She said that, since the Tribunal’s order in April 2008, she
had remained a friend of TAC and
had been invited to her home. She said that she
still had an interest in TAC’s welfare. She also mentioned that she had an
interest as a member of the public and as someone who had concerns for
[8] Following a short break to consider the application, the Tribunal determined
that, under
section 126
of the Act, BC was an interested person, being a person
who has “a sufficient and continuing interest” in TAC, as that
phrase is defined in Schedule 4 of the Act.
THE ISSUES AND THE LEGISLATION
[9] There were two main issues before the Tribunal:
there appropriate grounds for the appointment of an administrator to
(b) If so, who should be appointed?
[10] The first issue arises because
of the Act states that an
existing order must be revoked unless the Tribunal is satisfied it would make an
appointment if a new application
for an appointment were to be made. In effect,
this requires an examination of whether the adult in question still has impaired
and whether there is still a need for a formal appointment to be
[11] The second issue arises because
goes onto provide that, if there
are appropriate grounds for an appointment to continue, the Tribunal may either
continue the order
making the appointment, or change the order either by
changing the terms of the appointment, or by removing an appointee, or by making
a new appointment.
[12] The section further provides that an appointee can only be removed if the
Tribunal considers the appointee is no longer competent
or that another person
is more appropriate for appointment. The section states that an appointee is no
longer competent if, amongst
other things, the adult’s interests are not
being adequately protected, or an appointee’s duties have been neglected,
or an appointee’s powers have been abused, or an appointee has failed to
advise the registrar of titles of his or her appointment,
or an appointee has
otherwise contravened the Act.
THE EVIDENCE
[13] In addition to the written material contained on the Tribunal file, the
Tribunal took oral evidence from all parties attending
the hearing. This
evidence, where relevant and specifically relied upon by the Tribunal, is
discussed below.
ARE THERE APPROPRIATE GROUNDS FOR AN APPOINTMENT TO
[14] All parties at the hearing agreed that TAC continues to have impaired
capacity for financial matters. This was supported by
the medical evidence
relied on by the Tribunal in April 2008 and by a more recent report dated 19
June 2009 from Dr C of a Medical
Centre. Dr C had been TAC’s medical
practitioner for a period of twenty-three years and stated that he had last seen
29 May 2009. In his report, he stated that TAC has no concept of the
extent of her financial affairs and any complex tasks.
[15] In relation to need, TAC has significant financial funds that require
management and which involve regular supervision and financial
advice. Her
budget is in deficit and there is an issue relating to a proposed sale of her
interest in a farm property in rural Queensland.
[16] The Tribunal was satisfied on the above material that there were
appropriate grounds for an appointment of an administrator
to continue.
WHO SHOULD BE APPOINTED?
[17] While there were a number of issues raised by BC in her application, and in
her correspondence with the Public Trustee and in
her oral evidence, the major
issue which appears to have provided the impetus for the application for review
was a proposal by the
Public Trustee to sell the farm property. From
correspondence from TJ in the file, this appears to have particularly concerned
seemingly on the grounds that the property is a “family estate”
that had been handed down through the years.
[18] The opposition to the proposed sale of that property is clearly based on
misunderstandings and a misconception of the role of
the Public Trustee as
administrator for TAC. TAC owns half the property as tenant in common, and the
other half is owned jointly
by TN and his wife, TK. The latter advised in
correspondence to the Tribunal that they cannot afford to keep the property
they are under financial hardship owing to losses in superannuation.
They stated that they had waited eight months to be able to
put the property on
the market and that they were very anxious to affect a sale. As the Tribunal
explained during the hearing, owners
as tenant in common of a property own their
half share in their own right, and if a co-owner does not agree to a sale they
to Court and get an order for a statutory sale. The role of an
administrator in this situation is important. A statutory sale would
unnecessary costs if a sale is otherwise in the interests of the adult
[19] The Public Trustee advised that it had sought professional advice in
relation to a sale of the property. It had sought this
advice because
TAC’s budget is in deficit due to a lack of income, following the freezing
of her main income producing asset,
an income fund with AXA Limited. The farm is
non income producing and so TAC earns no income from it, but incurs half the
maintaining it. Clearly, any decision to sell the property is a
commercial decision which is a matter for an administrator to consider
[20] The Tribunal was satisfied that the Public Trustee has obtained appropriate
advice and has properly considered the circumstances
before making its
[21] The other major issue raised by BC related to the Public Trustee’s
budget and handling of TAC’s financial affairs,
including matters such as
the budget deficit, the other costs for TAC, the lack of financial statements
from the Public Trustee and
the question of its fees. She argued that the Public
Trustee had not been transparent and had not made full and complete disclosure.
[22] Once again, the issues raised appear to be based on misunderstandings and a
misconception of what the Act requires of the Public
Trustee as an
administrator. As mentioned above, the budget is in deficit principally because
there is no income being paid by the
AXA Australian Monthly Income Fund which
holds an amount in excess of $300,000 for TAC. This fund is currently not paying
and the funds are frozen. The Public Trustee took up an option to
withdraw 5 percent ($15,839) in June 2009. BC queried why this
had not been done
at the time of AXA’s first offer, if funds had not been available in the
Public Trustee’s cash account.
The Public Trustee’s response,
appropriate in the Tribunal’s opinion, was that it first wanted to obtain
the advice of
a financial advisor, namely ABN Amro Morgans Limited.
[23] BC and TJ expressed discontent with the allowance given by the Public
Trustee for TAC’s living expenses. The Public Trustee
has been providing
her with an allowance of $200 per week. BC argued that this was insufficient to
maintain the lifestyle to which
TAC had been accustomed. It appears once more,
however, that the concerns expressed are based on misunderstandings. The Public
has maintained an ANZ bank account with a balance of $2,000 or more that
can be accessed by TAC and her carer TJ. It appears that
they decided not to
access that account once the balance reached the figure of $2,000, because it
would have incurred further fees
if the balance went below that figure. The
Public Trustee reiterated at the hearing that funds are available to TJ as
carer, and that she should utilise the ANZ bank account, and if
there are further accounts they should be sent to the Public Trustee.
[24] In respect of financial statements and disclosure, the Public Trustee
produced accounts for the four month period from 9 May
2008 to 8 September 2008
and these were provided to TAC. While issue was taken at the hearing with the
lack of up to date information,
the reality is that the Public Trustee provides
annual statements and current ones are due in the near future. The Tribunal does
not normally require administrators to provide accounts more frequently than
annually. Just as importantly, TAC and members of the
family were included in
discussions with the Public Trustee on its proposed Client Service Plan, the
budget for TAC and the possible
sale of the family property. While there is some
dispute about the level of attendance by all concerned at these meetings, there
is nothing in the evidence to suggest that the Public Trustee deliberately
excluded anyone.
[25] In relation to the Public Trustee’s accounts, and in relation to its
fees, the accounts were examined by Vincent’s
Chartered Accountants, who
were appointed Approved Examiner by the Tribunal from 1 August 2007. In a report
dated 6 August 2009 the
examiner from Vincent’s concluded as follows:
“I conclude that the accounts indicate it is probable that
the administrator, The Public Trustee of Queensland, is managing
the estate in
the best interests of the adult, TAC in accordance with the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
The report also advised that the fees charged by the Public Trustee were in
accordance with the fees fixed by the Public Trustee by
gazette notice.
[26] While the representatives of the ANZ Trustees questioned the Public
Trustee’s representatives during the hearing about
its fees, the Tribunal
was satisfied that, for the purposes of this review, nothing hinges on any
comparison between the Public Trustee’s
fees and the possible fees charged
by the ANZ Trustees.
[27] Other minor issues were raised by BC in her correspondence with Public
Trustee but these were either satisfactorily answered
by the Public Trustee or
were of little relevance to question of the Public Trustee’s competence or
appropriateness.
[28] The Tribunal notes, however, that the Public Trustee advised in its
evidence to the Tribunal that no taxation returns had yet
been filed and that it
was still collating the information. An earlier Client Service Plan of the
Public Trustee indicated that tax
returns had not been lodged for approximately
ten years and that it was investigating whether tax returns should have been
While the Tribunal appreciates that this process would take some time,
it would be concerned if the situation was not clarified at
an early date.
[29] On consideration of all of the above, the Tribunal was satisfied that there
was little, if any, evidence to suggest that The
Public Trustee is no longer
competent as administrator or that ANZ Trustees is more appropriate for
appointment. In respect of competency,
the Tribunal was satisfied that no
relevant interests of the adult have not been adequately protected or are not
being adequately
protected by the Public Trustee, that the Public Trustee has
not neglected its duties or abused its powers, that it has advised the
of Titles of its appointment and that it has not otherwise contravened the
[30] In terms of appropriateness, the matters that the Tribunal must consider
are set out in
of the Act. There is nothing in that section, or in
the conduct of the Public Trustee as disclosed in the evidence before the
that ANZ Trustees would be a more appropriate appointment than the
Public Trustee. Clearly, apart from BC’s role in this matter
below), the main person dissatisfied with the Public Trustee is TJ.
[31] Just as clearly, however, the other members of the family support the
continued appointment of the Public Trustee. SP’s
submissions were to that
effect. He argued that conflicts with administrators were not uncommon but
submitted that the matters raised
in this case were more emotional then factual.
Certainly there is conflict between TJ and other members of the family,
particularly
TN and TK, as evidenced by correspondence from those parties. That
is not the concern or responsibility, however, of the Public Trustee
administrator. While TJ has an important role as the carer for TAC, the duty of
the Public Trustee as administrator is to make
decisions in the best interests
of TAC not of TJ, irrespective of the latter’s conflict with other members
of the family. In
this respect, the Tribunal rejects BC’s submission that
the Public Trustee should be removed as administrator because there
“breakdown of the relationship between the carer and the Public
[32] In short, the Tribunal was satisfied that the Public Trustee continues to
be an appropriate appointee as administrator for TAC.
It has sought professional
advice where required, it has produced accounts which have been examined and
found in order and there
is nothing to suggest that it has not always acted in
the best interests of TAC. In the result, the Tribunal was satisfied that the
appointment of the Public Trustee should be continued until further order of the
ROLE OF THE APPLICANT, BC
[33] The Tribunal has some concerns about the role played by BC in this matter.
She advised the Tribunal at the commencement of the
hearing that she did not act
as legal representative for TAC or for TJ. She argued that she was a friend of
TAC and still had a personal
interest in her welfare. The Tribunal accepted her
as an interested person who was therefore able to make the application. The
concern, however, is the role she appears to have adopted in
terms of her engagement with members of the family and with the Public
as administrator. All her correspondence is written on paper bearing her
letterhead “National Seniors Lawyers Pty Ltd”
and is signed by her
above a caption showing her typewritten name with the words “Senior
Lawyer” underneath. In her formal
application she described her
relationship to TAC as “advocate”. Some of her letters to the Public
Trustee indicate that
she was relaying concerns of TAC and in other letters the
concerns of TJ.
[34] In the circumstances, it is not clear to the Tribunal how she perceives her
role. She concedes not being the legal representative
of TAC or TJ. She suggests
that she has an interest in seniors, but there is no evidence to suggest that
she works for an organisation
which is a registered advocacy organisation for
seniors. She is apparently a solicitor with her own legal practice. In all the
circumstances,
while the Tribunal was satisfied that she could make an
application as an interested person, the role she has played vis-a-vis the
Public Trustee is more questionable. Indeed, the Public Trustee would appear to
have no duty of disclosure to her, despite her representations.
She is not a
member of the family and does not legally represent any member of the family.
While the Tribunal sees no reason to take
this issue any further, it felt it
should make known its concerns to BC and the other parties to the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (165 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter