URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIC/2009/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Adam John Low v Manchester Roofing Pty Ltd [2009] QIC 15; 191 QGIG 63 (7 May 2009)
[Extract from Queensland Government Industrial
dated 22 May, 2009, Vol. 191, No. 3, pages
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Workplace Health and
Safety Act 1995
- s. 164(3) - appeal against decision of industrial
Adam John Low AND Manchester Roofing Pty Ltd
PRESIDENT HALL
By a complaint made on 12 March 2008, Manchester Roofing Pty Ltd was charged
with a breach of s. 24 of the
Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995
Act). The obligation said not to have been discharged was that at s. 28(1) of
the Act. The "risk" was particularised as follows:
"The risk is the risk of death or injury, including the risk of the fracture
in the petrous temporal bone (side of skull) caused
injury to the cranial nerve
8 (nerve from the brain that is responsible for balance and hearing) and
complete hearing loss in the
right ear with tinnitus (ringing in the ear) and
vestibular (balance) deficits, to Luke Thomas WALKER.
The source of the
risk emanates from -
The system of work adopted for the placing of room
battens on a residential housing site.".
A circumstance of aggravation
was pleaded,
injuries amounting to grievous bodily harm to Luke
Thomas Walker. There was an agreed statement of facts:
NEALE GARATY v MANCHESTER ROOFING PTY LTD
STATEMENT OF FACTS
1. MANCHESTER ROOFING PTY LTD (the defendant) is charged with an
offence under s. 28(1) of the Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995
(the Act) in
that being a relevant person the defendant failed to ensure that the workplace
health and safety of its workers was
not affected by the conduct of its business
or undertaking.
2. The risk is the risk of death or injury, including the risk of the
fracture in the petrous temporal bone (side of skull) caused
injury to the
cranial nerve 8 (nerve from the brain that is responsible for balance and
hearing) and complete hearing loss in the
right ear with tinnitus (ringing in
the ear) and vestibular (balance) deficits, to Luke Thomas WALKER
3. The source of risk emanates from -
The system of work
adopted for the placing of roof battens on a residential housing
4. As a result of the failure to discharge the workplace health and safety
obligation WALKER sustained grievous bodily harm.
5. The offence occurred on the 16
day of May 2007 at a
workplace being a residential housing site located at 86 Howlett Road Capalaba
in the state of Queensland.
6. The defendant's principal place of business is based at 7 Ajax
Court, Eatons Hill. Workers are deployed from here to conduct roofing
various building sites in and around Brisbane. Workers of small teams are
assigned specific jobs at each site.
7. Michael John Rees (REES) is the sole director of the defendant.
8. The defendant's primary undertaking is that of providing roofing
contractor services.
9. The defendant employs a number of workers including WALKER, who was
employed as an Assistant Roof Plumber at the time of the incident.
10. WALKER had been employed by the defendant for approximately 3 years
prior to the incident.
11. WALKER's normal duties involved removing and replacing roof sheeting,
flashings and gutters as well as helping out in the office
with quotations,
estimates, ordering and marketing.
12. On the day of the incident WALKER was working with a foreman
employed by the defendant and another Trades Assistant to replace
an asbestos
roof upon a storage shed with a new colour bond roof. The shed was located a
short distance away from the main dwelling
on site, but on the same residential
property block.
13. A large vine that had been growing over the roof of the shed had to be
removed prior to work commencing. The vine which covered
the roof had made the
original asbestos roof slippery under foot.
14. After the vine and asbestos roof were removed, extra battens needed to
be inserted into the rafters to accommodate the new roof.
The shed did not have
a ceiling and the concrete floor below was exposed.
15. Whilst undertaking this task, the defendant's workers walked across the
16. Whilst WALKER was cutting a batten at one end of the shed where the roof
had been removed, he lost his balance and fell to the
concrete floor below. In
doing so he narrowly missed impaling himself of an upright and exposed star
17. The height of the roof was measured as being 2.8 metres from the lower
gutter of the roof to the ground and 3.4 metres from the
top of the gable down
to the ground. The rafter where WALKER fell measured approximately 3.1 metres
from ground level.
18. As a result of the fall WALKER sustained injuries which included:
A fractured skull with
bleeding between the side of the skull and the lining over the brain and
bleeding between the brain and the
tissues that cover
bruising of the
cranial nerve damage and
complete hearing loss in the right
19. His injuries constituted grievous
bodily harm.
The investigation revealed the
Both the foreman and
Trades Assistant were also standing on the exposed roof with WALKER at the time
of the fall.
There was no fall
protection in place at the time to prevent WALKER or the other workers falling
from or through the roof.
WALKER states
that on the morning prior to the job, the foreman, Aaron DAVIES (DAVIES), told
him and the apprentice to be careful
due to the moisture left by the vine over
DAVIES stated that he was
told by REES, to instruct the workers to be careful on the roof due to the wet
conditions, however, he was
not given a Work Method Statement prior to this
particular job as he would normally be given. He stated that this was due to
job being a small one-day
DAVIES further stated that REES
attended at the site after the incident and provided him with a Work Method
Other Matters
21. The defendant cooperated with the investigating agency, but
declined an invitation to participate in a Record of Interview.
22. The defendant has no previous convictions under the Act.".
It is desirable to make some comment about the Agreed Statement of facts.
First, it is now common ground that the project at Howlett
Road, Capalaba was
high risk construction work for the purposes of the Act. It follows from s. 26
of the Act that the obligation
at s. 28 might be discharged only by observing
the Regulation. The Regulation requires development of the Work Method
referred to at paragraph 20 of the Agreed Statement of Facts. Second,
there is not an agreement as to the significance of Mr Davies
reference to the
absence of the Work Method Statement being attributable to the size of the job
(see paragraph 20). On a criminal
appeal, it seems to me that I should adopt
the benign view that the Work Method Statement was not developed because it was
easy to determine a safe method of work. Third, whilst the
photographs tendered at first instance show a star picket (see paragraph
the photographs do not show the star picket to have been in the vicinity of the
fall. Again, this being a criminal appeal,
I shall deal with the matter on the
basis that the picket was not in the vicinity of the fall.
mitigation it may be accepted that there was a timely plea of guilty and
cooperation with the investigation by a first offender
who was otherwise a good
corporate citizen.
The Industrial Magistrate declined to record a
conviction; imposed a fine of $35,000; ordered the defendant to pay
investigation costs
in the sum of $1,132.51; costs of court in the sum of
$71.70; and allowed the defendant twelve months to pay. This is an appeal
limited to the quantum of the fine imposed.
Counsel for the Appellant
takes as a starting point the observations of this Court in
Transfield Services (Australia) Pty Ltd
(2007) 184 QGIG 179
"Going to the precedents, there is the usual difficulty arising from the
(happy) circumstance that breaches of the
Workplace Health and Safety Act
, causing a circumstance of aggravation are not frequent. More often
than not an attempt to develop a tariff will fail. One will
have a small number
of decisions each of which deals with singular fact situations, quite different
mitigating circumstances and
only the ultimate post-mitigation fine. Often, all
that may be derived are signposts along the way to the appropriate sentence.
However, in the case of lower level grievous bodily harm injuries, there is a
cluster of cases with similar elements of blame and
similar mitigating features,
which fall in a range of $30,000 to $40,000, compare
Brian Marfleet v Lindsay
Meyers Pty Ltd
[2006] QIC 50
(2006) 183 QGIG 240.
The cases constituting the cluster are
usually said to be
Rigby Hughes v Hessey Pty Ltd
(2005) 180 QGIG 294
Lowe v BBC Hardware Limted
[2006] QIC 39
(2006) 182 QGIG 204
Lindsay Meyers Pty Ltd
[2006] QIC 50
(2006) 183 QGIG 240
($35,000). Prior to the last
increase in the maximum fine available there was a comparable cluster consisting
Newman v JBL Applicators
[2003] QIC 143
(2003) 172 QGIG 1096
Geraty v Friendly Sofa Designs Pty Ltd
(2003) 173 QGIG 10
Neilands v CMC Cairns Ltd
[2001] QIC 54
(2001) 168 QGIG 132
($22,500) and
Wesche v NQ Blasting and Coating Pty Ltd
[2003] QIC 170
(2003) 174 QGIG 1223
Without seeking to subordinate the complexity of discretionary judgement to
arithmetic, if each of the four fines last
mentioned is adjusted in the same way
as the maximum penalty, the fine would fall within the range of $30,000 to
$40,000. The fine
of $18,000 was manifestly inadequate.".
The submission
is that in this case the injuries were more severe. I am not disposed to accept
that submission.
Thankfully, WorkCover has long since cleared Mr Walker
to return to work. Regrettably, he will forever suffer from a significant
hearing disability. However, all of the cases in the cluster involve grievous
bodily harm. In many cases a disability continued
into the future. I quite
accept that in taking into account the circumstance of aggravation at s. 24 one
is not confined to the
permanent injury and may look at the immediate impact of
the mishap on the body of the victim. Here, Mr Walker's initial injuries
fairly be characterised as potentially life threatening. However, falls from
heights are inherently life-threatening. That
consideration would be taken into
account on the issue of gravity/blame-worthiness even if injury had not ensued.
One must be careful
not to weigh the same factor on more than one occasion.
It is then contended that the situation in this case is more analogous
Waltham v Cairns Synergy Electrical Pty Ltd
(2007) 185 QGIG 40.
I am unable to accept the submission. In that case the height of the roof was
five metres. In that case (an admittedly experienced)
workman had been given no
formal instruction or training by the respondent about the performance of work
at a height, had no received
no formal induction and was not provided with any
safety equipment additional to a ladder. Even planks, which would have been of
assistance, were not provided. Here, in the course of submissions, the
solicitor for the defendant at first instance departed from
the agreed statement
of facts to assert that risk assessments had been completed and work method
statements prepared "for all other
jobs in the past". If one additionally reads
the agreed statement of facts in the beneficial sense explained above, it seems
me that this case is not comparable to
Waltham v Cairns Synergy Electrical
and falls within the cluster.
The Industrial
Magistrate's decision to adopt a sentencing point at or about the midpoint of
the cluster seems to me to be entirely
unexceptional. Absent any error of law
or of principle this Court will interfere with a sentencing Industrial
Magistrate's exercise
of discretion only where the fine imposed is manifestly
inadequate or manifestly excessive.
I dismiss the Appeal. I reserve all
questions as to costs.
Dated 7 May 2009.
D.R. HALL, President
Released: 7 May 2009
Appearances:
Ms V. McKenzie of Legal and Prosecution Services,
Workplace Health and Safety, for the Appellant.
Mr J. McPherson of MVM Legal,
Solicitors for the Respondent.
Government Printer, Queensland
The State of
Queensland 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (75.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter