URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/61.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mineralogy Pty Ltd and Department of the Environment, Tourism, Science and Innovation [2025] QICmr 61 (16 September 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
Mineralogy Pty Ltd and Department of the Environment, Tourism,
Science and Innovation
[2025] QICmr 61
(16 September 2025)
Application Number:
﻿Mineralogy Pty Ltd
Respondent:
Department of the Environment, Tourism, Science and Innovation
Decision Date:
16 September 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS -
DOCUMENTS NONEXISTENT OR UNLOCATABLE - applicant submits information
exist - whether agency has conducted reasonable searches - whether access to
documents may be refused on the basis they are
nonexistent -
sections 47(3)(e)
(1)(a) of the
Right to Information Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied to the Department of the Environment, Tourism, Science and
Innovation (
) under the
Right to Information Act 2009
access to various documents
concerning submissions made by another company about a proposed biodiversity
offset strategy in relation to a particular coal mine
Biodiversity
conducting searches, the Department
to refuse access to the
documents sought on the basis they were
nonexistent.
applicant applied to the Office of the Information Commissioner (
external review of the Department’s
During the review, the
applicant provided further information in support of their contention that the
Department had not conducted
all reasonable searches for the documents
and the Department undertook
further searches and enquiries, but did not locate any responsive
I have therefore
examined the reasonableness of the Department’s searches and made a
finding on whether access to responsive
documents may be refused on the basis
nonexistent.
the reasons set out below, I affirm the Department’s decision and find
that access to responsive documents may be refused
on the basis they do not
exist. In making this decision, I have taken into account evidence, submissions,
legislation and other material
set out in these reasons (including footnotes).
Relevant law
to a document may be refused under the RTI Act if it is nonexistent or
unlocatable.
A document will be
nonexistent if there are reasonable grounds to be satisfied it does not
A document will be
unlocatable if it has been or should be in the agency’s possession and all
reasonable steps have been taken
to find the document, but it cannot be
be satisfied that a document does not exist, the Information Commissioner has
previously identified a number of key factors to
consider, including the
agency’s structure, its recordkeeping practices and procedures, and the
nature and age of requested
By considering
relevant key factors, a decision-maker may conclude that a particular document
was not created because, for example
the agency’s processes do not require
creation of that specific document. In such instances, it is not necessary for
to search for the document, but sufficient that the circumstances to
account for the nonexistence are adequately explained.
all reasonable steps must be taken to locate the
documents. What constitutes
reasonable steps will vary from case to case, depending on which of the key
factors are most relevant
in the circumstances. The Information
Commissioner’s external review functions include investigating and
reviewing whether
agencies have taken reasonable steps to identify and locate
documents applied for by
applicants.
an external review, the agency or Minister who made the decision under review
has the onus of establishing that the decision was
justified or that the
Information Commissioner should give a decision adverse to the
However, where the
issue of missing documents is raised, the applicant bears a practical onus of
demonstrating that the agency has
not discharged its obligation to locate all
relevant documents.
and mere assertion will not satisfy this
scope of the access application is set out
For the period 1 March 2013 to 22 May 2019, (inclusive):
(a) correspondence (including electronic communications) and all attachments
to any such correspondence, and
(b) all diary entries (including any electronic calendar entries and meeting
makers), file notes, and minutes of meetings,
between (i) the Department ..., or the then Team Leader (Assessment) of the
Department, or any personnel of the Department, and any
[the coal mine company]
[two other named
(c) any correspondence (including electronic communications) and all
attachments to any such correspondence between any personnel
of the Department,
concerning the submissions made by
[the other company]
to the proposed
Environmental Offset Strategy ... in relation to the ... Coal Mine ...
Department’s decision revealed that searches were conducted within the
Environmental Services and Regulation division on
two separate occasions and
that the name of the other company (which made submissions) was used as the
seeking an external review, the applicant submitted they have
‘significant difficulty accepting’
the Department’s
contention that it has no responsive documents as the Department
its search for documents on a single keyword which ... is patently inadequate
and inconsistent with the Department’s
under the RTI
Department provided OIC with a search certification and record of searches form
completed by a departmental officer who stated
‘completed the
[they were]
the assessment officer responsible for the assessment of the
... coal project.’
following table sets out the locations searched by the departmental officer and
the departmental officer’s reasons for
why no documents were located:
Locations searched
Comments/reasons why not located
‘Search of emails/folders containing ... offset
‘Firstly the ... Biodiversity Offset Strategy was not assessed by
this department. Secondly was not prepared by Biodiversity
and Carbon. Therefore
no documents were submitted by
[the other company]
to this department.
Recommend seeking information from the Office of the Coordinator-General, which
was the assessment office for
the ... Biodiversity Offset Strategy.’
‘Re-searched of all digital folders and EDocs records that contain
... offset material.’
‘As above – Please note attached copy of the Supplementary
Environmental Impact Statement for
[relevant coal]
mine in which it is
mentioned that a submission was received from
[the other company]
offset strategy section 9.3.3 on page 65 – recommend requesting document
from the Office of the Coordinator-General’
above was conveyed to the applicant along with OIC’s preliminary view that
the Department had provided a reasonable explanation
for why no responsive
documents were located, all reasonable steps had been taken to locate responsive
documents, and access may
therefore be refused on the basis they are
nonexistent.
applicant’s submissions in response can be summarised as
application was for
‘copies of correspondence (including emails)
concerning the submissions made by
[the other company]
and not just for a
copy of the submissions made by
[the other company]
the Department
played a key role, and was extensively involved, in the assessment of the
Biodiversity Offset Strategy, with extensive
communications between the
Department, the Commonwealth Department of Environment and the Office of the
Coordinator-General
Department's contention that it has no correspondence whatsoever concerning the
submissions made by
[the other company]
simply strains
reason the Department failed to locate any responsive documents is because
‘it has only based its search for documents on the single keyword ...
which, with respect, is patently inadequate and inconsistent
Department's duty under the
to proactively provide access to
all responsive documents’
response to a request to consider the issues raised by the applicant’s
submission,
the Department
confirmed that searches for relevant emails had been conducted and further
‘the Coordinator-General was responsible for the assessment of
the ... Biodiversity Offset Strategy and therefore was the recipient
submissions on this component of the EIS as a Coordinated Project’
the other company would not have sent something directly to the departmental
officer as they were
‘merely providing advice through
Department’s]
Impact Assessment team to the office of the
Coordinator-General.’
examined all the information available to me, including the outcome of the
Department’s searches and enquiries with the
relevant departmental
officer, I am satisfied that the Department has taken all reasonable steps to
locate responsive documents,
and that access may be refused on the basis that
such documents are nonexistent. While I accept that the Department was involved
in the assessment of the Biodiversity Offset Strategy, there is no evidence
before me to suggest that there was direct contact between
the Department and
the other company, the mining company or other named companies regarding the
submissions made by the other company.
Rather, the information available to me
supports the position that the Department was only involved to the extent that
provided to the Office of the Coordinator-General via the Impact
Assessment Team.
applicant has submitted that using only the name of the other company as the
sole search term was inadequate. In my view, the
name of the other company was
central to the scope of the application and was an appropriate search term for
the Department to use—had
there been responsive documents, I am satisfied
they would have included the name of the other company. I am further satisfied
systems and that they were undertaken by the departmental officer
who had been
directly involved in the assessment of the Biodiversity Offset Strategy, with
requisite knowledge of where responsive
documents would be located if they
existed within the Department. Further, that officer’s explanation
regarding the role of
the Office of the Coordinator-General also serves to
address why responsive documents do not exist within the Department.
acknowledge that the lack of responsive documents has not met the
applicant’s expectations of the Department’s involvement
assessment of the Biodiversity Offset Strategy. However, OIC does not have
Department, nor make any
determinations about the Department’s involvement in the assessment of the
Biodiversity Offset Strategy.
The issue for determination in this review is
whether access to documents may be refused on the basis they do not
on the information before me, including the Department’s search records
and submissions received from the applicant and
Department, I am satisfied that
the Department has searched in locations where it would be reasonable to expect
documents relevant
to the application to be found. I also consider that
enquiries with the departmental officer was an appropriate avenue to pursue,
given their involvement regarding the relevant coal mine project. In the
circumstances of this case, I find there are no further
reasonable searches that
the Department could undertake.
the reasons set out above, I find that the Department has taken all reasonable
steps to locate documents relevant to the scope
of the access application, and
access may be refused to responsive documents on the basis that they do not
the reasons set out above, I affirm the reviewable
and find that access to
responsive documents may be refused under sections 47(3)(e) and 52(1)(a) of the
RTI Act on the basis they
do not exist.
have made this decision under section 110 of the RTI Act as a delegate of the
Information Commissioner, under section 145 of the
Assistant Information Commissioner
Date: 16 September 2025
On 1 July 2025 key parts of the
Information Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2023
into force, effecting significant changes to the RTI Act. In accordance
with the transitional provisions in chapter 7,
part 9 of the RTI Act,
particularly section 206K of the RTI Act, references in this decision are to the
RTI Act as in force prior
Including correspondence,
diary entries, file notes, minutes of meeting and internal departmental
correspondence.
application dated 15 November 2024 and made compliant on 20 November 2024.
Decision dated 19 December
2024. This is the
reviewable decision
for the purpose of this external
Under sections
47(3)(e) and 52(1)(a) of the RTI
External review
application dated 23 December
Submissions dated 14
February 2025 following OIC’s preliminary view dated 5 February
Submissions to OIC dated
8 August 2025 in response to OIC’s request dated 27 June
Under sections 47(3)(e)
and 52(1)(a) of the RTI Act.
Sections 47(3)(e) and 52 of the RTI Act.
Section 52(1)(a) of the RTI
Section 52(1)(b) of
the RTI Act.
factors are identified in
Pryor and Logan City Council
(Unreported,
Queensland Information Commissioner, 8 July 2010) at [19], which adopted the
Information Commissioner’s comments
PDE and the University of
(Unreported, Queensland Information Commissioner, 9 February
2009) at [37]-[38]. These factors were more recently considered in
Department of Justice and Attorney-General
[2024] QICmr 33
(7 August 2024)
at [15] and
T12 and Queensland Police Service
[2024] QICmr 8
(20 February
2024) at [12].
130(2) of the RTI Act. The Information Commissioner also has power under
section 102 of the RTI Act to require additional
an external review. The Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal confirmed
Webb v Information Commissioner
[2021] QCATA 116
that the RTI
does not contemplate that
[the Information Commissioner]
will in some way check an agency’s records for relevant
’ and that, ultimately, the Information Commissioner is
dependent on the agency’s officers to do the actual searching
for relevant
Section 87(1) of
the RTI Act.
Mewburn and Department Local Government,
Community Recovery and Resilience
[2014] QICmr 43
(31 October 2014) at [13].
Parnell and Queensland
Police Service
[2017] QICmr 8
(7 March 2017) at [23] and
Rockhampton Regional Council
[2017] QICmr 49
(6 October 2017) at [36].
As clarified in the
applicant’s letter to the Department dated 25 November
External review
application dated 23 December
Provided to OIC on 3
February 2025.
The Office of
the Coordinator-General is part of the Department of State Development,
Infrastructure and Planning.
Letter dated 5 February
Submission dated 14
February 2025.
Email dated
27 June 2025.
Email dated 7
August 2025, provided as an attachment to an email to OIC dated 8 August
Section 47(3)(e) and
52(1)(a) of the RTI Act.
Under section 110(1)(a) of the RTI Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (374 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter