URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2005/111.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:34:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tamawood Ltd & Anor v Paans [2005] QCA 111 (15 April 2005)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Tamawood Ltd & Anor v Paans
[2005] QCA 111
TAMAWOOD LIMITED
(formerly Tamawood Pty Ltd)
ACN 010 954
(first appellant/first applicant/first appellant)
PHIL MARTYN
CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LTD
ACN 055 151 936
(second appellant/second
applicant/second appellant)
(respondent/respondent)
ELIZABETH PAANS
(appellant/respondent)
(formerly Tamawood Pty Ltd)
ACN 010 954 499
respondent/first applicant/first appellant)
PHIL MARTYN CONSTRUCTIONS PTY
ACN 055 151 936
(second respondent/second applicant/second
Appeal No 10327 of 2004
Appeal No 10328 of 2004
DC No 2660 of
DC No 3286 of 2004
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Application for Leave s 118 DCA (Civil)
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
15 April 2005
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
5 April 2005
Williams and Keane JJA and Philippides J
reasons for judgment of each member of the Court, each concurring as to the
orders made
In each application:
1. application for
extension of time within which to file the notice of appeal and to apply for
leave to appeal granted
2. leave to appeal
3. appeal dismissed
4. appellants Tamawood Limited
and Phil Martyn Constructions Pty Ltd pay the respondent's costs of the
application and appeal to
be assessed on the standard basis
CATCHWORDS:
PROCEDURE - INFERIOR COURTS - QUEENSLAND - COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER TRIBUNAL
- COSTS - where person successful in action against two
companies before the
Tribunal - where the two companies were ordered by Tribunal to pay damages -
where no order for costs made in
favour of the person - where Tribunal found
each party was justified in engaging legal representation - where all parties
to the District Court - where District Court judge confirmed decision
of Tribunal on the merits but ordered the two companies to
pay the person's
costs of proceedings in the Tribunal - where relevant Act provides '...parties
pay their own costs unless the interests
of justice require otherwise' - whether
order for costs made by District Court judge was in the interests of
PROCEDURE - INFERIOR COURTS - DISTRICT COURT - CIVIL JURISDICTION
- PRACTICE - COSTS - where appeal from Commercial and Consumer Tribunal
District Court - where relevant Act provides that '...appellant must pay the
costs of the appeal, including the costs of
any transcript' - where District
Court judge made costs order in favour of appellants - whether District Court
judge had discretion
to award costs to appellants - whether that discretion was
exercised correctly
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL - PRACTICE AND
PROCEDURE - QUEENSLAND - TIME FOR APPEAL - EXTENSION OF TIME - WHEN GRANTED -
companies failed to file notices of appeal and applications for leave
to appeal in time - where affidavit showed this was due to
confusion on part of
their solicitors - whether delay caused any prejudice to respondent
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act
2003 (Qld), s 70, s 71, s
District Court Act
1967 (Qld), s 118
Building Tribunal Act
2000 (Qld), s 61
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
(Qld), r 766, r 784,
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR
Forest Pty Ltd (Receivers and Managers Appointed) v Keen Bay
Pty Ltd & Ors
(1991) 4 ACSR 107
Kimtran Pty Ltd v Downie
[2003] QCA 424
[2004] 1 Qd R 651
Knight v FP Special Assets Ltd
(1992) 174 CLR 178
R N Wensley QC, with A E Lyons, for the first and second
applicants/appellants
D M Logan for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
William Goodwin for the first and second
applicants/appellants
McAlister & Cartmill (Coolum Beach) for the
WILLIAMS JA:
All issues relevant to the determination
of the applications and appeals in this matter are fully set out in the reasons
for judgment
of Keane JA. There is little I can add to what he has said for
concluding that the orders he has proposed should be made.
[2] The critical questions for determination are the meaning to be attributed
to and the scope of operation of
and s 71 of the
Commercial and Consumer
Tribunal Act
2003 (Qld). In seeking to uphold the reasoning of the learned
District Court judge counsel for the respondent submitted that s 70
treated as analogous to a preamble to a statute. Relying on common law
principles of statutory construction he then submitted
that the meaning of s 71
was clear and free from doubt and in consequence the words of s 70, the
preamble, could not be resorted
to to qualify or cut down the meaning or the
scope of operation of s 71. The submission is fallacious. Section 70, although
expresses the purposes of the division, cannot be equated with a preamble.
It is part of the statute and has the same force and
effect as s 71. It is made
clear by s 70 that the starting point is that each party should "pay their own
costs unless the interests
of justice require otherwise". Then s 71 deals with
the considerations relevant to deciding whether some order for costs should
made and the situation where the Tribunal has determined that the interests of
justice require that some order for costs be made.
The sections can, and
should, be read together as indicated by Keane JA in his reasons.
[3] The orders should be as proposed by Keane JA.
These two applications for leave to appeal were heard
together. The respondent, Ms Paans, was successful in proceedings which
brought against the applicants, Tamawood Limited ("Tamawood") and Phil
Martyn Constructions Pty Ltd ("Martyn") before the Commercial
and Consumer
Tribunal ("the Tribunal") which ordered each of them to pay Ms Paans $10,000 by
way of damages for loss suffered by
her by reason of the default of Tamawood and
Martyn in relation to the construction of a house on land owned by Ms Paans
at the Sunshine
Coast. In a separate decision the Tribunal declined to make any
order for costs in her favour.
[5] All of the parties to the proceedings before the Tribunal sought leave
from the District Court to appeal against the Tribunal's
decisions. Tamawood
and Martyn sought to be relieved of their respective liabilities to pay damages,
while Ms Paans sought an order
in respect of her costs of the proceedings
before the Tribunal.
[6] The District Court refused the application by Tamawood and Martyn,
granted leave to Ms Paans to appeal, allowed her appeal, set
Tribunal's decision in relation to costs and ordered in lieu thereof that
Tamawood and Martyn pay Ms Paans' costs of the
proceeding in the Tribunal
to be assessed on the District Court Scale applicable where the amount recovered
is less than $50,000.
The District Court also ordered that Ms Paans pay
Tamawood and Martyn their costs of her appeal fixed in the sum of $100.
[7] Tamawood and Martyn now seek leave to appeal to this Court from the
orders made by the District Court in relation to the costs
of the proceedings in
the Tribunal and the costs of Ms Paan's appeal in the District Court. Tamawood
and Martyn apply for leave
pursuant to
District Court of
Queensland Act
(Qld); leave being required because the decision of the
District Court was made in its appellate jurisdiction. Tamawood and Martyn
seek an extension of time for the filing of their notice of appeal and for
filing their applications for leave to appeal. The
applications for an
extension of time are opposed. It is convenient to deal with that application
at the outset.
Extension of time
[8] It is apparent from the affidavit filed on behalf of Tamawood
and Martyn that their failure to observe the time limit was due
to confusion on
the part of their solicitors about the procedures to be followed in order to
apply for leave to appeal. Ms Paans'
solicitors were informed before the
expiration of the time limit for the applications for leave to appeal of the
intention of Tamawood
and Martyn to appeal. The delay resulting from the
confusion on the part of the solicitors acting for Tamawood and Martyn was very
short. It was not apt to, and plainly did not, cause any prejudice to Ms Paans.
In my opinion, this Court should grant any extension
of time necessary to enable
the applications for leave to appeal to be dealt with on their merits.
Leave to appeal
[9] Tamawood and Martyn contend that the decision of the District
Court was erroneous in that it proceeded from an erroneous construction
and s 71 of the
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act
2003 (Qld) ("the
Act"). On behalf of Ms Paans it is submitted that leave to appeal should
be refused on the footing that, whether
or not the learned District Court judge
misconstrued s 70 and s 71 of the Act, his decision may nevertheless be
sustained on other
grounds. In any event, it is submitted on behalf of Ms Paans
that the decision of the learned primary judge is not attended by sufficient
doubt to warrant the grant of leave.
[10] A proper understanding of these arguments requires more detailed
reference to the statutory provisions in question and the reasons
Tribunal and of the learned District Court judge. The arguments in relation to
the proper construction of the Act are substantial
and the issues are of general
importance. For these reasons, the Court reserved its decision on the question
of leave and heard
argument from the parties in relation to the merits of the
[11] Sections 70 and 71 of the Act are contained in Part 5,
Division 7 of the Act. They deal in a general way with the awarding of
the Tribunal. They are in the following terms:
70 Purposes of div 7
The main purpose of this division is to have parties pay their own costs
unless the interests of justice require otherwise.
In a proceeding, the tribunal may award the costs it considers
appropriate on—
(a) the application of a party to the proceeding; or
(b) its own initiative.
The costs the tribunal may award may be awarded at any stage of
the proceeding or after the proceeding has ended.
If the tribunal awards costs during a proceeding, the tribunal may
order that the costs not be assessed until the proceeding ends.
In deciding whether to award costs, and the amount of the costs,
the tribunal may have regard to the following—
(a) the outcome of the proceeding;
(b) the conduct of the parties to the proceeding before and during the
proceeding;
(c) the nature and
complexity of the proceeding;
(d) the relative strengths of the claims made by each of the parties to the
proceeding;
(e) any contravention of an Act by a party to the proceeding;
(f) for a proceeding to which a State agency is a party, whether the other
party to the proceeding was afforded natural justice
by the State
(g) anything else the
tribunal considers relevant.
Examples of paragraph (g)
The tribunal may consider whether a party to a proceeding is acting in a way
that unreasonably disadvantages another party to the
proceeding. The tribunal
may consider whether the proceeding, or a part of the proceeding, has been
frivolous or vexatious.
party to a proceeding is not entitled to costs merely because—
(a) the party was the beneficiary of an order of the tribunal;
(b) the party was legally
represented at the proceeding.
The power of the tribunal to award costs under this section is in
addition to the tribunal’s power to award costs under another
provision of
this or another Act.
The tribunal may direct that costs be assessed—
(a) in the way decided by a presiding case manager; or
(b) by a person appointed by the tribunal."
The reasons of the Tribunal
[12] The Tribunal expressed the view that the effect of s 70 of
the Act is that "the parties are to pay their own costs unless the
interests of
justice require otherwise" and that s 71(5) of the Act makes it clear that
a party is not entitled to its costs merely
because it was successful in the
proceedings or because it was legally represented in those proceedings.
[13] The Tribunal then proceeded to consider the factors identified in s
71(4) in order to determine whether to award costs and the
amount of any such
award. In that regard:
(a) the Tribunal did not regard anything in the conduct of the
parties before and during the proceeding as a particular ground for
award of costs;
(b) the Tribunal accepted that the proceedings were complex and, in
particular, "that the complexity of the proceedings was such that
each party was
justified in engaging the services of legal representatives to assist them in
the conduct and defence of the claim";
(c) the Tribunal took the view that there was nothing in the relative
strengths of the claims made by the parties to assist "one way
or the other in
the consideration of whether to award costs";
(d) the Tribunal regarded the fact that Ms Paans had been found to be an
honest witness as irrelevant to the exercise of the discretion
as to costs;
(e) the Tribunal went on to state that it was also irrelevant that Ms Paans
had suffered financial hardship as a result of having
to fund her claim in
circumstances where the Maroochy Shire Council would not commence rectification
works connected with the construction
of the house until the Council was paid
$12,000. In this regard the Tribunal said:
"19 While it is the case that if the first respondent's representative had
addressed the applicant's concerns when she first brought
the problem to the
attention of the first respondent during the course of construction by checking
the set-out and excavation, it
is more likely than not that none of the events
which followed would have occurred, it can equally be said that if the applicant
had given the $12 [$12,000] or $13,000 to the Council to carry out the works to
alleviate the problem caused by the first respondent
she could have avoided
years of worry and expense. In my view hindsight is not a useful factor in
deciding whether to award costs.
20 The fact that the applicant spent about the same amount as she claimed in
prosecuting these proceedings is no reason to make an
order for costs in her
favour. All litigants in this tribunal understand (or should understand) that
in this tribunal the usual
rule in respect to costs does not apply, with the
consequence that any money spent in prosecuting the claim is spent absent any
of a costs order in the event the party succeeds. Parties with
limited funds should give careful consideration to how best they
might spend
their funds.
29 For the respondents it was submitted that the applicant's submissions were
an argument as to why each party should bear its own
costs. It was submitted
that the statutory position encourages parties to be commercial in their
approach to settlement, rather
than spend money on litigation. It was submitted
that the applicant's submissions could only carry weight and justify an
to the general rule in circumstances where a successful party had made
offer, which was not the case here.
30 I prefer the submissions of the respondents. In my view it is a relevant
consideration that, based on the evidence, there is no
doubt that the
applicant's concerns about inundation could have been addressed by work to be
undertaken by the Maroochy Shire Council
at a cost in the order of $12,000.
While the applicant can spend her money as she sees fit and is at liberty to
spend $12,000 and
more on the costs of the proceeding rather than pay the money
to the Council to relieve the problem, the respondents should not suffer
consequence."
[14] The Tribunal concluded that it was "not persuaded that the
interests of justice in this case require the making of an award of
favour of the applicant".
[15] I should also mention here that the Tribunal did not consider that any
award of costs should have been assessed by reference
to the District Court
Scale on the footing that that Scale applied to claims in excess of the claim
made and the amount awarded in
the proceedings before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal's view was that "If there were to be any assessment of costs in these
proceedings,
then it should be by reference to the Magistrates Court Scale with
an allowance by reference to the District Court Scale for work
undertaken in the
Tribunal which is not contemplated in the Magistrates Court Scale".
The District Court's reasons
[16] The learned District Court judge summarized the
interpretation of s 70 of the Act adopted by the Tribunal as being that
"ordinarily
no order for costs would be made in proceedings before the
Tribunal". One can understand why his Honour would say that, having regard
the manner in which the Tribunal applied its interpretation of the Act to the
facts before it, but to be fair to the Tribunal,
it was, in my respectful
opinion, expressing its understanding of a legislative intention that under the
Act the parties before it
should bear their own costs unless one side is able to
show good reason, in terms of the interests of justice in the particular
circumstances
of the case, why there should be a positive exercise of the
discretion in that party's favour. Generally speaking, that approach
exercise of a discretion is not unorthodox, in that a party who seeks the
exercise in his or her favour of a discretion to
grant relief must satisfy the
court that grounds exist for doing
In my view, the Tribunal's
understanding of s 70 and s 71 of the Act accords with the express language
of s 70 and s 71(5)(a).
To say that there is no prima facie position that
costs should follow the event is to say no more than the words of s 70 and
s 71(5)(a).
That conclusion is, it seems to me, inescapable. Whether it
will "ordinarily" be the position that no order as to costs is made
Tribunal will depend on whether the facts of the particular cases which come
before the Tribunal "ordinarily" exhibit features
suggesting that the interests
of justice require that a party have a costs order made in their favour. The
Tribunal cannot be criticized
for acknowledging that s 71(5) identifies two
factual circumstances which will not suffice for that purpose.
[17] The learned District Court judge went on to say:
"[43] Apart from s 70 however the costs provisions in s 71 are entirely
unexceptional. The basic provision of subsection (1) is that
'In a proceeding,
the tribunal may award the costs it considers appropriate ...' This is a
familiar approach to the conferring of
a power to deal with the question of
costs, which may be dated back to r 47 of the rules of procedure in the schedule
Supreme Court of Judicature Act
1873: '... the costs of and
incident to all proceedings in the High Court shall be in the discretion of the
court ...' (See the discussion
of this and other provisions in similar terms in
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
at 84-6 per Gaudron
and Gummow JJ.) Such formulations give the relevant body, here the Tribunal, a
broad general discretion which,
although absolute and unfettered, is to be
exercised judicially, 'that is to say, not by reference to irrelevant or
extraneous considerations,
but upon facts connected with or leading up to the
litigation.' (
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
at 557 per Dawson J.)
[44] It came to be recognised in time that, in circumstances where a
discretion as to costs was conferred on a court or tribunal in
such terms, 'a
successful party in the absence of special circumstances had a reasonable
expectation of obtaining an order for costs
in its favour unless for some reason
connected with the case a different order was specially warranted. Any
departure from this
expectation would require that there should be material upon
which the adverse discretion could be properly exercised. It could
exercised by reference to idiosyncratic notions or to facts and circumstances
irrelevant to the case.'
(supra) at 120-1, per Kirby J.
Hence the modern formulation in UCPR r 689(1) that costs 'follow the event,
unless the court considers
another order is more appropriate.') On the face of
it therefore s 71(1) does not implement a purpose that the starting point
the discretion is that parties pay their own costs. Rather it implements a
purpose that the Tribunal has a discretion in the awarding
of costs to give
effect in the interests of justice."
[18] Later, his Honour said:
"[51] If s 71 had appeared alone, there would have been nothing to indicate
that the approach to costs in proceedings before the Tribunal
would be any
different from the approach to costs in any court or tribunal which has a
discretion of the kind derived from the
Judicature Act
rules. The only
question then is what modification to that general discretion is required by the
terms of s 70. But there is nothing
in that section which actually says that
leaving the parties to pay their own costs is to be the ordinary or usual
outcome, and that
some sort of special or exceptional circumstances are to be
required before any order for costs will be made. (Contrast
Planning Act
1997 s 4.1.23(1), which goes even further. There were special
reasons for that provision:
Mudie v Gainriver Pty Ltd
[2002] QCA 546
.) Rather, it speaks of the situation where parties pay their own costs as
a default position, one which applies 'unless the interests
of justice require
otherwise.' It is difficult to see how that requires a different approach from
one where the jurisdiction to
award costs is expressed as a discretion to make
such order for costs as the interests of justice require. Commonly the
of justice will require some order for costs, but that is not
universally the case, and situations do arise from time to time where
consistent with the interests of justice for the costs to be left to lie where
they fall. But that is not in any way inconsistent
with the general principles
as to the exercise of a discretion as to costs which have been established over
the centuries.
[52] Properly understood, in my opinion s 70 is not a qualified prohibition
on the making of orders for costs; rather it is a statement
that the legislative
purpose, in enacting a broad general discretion as to costs in s 71, was to
permit the Tribunal to make such
orders as to costs as the interests of justice
required, while recognising that there would be times when the interests of
would not require any order as to costs. Read in this way, the terms of
s 70 are unexceptionable, just and reasonable, and entirely
consistent with the
terms of s 71. In my opinion that is the correct approach. It is consistent
Acts Interpretation Act
. It is in my opinion
consistent with the object stated in
'to have the Tribunal deal with
matters in a way that is just, fair, informal, cost efficient and speedy.' I
will not quote the
more detailed provisions in subsection (2), but it appears to
me that it is entirely consistent with those provisions, particularly
context of the circumstances of this matter) the legislative endorsement of the
proposition that it is fair that litigants
have an equal opportunity regardless
of resources to assert or defend their legal rights:
s 4(2)(b)(i).
[53] That objective is clearly assisted in circumstances where a private
individual homeowner of perhaps modest means receives the
benefit of an order
for costs if a successful claim is brought in the Tribunal. It would plainly be
unfair and unjust for a person
who had a good claim to be unable to pursue it in
the Tribunal, or for it not to be worthwhile for such a person to pursue it in
the Tribunal, because the costs of pursuing the claim would be greater than the
amount recovered, or would so diminish the amount
recovered as not to make the
hazard of litigation worthwhile. It seems to me that
s 4(2)(b)(i)
clear indication of a legislative intent that successful applicants of modest
means should not ordinarily be denied their costs
of proceedings in the
Tribunal. To read s 70 in the way contended for by Tamawood and Martyn, and
adopted by the member of the Tribunal
in the present case, would in my opinion
be to frustrate and deny the objects of the Act set out in s 4."
[19] His Honour referred to paragraph [19] of the Tribunal's
reasons, which has been set out above, and said:
"[58] The two factors referred to in paragraph 19 are not commensurable at
all. The first point, that the matter was drawn to the
attention of
Martyn’s representative during the course of construction but not fixed
then, seems to me to be a compelling reason
why an order for costs should be
made against Martyn and in favour [of] Ms Paans. On the other hand, the
proposition that the problem
could have been fixed by the applicant spending
money on rectification work cannot rationally justify depriving Ms Paans of an
for costs. The problem here is that serious errors of law in relation to
the assessment of damages have carried over and infected
the decision in
relation to the question of costs."
[20] The learned District Court judge concluded that the Tribunal
had misinterpreted s 70 and s 71; and that the exercise by the
Tribunal of
the discretion conferred upon it had miscarried as a result.
[21] His Honour proceeded to analyse the reasons given by the Tribunal for
declining to conclude that the interests of justice required
an award of costs
in favour of Ms Paans and went on to say that, even if he was in error in
respect of his interpretation of s 70
and s 71 of the Act, the Tribunal's
exercise of the discretion as to costs had miscarried so as to entitle him to
exercise that discretion
afresh. He concluded in this regard:
"[72] In my opinion the important considerations here are that the applicant
was successful, and there is no material to indicate
that there was some
unreasonable attitude on the part of the applicant either in the way the claim
was pursued or in failing to engage
in proper negotiations. The applicant has
pointed out the problem at an early stage, when it could easily have been
remedied, but
it was not. The respondents raised false issues, which made the
matter more complicated than it otherwise needed to be. There is
suggest that the applicant had unduly prolonged the hearing, or was conducting
the proceedings unreasonably. If an order
for costs were not made, it would in
effect deprive the applicant of the compensation she is entitled to receive. In
circumstances
where the basis of the assessment of damages was wrong, it is not
appropriate to have too much regard to the actual amount of damages
awarded. In
the circumstances I intend to accept the member’s assessment that the
matter was complex, although as I say to
some extent the complexity arose
because of the attitude of the respondents.
[73] In all the circumstances in my opinion this is a clear case justifying
an order for costs in favour of the applicant, and they
ought to be on the
District Court Scale where the amount recovered is less than $50,000. I will
order that, in the event of the
parties failing to agree on the costs, the costs
be assessed by a deputy registrar of the District Court. I will hear the parties
in relation to the costs of the appeal."
[22] At this point, I should say that, in my respectful opinion,
the learned District Court judge erred in his interpretation of s
70 and s 71 of
the Act. I am also of opinion that, although his Honour was in error in his
interpretation of the Act, there was
nevertheless, as his Honour said, a
separate and sufficient basis for setting aside the Tribunal's decision and for
the substitution
of his own view as to the proper disposition of the costs of
the proceeding before the Tribunal. I proceed now to explain the reasons
have led me to these conclusions.
Sections 70 and 71 of the Act
[23] As I have already said, in my view, the language of s 70 and
s 71(5)(a) is sufficiently clear to negate the proposition that
costs should,
prima facie, follow the event unless the Tribunal considers that another order
is more appropriate. In this regard,
it is clear that the power of a court or
tribunal to award costs to a party is now the creature of
The nature and extent of
that power can only be discerned by close consideration of the terms of the
statute which creates the power
and prescribes the occasions for, and conditions
of, its exercise. In the performance of this task, observations of the courts
relation to the operation of other statutory regimes relating to costs may
afford general assistance but they cannot be allowed to
distract attention from
the terms of the particular statute in question.
[24] The language of the provisions of the Act to which I have referred is
sufficiently clear to negate the proposition that success
in the proceedings is
sufficient to establish a prima facie entitlement to the beneficial exercise of
the discretion conferred by
s 71(1) of the Act. The approach of the learned
District Court judge seems to me, with respect, to deny the words of both s 70
s 71(5) their ordinary meaning; it is not to the point that another form of
words might have been used to make that position even
[25] The Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill for the Act said that one of the
key principles underpinning the operation of the Tribunal
was to be an "emphasis
on self-representation - provisions are made in the Bill for parties to
represent themselves, thus ensuring
that the [Tribunal] maintains
informality".
It went on to
"Clause 70 establishes beyond doubt that the purpose of this Division is that
parties pay their own costs unless the interest [sic]
of justice require
otherwise. This provision is in keeping with the objective of the Bill to
establish an informal and cost effective
[26] The approach taken by the learned District Court judge cannot
be said to "best achieve the purpose" of the Act made evident by
Considerations of the
legislative history of analogous provisions support this view. In this regard,
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
2000 (Qld), the Act establishing one
of the Tribunal's predecessors, did not contain a provision equivalent to s 70.
It did contain,
at s 61, a provision equivalent to s 71 of the Act. To view s
70 in the same light as the learned District Court judge is effectively
the new provision with no real work to do. In this regard, Mr Logan of counsel,
who appeared for Ms Paans, relied upon
the decision of this Court in
Kimtran Pty Ltd v Downie
support the proposition that s 70 added no relevant instruction to the Tribunal
in relation to the exercise of the direction under
s 71(1) of the Act. It is
clear, however, that the Court in
was concerned with the issue of
power to award costs against non-parties rather than the manner in which the
discretion should be
exercised by the Tribunal. In my view, neither the
decision nor any dicta in the Court's reasons affords support for the
proposition
advanced on behalf of Ms Paans.
[27] On behalf of Ms Paans, reference was made to other provisions of the Act
which expressly provide for the making of orders for
costs. In this regard,
attention was drawn to s 50(6) (order for costs to remedy prejudice or
detriment); s 52(4)(b) (Tribunal
may not extend time or waive compliance if
prejudice could not be remedied by an order for costs or damages); s 58(b)
(to compensate
a party where vexatious or oppressive proceedings are commenced);
s 60(2)(a) (requiring one party to compensate another for costs
where it has
caused the other disadvantage); s 64 (costs to be paid where a proceeding
is withdrawn); s 67 and s 68 (detailed provisions
for security for costs, the
existence of which recognizes the prospect of an award of costs in the
proceedings); s 69(2) (which
contemplates adverse costs orders against a
party); s 71(6) (which expressly adverts to the existence of other
provisions under
the Act or other Acts which may entitle the Tribunal to award
costs); s 72(2) (which provides for a power to stay a fresh proceeding
adverse costs order has not been met); s 79(1)(b) (which confers a broad
discretion as to the making of a costs order against
a party upon an
adjournment); s 115(2)(c) (which confers an entitlement on an applicant to
costs in the event of a decision by default);
s 116 (which provides for a costs
order upon setting aside a decision by default); s 125(3)(b) (which
provides for an order for
costs upon a summary decision application); s 142(2)
(which provides for a costs order if a reasonable offer to settle is refused);
and s 142(4)(b) (which contemplates costs orders being made in favour of a party
after an offer to settle has been made).
[28] The existence of the provisions referred to in the preceding paragraph
cannot alter the ordinary meaning of s 70 and s 71 of
the Act. In any event,
the existence of this extensive array of special provisions relating to orders
for costs in particular circumstances
tends, in my view, to confirm that s 70
and s 71(1) are intended to impose a general rule that good reason must be
shown in terms
of the interests of justice for making an award of costs in
proceedings before the Tribunal.
The application of the Act
[29] As I have said, although I consider the Tribunal's
interpretation of s 70 and s 71 of the Act was essentially correct, I agree
the learned District Court judge that the Tribunal erred in its application of
the law as understood by it to the facts of this
case. There are, broadly
speaking, three reasons for my conclusion in this regard.
[30] First, the Tribunal found that each party
was justified in engaging the services of legal representatives to assist them
conduct and defence of what the Tribunal recognized to be complex
proceedings. That finding alone could be, in my view, a sufficient
conclude that the interests of justice warranted the exercise of the discretion
to award costs in favour of the successful
party, at least in the absence of any
countervailing consideration. The Tribunal erred in failing to appreciate the
implication
of this finding for an understanding of where the interests of
justice lay in relation to the costs of the proceedings.
[31] There will inevitably be occasions when the aspirations of the
legislature that parties before the Tribunal should not be legally
represented
cannot reasonably be met having regard to the nature of the issues involved.
That this is so is recognized by the terms
of s 73 which deals with the topic of
representation. It provides:
73 Purposes of div 7
The main purpose of this division is to have parties represent themselves and
save legal costs unless the interests of justice require
otherwise."
[32] If orders for costs were not to be made in favour of
successful parties in complex cases, then just claims might not be prosecuted
persons who are unable to manage complex litigation by themselves. Such a state
of affairs would truly be contrary to the interests
of justice; and an
intention to sanction such a state of affairs cannot be attributed to the
legislature which established the Tribunal.
[33] To say this is not to ignore s 71(5)(b) of the Act. There is a clear
distinction, in terms of the interest of achieving justice,
between the mere
fact of having representation and the fact of having reasonably obtained that
representation because of the complexity
of the case. In the absence of
countervailing considerations, where a party has reasonably incurred the cost of
legal representation,
and has been successful before the Tribunal, it could not
rationally be said to be in the interests of justice to allow that success
eroded by requiring that party to bear the costs of the representation which was
reasonably necessary to achieve that outcome.
Finally in this regard, it should
also be borne in mind that s 71(4)(a) of the Act expressly recognizes that "the
outcome of the
proceeding" is a consideration which is relevant to the exercise
of the discretion conferred by s 71(1) of the Act.
[34] Secondly, the learned District Court judge was, in my respectful
opinion, correct to conclude that the decision by Ms Paans to
pursue her rights
against Tamawood and Martyn, rather than to use her funds (assuming she had them
available to her) to pay for the
rectification of her problems by the Maroochy
Shire Council, was not a consideration which could rationally lead to the
of the Tribunal's discretion against Ms Paans. Such a consideration is
not expressly referred to as a relevant matter in s 71(4)
of the Act.
Indeed, the Tribunal's decision in favour of Ms Paans in the substantive
proceeding was itself a clear recognition that
Ms Paans had rights against
Tamawood and Martyn. That she chose to pursue them, as the legislature no doubt
intended she should,
could not, on any rational view of the factors bearing upon
the exercise of the discretion under s 71(1), be treated as a disqualifying
[35] Thirdly, his Honour was, in my respectful opinion, correct to regard the
conduct of Tamawood and Martyn prior to the commencement
of proceedings by Ms
Paans by reason of what was found to be their continuing default as a
consideration tending to support an award
of costs in her favour. It is, of
course, a consideration made relevant by s 71(4)(b) of the Act. The Tribunal's
evident failure
to appreciate this point was an error of principle.
[36] For these reasons I am of the opinion that the learned District Court
judge was correct in concluding that, even if the Tribunal
had correctly
interpreted s 70 and s 71 of the Act, the exercise of the discretion had
miscarried and that he was entitled to exercise
afresh the discretion to award
costs. The orders which he then made were open to him as a proper reflection of
the interests of
justice having regard to the facts of the case as found by the
The scale of costs
[37] In my view, no basis is shown for interfering with the
decision of the District Court in relation to the quantification of costs
reference to the District Court Scale. The effect of his Honour's order is not
in doubt. The quantification of costs was quintessentially
a matter for the
discretion of the learned District Court judge. It is not shown that his Honour
erred in fact or in law in the
exercise of that discretion.
The costs in the District Court
[38] It is said that the quantum of the costs fixed by the
District Court in favour of Tamawood and Martyn is "patently unreasonable".
is also said to be contrary to the provisions of s 100(8) of the Act which
"The appellant must pay the costs of the appeal, including the costs of any
transcript."
[39] On one view, s 100(8) may be thought to be a curious
provision, if for no other reason than that it would, if interpreted literally
and in isolation from the context in which it appears, deny the power vested in
the District Court by the combination of r 766(1)
and r 785 of the
Civil Procedure Rules
to award costs to an appellant who
is ultimately successful in the appeal, and oblige that successful appellant to
pay the legal costs
of the unsuccessful respondent. That would be a
particularly odd result. While it may be accepted that the Act is informed by a
general policy of discouraging the incurring of legal costs, that policy would
not be advanced by a result whereby the legally represented,
but unsuccessful,
respondent has its legal costs paid by a successful but unrepresented appellant.
It is a result most unlikely to
have been contemplated by the legislature.
[40] Further, the provisions of s 100 for appeals from the Tribunal to the
District Court assume the existence and operation of the
legislation which
establishes the powers and procedures of the District Court. This legislation
includes powers to make orders as
If the legislative
intention was to abrogate these provisions in relation to appeals from the
Tribunal, one would expect that it
would be expressed in the clearest terms.
[41] When s 100(8) of the Act is considered in its context it can be seen, in
my opinion, that it should properly be understood as
concerned to make it clear
that the appellant must bear the costs associated with the appeal concerned with
the steps prescribed
for the initiation of the appeal to the District Court, as
distinct from legal costs, that is, the costs of legal representation
[42] It is to be noted that s 100(3) provides for the time within which "an
appeal must be filed". In speaking of "an appeal" as
something to be filed,
this provision is plainly concerned to speak of the initiating process.
Similarly, s 100(4) provides for
the documentation which must accompany "an
appeal". In addition, r 784 of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
(Qld), with which these provisions of the Act are linked, prescribes steps
necessary for the formal initiation of an appeal and in
this context, the
reference in s 100(8) to "the costs of the appeal" can sensibly be seen to refer
to the costs involved in the formal
processes required to initiate an appeal as
distinct from the legal costs of representation. That understanding is also
by the circumstance that s 100(8) expressly includes the "costs of any
transcript" as part of "the costs of the appeal". For the
sake of completeness,
it may be noted that the power to award costs vested in the Tribunal is at large
in the sense that it is not
limited to any species of costs.
[43] There was no suggestion that Ms Paans has not paid the costs associated
with the appeal referred to in s 100.
[44] Once it is accepted that the District Court was not obliged to order
that a successful appellant should pay all the costs of
an unsuccessful
respondent, and that his Honour has a discretion to award costs other than the
costs referred to in s 100(8) of the
Act and to fix the quantum of costs, it is
necessary to consider whether that discretion has miscarried, that is, whether
so fixed is "patently unreasonable".
[45] In this case, there were, of course, two applications for leave to
appeal before his Honour. His Honour's order in relation
to costs no doubt
reflected his Honour's view as to the level of success enjoyed by Ms Paans
overall. That was, in my view, a consideration
relevant to the exercise of his
Honour's discretion. That his Honour's order gave effect to this consideration
is no basis for arguing
that the exercise of discretion was "patently
unreasonable".
[46] For these reasons, I would make the following orders in each
application:
(a) the application for an extension of time within which to file
the notice of appeal and to apply for leave to appeal be granted;
(b) leave to appeal be granted;
(c) each appeal be dismissed;
(d) the appellants Tamawood and Martyn pay the respondent's costs of the
application and appeal to be assessed on the standard basis.
PHILIPPIDES J:
I have had the benefit of reading the
comprehensive reasons for judgment of Keane JA and the additional reasons for
judgment of
Williams JA. I agree with those reasons and the orders
Main v Main
[1949] HCA 39
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR 541
Knight v FP Special Assets
(1992) 174 CLR 178
Forest Pty Ltd (Receivers and Managers
Appointed) v Keen Bay Pty Ltd & Ors
(1991) 4 ACSR 107
at 111 - 113.
See the Explanatory Memorandum
Explanatory Memorandum at
This objective is expressly
identified in s 4(1)(b) of the Act.
Acts Interpretation Act
[2003] QCA 424
esp at [18];
[2003] QCA 424
[2004] 1 Qd R 651
esp at 658 - 659.
Uniform Civil Procedure
(Qld) r 766(1) and r 785.
and s 115(2)(c) of the
Act which clearly refer to "legal costs" as costs associated with legal
representation as distinct from other
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (156 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter