URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sutcliffe, J. v Pimsco Investments Pty Ltd (no. 2) [2003] QBT 21 (16 April 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 021
SUTCLIFFE v Pimsco Investments Pty Ltd (no. 2)
SUTCLIFFE John
Pimsco Investments Pty Ltd
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
16 April 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
10 April 2003
DECISION OF:
Ms J. McVeigh
CATCHWORDS:
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
, section 61
REPRESENTATION:
RESPONDENT:
SOLICITORS:
Winchester Young & Maddern
RESPONDENT:
Astill Lawyers
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Introduction
This decision relates to the costs in
these proceedings, the proceedings themselves having been settled on 10 March
On 24 May 2002 John Sutcliffe (“the
applicant”) filed an application seeking payment of $50,243.63. The claim
to the construction of a residence at 41 Rita Street, Holland Park for
Pimsco Investments Pty Ltd (“the
respondent”).
On 20 June 2002 the respondent filed its
defence in the proceedings. The respondent also counterclaimed in respect of
the sum of $1,260.
On 9 August 2002 the applicant filed an
amended statement of claim. The amended statement of claim advanced an
alternate basis for
claiming $50,243.63. He filed a reply and answer and
defence to the counterclaim on the same day.
On 26 August 2002 directions were made for
the exchange of statements. The applicant complied with the direction, albeit
late, whereas
the respondent did not file any statements by the required date.
On 10 September 2002 the respondent filed
an amended defence and counterclaim.
On 23 September 2002 the applicant’s
reply to the amended defence and counterclaim was filed.
At a directions hearing on 22 October 2002
the respondent was ordered to deliver its statements of evidence by 25 October
did not do so. The matter was listed for a two day hearing commencing
on 9 December 2002.
On 28 October 2002 the applicant applied
for a summary decision. For the reasons delivered on 4 December 2002 his
application was
refused. Having considered the evidence adduced by the parties
in the summary dismissal application, Deputy Chairperson Bradford-Morgan
concluded that it was necessary to conduct the hearing before making a final
determination in the proceedings in order to make the
necessary findings of
credit going to the question of formation of the contract. It was her view that
issues of credit could not
properly be determined on a summary decision
application. She ordered each party to bear its own costs of the application
summary decision.
The matter came on for hearing before me
on 9 December 2002. I adjourned the hearing on the application of the
respondent on the
basis that the matter was not ready to proceed. I ordered the
respondent to compensate the applicant in respect to his costs unnecessarily
incurred in preparation for the hearing. Pursuant to section 51 of the
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
2000 (“the Act”) I indicated
that the tribunal would not continue with the respondent’s counterclaim
respondent had complied with the costs order. Directions were given
for the filing of an amended statement of claim, amended defence
counterclaim and amended reply. The matter was listed for a section 152
conference.
The further amended statement of claim
was filed on 16 December 2002. The applicant reduced his claim from $50,243.63
to $16,185.
The amended defence and counterclaim was
filed on 20 December 2002. It put at issue matters that had previously been the
of admissions.
On 28 January 2003 the applicant’s
amended reply and answer was filed.
The matter was not settled at the section
152 conference on 11 February 2003. Deputy Chairperson Roney made directions
for the further
conduct of the proceedings including the allocation of three
hearing days commencing 26 March 2003.
At a directions hearing on 10 March 2003
the Chairperson noted that the matter had settled, save and except for the
matter of costs.
She directed the respondent to file its application for the
vacation of paragraph 2 of the order made on 9 December 2002. She directed
parties to file written submissions in respect of the costs of the
The respondent filed its application to
vacate order 2 made on 9 December 2002 on 24 March 2003.
I heard that application together with
each party’s application for costs in the proceedings on 10 April 2003.
The solicitor for the applicant relied
statements of J Sutcliffe –
26-9-02 and 1-11-02;
statement of F Costanzo
statements of S Secco
– 25-10-02 and 14-12-02.
Counsel for the respondent relied on a
statement of S Secco made on 24 March 2003.
Submissions - Applicant
The solicitor for the applicant provided
written submissions which he supplemented orally. It was submitted that the
tribunal should
(sic) set aside the order of 10 September 2002 in respect of
costs and should order the respondent to pay the applicant’s costs
proceedings assessed by reference to Magistrates Court Scale F together with the
costs of obtaining the assessment by the
quantity surveyor. I assume that the
submission in respect of the order of 10 December is in error and that the
applicant wishes
to retain the benefit of the costs order in his favour made on
Submissions - Respondent
Counsel for the respondent provided
written submissions which he supplemented orally. It was submitted that the
applicant should
pay the respondent’s costs of the proceedings on an
indemnity basis.
Application
to revoke costs order of 9 December 2002
Section 42(5) of the Act gives the
tribunal the power, at any time, to revoke an order made by it.
The hearing was adjourned on the first
morning on the application of the respondent. The respondent had not filed
material by that
date, contrary to a number of orders made for the filing of
such material. In her decision in respect of the summary decision application,
Deputy Chairperson Bradford-Morgan noted that the respondent had not adduced
evidence to controvert the applicant’s evidence
of reasonable value of the
works (paragraph 50) and recorded the concession by counsel for the respondent
that the respondent had
failed to file any material in defence of the
application for a summary decision and that the only material filed in support
claim and defence was a three page statement by Mr
In his oral submissions counsel for the
respondent indicated that the adjournment had been requested to enable the
respondent to closely
examine the documents provided by the applicant and while
conceding that the adjournment request was untimely nonetheless observed
the applicant could never have proved his $50,000 claim.
There is no challenge to the statement of
Mr Sutcliffe that he gave the applicant all of the invoices for the job. There
is no reason
that the respondent could not have perused and analysed the
applicant’s documents which supported his claim and indeed one
expected the respondent to have done that during the course of preparation of
cross examination when preparing for the
While it is now abundantly plain that the
applicant’s claim for $50,000 was always overstated, involving a double
counting of
a claim in excess of $30,000, there is no reason why the respondent
could not have identified the problem well before it was identified
I am not persuaded that the order of 9
December ought be revoked as I remain of the view that the adjournment was
requested by the
respondent who was then not prepared for a hearing. I remain
of the view that the respondent’s failure to prepare and consequent
request for an adjournment unreasonably disadvantaged the applicant, who had
incurred the costs of preparing for the hearing.
The order of 9 December 2002
will stand.
Costs of the proceedings
In deciding whether to award costs and
the amount of the costs section 61(4) of the Act sets out matters to which the
tribunal might
have regard. These matters are:
“(a) the outcome of the proceeding;
(b) the conduct of the
parties to the proceeding before and during the proceeding;
nature and complexity of the proceeding;
(d) the relative strengths
of the claims made by each of the parties to the proceeding;
contravention of the Queensland Building Services Authority Act 1991, the
Domestic Building Contracts Act 2000 or any other
Act by a party to the
proceeding;
(f) for a proceeding to which the authority is a party,
whether the other party to the proceeding was afforded natural justice by
(g) anything else the tribunal considers
The solicitor for the applicant submitted
that his client had been entirely successful in his claim in that the respondent
him $16,185. Counsel for the respondent submitted that his client had
been entirely successful in its defence of the applicant’s
original claim
in excess of $50,000. In a sense each submission is correct.
The outcome of the proceedings is that
they were settled, the respondent alleging on a commercial basis, but in any
case settled by
the payment of the entirety of the applicant’s claim, as
The solicitor for the applicant
contrasted the conduct of his client, which was in accordance with the
directions made by the tribunal,
with the conduct of the respondent which failed
to comply with numerous orders. He also observed that the respondent had not
an offer under section 157 of the Act nor made any other form of offer to
pay the applicant $16,185 before 5 March 2003. It was
submitted that the
applicant’s conduct in bringing and maintaining the claim was reasonable
and indeed the only reason that
he received payment.
Counsel for the respondent was very
critical of the conduct of the applicant. He submitted that the applicant
brought his claim for
an amount in excess of $50,000 in reckless disregard of
the facts, demonstrated by the applicant’s amendment of his claim after
the adjournment of the hearing. He drew attention to the uncontradicted
evidence of Mr S Secco that had the applicant asked for
the $16,000 which he was
eventually paid that the respondent would have paid the money in order to
achieve a settlement of the dispute.
Counsel for the respondent submitted that
this was an appropriate case for the making of an indemnity costs order. He
relied on the
statement of Woodward J in
Fountain Selected Meats (Sales) Pty
Ltd v International Produce Merchants Pty Ltd
[1988] FCA 202
(1998) 81 ALR 397
“I believe that it is appropriate to
consider awarding solicitor and client or indemnity costs, whenever it appears
action has been commenced or continued in circumstances where the
applicant, properly advised, should have known that he had no chance
of success.
In such cases the action must be presumed to have been commenced or continued
for some other ulterior motive, or because
of some wilful disregard of the known
facts or the clearly established law. Such cases are, fortunately, rare. But
when they occur
the court will need to consider how it should exercise its
unfettered discretion.”
It was submitted that the applicant and
his solicitor had failed to analyse his own paperwork with the result that the
claim as filed
sought an amount never capable of substantiation. It was
submitted that this was in wilful disregard of the known facts.
The solicitor for the applicant submitted
that his client commenced and continued his proceedings in order to get paid.
It was submitted
that not only did he have a chance of success, but that he
succeeded in that he was paid $16,185.
I accept that the applicant made a
mistake and that as soon as he was aware of this mistake he corrected by
arranging for the filing
of an amended statement of claim.
I reject the submission that it would be
appropriate to make an order for indemnity costs in these proceedings on the
basis that the
proceedings were neither commenced nor continued in circumstances
in which the applicant had no chance of success.
When assessing the conduct of the parties
before and during the proceeding it would be wrong to do so using the benefit of
While Mr Secco is no doubt genuine in his statement that he would
have paid $16,185 to settle if he had been asked to do it, there
is no evidence
that the respondent made any attempt to settle for that figure, or anything like
it, prior to 5 March 2003. A prudent
respondent would have examined the
material which it had, would have considered the costs likely to be incurred
should the matter
proceed and would have made an offer to settle. The
respondent did none of these things.
The proceedings had a level of complexity
which justified the parties seeking legal representation and which justify the
an award of costs.
I am unable to make any finding in
respect of the relative strengths of the claims made by each party the matter
not having proceeded
to hearing. I note however that the respondent has paid
the applicant the entirety of his amended claim.
While there were allegations of
contravention of the
Domestic Building Contracts Act
2000, as the matter
was not resolved at hearing I am not able to make any finding about whether
those allegations were made out.
Taking into account the various matters,
in particular that the matter was settled by the respondent paying the applicant
he claimed and the conduct of the parties throughout the proceedings
I have concluded that my discretion is appropriately exercised
by ordering the
respondent to pay the applicant’s costs of the proceedings. However, I do
not think the applicant deserves
all his costs. I will not allow him the costs
of the amended statement of claim nor of the work associated with advancing his
on the alternate basis.
The respondent’s application to
revoke order 2 of 9 December 2002 is refused.
The respondent will pay the
applicant’s costs of the proceedings, save for his costs of the claim on
the alternate basis, to
be agreed or failing agreement to be assessed by
reference to Magistrates Court Scale
..................................................
J. MCVEIGH- MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 021
Application No:
Sutcliffe, John
C/- Winchester Young & Maddern
MT GRAVATT QLD 4122
Respondent:
Pimsco Investments Pty Ltd
C/- Astills Lawyers
BRISBANE QLD 4001
Section 61 - Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
Upon hearing Mr Young on behalf of the applicant and Mr Barlow
of counsel on behalf of the respondent, the Queensland Building Tribunal
the following orders:
The respondent’s application to
revoke order 2 of 9 December 2002 is refused.
The respondent will pay the
applicant’s costs of the proceedings, save for his costs of the claim on
the alternate basis, to
be agreed or failing agreement to be assessed by
reference to Magistrates Court Scale
......................................................
MS J. MCVEIGH - MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Date: 16 April 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter