URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Younger, Lois v Qbsa [2003] QBT 20 (10 April 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 020
Younger v QBSA
[2003] QBT Q192-02
YOUNGER Lois
QUEENSLAND BUILDING SERVICES AUTHORITY
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
10 April 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
13 March 2003
DECISION OF:
Mr P. Lohrisch
CATCHWORDS:
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
REPRESENTATION:
Self-represented
SOLICITORS:
RESPONDENT:
In-house solicitor – Mr Robinson
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Introduction
This is an application by a homeowner for
a review of a decision by the Queensland Building Services Authority (“the
Authority”)
rejecting a claim by the homeowner under the Statutory
Insurance Scheme. A letter of rejection by the Authority (confirmed by a
subsequent letter dated 26 September 2002) is dated 27 August
The Applicant lodged a dispute
notification form with the Authority dated 2 April 2002.
The dispute notification form listed the
following as alleged defective work :-
ceiling, deterioration around windows, crack in front of house (exterior),
skirting boards, silicone finishes around
benches and shower recess, paint work
peeling around front door, front panel at door and rear sliding door
The Applicant’s inspector Mr
Stennett attended to inspect the Applicant’s complaints on 8 May
By letters dated 21 May 2002 and 7 June
2002 the Authority requested of the Applicant as to when the defects first
became apparent
to her. The defects were numerically listed in the
Authority’s letter of 7 June 2002 as follows:-
“ 1. Cracks in the ceilings
Deterioration around
Cracks in front of
Silicone finish around
the bench and shower
Paintwork peeking
around the front door
panel door and rear sliding door leaks.”
The Authority also noted that it enclosed
a copy of “
the relevant Insurance Policy Conditions Booklet –
”. This had been requested by the Applicant.
By letter dated 5 July 2002 the Applicant
corresponded with the Authority in the following
“Thank you for your letter of 7 June 2002
and the enclosed Insurance Policy Conditions Booklet.
I apologise
for the delay in getting my responses back to you.
I have followed
your recommendation of linking the dates I noted damage to weather events etc.
To the best of my recollection I advise
“1. Cracks in the ceiling – have appeared over
a period of time. The first one in the hall near the front door occurred
July 2001. I also believe another crack extending
through the lounge to dining
room is about to appear.
Deterioration around windows
– first noticed in about February 1998 in one area, but all of the windows
have deteriorated since
then, with the most recent on occurring in February
Cracks in front of house
– first noticed in December 2001.
Skirting boards – first
noticed in December 2001.
Silicone finish around the
bench and shower recess – first noticed prior to moving in and it was
supposedly fixed then. BSA
Inspector was shown the problem and I believe he
included it in the claim as it was so poorly
Paintwork peeling around the
front door – first noticed the paintwork around the front door peeled in
Front panel door and rear
sliding door leaks – first noticed rear sliding door leak and the front
panel door seal to be defective
during April
The Authority then responded in the
following terms by letter dated 27 August
“Dear Ms Younger
CONSTRUCTION AT 42 DAVIDSON STREET, SOUTH TOWNSVILLE
has reviewed your claim for assistance with the rectification of defective work
as detailed in your Dispute Notification Form
dated 11 April
The BSA regrets that the Statutory Insurance Scheme is
unable to be of assistance to you in respect to these matters for the following
ITEMS 1, 3, 4, & 5
The BSA has
classified the defects numbered items 1, 3, 4, & 5 as Category 2 defects and
as such they are unable to be considered
as a claim under the Statutory
Insurance Scheme. In this regard I refer you to the following
The insured in NOT
ENTITLED to compensation under section 3 of this policy
(b) In the case of a minor defect, more
after the date of practical completion of the residential
construction work.
All claims under this policy must be
(c) In the case of a minor defect – within one month
of that defect first, in the opinion of the Authority, becoming
ITEMS 2, 6 & 7
information provided by yourself, you have indicated that deterioration around
the windows became apparent in 1998 and over
time have deteriorated further, you
have also indicated that you were aware of item 6 & 7 which related to the
paintwork peeling
around the front door (6) and front panel door and rear
sliding door leaking in January 2000 and April 2000 respectively, and that
failed to lodge a Dispute Notification Form until April 2002.
this instance I would direct you to section 8.2 of the Insurance Policy
conditions booklet which states:-
All claims under this policy must be
(b) In the case of a major defect or the subsidence or
settlement of the foundations – within three months of that defect or
subsidence or settlement first, in the opinion of the Authority, becoming
Or within such time as the Authority may
We regret to advise that in this instance we are unable to
provide you assistance in this matter as your delay in notifying the BSA
prejudiced the BSA by way of increased sub sequential damage and denied the BSA
an opportunity to direct the builder prior to
his Bankruptcy.
your convenience I have enclosed a copy of the relevant Insurance Policy
Conditions – Edition 2.
NOTE: Pursuant to section 104 of
the Queensland Building Tribunal Act, you are entitled to apply to the
Queensland Building Tribunal
(the tribunal) for a review of the BSA’s
decision to disallow a claim under the Statutory Insurance Scheme wholly or in
An application for review must be made to the Tribunal within
twenty-eight (28) days from the date of receipt of this letter. For
information, the telephone number of the Tribunal is
Yours faithfully
for Regional Manager”
By letter dated 16 September 2002 the
Applicant responded to the Authority’s rejection of her claim in the
following terms:-
CONSTRUCTION AT 42 DAVIDSON STREET, SOUTH TOWNSVILLE
I refer to a
letter dated 27 August 2002, Ref No 3 – 1648-02, signed by Leanne Tyler
advising that my claim for the above referenced
residence has been disallowed
due to time limits imposed by the insurance body.
I wish to advise
that I did not receive any correspondence from you when I initially moved into
the residence. Therefore, I did not
receive a copy of the insurance conditions,
even though I was supposed to. I believed that I had 6 years to lodge a claim
defects, notwithstanding the fact that the builder went
I have been advised by Leanne that the claim has been
refused due to time limits being exceeded.
When the residence was
inspected by Milton Stennett, he advised that there would be no problem with my
insurance claim. I have recently
spoken to him again about the refusal of the
claim and he advised that I should contact you initially to have you review the
before lodging the review with the Queensland Building Tribunal.
I note that I only have 28 days in which to lodge the review with
the Queensland Building Tribunal (“QBT”) and ask that
you review the
claim prior to my lodging the matter with the QBT. I believe I will need to
lodge the mater no later than 24 September
2002 which would mean I would need to
post the lodgement on 20 September 2002. As the time frame is so short, I ask
for your prompt
attention to this matter and would appreciate hearing from you
in the very near future.
I can be contacted on 4799 7870 between
8.30am and 4.30pm on 16, 17 and 18 September and 4772 5221 on 19 and 20
September 2002. Alternatively,
my mobile phone number is 0438 725
Yours faithfully
The Authority then replied by letter
dated 26 September 2002 again rejecting the Applicant’s
The Applicant then applied to the
Tribunal on 14 October 2002 for a review of the Authority’s decision. The
grounds upon which
the Applicant sought the review was expressed
“I never received a copy of the Insurance
Policy Conditions at the time I moved into the residence. I first sighted the
in June 2002.”
Respondent Authority’s
Statement of Reasons
The Authority amended its Statement of
Reasons, the amended version being Exhibit 4. Apart from the foregoing matters
dealing with
letters passing between the parties, the Authority produced a
further letter in its amended Statement of Reasons dated 4 October
addressed to the owner. The letter is “SOR 21” to the
Authority’s amended Statement of Reasons and is
“4 October 1996
PO Box 5189
Townsville Qld 4810
CERTIFICATE OF
CONSTRUCTION AT 42 DAVIDSON ST, SOUTH TOWNSVILLE, QLD
I am pleased to enclose a Certificate of Insurance and
Policy Conditions booklet for Residential Construction Work at the above
This Certificate is issued under the Queensland Building
Services Authority Act 1991 and is evidence the Work is covered under the
Statutory Insurance Scheme.
It is in your interest to familiarise
yourself with the protection afforded by the Policy and understand the Policy
Conditions. As
an example, your attention made in advance of the requirement of
your contract.
DO NOT PAY PROGRESS PAYMENTS BEFORE THE APPLICABLE STAGE OF
CONSTRUCTION , SHOWN ON YOUR CONTRACT, HAS BEEN
Details shown on the Certificate are from the
schedule provided to the BSA by the Contractor. Please check the Certificate
information not agree with your records,
Certificate with the amendments to this office
. If your Certificate is correct, please keep it in a safe place.
The Policy remains current until the expiry date shown on the
Certificate
without any further premium payment.
Any enquiries concerning the
Certificate or Policy should be directed to the BSA’s Insurance New
Business Branch on (07) 3225
2879 or (07) 3225 2878.
Manager Insurance
The letter addresses the substance of the
Applicant’s then grounds for review, namely that she had not been
forwarded a copy
of the Insurance Policy Conditions upon completion of the house
and therefore could not know of the notice requirements.
Further the Authority’s Statement
of Reasons sets up that under the policy:-
By clause 6.1.2 the Applicant an insured
is not entitled to compensation where in the case of a minor defect more than
has elapsed since the date of practical
completion.
The Applicant as insured, by a
combination of clause 6.1.5 and clause 8.2, is not entitled to compensation
unless the claim is made:-
for a major defect – within three
months of the defect in the opinion of the Authority becoming
for minor defect – within one month
of the defect first, in the opinion of the Authority, becoming
The Statement of Reasons also annexes a
report from its inspector Mr Stennett. Adopting the numbering in the letters
passing between
the Applicant and the Authority dated 7 June and 5 July the
Authority considered that:-
items i, iii, iv, v were identified by Mr
Stennett as Category 2 defects or minor defects – as such the Authority
rejected the
claim as notification to the Authority was outside time (namely the
six months from practical completion);
as to items vi, vii, these were
identified by Mr Stennett as Category 1 defects or major defects – the
Authority considered
therefore that the notification of these defects to the
Authority was outside the time (namely three months from the defect becoming
as to item ii – windows 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, and 6 were identified by Mr Stennett as Category 1 or major defects –
the Authority
determined that the notification to the Authority was outside the
time (namely the three months period);
as to item ii – windows 7, 8 and 9
the Authority accepted that notification of these defects were within the three
months allowed
and liability to pay compensation to the Applicant was accepted
by the Authority.
Applicant’s
Lois Younger
Ms Younger filed a statement dated 2
December 2002. In it she confirmed the reasons for wanting the
Authority’s decision reviewed
The Authority must under section 69(4) of
Queensland Building Services Authority Act
1991 provide a copy of the
Insurance Policy to a homeowner at the same time as the Certificate of Insurance
is issued. She said
that she never received a copy of the Insurance Policy or
the Certificate.
Had she been provided with a copy of the
Insurance Policy she would have been aware of time limits which applied to
claims and would
have complied with them.
The Insurance Booklet was not forwarded
to her under cover of the Authority’s letter of 7 June 2002, the book not
being received
until some time later. She said it was only after receipt of
that policy that the conversation between herself and Ms Tyler of the
regarding time limits had any meaning to her.
The Applicant considered that insurance
on the house was valid for at least six years and six months and that for this
believed Category 2 defects were still within the relevant period of
insurance cover.
She then makes reference to certain of
the windows deteriorating from about February 2002 which is within the time
limits. It is
in respect of those windows that the Authority has accepted
responsibility in its amended Statement of Reasons made subsequent to
Applicant’s statement.
The Applicant confirmed in cross
examination that the address she had noted on the building contract, namely PO
Box 5189, Townsville,
4810 was the post office box of a friend who maintained
that post office box at all relevant times. Indeed the Applicant confirmed
she had received other correspondence through that post office box. She said
however she did not realise that that post office
box would be the address that
the Authority would use to forward documents. She confirmed nonetheless that
she was staying at the
friend’s house through the relevant period, while
the house was being built. She said however that she was in Sydney at the
namely 4 October 1996 when the Authority had forwarded their letter enclosing
the Insurance Certificate and the Insurance Policy
Conditions.
The Applicant confirmed that her letter
of 4 July 2002 to the Authority as to the timing of her becoming aware of the
various defects
was correct. She said however that now the ten windows had
deteriorated.
The Applicant was taken through in cross
examination when the damage in each of the photographs attached to the Statement
became apparent. It was clear from her evidence that her previous
notification as to timing in her 4 July 2002 letter was confirmed.
Authority’s Evidence
Ms Tyler is currently a Licensing Officer
with the Authority. She was previously the Authority’s Insurance Officer
in Townsville.
Ms Tyler provided a statement which was Exhibit 2 and also gave
oral evidence. Ms Tyler said at paragraph 4 that the Authority
forwarded a
letter dated 4 October 1996 from the Authority’s insurance division to the
Applicant enclosing a Certificate of
Insurance in addition to the Policy
Conditions. She said the letter (SOR 21 to the amended Statement of Reasons)
was sent in the
course of the Authority’s normal practice to send such
letter where the insurance premium has been paid and to the address
Ms Tyler said that the copy letter had
been generated from the Authority’s computer records and she believed it
was in accordance
with the Authority’s practice. She said that there was
no evidence on the Authority’s file that the letter had been
returned to
the Authority. She said in the event that such a letter is returned, the
Authority tried to contact the owner by sending
it to the site address, although
this was not necessary and did not occur in this instance.
Milton Stennett
Mr Stennett provided a statement dated 6
January 2003. He confirmed his Inspection Report of 8 May 2002. Mr Stennett
was questioned
over time. He further conceded that, when the deterioration started,
have been apparent to the Applicant what was happening.
Section 69(4) of the
Building Services Authority Act
1991 to which the Applicant refers requires
the Authority give a copy of the policy to the consumer when the Certificate of
is given to the consumer.
I am satisfied that the Authority
forwarded a letter to the Applicant (which the Applicant says she did not
receive) on or about 4
October 1996. That letter indicated that it enclosed the
Certificate of Insurance and a copy of the relevant policy. As I understand
Applicant’s evidence it was both the letter and the apparent contents that
she did not receive.
The letter was forwarded (on the evidence
of Ms Tyler which I accept) according to the normal practice of the Authority.
Ms Tyler said that the Authority’s file does not indicate that the
letter had been returned, an event which would have prompted
further attempts by
the Authority to forward the policy and the Certificate of Insurance to the
Applicant, attempts which were not
recorded on the Authority’s file.
There is no suggestion in the evidence that the post office box number, to which
the Authority’s
letter was addressed, was not relevant to the
Applicant’s receipt of correspondence through the time of the
Authority’s
letter was sent.
I consider that the act of posting the
letter was sufficient to comply with the Authority’s duty under section
69(4), namely
to “give” the consumer the relevant documentation.
Once the Authority has properly discharged its obligation under section
my view the relevant policy of insurance applies and cannot be avoided by the
Applicant/Insured’s stated non-receipt
of the subject correspondence.
It seems to me that, although the
Applicant was absent in Sydney through the relevant time, she still maintained
relations with the
post office box holder and, moreover, considered that postal
address her relevant postal address at the time. One can only surmise
Authority’s letter and enclosed documentation went astray upon receipt
into the post office box. In any event, as
I have said, that is not, it seems
to me, relevant to a proper interpretation of the Authority’s obligation
under section 69(4).
With respect to letters passing between
the Applicant and the Authority, in particular the Applicant’s letter of 5
the Applicant’s evidence, particularly under cross examination,
was clear, namely that the times noted by the Applicant in
her letter of 5 July
2002 remain the Applicant’s best recollection as to when the various
defects became apparent to her.
The Applicant in both her evidence and
submissions suggested that, when she advised the Authority of those
recollections in July
2002, she was not aware of the repercussions, given that
she had not at that time received a copy of the relevant insurance policy.
It seems to me that whether or not the
Applicant was aware of the policy conditions at the time, and indeed the
repercussions of those
policy conditions, is irrelevant as her recollection of
events could not have been, and should not have been, any different than
related in her letter of 5 July 2002.
It is based upon those recollections that
the Authority arrived at its decision pursuant to the policy. The Applicant did
to take issue with the Authority’s reasoning based upon her
recollected dates and the policy conditions. Indeed I have no
problem with the
Authority’s reasoning in that regard.
The result must be that the
Authority’s determination in its letter of 27 August 2002 upon the
Applicant’s various claims
particularly as updated in the
Authority’s amended Statement of Reasons (save for windows 7, 8 and 9 in
item ii) should be
confirmed. In respect of windows 7, 8 and 9 (further to the
Authority’s admission of liability) it should be
I reserve any decision upon the matter of
costs and give leave to the parties to make application in that
The Authority’s decision as
contained in its letter of 27 August 2002 is confirmed subject to an exclusion
in respect of item
ii as referred in that letter on account of windows 7, 8 and
9 identified in the Authority’s amended Statement of Reasons in
the Authority’s decision is reversed.
The parties are given leave to make
application in respect of costs in the event they cannot agree as to
........................................
P. LOHRISCH - MEMBER
Queensland Building
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 020
Application No:
LOIS YOUNGER
32 Davidson Street
SOUTH TOWNSVILLE Q 4810
Respondent:
QUEENSLAND BUILDING SERVICES AUTHORITY
11 Edmondstone
SOUTH BRISBANE Q 4101
Section 93 –
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
Upon hearing Ms Younger, the Applicant and Mr
Robinson on behalf the Respondent, the Queensland Building Tribunal makes the
That the Queensland Building Services
Authority’s (“the Authority”) decision as contained in its
letter of 27 August
2002 is confirmed, save for an exclusion in respect of
windows 7, 8 and 9 identified in the Authority’s Amended Statement of
The parties are given leave to make
application in respect of costs in the event they cannot agree as to
.............................................
P. LOHRISCH – MEMBER
Queensland Building
Date: 10 April 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter