URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2009/63.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:38:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CAC, Re [2009] QGAAT 63 (14 August 2009)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL
[2009] QGAAT 63
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Approval of a Management Plan
In the matter of CAC
MATTER NUMBER:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
DATE OF HEARING:
22 June 2009
DATE OF ORDER:
22 June 2009
DATE OF REASONS:
14 August 2009
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
C Endicott Deputy President
J Allen Member
CATCHWORDS:
ADMINISTRATORS-Where administrator is a private trust company-Where
administrator failed to properly consider alternative superannuation
strategies-Where tribunal gives directions to administrator for all future
reviews of appointment.
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Public Trustee Act 1978
Trustee Companies Act 1968
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
s292-90, s292-
APPROVAL OF A FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN
Tribunal approves the investment recommendations set out on page 18 of the
financial management plan dated 22 April 2009.
Tribunal declares that in 2008 Trust Company of Australia Limited did not
adequately model the investment structure for CAC, in
particular Trust Company
of Australia Limited did not take proper account of the advantages of making a
superannuation contribution
under section 292-
Income Tax Assessment
Tribunal directs Trust Company of Australia Limited on each occasion that its
appointment as administrator for CAC is reviewed
to provide to the Tribunal
modelling prepared by an independent expert of a comparison between:
assets then under its administration for CAC, and
assets that would notionally be under its administration for CAC if variously
20%, 40%, 60% and 80% of the initial funds held
under its administration, namely
$4,290,560, had been contributed into superannuation at the commencement of its
appointment as administrator
modelling is to be based on the assumption that CAC could have satisfied
conditions of release for superannuation purposes in
REASONS FOR DECISION
History of the application
[1] CAC is 37 years of age. He sustained personal injuries, including severe
head injuries, in a motor vehicle accident on 10 February
1996. Proceedings, in
which his father acted as his litigation guardian, for the recovery of damages
to compensate CAC for his personal
injuries were commenced in the Supreme Court
of Queensland in 1999. On 11 July 2008 Justice Cullinane sanctioned a compromise
the proceedings under
Public Trustee Act 1978
[2] The compromise provided that damages in the sum of $4,925,000 inclusive of
statutory refunds were recovered by CAC plus his legal
costs of the damages
proceedings. Justice Cullinane appointed Trust Company of Australia Limited
(“Trust Company”) as
administrator for CAC of the compromise sum
after statutory deductions and after payment of a past care claim quantified at
The sanction order directed that CAC also recover reasonable costs of
the administration of the damages award.
[3] Justice Cullinane ordered Trust Company to give the Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal (“the Tribunal”) a management
approval within sixty days of the date of sanction. Trust Company subsequently
asked the Tribunal for an extension of time
in which to provide the management
plan and on 5 December 2008 the management plan was received by the Tribunal. As
from 1 January
2009 management plans have been called financial management plans
due to an amendment to the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(“the Act”).
[4] In accordance with Presidential Direction 2 of 2007, an oral hearing was
scheduled for 27 March 2009 to facilitate provision
by the adult, his family and
the administrator of relevant input into issues arising from the consideration
of the financial management
plan by the Tribunal. CH who had been appointed
guardian for CAC attended the hearing as did representatives of Trust Company
representatives of The Public Trustee of Queensland. CAC did not attend the
hearing. After receiving oral submissions about aspects
of the financial
management plan, the Tribunal directed that further information be provided
administration.
[5] On 24 April 2009 a revised financial management plan was received by the
Tribunal together with information provided by Trust
Company in response to the
directions of the Tribunal. On 4 June 2009 The Public Trustee of Queensland
provided written submissions
to the Tribunal commenting on specific aspects of
the financial management plan and the further information that had been provided
by Trust Company. On 22 June 2009 a hearing was conducted by the Tribunal to
consider the financial management plan.
The Issues and the Legislation
Section 20(2)
of the Act provides that the Tribunal may approve a financial
management plan. The issue considered by the Tribunal at the hearing
was whether
the financial management plan, as revised, should be approved.
[7] Trust Company sought approval of a financial management plan dated 22 April
2009. According to Trust Company, the financial management
plan set out the
strategies for management of $4,301,945 being the amount of the recovered
damages combined with the recovered administration
fees but net of the past care
claim, legal fees and capital commission paid to Trust Company pursuant to
subss(1) and (2) of s41
Trustee Companies Act 1968
[8] Trust Company’s strategy was to invest the settlement proceeds into a
diversified portfolio of managed funds and Australian
shares within the TCPMS
Portfolio with a profile of a balanced investor. An amount of $38,000 was to be
used to purchase a motor
vehicle, furniture and gym equipment. As a house is
intended to be purchased for CAC in three to five years time, $700,000 was
in rolling six month term deposits (interest to be reinvested) to be
available for this proposed purchase. At least $50,000 was to
be held in at call
funds to cover emergencies.
[9] The plan incorporated a strategy of making an initial concessional
contribution of $50,000 into a superannuation fund in the
2009 tax year for
which the maximum tax deduction of $50,000 could be claimed and of making
regular concessional contributions to
superannuation of at least $50,000 each
year resulting in a tax saving of up to $15,000 per annum. It was stated that
the superannuation
benefit would accrue in a concessionally taxed environment
over the long term.
[10] The cash flow budget in the plan for 2009/2010 was stated to be:
Investment income $158,973
payable $30,983
TOTAL $127,990
Expenditure
expenses $11,330
Costs of care $112,270
Board & rent $11,330
Company fees $13,362
Superannuation $50,000
TOTAL $198,292
[11] The deficit for the first year of the plan was estimated to be $70,302 and
projections to the year 2033 revealed a deficit of
expenditure over income for
each year on the basis set out in the table and incorporating increases to the
care and cost of living
expenses indexed at 3% annually.
[12] Assuming an annual return of 6.85% (income of 4.7% and growth of 2.15%),
projections in the plan to the year 2033 valued the
TCPMS investment portfolio
at $7,562,872 and the superannuation account at $2,573,267. The plan anticipated
that the house, if purchased
for $850,000 in 2014, would be valued at $1,238,290
in 2033. CAC would turn 60 years of age in the 2033 tax year.
[13] The plan described the manner in which TCPMS Investment Portfolio provides
investment diversification across all asset classes
via managed funds reducing
the impact of poor returns from any one investment, market or asset class. The
plan set out the recommended
asset allocation (based on a balanced investor
profile) as follows:
sector Proposed Target
Cash 11.80% 5%
assets 28.34% 35%
Australian equities 29.30% 25%
International
equities 20.51% 23%
Property 10.05% 10.05%
TOTAL 100% 100%
[14] The calculations based on the strategy outlined in the financial management
plan predicted that the funds under management would
last during the life
expectancy of CAC.
[15] At the hearing on 27 March 2009, CH expressed satisfaction with the actions
of Trust Company and of the general strategy in
the financial management plan.
Her main concern was to ensure that the recovered funds lasted CAC’s
lifetime. The evidence
given to the Tribunal revealed that CAC is physically
impaired from his injuries as well as having severely impaired cognitive
functioning.
He is dependent for most of his activities of daily living and care
and is unlikely to be able to return to any form of remunerative
employment. The
Centrelink preclusion period extends to 2058.
[16] The investment recommendations were set out on page 18 of the financial
management plan. The recommendations were in accordance
with the articulated
strategy of investing the funds into a balanced investment portfolio in line
with the asset allocation set out
in paragraph [13]. The Tribunal considered
that the recommended investments were consistent with the asset allocation
strategy, were
appropriate to the risk profile of CAC and approved the
recommendations.
Alternative strategy
[17] The Tribunal did not adopt its usual course of approving the financial
management plan under
of the Act. The reason why the Tribunal departed
from its usual course arose from dissatisfaction with Trust Company as to the
in which it rejected an alternative strategy for management of the
recovered damages on behalf of CAC.
[18] Trust Company received the recovered damages in August 2008. The initial
version of the financial management plan was dated
28 November 2008. That
version (as did the 22 April 2009 version) provided for investment of the funds
outside of a superannuation
environment with the exception of an annual
contribution of $50,000 into a superannuation fund.
[19] The initial plan described the advantage of investing via superannuation in
the following words: “
The advantage of investing via superannuation is
that the fund pays tax at the maximum rate of 15% on all earnings within the
as opposed to the personal marginal tax rate which will be much higher for
the foreseeable future. When this benefit is transferred
to the pension phase
the rate of tax on earnings and capital gains reduces to NIL.”
[20] The initial plan described the disadvantage of investing via superannuation
in the following words: “
The disadvantage is that superannuation money
is normally preserved until you reach 60 years of age. However, given the extent
the disabilities, the funds should be accessible on the grounds of permanent
incapacity if required at any stage in the future. Having
stated this, we
consider there to be sufficient funds held outside of superannuation for this
not to be necessary.”
[21] The initial plan set out on page 23 alternative strategies that had been
considered and discounted. The following wording describes
why one alternative
strategy was discounted: “
Investing additional non-concessional amounts
into superannuation. Whilst superannuation provides an opportunity for tax
saving, we have discounted this strategy as the preservation of
superannuation assets may prevent you from gaining access to these
funds prior
to age 60.”
[22] As a result of discounting the strategy of investing more than $50,000 into
superannuation in November 2008, Trust Company did
not take advantage of the
provisions in ss292-90(2)(c)(ii) and 292-
Income Tax Assessment
that exclude a contribution to superannuation from a person’s
personal injury damages from that person’s non-concessional
contributions.
Those provisions mean that a person can contribute all or part of the proceeds
of a personal injuries settlement to
superannuation without breaching the
non-concessional contributions cap as long as the contribution is made within 90
days of receipt
of the settlement funds by the person or their
representative.
[23] Had Trust Company not discounted the strategy of investing more than
$50,000 in superannuation in November 2008, funds of up
to $4,200,000 could have
been contributed to superannuation and arrangements made to convert the funds
into an account based pension.
No income tax is payable on the earnings and no
capital gains tax is payable on capital growth in the fund in the pension phase.
Based on the calculations in the plan, CAC will pay at least $30,000 each year
in tax to 2033 while the bulk of the funds are invested
outside a superannuation
environment.
[24] The representatives of Trust Company told the Tribunal at the hearing on 27
March 2009 that the administrator was aware of the
provisions in the
Tax Assessment Act 1997
that consideration had been given to the strategy
of making a non-concessional contribution to superannuation in an amount greater
than $50,000, financial modelling had been done of this strategy and the
conclusion had been reached that the best option was not
to proceed via
investment in the superannuation environment.
[25] The Tribunal was told that Trust Company was cautious about committing
large amount of funds to a system where the rules are
still being developed.
Trust Company considered that the prudent and preferred alternative in this case
had been to make progressive
contributions to superannuation. CH was not
consulted for her views on this alternative strategy during the 90 day period
receipt of the recovered damages nor at the time when Trust Company
made the decision not to invest all or a substantial part of
the settlement
funds into superannuation in November 2008.
[26] Trust Company provided a copy of the financial modelling conducted between
August and November 2008 to the Tribunal as directed
after the hearing on 27
March 2009. An examination of the modelling of the alternative strategy
involving superannuation reveals
that the modelling was done on the basis that
$1,000,000 was contributed into superannuation. A comparison of the outcome of
chosen strategy and the superannuation strategy found as follows:
5 years 10 years 20 years 25 years
$5,565,234 $6,856,341 $11,051,979 $14,334,886
Superannuation
$5,503,372 $6,680,830 $10,209,662 $12,797,980
[27] The Tribunal was told that no other modelling had been conducted with
contributions to superannuation greater than $1,000,000.
In other words, the
only modelling conducted within the 90 day period after Trust Company received
the settlement funds was on the
basis that 22% of the funds were contributed to
superannuation. Trust Company told the Tribunal that once modelling on that
had been analysed and found not to be of benefit to CAC, no further
modelling based on any higher percentage of funds contributed
to superannuation
was considered to be necessary.
[28] Trust Company in written submissions received by the Tribunal on 24 April
2009 and at the hearing on 22 June 2009 sought to
explain why the superannuation
strategy was discounted in the following terms: “
The current favourable
tax position and access to pension funds was legislated through the Tax Laws
Amendment Bills (Simplified Superannuation)
2007. Financial commentators
consider that there is a very real risk that, given the current reviews of
taxation, there will be a
review of the ability to withdraw all funds from a
pension account and, therefore, there is a risk that the withdrawal of funds may
be limited to a percentage of balances in the future. An assessment of the
financial needs of the client takes time for proper and
prudent consultation
with the immediate family. Accordingly, in combination with all of the concerns
we have regarding lump sum payments,
there is a timing pressure to make
decisions within a 90 day period if the personal injury payment is elected.
This may prove erroneous
as more information comes to hand. We strongly believe
that to be the case in these circumstances. A progressive contribution to
superannuation account in this circumstance provides an opportunity to make
financial decisions after proper family consultation
and review the deductible
or concessional contributions each year.”
[29] In response to questions from the Tribunal, Trust Company conceded that it
does not have a general policy to reject in all cases
the strategy of investing
all or a substantial part of a damages award into superannuation. Trust Company
has a superannuation product
which is used in those cases where it does take
advantage of the provisions in ss292-90(2)(c)(ii) and 292-
Tax Assessment Act 1997
The representatives at the hearing explained that
the cases chosen to invest in the superannuation environment are usually those
there is no tax deductibility for large care costs.
[30] Written submissions to the Tribunal made on behalf of The Public Trustee of
Queensland provided independent analysis of the
superannuation modelling
conducted by Trust Company and of the reasoning on which the decision to reject
the alternative superannuation
strategy was based. The submissions noted that
the modelling did not compare the recommended strategy with a full
superannuation
[31] It was submitted that an examination of the original financial management
plan dated 28 November 2008 did not reveal that a
full superannuation strategy
had been considered by Trust Company but rather the administrator seemed to have
automatically adopted
an after-tax contribution strategy without referring to
any modelling of the alternatives. It was submitted that:
(a) the reasons
for the choice of a limited superannuation contribution strategy lacked depth
and did not address CAC’s potential
to access his superannuation before
preservation age (60 years) given the personal injury that he had sustained;
reasoning set out in the plan overlooked the tax advantages offered by a full
superannuation strategy;
consideration of alternative strategies was cursory and those alternative
strategies were rejected with insufficient information
as to the reasons for
being rejected;
(d) the plan
did not document why the strategy to implement a non-concessional contribution
to superannuation without breaching the
limits under ss292-90(2)(c)(ii) and
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
was not considered;
(e) CAC would
have met the condition for release to access his superannuation funds.
[32] The written submissions also analysed the 22 April 2009 financial
management plan. It was noted that the superannuation strategy
is given more
attention in the revised plan but Trust Company came to the same recommendation
as in the original plan. It was submitted
that the reasons for discounting the
superannuation strategy seem to be largely based on the fact that Trust Company
could not complete
a financial plan within the 90 day deadline. It was submitted
that this may not be a defensible reason from a compliance perspective
discount the superannuation strategy given that other professional
administrators are able to implement a superannuation strategy
despite the tight
Declaration and directions
of the Act, an administrator may only invest in authorised
investments. An authorised investment is defined in sch 4 of the Act as
investment approved by the Tribunal or an investment pursuant to
Trusts Act 1973
, more commonly referred to as the Prudent Person rule.
The Prudent Person rule replaced Authorised Trustee Investments.
Trusts Act 1973
provides as follows:
(1) A trustee must, in exercising a power of investment
(a) If the trustee’s profession, business or employment is, or
includes, acting as a trustee or investing money for other persons
exercise the care, diligence and skill a prudent person engaged in that
profession, business or employment would exercise
in managing the affairs of
other persons; or
(b) If the trustee’s profession, business or employment is not, or
does not include, acting as a trustee or investing money
for other persons
– exercise the care, diligence and skill a prudent person of business
would exercise in managing the affairs
of other persons.
[35] Trust Company was required to comply with the Prudent Person rule when, as
administrator, it formulated the investment strategy
for CAC. As a trustee
company, it is the business of Trust Company to invest money for other persons.
It had the duty to exercise
the level of care, diligence and skill that a
prudent person engaged in the business of managing the affairs of other persons
[36] During the course of the hearings when the Tribunal considered the
financial management plans prepared for CAC the Tribunal
had the advantage of
submissions from The Public Trustee of Queensland on issues that assisted the
Tribunal to assess the level of
care, diligence and skill that a prudent person
of business would have exercised in a case such as this. It was submitted that
reasons originally stated by Trust Company for not considering a full
superannuation strategy and for the decision to adopt an after-tax
contribution
strategy without modelling the alternatives lacked depth and did not address the
central issue of access to superannuation
prior to preservation age due to the
presence of a condition of release. It was submitted that the more recent
reasons put forward
by Trust Company, that there had been insufficient time to
properly consider and implement a full superannuation strategy, were not
defensible from a compliance perspective.
[37] The Tribunal finds that these criticisms of the actions of Trust Company
are validly made. The Tribunal considers that a prudent
person engaged in the
business of managing the affairs of other persons would have conducted more in
depth consideration of the superannuation
alternatives including modelling more
than one scenario involving just 22% of the funds available for investment. An
examination
of the original financial management plan leads to the inevitable
conclusion that only cursory consideration had been given by Trust
the options for investment accorded by ss292-90(2)(c)(ii) and 292-
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
The reasons subsequently put forward
during the plan approval process were barely supported by the original documents
and modelling.
[38] Trust Company as administrator had the responsibility to determine
appropriate investments for CAC but it was required to have
had regard to
certain matters specified in
Trusts Act 1973
when it exercised
the power of investment for CAC. The matters, where relevant, included (with the
word “trust” replaced
purposes of the
and the needs and circumstances of the
beneficiaries;
(d) the need to maintain the real value
of the capital or income of the
(e) the risk of capital or income loss or depreciation;
(f) the potential for capital appreciation;
(g) the likely income return and the timing of income return;
(h) the length of the term of the proposed investment;
(i) the probable duration of the
(j) the liquidity and marketability of the proposed investment during, and at
the end of, the term of the proposed investment;
(k) the total value of the
(l) the effect of the proposed investment for the tax liability of the
[39] The Tribunal is satisfied that investment decisions in the original
financial management plan had regard to the matters set
out above as required by
Trusts Act 1973
with the exception of (l) as to tax liability.
The Tribunal can find no evidence in the documents that regard was had within
the relevant
90 day period of the effect that a full superannuation strategy
would have had on CAC’s tax liability and in turn on the capital
preservation of the funds over the longer term. It was too late to reverse the
strategy after November 2008 when the benefit of making
non-concessional
contributions without breaching the contributions cap had expired.
[40] For the reasons set out in the preceding paragraphs, the Tribunal made a
declaration that Trust Company had not adequately modelled
the investment
structure for CAC and in particular Trust Company had not taken proper account
of the advantages of making a superannuation
contribution under s292-
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
[41] The Tribunal was concerned that, due to the failure of Trust Company to
properly consider the alternative superannuation strategy,
CAC may incur
expenditure by way of taxation liability that could result in a reduction over
time in the value of the funds under
administration. Given the contingencies
inherent in funds management, it was not at all feasible for the Tribunal to put
a process to accurately identify and calculate any such reduction
resulting from the failure of Trust Company to properly consider
superannuation strategy.
[42] However the Tribunal made directions that on each occasion when the
appointment of Trust Company as administrator of CAC is
reviewed, Trust Company
is required to provide to the Tribunal modelling prepared by an independent
expert of comparisons between
the actual value of the assets at the time of
review to the notional value of the assets had 20%, 40%, 60% and 80% of the
funds been contributed into superannuation under ss292-90(2)(c)(ii) and
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
in the relevant 90 day
period in 2008.
[43] In the event that the future modelling establishes any relevant reduction
in the value of the funds under administration, it
was anticipated by the
Tribunal that CAC or his family may consider whether some form of compensation
should be sought to compensate
for the negative effect resulting on the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (159 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter