URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/67.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
H57 and Mareeba Shire Council [2025] QICmr 67 (9 October 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
H57 and Mareeba Shire Council
[2025] QICmr 67 (9 October
Application Number:
Respondent:
Mareeba Shire Council
Decision Date:
9 October 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS -
complaint information about the applicant’s property - personal
information and privacy - accountability - prejudice flow of information -
whether disclosure would on balance be contrary to the
public interest -
Information Privacy Act 2009
Right to Information Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied to Mareeba Shire Council (
) under the
Information Privacy Act 2009
documents regarding a report made to Council about the applicant’s
located 61 pages and decided to grant access to 47 pages and refuse access
to 11 pages and parts of three pages.
applicant applied for internal review of this decision. On internal review,
again decided to refuse access to the above
information.
25 March 2025, the applicant applied to the Information Commissioner for
external review.
the reasons set out below, I affirm Council’s decision and find that
access to this information may be refused as disclosure
would, on balance, be
contrary to the public interest.
Reviewable decision
decision under review is Council’s internal review decision dated 6 March
Evidence considered
reaching my decision in this matter, I have taken into account the evidence,
submissions, legislation and other material as set
out in these reasons
(including footnotes).
I have also
had regard to the
Human Rights Act 2019
particularly the right to seek and receive
information,
and in doing so, I
have acted in accordance with section 58(1) of the HR
Information in issue
information in issue comprises 11 pages and three part-pages. I am limited in
the level of detail I can give about this
information.
However, it can
broadly be described as identifying information of other individual/s (such as
names and contact details), information
provided by other individual/s to
Council, and correspondence between those individual/s and Council (
Information
applicant is
‘not interested in the disclosure of the identity of the
complainant and/ or any information related’
and asserts that they
without a shadow of a doubt...who exactly the complainant
Nothing in this
decision should be taken to confirm or deny the applicant’s assumption
Issue for determination
issue for determination is whether disclosure of the Complaint Information
would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest
under section 49 of the
Relevant law
the IP Act, a person has a right to be given access to government-held documents
containing their personal
information.
This right is subject
to certain limitations, including grounds on which access to a document may be
Access to a document
may be refused where its disclosure would, on balance, be contrary to the public
RTI Act identifies many factors that may be relevant to deciding the balance of
the public interest
and explains
the steps that a decision maker must
in deciding the public
interest as follows:
identify any
irrelevant factors and disregard them
relevant public interest factors favouring disclosure and nondisclosure
balance the
relevant factors favouring disclosure and nondisclosure; and
decide whether
disclosing the information would, on balance, be contrary to the public
irrelevant factors arise in the circumstances of this case, and I have taken
none into account.
Factors favouring disclosure
Applicant’s personal Information
Complaint Information contains a small amount of the applicant’s personal
information, giving rise to a factor favouring
disclosure to which I attribute
high weight.
the applicant’s personal information appears intertwined with the personal
information of others (such as within the
complainant’/s’ statements
As a result, the applicant’s personal information cannot be released
without also releasing the personal information of other
individual/s, giving
rise to a public interest harm and a further factor favouring nondisclosure that
I will discuss below.
Accountability and transparency of Council
of the Complaint Information would enhance Council’s transparency and
accountability in relation to the complaint
Additionally,
disclosure would give the applicant a more fulsome understanding of the
information relied on by Council when assessing
and deciding the complaint
against them.
the applicant has been advised of the specific nature of the complaint and
provided the opportunity to respond in the course
of Council’s
investigation. Due to the steps taken by Council to inform the applicant about
the complaint process (including
through the release of information), the weight
afforded to the factors which seek to improve Council’s transparency and
accountability
in decision-making processes is reduced. Accordingly, I afford
low weight to these factors favouring disclosure.
Advance fair treatment
applicant asserts that it would be fair to see
‘all evidence
presented/provided against
factor favouring disclosure will apply when the release of information could
reasonably be expected to advance the fair treatment
of individuals in
accordance with the law in their dealings with
provided the applicant with key information about the complaint during the
investigation. Council were satisfied with the
applicant’s response to
the complaint and decided that no further action was necessary. Nevertheless, I
recognise that disclosure
of the Complaint Information would provide the
applicant with a complete understanding of the information provided to Council
their property, which may assist dealings with Council about the
applicant’s property.
owing to the nature of the Complaint Information (that is mostly correspondence
between Council and the complainant/s), the
information released to the
applicant and that Council determined to take no further action in relation to
the complaint, I afford
this factor low weight.
factors favouring disclosure
from the above factors, the applicant also submits that disclosure of the
Complaint Information could reasonably be expected
contribute to
the administration of justice for a person, including procedural
reveal that the
information is incorrect, misleading, gratuitous or unfairly
contribute to
the maintenance of peace and
contribute to
the enforcement of the criminal
do not accept that any of the above factors are enlivened in this case for the
reasons set out below.
assessing whether the release of the Complaint Information would contribute to
the administration of justice for a person, I
must consider whether:
the applicant
has suffered loss, or damage, or some kind of wrong, in respect of which a
remedy is, or may be, available under the
the applicant
has a reasonable basis for seeking to pursue the remedy; and
disclosing the
requested information held by Council would assist the applicant to pursue the
remedy, or evaluate whether a remedy
is available or worth
to the applicant’s assertions, there is nothing before me indicating that
a legally recognised wrong was perpetrated
against the applicant and that the
evaluation or pursuit of a remedy might be facilitated by disclosure of the
Complaint Information.
In this respect, the applicant has access to information
concerning Council’s handling of the complaint and the investigative
outcome. I do not consider that the Complaint Information is required to enable
the applicant to pursue a legal remedy or evaluate
whether a remedy (legal or
otherwise) is available or worth pursuing.
applicant contends that without the Complaint Information, they
not be able to find justice in
However, I do
not consider that the Complaint Information is required to enable the applicant
to escalate their concerns through
alternate avenues, particularly in
circumstances where the applicant has explained that they do not seek
identifying information
of the complainant/s. I also note that, if the
applicant does commence any legal action, it is reasonable to expect that
court disclosure processes will be available to enable the production
of documents. Given the information which has been disclosed
by Council and the
limited nature of the Complaint Information, I do not consider this factor
relating to the administration of justice
for a person applies.
the applicant considers that it would be fair to see all evidence presented to
Council against them, this is not required to
afford the applicant procedural
fairness. Rather, procedural fairness requires a decision maker to act fairly
when deciding a matter
that will impact a person’s rights or
This means the person
subject to a decision must be provided with adequate information to effectively
respond to the case against
them. The released information shows that the
applicant was notified of the complaints against their property, provided an
opportunity
to respond and informed of the outcome of the investigation. In
these circumstances, I am not satisfied that procedural fairness
requires the
applicant to receive the Complaint Information and I do not consider that this
factor applies.
is also nothing within the Complaint Information that I consider disclosure
would reveal to be incorrect, misleading, gratuitous
or unfairly
subjective.
Some of the
Complaint Information is purely factual, which presents as accurate and correct.
Due to the nature of statements of private
individual/s made to a regulatory
agency, some of the information is, of course, inherently subjective –
that does not mean
that it is unfairly so. Rather, it is the complainant/s
account or interpretation of matters. As such, this factor does not arise
applicant is also concerned about harassment or potential criminal conduct by
other individuals. The applicant contends that
full access to the Complaint
Information would assist them to have
‘irrefutable factual
to pursue these concerns. As such, I have considered whether
disclosure of the Complaint Information could reasonably be expected
contribute to the enforcement of the criminal
The applicant
... in cases of suspected criminal activity, the need to disclose information
for law enforcement purposes often outweighs the individual’s
rights. I believe this to the be case in this matter and that access ALL
information provided by the complainant, therefore
should not be denied.
do not accept that this argument applies in the circumstances but rather,
relates to personal information being disclosed
a law enforcement
agency by another government entity. The Queensland Police Service, as the
relevant criminal law enforcement agency,
would be able to obtain further
information from Council directly should it be required for investigating an
alleged offence.
from the applicant’s assertions, there is no information before me, either
within the Complaint Information or otherwise
that indicates breaches of the
criminal law. The applicant contends that OIC would be unable to identify if
there were evidence
of criminal conduct within the Complaint Information.
However, having independently assessed the contents of the Complaint
Information,
from an objective viewpoint, I am satisfied that it does not
demonstrate breaches of the criminal law. As such, I am not persuaded
disclosure of the Complaint Information would contribute to the enforcement of
the criminal law.
applicant has stated that they:
... do not have any desire to ruin anyone’s life,
as long as there
to protect myself & pacify the
situation at hand – The very reason why I am seeking access to ALL
evidence presented by
the complainant
[named person]
I am serious about taking the matter further, if / when(ever) needed.
statement indicates that the applicant may consider that disclosure of Complaint
Information could reasonably be expected to
contribute to the maintenance of
peace and order. I acknowledge the applicant’s desire to
the situation. However, I do not consider that
disclosure of the Complaint Information will contribute to peace and order due
the confined nature of the information relating to Council’s engagement
with other individual/s in the complaint process.
I also note that generally,
the role to maintain peace and order is a function of a law enforcement entity,
not an individual citizen.
For these reasons, I do not consider this public
interest factor applies.
Factors favouring
nondisclosure
Personal information and privacy
detailed above, much of the Complaint Information does not contain the
applicant’s personal information and is, instead,
the personal information
On this point, the
applicant submitted that
... seems to be quite illogical to me, as 10 (!!!) pages of mainly
information on the complainant...should
normally constitute the
subject matter / focus of a complaint to the Council. [sic]
I acknowledge the applicant’s assertions about what they expect
document might contain, I have had the opportunity to view the documents in
their entirety. I am satisfied that the Complaint Information
comprised of:
intertwined
personal information of both the complainant/s and applicant; or
identifying
information of the complainant/s including complainant’/s’
perspectives and experiences, alongside communication
from Council to the
complainant/s.
have considered whether release of the Complaint Information could reasonably be
expected to prejudice the protection of the complainant’/s’
or cause public interest
harm through disclosure of their personal
information.
I consider the
provision of information to regulatory agencies, such as Council, is a private
action within an individual’s
Given the context that
this information appears in – that is – a complaint made by private
individual/s to Council as
a regulatory body, I consider the public interest
harm anticipated from disclosure of this information is significant, and that
would be a significant intrusion into the complainant’/s’
identity of the
complainant/s, release of the Complaint Information would reveal this. As
such, I afford each of these factors
substantial weight.
Prejudice the flow of information to
disclosing information could reasonably be expected to prejudice the flow of
information to a regulatory agency, or prejudice
an agency’s ability to
obtain confidential information, public interest factors favouring nondisclosure
arise, as well as a
public interest harm
relies on members of the public to provide information and raise concerns to
enable it to administer and enforce local government
laws. I am satisfied that
routinely disclosing Complaint Information of this kind could reasonably be
expected to discourage people
from coming forward with information. As a result
of individuals not providing a full and frank account, this could be expected
prejudice Council’s ability to obtain such information in future,
including information which it usually treats as confidential,
and in turn,
affect Council’s ability to discharge regulatory
acknowledge the applicant’s concern about the veracity of the
complaints.
I recognise that a
person who is the subject of a complaint may experience a sense of unfairness or
injustice in not knowing the
complete account of the concerns raised against
the Information Commissioner has previously found that these circumstances must
be tolerated, where informants genuinely,
but mistakenly, believe that an issue
requires investigation by a relevant
Due to the strong
public interest in protecting the free flow of information to a regulatory
agency, even where this may result in
an agency investigating unsubstantiated
allegations, I consider that the factors designed to protect the flow of
information to Council,
including confidential information, carry substantial
Balancing relevant public interest factors
acknowledge the importance of ensuring that regulatory agencies conduct
investigations in a transparent and accountable way. I
also recognise that to a
limited extent, the Complaint Information may assist the applicant in any
dealings with Council about the
property. However, I am satisfied in the
circumstances of this case, that these factors should be afforded low weight.
some of the Complaint Information is the applicant’s personal information,
it is intertwined in such a way with that of
the complainant/s, that it is not
possible to separate from the personal information of others. For this reason,
disclosure of the
applicant’s information would disclose the personal
information of individual/s other than the applicant, prejudice the
complainant’/s’
right to privacy, causing a public interest harm and
impacting the flow of information to a regulatory body.
identified and carefully considered the public interest factors for and against
disclosure, I consider that the public interest
in protecting the personal
information and right to privacy of others and Council’s ability to obtain
information for its regulatory
function, on balance, outweigh the factors
favouring disclosure.
the reasons set out above, I affirm Council’s
and find that access
may be refused to the Complaint Information as disclosure would, on balance, be
contrary to the public
have made this decision as a delegate of the Information Commissioner, under
section 139 of the IP
Manager, Right to Information
Date: 9 October
On 16 December
On 1 July 2025 key parts of the
Information Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2023
(Qld) (IPOLA Act)
came into force, effecting changes to the IP Act and
Right to Information Act
(Qld) (RTI Act). References to the IP Act and RTI Act in this
decision are to the legislation as in force prior to 1 July 2025.
accordance with chapter 8, part 3 of the IP Act and chapter 7, part 9 of
the RTI Act, comprising transitional provisions
requiring that access
applications on foot before 1 July 2025 are to be dealt with as if the IPOLA Act
had not been enacted.
Decision dated 21
January 2025.
Internal review decision
dated 6 March 2025.
Including the
applicant’s external review application dated 25 March 2025, and
submissions dated 16 July 2025, 3 August 2025
and 1 September
Section 21(2) of the HR Act.
Section 121 of the IP
Submission dated 16 July
Section 40 of the IP Act.
Section 67 of the IP Act. An agency
may refuse access to a document in the same way and to the same extent access
could be refused
under section 47 of the RTI Act, were the document to be the
subject of an access application under that
Sections 47(3)(b) and 49 of the
RTI Act. The term ‘public interest’ refers to considerations
affecting the good order
and functioning of the community and government
affairs, for the wellbeing of citizens generally. This means that, ordinarily,
public interest consideration is one which is common to all members of, or a
substantial segment of, the community as distinct from
matters that concern
purely private or personal interests. However, there are some recognised public
interest considerations that
may apply for the benefit of an
individual.
Schedule 4 of the RTI
Act. This list is not exhaustive and therefore, other factors may
also be relevant in a particular case. The
public interest balancing test is to
be applied with a pro-disclosure bias (Section 44(4) of the RTI
Section 49(3) of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 2, item 7 of the
RTI Act. Section 12 of the IP Act defines ‘personal information’ as
follows: ‘information
or an opinion, including information or an opinion
forming part of a database, whether true or not, and whether recorded in a
form or not, about an individual whose identity is apparent, or can
reasonably be ascertained, from the information or
Matthews and Gold Coast
City Council (Unreported, Queensland Information Commissioner, 23 June 2011) at
Schedule 4, part 2, items 1 and 3
of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 2,
item 11 of the RTI Act.
dated 16 July 2025.
Schedule 4, part 2,
item 10 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4,
part 2, items 16 and 17 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 2, item 12 of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 2, item 15 of the
Schedule 4, part 2, item 18 of
the RTI Act.
Willsford and Brisbane
City Council
[1996] QICmr 17
(1996) 3 QAR 368
and confirmed in 1OS3KF and Department of
Community Safety (Unreported, Queensland Information Commissioner, 16 December
Submission dated 16 July
The fair hearing aspect of
procedural fairness requires that, before a decision that will deprive a person
of some right, interest
or legitimate expectation is made, the person is
entitled to know the case against them and to be given the opportunity of
to it (Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
at 582 per Mason
While not raised by the applicant,
for completeness, I do not consider that disclosure of the Complaint Information
would reveal
that it was out of date or
irrelevant.
Schedule 4, part 2, item 18
of the RTI Act.
Submission received 16
Further, by the
applicant’s own submission dated 16 July 2025, they have raised their
concerns about who they consider the
complainant/s to be with the Queensland
Police Service.
Submission dated 16
July 2025. This submission has been altered to remove identifying information
of other individuals.
See footnote 14
for the definition of ‘personal information’. I am satisfied the
Complaint Information falls within
this definition.
Submission dated 16 July 2025.
Schedule 4, part 3, item 3 of the RTI
Act. The concept of ‘privacy’ is not defined in the IP Act or the
RTI Act. It
can, however, essentially be viewed as the right of an individual
to preserve their ‘personal sphere’ free from interference
others (paraphrasing the Australian Law Reform Commission’s definition of
the concept in ‘For your information:
Australian Privacy Law and
Practice’ Australian Law Reform Commission Report No. 108 released 12
August 2008, at paragraph
Schedule 4, part 4, section 6 of the RTI
See Marshall and Department of
Police (Unreported, Queensland Information Commissioner, 25 February 2011) at
Schedule 4, part 3, items 13 and
16 of the RTI Act, and schedule 4, part 4, section 8 of the RTI
Submissions dated 25 March 2025,
16 July 2025 and 3 August 2025.
and Department of Police (Unreported, Queensland Information Commissioner,
31 January 2012) at [35] –
Under section 123(1)(a) of the IP
Under sections 67 of the IP Act
and 47(3)(b) and 49 of the RTI Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (433 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter