URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTBCCM/2009/55.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RCT Enterprises Pty Ltd ATF RCT Enterprises Staff Superannuation Fund, Maniaci, Forestieri v The Body Corporate for Costa Royale CTS 18054 [2009] QCCTBCCM 55 (12 November 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
RCT ENTERPRISES PTY LTD ATF RCT ENTERPRISES STAFF SUPERANNUATION FUND,
MANIACI AND FORESTIERI V BODY CORPORATE FOR COSTA ROYALE CTS
CCT KL023-09
RCT ENTERPRISES PTY LTD ATF RCT ENTERPRISES STAFF SUPERANNUATION
MANIACI Rosario & Rita Amelia
FORESTIERI Fausto & Maria
BODY CORPORATE FOR COSTA ROYALE CTS 18054
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
12 November 2009
DELIVERED AT:
DECISION ON THE PAPERS OF:
Mr K D Dorney QC
CATCHWORDS:
Adjustment of lot entitlements in Contribution Schedule of Community Titles
Scheme – Different types of buildings on scheme
land – Different
cost effects for different buildings
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
application in this proceeding was filed on 30 April 2009. It seeks an
adjustment of the Contribution Schedule for the community
titles scheme known as
“Costa Royale” Community Titles Scheme 18054 (“CTS”).
The application is brought
pursuant to
section 48(1)(b)
Body Corporate
and Community Management Act 1997
(“BCCM Act”), as facilitated
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act 2003
(“CCT Act”).
are three applicants. They are, respectively, the owners of Lots 9, 10 and 12
in the CTS.
respondent, as required by section 48(2) of the BCCM Act, is the Body Corporate
of the CTS. It filed its defence on 10 July 2009.
application had sought that the proceeding be determined “
”. On 22 July 2009, the Tribunal noted that both parties would
prefer that the Tribunal make a determination of the dispute
on the papers if
parties have, in additional to material filed with their pleadings, filed
evidence. The applicants filed theirs on 21 August
2009 and the respondent
filed its on 22 September 2009.
Tribunal has decided that it can make a decision on all of the proceeding from a
consideration of the documents filed, without
the parties or witnesses
appearing, because the Tribunal considers it appropriate in all the
circumstances.
Relevant legislation
respect to a hearing “on the papers”, section 48 of the CCT Act
provides that the Tribunal may decide all of a proceeding
from a consideration
of the documents filed, without the parties or witnesses appearing, if
(a) the parties to the proceeding agree; or
(b) the Tribunal considers it appropriate in all the circumstances.
the application for adjustment, the relevant provisions in the BCCM Act are
sections 46, 47, 48 and 49.
both parties’ understanding of those provisions and given that both
parties have filed extensive material, it is unnecessary
to set out the
legislation in detail, particularly because it will be the subject of general
consideration when, next, the Tribunal
considers what are the relevant legal
principles.
Legal principles
relevant legal principles and the circumstances for their implementation were
considered by the Queensland Court of Appeal in
Fischer v Body Corporate for
Centrepoint Community Titles Scheme 7779
[2004] QCA 214
[2004] 2 Qd R 638.
expressed in
, the following aspects are important for this
the preferable
view of the Act is that a contribution schedule should provide for equal
contributions by lot owners, except insofar
as some lots can be shown to give
rise to particular costs to the body corporate which other lots do not: at 644
the question
whether a schedule should be adjusted is to be answered with regard to the
demand made on the services and amenities
provided by a body corporate to the
respective lots, or their contribution to the costs incurred by the body
corporate, with more
general considerations of amenity, value or history to be
disregarded, because what is at issue is the “
distribution of the costs: at 644 [26];
is intended to produce a contribution lot entitlement schedule which
divides body corporate expenses equally except to the extent
that the lots
disproportionately give rise to those expenses, or disproportionately consume
services, with that determination only
being able to made by reference to
factors which have a financial impact or consequence on the body corporate: at
the starting
point for the allocation of lot entitlements is that the entitlements should be
equal, with a departure from that principle
being allowable only where it is
just, or fair, to recognise inequality: at 645 [31];
such a departure
must take as its reference point the proposition, for which it departs, that lot
owners should contribute equally
to the costs of the building, with the focus of
the inquiry being the extent to which a lot unequally causes costs to the body
at 645 [31];
if the inquiry
concerning adjustment is limited to the extent to which a lot creates costs, or
consume services, above or below the
average, one can readily determine what the
contribution lot entitlement should be: at 645 [32]; and
section 49, and
in particular section 49(4), of the BCCM Act should be construed as meaning that
those identified matters to which
a Tribunal may have regard are to be regarded
only to the extent, if any, that they affect the cost of operating a community
scheme: at 646 [33].
application had attached to it a document entitled “Review of Contribution
Lot Entitlements – Costa Royale”.
This was dated 8 September 2008
and was prepared by Mr Tyrin Batty of Stewart Silver King & Burns
(“SSKB”). It
contained, in Annexure 1, a recommended Schedule of
Entitlements which suggested an allocation of lot entitlements of
to Lots 1 to 12 (inclusive) and entitlements of
“40” for Lots 13 to 24 (inclusive). The accompanying Community
Statement showed that the existing Contribution Schedule contained
lot entitlements which were exactly the same, for each lot, as
entitlements in the Interest Schedule. Of course, no change was sought to the
Interest Schedule. As for the Contribution
Schedule itself, while Lots 13 to 24
(inclusive) each have a lot entitlement of “33” the lot entitlements
allocated to
the remaining 12 Lots vary between “45” and
additional material filed on behalf of the applicants is a Statement by Mr
Martin Walsh of SSKB. His statement attaches a Report
dated 13 August 2009 in
which he reviews the earlier SSKB Report. Lastly, the applicants have filed, on
5 October 2009, a supplementary
Report from Mr Martin Walsh in which he states
that, since the respondent has identified several alleged errors in the SSKB
a new attached schedule has been created to take into account
consequential amendments.
its part, the respondent, consistently with its defence (and attached
Appendices) has filed 2 statements. The first is a Statement
by Mr Dieter
Telburn who is the Treasurer of the Committee of the respondent. The second is
a Statement by Mr Lawrence Valentine
Irvin who, with his wife, are the sole
directors and shareholders of a company which is, and has been since 1994, the
Manager/Caretaker
of the CTS. Part C of Mr Telburn’s Statement is a
report from BMCS Management dated 8 September 2009 under the authorship
Barry Turner.
Nature of the CTS and its effect on the Schedules
is not in dispute that the scheme property, located at Trinity Beach,
Queensland, consists of 3 separate building structures.
Those separate
structures are:
building that comprises 12 units with an underground car park and 1 lift;
building that is comprised of 6 attached townhouses, each with internal garages
and fenced rear gardens; and
(identical) 2 storey building that is also comprised of 6 attached townhouses,
each with internal garages and fenced rear
Necessarily,
the existence of several different buildings, particularly when they are of
different types, necessarily complicates
the consideration of how various lots
may disproportionately give rise to expenses, or disproportionately consume
services provided.
But what needs to be borne in mind is that the concern is
simply with the costs for which the lot entitlements in the Contribution
Schedule are related. What appears to have been confused, at least on the
respondent’s side, is that section 47(2)(a) of the
BCCM Act states that
the Contribution Schedule lot entitlement for a lot is the
” for calculating the lot owner’s share of
amounts levied by the body corporate, “
the extent of the
lot owner’s obligation to contribute to a levy for a particular purpose is
specifically otherwise provided
for in the BCCM Act
” (emphasis added).
That exception is footnoted in the legislation with a statement that the
regulation module applying to a
community titles scheme might provide that a lot
owner’s contribution to some or all of the
required to be
put in place by the body corporate is to be calculated on the basis of the
Interest Schedule lot entitlement
. Since the relevant module
in this particular CTS is the “
Accommodation Module
since that module does provide that a lot owner’s contribution to at least
the insurance premium concerning the
common property and the 3 buildings is
calculated according to the Interest Schedule lot entitlements, it is not to the
the respondent Body Corporate incorporates such insurance premiums in
the ordinary levies that it requires all lot owners to pay.
That is, for the
purpose of the Contribution Schedule, it is irrelevant for determining its lot
entitlements that certain insurance
premiums are payable on the basis of the lot
entitlements in the Interest Schedule.
provisions in the
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation
Module) Regulation 2008
section 139
section 176.
The latter states
that the body corporate must insure, for full replacement value, the common
property and the body corporate assets
and that the owner of each lot that is
included in the community titles scheme is liable to pay a contribution levied
by the body
corporate that is a “
proportionate amount of the
” for a policy of insurance taken out under
section 176
the interest schedule lot entitlement of the lot
Allied with that are
section 177
section 180
which both contain similar
requirements, though concerning reinstatement insurance.
Section 180(1)
provides that the owner of each lot that is included in the community titles
scheme and is covered by reinstatement insurance required
to be taken out by the
body corporate is liable to pay a contribution levied by the body corporate that
is a proportionate amount
of the premium for reinstatement insurance that
reflects, relevantly, the Interest Schedule lot entitlement of the lot: see
Section 180(2)
then permits an adjustment which, given the
present evidence, is irrelevant. Lastly,
section 180(3)
states the contribution
that the owner of a lot is liable for may be recovered by the body corporate as
part of the owner’s
annual contribution to the Administrative Fund. This
emphasises the fact that a contribution to a particular Fund is not necessarily
connected with paying a proportionate amount based upon the Contribution
Necessarily,
public risk insurance under
section 185
may well be determined on the basis of
the lot entitlements in the Contribution Schedule.
approaches apply even though
section 146
Accommodation Module
provides, for example, by
section 146(2)
, that the cost of insurance should, in
fact, be paid from the Administrative Fund - but this in circumstances where
section 139(5)
specifically provides that the contributions levied on the owner
of each lot “
contributions payable for
” must be proportionate to the Contribution Schedule lot
entitlement for the lot (emphasis added).
Points of agreement
parties agree that there are many matters arising from both the Administrative
Fund and the Sinking Fund which must be shared
equally under the principles
enunciated in
both parties disagree about what items relevant to the Contribution Schedule are
those where specific types of lots create
costs, or consume services, above or
below the average. In very general terms, the real difference is between those
lots that are
townhouses and those lots that are apartments in the 3 storey
the areas of disagreement have been identified, it is necessary to canvass those
in some detail.
Points of disagreement
to one side the issue of insurance (about which the evidence points only to
insurance which is based upon a determination
arising from the lot entitlements
in the Interest Schedule – and therefore needs to be disregarded), the
main areas of disagreement
are with respect to the outgoings between the
different types of lots insofar as they concern the annual caretaker’s
annual costs for power and the analysis of repair and maintenance costs
incurred on an annual basis.
the respondent has taken issue with the initial report of SSKB concerning the
apportionment of expenses relevant to the Sinking
Fund, the Tribunal is of the
view that the latest report of SSKB of 5 October 2009 has adequately addressed
concerns raised with
respect to the Sinking Fund.
Consequently,
the Tribunal will now proceed to consider the remaining areas that it has
identified as being areas of disagreement.
Caretaking fees
of the nature of the buildings erected on this CTS land, it is reasonable to
approach a consideration of the caretaker’s
fees on the basis of how,
objectively; the cost that arises from those fees is spread between the 2 types
the Tribunal has been presented with the Report of BMCS of 8 September 2009, and
since the Tribunal has determined that there
is nothing in all the SSKB Reports
which cogently disputes the results set out in that Report, the Tribunal has
decided to accept
the general tenor of the BMCS Report. But given that, by its
very nature, the allocation is one which is somewhat impressionist,
that the percentages derived give only an apparent accuracy, the Tribunal has
decided that it will allocate the caretaker’s
fee as to 80% equally borne
by all lots and 20% being borne by the apartment lots solely. This means that
the Caretaking Fees of
$44,980.00 which represent 52.63% of the total
expenditure should be broken down such that Method 1 used by SSKB will be
42.1% of such total expenditure and Method 4 will be allocated 10.53%
of such total expenditure.
Community power
is nothing in any of the SSKB Reports which effectively proves that the
assertion on behalf of the respondent that there are
3 electricity meters on the
CTS land is wrong. On this conclusion, the Tribunal, therefore, accepts that
electricity meters numbered
937622 and 937623 do measure usage for the building
containing the apartment lots (including the lift) and that electricity meter
numbered 937621 measures usage by outside lights in the garden and pool,
including the pool pump.
a copy of the electricity bill covering the period 20 February 2009 to 22 May
2009, it can be seen that there is quite a difference
in the usage between the
meters. But the Tribunal also accepts that some of the electricity usage
relevant to the building containing
the apartment lots measures power used by
outside lights which assist in the security of the common property of the CTS,
as by signs for the benefit of all owners of lots. Therefore, doing the
best that the Tribunal can do in the circumstances, it has
allocated the
expenditure of $4,000.00, which represents 4.68% of the total expenditure on the
basis of 3.12% as a cost relevant
to the apartment lots and 1.56% to the
townhouse lots. An alternative way of approaching it would have been to have
allocated two-thirds
of 4.68% to Method 1 and one-third of 4.68% to Method 4.
The same mathematical outcome would have been achieved.
other words, the base figures taken from the electricity meters, when converted
into costs and when the common property benefit
is properly allocated to the
actual electricity expenses, would mean that two-thirds of the costs would have
been shared equally
with the remaining one-third being allocated to the
apartment lots.
Recurrent maintenance costs
all irrelevancies (already analysed) from Attachments 5.1 to 5.3 (inclusive) of
the Attachment to the Statement of Mr Telburn,
it can be seen that over a
relatively recent three year period a substantial proportion of the recurring
repair and maintenance costs
force a conclusion that the apartment lots
disproportionately consume such repair and maintenance services.
there is nothing in any of the SSKB Reports which gainsays that conclusion.
Consequently,
taking those Attachments as a general guide, there should be an allocation of a
90:10 proportion of such costs as the
ratio of relevant costs of repair and
maintenance to apartment lots as compared to townhouse lots. That means for R
& M Electrical,
R & M General (Building) and R & M Plumbing the
respective costs of $1,000.00, $1,358.02 and $523.57 which, in total are
of total expenditure, should be allocated as to 0.34% to Method 3 and 3.03% to
Method 4. A split between Method 1 and Method
4 would achieve the same outcome
if allocated as 0.68% and 2.69%, respectively.
Conclusions
the Tribunal accepts, for the most part, the Distribution of Expenditure to Lots
as set forth in the adjusted Schedule of the
SSKB Report dated 5 October 2009,
the Tribunal will make adjustments to that table and then consequential
adjustments to the Distribution
of Expenditure Table contained in the same
the adjustments referred to above, even though mathematically they could have
been made to different columns although with
the same outcome, the following
results are achieved for the various Methods:
Translating
those percentage changes to the Distribution of Expenditure, the column entitled
Suggested Lot Entitlements as a % of Total Space L/E
now read, for respective lots 1 to 24 (inclusive) as follows:
3.18% (for Lots
those percentages are necessarily only superficially accurate because of the
many assumptions made about what is the proper
yearly figure to use for such
calculations and given the inherent inaccuracy of determining to what extent the
various types of lots
creates costs, or consume services, above or below the
average, the appropriate way to determine a proper allocation of lot
entitlements
between the lots in the Contribution Schedule is to calculate the
lot entitlements to 2 significant figures (with consequential rounding).
gives effect to the principle that, while equality is the starting point, it is
just and equitable, in these circumstances,
for the lot entitlements as between
the types of lots in different building structures to be unequal in the ways
determined.
an approach would yield an outcome that would have Lots 1 to 12 (inclusive)
being allocated a lot entitlement allocation of “52”
and Lots 13 to
24 (inclusive) being allocated a lot entitlement allocation of
a result of the determinations reached, the Tribunal will order that the
Contribution Schedule for this CTS be adjusted such that
it reflects the
adjustments so calculated. That is, Lots 1 to 12 (inclusive) will have each a
lot entitlement of “52”
and Lots 13 to 24 (inclusive) will have each
a lot entitlement of “32”.
there has been no order by the Tribunal that either party have legal
representation, given the particular outcome where neither
submissions have been accepted in their entirety and giving proper importance to
sections 70 and 71 of the CCT Act,
it is appropriate that there be no order as
______________________________
MR K D DORNEY QC
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (783 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter