URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRAT/2009/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:50:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Missen v Queensland Racing Limited [2009] QRAT 19 (30 July 2009)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
NOTICE OF DECISION
: 30 July 2009
Mr Dale Missen
: Queensland Racing Limited
APPEAL FROM
: Appeal from the decision that the Appellant breached
AR81A(1)(a) and the imposition of a penalty of 3 months suspension.
BREACH OF RULE
: AR81A(1)(a)
: Appeal Upheld.
APPEARANCES
: The Appellant appeared on his own behalf.
Mr A J Orchard, Director of Integrity Operations of Queensland Racing
Limited appeared on behalf of the Respondent.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Mr Leo Williams AO - Chairman
Mr Brock Miller - Deputy Chairman
Mr Dennis Standfield - Member
On the second and final day of the Stewards Inquiry held at the Rockhampton
Jockey Club on 2 June 2009 the Appellant was found by
the Stewards to have
breached AR81A(1)(a) and the Stewards imposed by way of penalty suspension of
the Appellant’s licence
to ride in races commencing midnight 6 June 2009
up to and including midnight 23 August 2009. The suspension was said to be for
a period of 3 months with an allowance for the two week period the Appellant was
stood down from riding.
AR81A(1)(a) reads:-
AR.81A. (1) Any rider commits an offence and may be punished if
(a) a sample taken from him is found upon analysis to contain a substance
banned by AR81B”
AR81B states that diuretics are banned for the purposes of AR81A.
The particulars of the breach of the rule given at the Inquiry (Stewards
Inquiry Transcript (“SIT”) of 2/06/09 at page
16 from line 42) were
stated as:-
“...The particulars of the charge are that you, Jockey Dale Missen,
did provide a sample at the Sunshine Coast on 21
2009, when engaged to ride at that meeting, and
upon analysis the sample you provided on that day has returned a positive
to a diuretic, and in particular the diuretic frusemide.”
The Appellant pleaded not guilty to the charge stating as the basis of his
defence that the Stewards had not complied with Queensland
Limited’s (“QRL”) Drug and Alcohol Policy for Licence Holders
and Race Club Officials (“the Policy”)
as they did not provide
evidence of a chain of custody of the sample from when it was taken to when it
was analysed on 3 April 2009
at Racing Analytical Services Ltd in Victoria. The
results of the analysis were referred to in Certificate No. RAS09/01789-B
Certificate”) and stated that Frusemide was present in the
sample analysed.
While the Notice of Appeal to the Tribunal is stated to be lodged on 15 June
2009, that Notice is dated 4 June 2009 which is the day
the Appellant first sent
the Notice of Appeal together with his Application for a Stay and Credit Card
Authorisation by facsimile
to the Racing Appeals Tribunal Registry. However,
shortly after sending those documents, the Appellant contacted Registry staff
and advised that as he had to lodge the Appeal to the First Level Appeal
Committee (“First Level”), he asked to “tear
up the documents
he had faxed“. As his Notice of Appeal was not processed at the time of
his phone call, the documents were
discarded by Registry staff in accordance
with the Appellant’s request.
On 15 June 2009 the Appellant telephoned Registry staff and advised that he
tried to lodged his Appeal with the First Level but was
told by Queensland
Racing that he was out of time and he requested that his Appeal be lodged with
the Tribunal as he claimed he was
denied natural justice. The Notice of Appeal
was accepted by the Registry on 15 June 2009.
On 25 June 2009 the Tribunal Registry received a letter dated 19 June 2009
from Mr Wade Birch, Chief Steward of Queensland stating:-
RE: Dale Missen Appeal
It has been brought to my attention that the above jockey has lodged an
appeal with the Racing Appeals Tribunal in respect of his
suspension.
I note in the light of the fact that the suspension was for a period of 3
months, Mr Missen has the ability to appeal to the First
Level Appeals
Committee. He failed to appeal within the time period of 2 days.
In accordance with Section 167(1)(c) of the
Racing Act 2002
, the Tribunal
has jurisdiction to hear appeals from the decisions of stewards ‘if there
is no right of appeal to an appeal
committee against the decision’. In
this case, there was a right of appeal (which was not exercised within the
and therefore, in my submission, the Tribunal does not have
I would be grateful if you would confirm whether, in light of the
foregoing, the Tribunal plans to deal with this matter.”
The matter was set down for hearing by the Tribunal on 29 June 2009 with the
Appellant to appear by video conference from Mackay.
On that day Mr MacSporran
SC appeared for the Respondent but there was no appearance in Mackay by the
Appellant and he could not
be raised by telephone. The Tribunal decided not to
dismiss the matter and then made an order calling on the Appellant to satisfy
the Tribunal as to why he should be given leave to extend the date for hearing
of the Appeal. Notwithstanding the non-appearance
of the Appellant at the first
hearing date, the Respondent through Mr MacSporran SC provided an Outline of
Submissions dated 25 June
2009 submitting that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction
to hear the Appeal. (“Respondent’s First Submissions”).
The Appellant did advise the Tribunal as to why he did not attend on 29 June
2009 and a new Hearing date was notified to the parties
for 30 July 2009 with
the Appellant again to appear by video conference from Mackay. The Appellant
did appear and Mr A. J. Orchard
appeared for the Respondent and provided a
further Outline of Submissions dated 30 July 2009 (“Respondent’s
Second Submissions”).
At this Hearing with respect to the jurisdictional issue the Appellant stated
that he did attempt to contact Ms Debbie Toohey at Queensland
Racing who holds
the position of First Level Appeals Secretary. The Appellant said that all
jockeys in Queensland have Ms Toohey’s
number and they know to phone her.
He said that he attempted to speak to her by telephone on 4 June 2009 but could
not raise her
and left a message on her voicemail. It appears that documents
were faxed by Ms Toohey to the Mackay Turf Club that day but either
Appellant did not enquire or was not advised that the documents were received.
In any event it was the following day, Friday
5 June 2009 that the Appellant
lodged his Appeal with Ms Toohey. Ms Toohey gave evidence to the Tribunal and
stated that when the
Appeal was received, she did speak to the Appellant as to
whether the Appeal would be accepted. Ms Toohey gave evidence that after
discussing the matter with her Appeals Manager Ms Shara Murray, Mr Missen was
advised that his Appeal was out of time and would not
be heard by the First
Level. No evidence was led or given as to the reasons for this decision.
There is no doubt that the Appellant knew of the two day requirement to lodge
an Appeal with the First Level. Indeed, Appeal No. RT010-09
by the Appellant was
an appeal against a careless riding suspension and was an Appeal from a First
Level Appeal Committee’s
decision of 27 May 2009 and lodged with the
Tribunal on 1 June 2009. The Appellant stated that he had blank Racing Appeal
Notice of Appeal forms which were those he completed and faxed on 4
June 2009. It can only be speculated whether he initially knew
However, he was a day late with the notice to
the First Level and Ms Toohey
decided that the Appeal may not be heard. Because of this, the Respondent
claims this Tribunal is
precluded from jurisdiction to hear the matter.
The arguments on the jurisdictional issue raised by the Respondent in the
Respondent’s First Submissions are set out in paragraphs
6 to 19 and
Racing Act 2002
(“the Act”), in
provides that the rules of racing may allow a person aggrieved by a reviewable
decision to appeal to an appeal committee.
7. “Reviewable Decision” is defined by
relevantly for
present purposes, as a decision of the Stewards to suspend a license for a
period of not more than 3 months.
Section 96(d)
provides that the rules of racing may stipulate time
limits that apply for such an appeal.
9. LR 31 sets out the requirements relating to appeals from decisions of
the Stewards.
10. Relevantly for present purposes LR31 contains the following
provisions:-
“(3) The right of appeal to a First Level Appeal Committee is in
addition to any right of appeal to the Racing Appeals Tribunal
provided by the
Racing Act 2002
(4) If a right of appeal to a First Level Appeal Committee is available
to a person, that right of appeal is to be exhausted before
the person lodges
any appeal to the Racing Appeals Tribunal.
(5) Any person who wishes to appeal to a First Level Appeals Committee
(an “Appellant”) must lodge a “Notice of
Appeal” in the
prescribed form (available on the Queensland Racing website or from Queensland
Racings offices) with the First
Level Appeals secretary:
(a) by delivery to any regional office of Queensland Racing;
(b) by express post to PO Box 629 Hamilton Central Queensland
(c) by facsimile to (07) 3852 27818; or
(d) by email to:
appealssecretary@queenslandracing.com.au
(6) A Notice of Appeal must be lodged with the Appeals secretary within
2 working days of the date on which the Stewards made the
decision which is the
subject of the Appeal.
(7) The date of lodgment for a Notice of Appeal in the prescribed form
is the date on which it is received by the Appeals secretary.
(8) Should the First Level Appeals Committee secretary not receive the
appeal in the prescribed form within 2 working days of the
date on which the
Steward’s decision (which is the subject of the appeal) is made, then the
First Level Appeals secretary may
decide that the appeal not be heard by any
First Level Appeal Committee.”
11. It is clear that in the circumstances where the Appeal Notice is not
lodged as required within 2 working days of the decision
of the Stewards, the
Appeals secretary, in this case Ms Toohey, has a discretion to decide that the
appeal not be heard.
12. The Appeals secretary exercised her discretion in this case.
13. In these circumstances, there was never a valid appeal on foot before
the First Level Appeals Committee.
LR 31(3) provides that the appeal to the First Level Appeals Committee is in
addition to any right of appeal to the Racing
Appeals Tribunal, LR 31(4)
provides that the appeal to the First Level Appeals Committee must be exhausted
before any right of appeal
to the RAT is
15. Because there was never a valid appeal to the
Firsts Level Appeals Committee on foot because of the late lodgement of the
of Appeal, the right of appeal to the Fist Level Appeals Committee has
not been exhausted. There is therefore no additional right
of appeal to the
16. The Act in s.167 provides for decisions that may be appealed to the
17. Section 167(1)(c) provides a right of appeal to the RAT against a
decision involving the imposition of a monetary penalty by,
or other decision
of, a Steward of a control body if there is no right of appeal to an Appeal
Committee against the decision.
18. This section only provides an appeal to the RAT where there is no
provision allowing an appeal to the First Level Appeals Committee.
avail the Appellant here because there was an appeal available to him at the
First Level Appeals Committee had he lodged
his Notice of Appeal within 2
working days of the decision of the Stewards.
19. In the end result, it is respectfully submitted that the RAT has no
Section 167 of the Act states the decisions that may be appealed to the
Tribunal and states:
“167 Decisions that may be appealed
(1) Subject to subsection (4), a person aggrieved by any of the following
decisions may appeal to the tribunal against the decision
(a) a control body’s decision to –
(i) refuse to grant or renew a licence; or
(ii) take disciplinary action relating to a licence; or
(iii) take an exclusion action against a person; or
(iv) impose a monetary penalty on a person;
(b) a decision of an appeal committee made in relation to an appeal
against a monetary penalty imposed by, or other decision or,
(c) the imposition of a monetary penalty by, or other decision of, a
steward of a control body if there is no right of appeal to
an appeal committee
against the decision;
(d) another decision of a control body prescribed under a
regulation.
(2) A steward of a control body may appeal to the tribunal against a
decision of an appeal committee made on an appeal against the
(3) Subject to an order under section 169, if –
(a) an appeal committee refuses to hear an appeal from a decision of a
steward of the control body that established the committee;
(b) within 6 weeks after lodging an appeal mentioned in paragraph (a),
the appeal has not been decided by the appeal committee;
The committee is taken to have decided to dismiss the appeal.
(4) Despite subsection (1), an appeal does not lie to the tribunal
against any of the following decisions –
(a) a decision relating to the eligibility of an animal to race or the
conditions under which an animal can race;
Example for paragraph (a) –
A Steward’s decision is requiring an animal to pass a stated
examination or test before being allowed to race.
(b) a decision canceling or suspending the licence for an animal, unless
the cancellation or suspension relating to that licence relates
(i) a decision to take disciplinary action relating to the licence of a
licence holder; or
(ii) a decision to take an exclusion action, under the control
body’s rules of racing, against a person;
(c) a decision about a protest or objection against placed animals
relating to an incident that happened during a race or trial;
(d) a decision imposing a penalty of not more than $250;
(e) a decision relating to a dispute between a racing bookmaker licensed
by a control by and a person who placed a bet with the
bookmaker for a race at a
race meeting held under the control of the control body;
(f) if a decision to stop, restart, rerun, postpone or abandon a
Furthermore, Section 169 of the Act states:
“169 What happens if appeal committee refuses to hear or fails to
decide an appeal
(1) This section applies if an appeal committee is taken under section
167(3) to have decided to dismiss an appeal (the dismissal
decision) and the
appeal committee lodges a written application with the director for an order
that the time for consideration of
the appeal by the appeal committee be
(2) The tribunal may make the order.
(3) The tribunal may also make any further order relating to the
adjournment or otherwise of an appeal made to the tribunal against
the dismissal
decision that the tribunal considers appropriate.”
In the Respondent’s Second Submissions the Respondent dealt further
with the provisions of Section 167(3)(a) of the Act and
those submissions are
dealt with in paragraphs 2 to 9 of the submissions which state:-
“2. Section 167(3)(a) provides that if an appeal committee refuses
to hear an appeal from a decision of a Steward of the control
established the committee, the committee is taken to have decided to dismiss the
Section 95(1)
Racing Act 2002
provides that a control
body’s rules of racing for its code of racing may allow a person aggrieved
by a reviewable decision
to appeal against the decision to an appeal committee
established by the control body.
Section 96(a)
Racing Act 2002
also allows a control
body’s rules to provide for the establishment of an appeal
5. Queensland Local Rule of Racing 31(1) creates an appeal
6. Local Rule of Racing 31 also acknowledges the existence of an appeal
secretary with Local
in particular allowing the appeals secretary to
decide that, where the prescribed form of appeal is not received within two days
of the date on which the Stewards decision is made, the appeal is not to be
heard by any appeal committee.
7. In these Local Rules of Racing there is a clear distinction between
the appeal secretary and the appeal committee. The appeals
secretary is not a
member of the appeal committee and is not empowered the made decisions on behalf
of the appeals committee.
8. The appeals secretary in this case exercised her discretion to decide
that the appeal not be heard by the appeal committee in
accordance with Local
Rule of Racing 31 (8).
9. In these circumstances, there was no refusal by an appeal committee to
hear the appeal within the meaning of Section 167(3)(a)
as the appeal was never
considered by the appeal committee. Instead, the decision that the appeal not
be heard was made by the appeals
secretary. It follows that Section 167 (3) has
no application to the facts of the current matter.”
If the Respondent’s submissions are correct then the discretionary
power given by LR31(8) to the First Level Appeals Secretary
in deciding whether
the First Level will or will not hear an appeal which is lodged outside of the
two working day period not only
precludes the First Level from dealing with the
matter, but also this Tribunal. While the term “First Level Appeals
is not defined in the Rules, the Tribunal sees the functions
which the Secretary carries out under LR 31 as no more than part of
the process
of determination of appeals by the First Level. The First Level Appeals
Secretary is not a statutory appointment and
the Tribunal cannot accept that
power given to the Secretary ousts the jurisdiction of the First Level or this
Tribunal. As part
of the process of determining matters by the First Level, any
decision made by the First Level Appeals Secretary must be considered
decision of the First Level Appeal Committee.
While Section 96 of the Act enables a control body’s rules of racing to
provide for matters involving an appeal committee, including
how an appeal is
started and time limits that apply for an appeal those matters deal with the
process for determination of an appeal
and cannot vest any power in any person
outside the powers vested in the First Level. The Tribunal sees no reason to
read down the
provisions of Section 167(3). The simple facts of this matter are
that the Appellant did lodge an appeal with the First Level on
5 June 2009 that
has not been heard because of an executive decision and by Section 167(3) the
Committee is deemed to have decided
to dismiss the Appeal. Any purported
“power” given to the First Level Appeal Secretary is subordinate to
for the Appellant to have the Tribunal determine his Appeal under
Section 167(3) of the Act.
The Tribunal is of the view that the reference to “...the appeal not be
heard by any First Level Appeal Committee” in
LR31(8) is within the scope
of “...refuses to hear an appeal...” as referred to in Section
167(3)(a) of the Act.
Furthermore, there is the issue of whether the First Level Appeals Secretary
did exercise her discretion. While this is not relevant
as the Tribunal has
found that the acts of the Secretary are part of the First Level Appeal process
and Section 167(3) should not
limit the Appellant’s right of appeal, the
evidence given by Ms Toohey is that she was aware that the Appellant intended to
lodge the Appeal within the two day period. No prejudice to the Stewards is
shown and there were reasonable prospects of success
in the Appeal. It is
difficult to see on what basis the Secretary did not accept the Appeal for
hearing on its merits.
The Tribunal is of the view that it has jurisdiction to deal with the Appeal.
The substantial issue in the Appeal is whether the evidence before the
Tribunal is sufficient compliance with the “documented
custody” requirements with respect to the sample taken from the Appellant.
The Appellant has submitted that the Respondent
has not complied with the
Policy. The relevant requirement which the Appellant is referring to in the
Policy is at the second paragraph
of the third page of the Policy which
“Tests will be conducted in a manner that respects the privacy of
the person from whom the sample is being collected. The time,
place and name of
each person who handles a sample must be recorded so as to provide a documented
chain of custody.”
At the Inquiry the Stewards responded to the Appellant’s submissions of
non-compliance with the Policy when finding the Appellant
had breached the Rules
in the following terms (SIT on 2/06/09 at page 18 from line 18):
“THE CHAIRMAN: Thanks, Jockey Missen. In relation to this matter
with your swab sample 41319, the defence that you have put
up, that you believe
there is a concern with the sample not being your own, the evidence which has
been tendered, particularly Exhibit
4 which is the Drug Testing Custody and
Control form, which was signed by Dr Vine when the sample arrived in the lab,
and he clearly
indicates that the condition when received was undamaged when it
arrived in the lab.
When samples arrive in the lab, if the seals are broke and/or damaged, we
are advised of that. This sample has clearly arrived at
the laboratory
undamaged and with the seals intact. We therefore feel that the integrity of
the sample has not been compromised
and therefore believe that it is your sample
of urine and believe that we can formally find you guilty as
While the Stewards were dismissive of the Appellant’s submission that
the Policy has not been complied with, the Tribunal is
concerned with the
evidence before it that there has been compliance. The evidence relied upon by
the Stewards is a printed form
from Racing Analytical Services Ltd which is bar
coded as No. 41319. That form is titled “Drug Testing Custody and Control
Form”. There were two exhibits of the relevant form in the Exhibits at
the Stewards Inquiry. On Exhibit 1 there is a notation
at the foot of the form
as “WHITE COPY – CLIENT – DO NOT SEND TO LABORATORY”.
The form is stated to be
in two sections. Section 1 is headed “To Be
Completed By Collector At Collection Site” and Section 2 “To Be
By Person Providing Specimen”. Exhibit 1 refers to a random
sample taken at 6:03 pm on 21 March 2009 at Caloundra. The Collector’s
name was stated as W. Booshand with the Appellant stated to be the person who
provided the sample. Exhibit 4 at the Inquiry has
at the foot of the form
“PINK COPY – LABORATORY – MUST ACCOMPANY SPECIMEN TO
LABORATORY”. On Exhibit 4,
Section 2 of the form is blacked out and there
is a Section 3 headed “To Be Completed By Laboratory”. Section 3 is
and has stated the sample was received undamaged and the result being
positive and signed by J H Vine with the date being 3 April
2009. There is
additional printed wording on Section 3 of the form which states:
“I certify that a sealed pack has been received and was allocated
the above laboratory number; that the specimen has the same
number as that at
the top of this form; that the specimen was examined on receipt; handled and
analysed in accordance with established
procedures and that the results below
are for this specimen.”
That endorsement can only be interpreted that the sample was received and
analysed on the same date, namely 3 April 2009.
With that endorsement, the Tribunal can only conclude that this states that
the Appellant’s urine sample was collected on 21
March 2009 at Caloundra
and received at Racing Analytical Services Limited in Melbourne on 3 April 2009
which is a period of 13 days.
While at the hearing Mr Orchard was invited by the Tribunal to make
submissions regarding custody and control issues, the Respondent
chose not to do
so, other than relying on the Drug Testing Custody and Control form which were
exhibited at the Stewards Inquiry.
The Tribunal has had a number of matters before it where there have been
urine samples taken from licensees. In those matters, the
procedure with the
custody and control issue was dealt with differently than what has occurred in
this matter. In those recent other
matters there have been statutory
declarations taken by the Stewards as to who had custody of the samples from
when they were taken,
when they were transported and when they were forwarded to
the analytical laboratories.
The Respondent’s policy is quite clear in that it requires
“...each person who handles the sample must be recorded so
as to provide a
documented chain of custody”. There are simply no details in this matter
of “The time, place and name
of each person who handles a sample
...”. There is no explanation as to what happened to the sample for the
thirteen days
to when it was signed as being received by Dr Vine of Racing
Analytical Services Ltd.
This is a serious charge. The Appellant’s livelihood is affected and
the Tribunal is of the opinion that the evidence before
it must be at the higher
end of “reasonable satisfaction” as required by
Brigenshaw v
Brigenshaw (1938) 60 CLR.
The Tribunal is not satisfied that the Respondent
has complied with its Policy with respect to the taking and analyzing of the
Appellant’s
The Appeal is upheld at the Appeal Deposit Fee refunded to the Appellant.
Mr Leo Williams
AO ............................................................
Miller ............................................................
Standfield ............................................................
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (122 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter