URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QADT/2009/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Diggles v Heery and Australian Laboratory Services Pty Ltd [2009] QADT 22 (23 November 2009)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL QUEENSLAND
Diggles v Heery and Australian Laboratory Services Pty Ltd
Catherine Diggles
Complainant
Michael Heery
First Respondent
Australian Laboratory Services Pty Ltd
Second Respondent
PROCEEDING:
Interlocutory application to dismiss complaint
DELIVERED ON:
23 November 2009
DELIVERED AT:
Member Ann Fitzpatrick
HEARING DATES:
9 October 2009
interlocutory application is dismissed.
order as to costs.
CATCHWORDS:
Agreement not to complain – exercise of Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner’s powers under section 137 to accept a complaint
person had previously agreed not to complain – lack of statutory power of
tribunal under section 215A or otherwise
to consider an agreement not to
complain after Commissioner’s power has been exercised.
CASES CITED:
(2006) QADT
Mt Isa Mines
Limited & Ors v Hopper
(1999) 2 Qd R
and State of Queensland
(2007) QADT
White (Quick Service) Taxis Ltd v Sailor &Anor
McKain v RW
Miller & Company (SA) Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 56
[1991] HCA 56
(1992) 174 CLR
McKnoulty v State of Queensland (Department of Corrective Services) and
(2007) QADT 15
Webster v Gilbert & Ors
(2004) QADT
State Electricity Commission of Victoria v. Rabel
Jacki Byrne v State of Queensland
QADT [1998] No.
Qantas Airways v Gubbins (1992) 28 nSWLR26
Felmingham v
Kutley freightlines Pty.Ltd and Ors
(2006) QADT 44
Briggs v Deeb and
Mid Esplanade Projects t/as Acacia Court Hotel
(2004) QADT 21
v Dickinson and SPA Traders (Marketing) Pty.Ltd
(2004) QADT 8
LEGISLATION CITED:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
sections 137
Judicial Review Act 1991
REPRESENTATION:
Ms Diggles represented herself at the hearing.
Mr C Murdoch of Counsel
represented the respondents instructed by Minter Ellison lawyers.
is an application by the Respondents, Michael Heery and Australian Laboratory
Services Pty. Ltd (Respondents), that:
Complaint against the Respondents be dismissed pursuant to section 215A of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
(b) That the
Complainant pay the costs of and incidental to the Application and the
Complaint, to be agreed.
Application was heard on 9 October, 2009. The Respondents were represented by
Minter Ellison, lawyers, instructing Mr C Murdoch
of Counsel. The Complainant
was self represented.
material before me in the Application is:
(a) Notice of
Referral and Referral Report - Form 8, together with Attachments, received by
the Tribunal 30 June, 2009;
(b) Statement
of Catherine Diggles, dated 30 March, 2008, filed 10 August, 2009;
(c) Application
to Dismiss Complaint, dated 27 August, 2009;
(d) Affidavit
of Michael Heery, sworn 11 September, 2009;
(e) Affidavit
of Laura Lonie, sworn 11 September, 2009 as amended on 9 October, 2009 at
paragraphs 20 and 21; and
(f) Response by
Catherine Diggles, dated 24 September, 2009.
matter arises out of termination of the Complainant’s employment on 18
February, 2008. The Complainant had been an employee
of Australian Laboratory
Services Pty Ltd, since 1993. Her most recent role was that of a Laboratory
Technician in the Environmental
Division. The Complainant had suffered a number
of work related injuries during the course of her employment. Prior to
termination
of her employment the Complainant had been participating in a return
to work program, after injuring her wrist. She suffered a further
condition and before the termination date was asked to remain away from work on
full pay until a medical clearance for work
was provided.
18 February, 2008 the Complainant was asked to attend a meeting with the First
Respondent, Mr Heery, Queensland Business Manager,
Environmental Division and
with Ms Laura Lonie, Senior Human Resources Officer.
date there has been no testing of the evidence of the parties with respect to
their version of events at that meeting. However,
the outcome of the meeting
was that the Complainant signed a Deed of Release document presented to her by
parts of the Deed are as follows:
made the above employee terminated effective 18 February 2008
(‘Termination’).
Employee and ALS have reached agreement on the terms set out in this
Employee releases ALS, its officers and employees from all claims (whether known
or unknown and whether arising now or in the
future) relating to the matters
recited, the Employment, the terms of the Employment (including notice of
termination), the Proceedings
and the Termination, except for claims for workers
compensation, and agrees that they may plead this deed as a bar to any such
In this clause, ALS includes related bodies corporate of ALS as that
term is used in the
Corporations Act 2001
(a) pay to the Employee a gross sum of $9,711.43 within 7 days of receipt of
this deed executed by the Employee, in respect of all
entitlements arising on
the Termination;
(b) provide the Employee with:
(i) a completed Employment Separation Certificate; and
(ii) a Statement of Service; and
(iii) an outplacement program.’
18 April, 2008, the Complainant lodged her Complaint with the
Anti-Discrimination Commission, Queensland (Commission), alleging
discrimination
on the basis of impairment in the area of employment.
Complaint is made against her employer Australian Laboratory Services Pty Ltd.,
and its employee, Michael Heery.
statement received by the Commission on 5 June, 2008 the Complainant made
submissions to the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner (Commissioner)
in relation
to section 137 of the Act and the Deed of Compromise entered into by her on 18
February, 2008.
letter dated 10 July, 2008, the Respondents through their lawyers, Minter
Ellison, made submissions to the Commissioner in relation
to section 137 of the
Notice of Referral and Referral Report notes that the Complaint was accepted on
2 February, 2009 after considering the provisions
of section 137 of the Act.
30 March, 2009, the Complainant requested a referral of her complaint to the
Queensland Anti-Discrimination Tribunal (Tribunal),
pursuant to section 166 of
Respondents lodged their Application to dismiss the Complaint on
Parties’ Submissions
Murdoch was asked to address the Tribunal, on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
to hear the Respondents’ Application, in
light of the Commissioner having
accepted the Complaint and in particular having assessed that it was fair to
accept the Complaint
pursuant to section 137 of the Act.
out below are the Respondents submissions with respect to the jurisdictional
Complainant entered into a Deed of Release on 18 February, 2008 whereby she
compromised any claim she might have under the
Act arising out of termination of
her employment on that day.
accordance with the Deed she was paid a sum equal to 12 weeks salary and
provided with an outplacement program to the value
Complainant accepted the payment and participated in the outplacement
(d) There has
therefore been an accord and satisfaction.
Respondents are entitled to rely on the Release set out in the Deed as a bar to
any claim by the Complainant.
Tribunal has jurisdiction pursuant to section 215A of the Act to dismiss the
(g) Section 137
of the Act is a power given to the Commissioner. It is not relevant to the
exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion.
The Tribunal has its own power to
deal with the mater under section 215A of the Act.
(h) This is
analogous to out of time matters. There is a separate power given to the
Tribunal to consider the issue.
Tribunal is not bound by the view taken by the Commissioner. The Tribunal
cannot adopt the view taken by the Commissioner.
To do so would be a failure on
the part of the Tribunal.
Respondents rely upon those parts of section 215A of the Act which relate to the
complaint being “misconceived”
“lacking in
substance”,
because of the fact of the compromise. If the Tribunal is
against the Respondents on those points then they rely upon the
part of section 215A to found a dismissal of the Complaint.
The reasons being the compromise, an estoppel and public policy.
Respondents do not rely on the
“frivolous, vexatious or
parts of section 215A.
decision of
F v C,B and State of Queensland
(2007) QADT 13
, to which the
Tribunal directed the Respondents, can be distinguished on the following
(i) paragraph
28 of that decision, with respect to the power of the Tribunal to consider a
compromise is obiter dictum;
(ii) the case
before the President involved terms of an alleged settlement which had not been
effected, unlike the current case, where
there has been an accord and
satisfaction;
(iii) contrary
to the view expressed by the President at paragraph 28(b) of the decision,
section 189 of the Act operates to deal
with Complaints settled once the
Complaint has been lodged. In this case a settlement was reached before the
matter was lodged in
the Commission. In these circumstances, section 189 of the
Act does not apply;
respect to the statement of the President at paragraph 28(a) of the decision, to
the effect that the Tribunal does not have
a jurisdiction to hear disputes about
contracts of compromise, the Respondents contend that is not correct because of
section 215A
of the Act. Section 215A includes the ground for dismissal
“or any other reason the complaint should not be further
considered”
. To give that meaning one has to look at the compromise;
difficult to conceive that where section 215A exists, the Tribunal is obliged to
consider a matter which has been compromised.
(m) Reliance
was placed on the decision of
Qantas Airways Ltd v Gubbins
(1992) 28 NSWLR
, in particular the statement of their Honours Gleeson C.J and Handley J.A
at the bottom of page 31 and the top of page 32 of the
decision, to the effect
that the then New South Wales Equal Opportunity Tribunal must have jurisdiction
to adjudicate on defences
such as release or accord and satisfaction when
complainants seek to recover damages in proceedings in the Tribunal.
(n) Finally,
the decision of
Jacki Byrne v State of Queensland No H135/96,
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal of Queensland was referred to as discussing section
137 of the Act but other than paragraph 34 of the
decision was said not to be
Respondents then addressed the Tribunal on what they termed “matters of
substance”, separate from the jurisdictional issue. The Complainant
relied upon her Response to the Application filed in the
Tribunal and made no
further submission.
find that the Tribunal does not in this case have the power to make the orders
sought by the Respondents in this Application. For
this reason I do not intend
to address the submissions on the “matters of substance” set out in
the Respondents written
outline of submissions and addressed orally to me at the
reasons for finding that the Tribunal lacks the power to make the orders sought
by the Respondents are set out below.
Statutory Framework
Commissioner has in accordance with section 136 and section 137 of the Act
accepted the Complaint. Conciliation of the Complaint
has been attempted, but
has failed. Pursuant to section 166 of the Act the Complaint has been referred
to the Tribunal. The jurisdiction
of the Tribunal is to hear referred
Complaints.
175 (1) of the Act provides:
‘The Tribunal must accept a complaint that is referred to
it by the Commissioner, unless the complaint was made to the Commissioner
than 1 year after the alleged contravention of the Act.’
Tribunal’s functions are set out at section 248 of the Act and relevantly
‘(a) to hear and determine complaints that the Act has
been contravened.’
Hopper v Mt.Isa Mines Limited
Moynihan J said at paragraph 8:
‘It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction, which is statutory rather than inherent, is
founded on referral of a complaint complying with the terms of
F v C, B and State of Queensland
, said at paragraph
‘The argument regularly put and more often than not
accepted is that the Tribunal has a jurisdiction to hear referred complaints
nothing more. It does not have a jurisdiction to hear disputes about contracts
of compromise.’
Black and White (Quick Service) Taxis Limited v Sailor and Nelson
, Jones J considered the power of the Tribunal to join another party
to the Complaint after referral of the Complaint. His Honour
considered more
broadly the Tribunal’s statutory jurisdiction at paragraph
‘A complaint comes to the Tribunal through a process
ordained by the Act which requires -
complaint in writing complying with section 136 made to the
Commission in
one year of the contravention (section 136 and
section 137);
decision by the Commissioner whether to accept or reject the complaint (section
Commission is to investigate the complaint (section 155 and section
the Commissioner believes that a complaint may be resolved by conciliation,
conciliation must be undertaken (section 158);
the complaint is not or not likely to be resolved by conciliation the
complainant is to be so advised (section 165);
complainant may elect to require a referral of the complaint to the Tribunal
(section 166).’
paragraphs 34 and 35 His Honour said:
‘By the time the referral by the Commissioner takes place,
the true issues for the Tribunal’s determination should have
distilled. These issues would include reference to any new features or new
parties relevant to the contravention as identified
in the written complaint.
The Commission does not have power to make amendments or to join parties. Part
of its investigation is
to identify the issues relating to the contravention and
this becomes the platform upon which the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
What is actually referred to the Tribunal is a bundle of issues relating
to a contravention of the Act. The Tribunal’s task
is to determine those
issues and reach a conclusion as to whether there has been such a
contravention.’
with sections 136 and 137 and the analysis of Jones J, the Commissioner has the
role of gatekeeper. Once the Complaint
is accepted and referred, the Complaint
must be heard and determined by the Tribunal, subject to the exercise of its
discretion with
respect to procedural matters.
Meaning and effect of section 215A
215A of the Act appears in Division 4 which is headed
“Miscellaneous”
215A provides:
‘Tribunal may dismiss frivolous and other
(1) If, at any stage of a proceeding, the Tribunal is satisfied that a
complaint is frivolous, trivial, vexatious, misconceived or
substance, or that for any other reason the complaint should not be further
considered, it may dismiss the complaint.
(2) The Tribunal may act under subsection (1) on its own initiative or on the
application of a party to the proceeding.’
215A of the Act was inserted into the Act by the
Discrimination Law Amendment
. The Explanatory Notes to that Bill state that
will implement a number of reforms to improve ADCQ and Anti-Discrimination
procedures”
215A(1) of the Act sets out findings available to the Tribunal on a hearing of
the substance of the matter. The real point
of the section is subsection (2)
which gives the Tribunal a procedure it did not previously have, that is, to act
on its own initiative,
not only on the application of a party to the proceeding,
in dismissing a complaint and subsection (1) which enables the Tribunal
at any stage of the proceedings. It is a procedural provision. (
v RW Miller and Company (SA) Pty Ltd
Concepts in section 215A
legal grounds for acting to dismiss a Complaint set out in section 215A of the
Act, include that the Complaint is
“misconceived”
“lacking in substance”
“that for any other reason
the complaint should not be further considered”
. These terms have
been considered and interpreted.
v State of Queensland (Department of Corrective Service) and
Webster v Gilbert, Meadowcroft, De Araugo and QUT
provide useful
statements of the law with respect to the meaning of
“misconceived”
“lacking in
substance”.
the latter case, at paragraph 5 Member Roney accepted the formulation by His
Honour Ormiston J.A in
State Electricity Commission of Victoria v
‘... the expression (lacking in substance) is synonymous
with, and in no real sense different from the expressions used to describe
claims which are vexatious or are otherwise such as should be peremptorily
terminated.’
Roney at paragraph 6 referred to His Honour Ormiston J.A’s note in that
“misconceived”
usually connotes a misunderstanding
of legal principle, whereas
“lacking in substance”
an untenable position of law or fact. Member Roney put Ormiston J.A’s
formulation as
‘the complainant has no arguable case, in fact or law,
which should be allowed to be resolved at a full hearing.’
Application is not directed to the question of whether the substance of the
Complaint as referred to the Tribunal is misconceived
or lacking in substance,
in the sense that the facts relating to the termination of the
Complainant’s employment could not
give rise to a finding of unlawful
discrimination on the basis of impairment in the terms of the Act. Those issues
are left to a
full hearing of the matter.
is the effect of the Respondents’ submissions that the Tribunal is able
under section 215A of the Act to look at the Deed
of release said to bar the
making of the Complaint and to order that the Complaint be dismissed on the
basis that the making of the
complaint is misconceived or lacking in substance,
or that the compromise is another reason for dismissal of the Complaint.
do not consider that it is the function of section 215A of the Act to look at
the Complaint is misconceived or lacking in substance.
Section 215A(1) sets out grounds for dismissing a Complaint if the substance
the Complaint is misconceived or lacking in substance.
to the other basis for dismissal of the Complaint contemplated by section 215A,
“any other reason”
, Mr Murdoch has indicated that he
also relies on that ground for the making of the Application, in the event that
I find against
him in respect of his other submissions.
Murdoch has submitted that the Tribunal has the power by virtue of section 215A
and in particular the words
“...or that for any other reason the
complaint should not be further considered, it may dismiss the
complaint”.
He submits that to give those words meaning the Tribunal
should look at the compromise of the Complaint.
is true that the words
“for any other reason”
are very broad.
To date they have been used as a basis for dismissing Complaints for want of
prosecution and failure to comply with
the directions of the Tribunal. ( See
Felmingham v Kutley Freightlines Pty. Ltd and Ors
(2006) QADT 44
Briggs v Deeb and Mid Esplanade Projects t/as Acacia Court Hotel
Hillway v Dickinson and SPA Traders ( Marketing ) Pty. Ltd
(2004) QADT 8).
the question of the width with which section 215A is expressed, in particular
“for any other reason”
, the discussion by His
Honour Jones J in
apposite. His Honour was discussing the power under section 177 of the Act for
the Tribunal to join a person as a party to a
proceeding by giving the person
reasonable notice. He said at paragraph 28:
‘Despite the width of the power as expressed, its use has
been constrained by the perceived limited nature of the Tribunal’s
statutory jurisdiction...’
at paragraphs 35 and 36:
‘...The express statutory powers to join parties, to amend
the complaint and to deal jointly with complaints are procedural
intended to facilitate and complement the general purposes of the Act. Whilst
acting within jurisdiction there is a wide
discretion to deal with procedural
The purpose of the Act and the nature of the relief it provides suggests
that the Court should favour an interpretation which gives
most effect to the
legislative objects. The legislation is both protective and remedial. It
identifies a need “to ensure
that the determinations of unlawful conduct
are enforceable in the courts of law (s5(c)). The Tribunal’s function is
importantly
to determine whether the conduct does contravene the law.
Consequently, the examination of a complaint should not be constrained
confined by a description of actions that may have been narrowly stated at the
time of its making. It follows that the discretionary
process of determining
whether or not to amend a complaint or to join a party must find some basis in
the contravention as referred
and that fact is a question committed to the
Tribunal for its decision. See Parisienne Basket Shoes Pty Ltd v
my view allowing the words
“for any other reason”
a power to consider Deeds of Compromise and to dismiss claims because of an
estoppel or accord and satisfaction, in circumstances
where the statutory
framework of the Tribunal’s powers does not expressly contemplate that
exercise of power, would be to go
too far and would be inconsistent with the
general purpose of the Act. Parliament has expressly given the Commissioner the
to consider deeds of compromise before accepting the Complaint.
Parliament has not given the Tribunal an express power to revisit
that decision,
or to apply the common law with respect to accord and satisfaction or estoppel.
The Tribunal’s prescribed function
is to consider whether the Act has been
contravened on the facts before it.
statutory regime is different to that in place in New South Wales at the time of
decision referred to by the Respondents. There is no
equivalent of section 137 of the Act in the New South Wales legislation of
Meaning and effect of section 137
137 of the Act is a powerful statutory aid to furthering the objects of the Act.
Section 137 enables the Commissioner on the
grounds of fairness, to accept a
Complaint from a person who had previously agreed with another person not to
complain. This is
a means of over-riding the common law with respect to accord
and satisfaction and estoppel based on a Deed of Release. The section
‘Unfair agreements not to complain are not binding
(1) The commissioner may accept a complaint from a person who had
previously agreed with another person not to complain, if the commissioner
the reasonable opinion that it is fair to accept the complaint.’
the power is exercised and the Complaint is accepted despite the prior existence
of an agreement not to make Complaint under
the Act, that is an end of the
matter for the purpose of the statutory scheme for dealing with Complaints. The
substance of the
Complaint must be dealt with in the Commission and on referral
by the Tribunal.
137 of the Act is intended to give primacy to the objects of the Act over
individual arrangements if in the reasonable opinion
of the Commissioner, it is
fair to do so. The intention of the Parliament is to give a Complaint passage
through both the Commission
and the Tribunal. In that context, the Tribunal
would need an express power to dismiss a Complaint because of a compromise,
assessed as unfair. Where parliament has intended the Tribunal to
have a power to dismiss a Complaint previously accepted by the
Commissioner,
such as in the case of Complaints made out of time, an express power has been
given to the Tribunal (see section 175
of the Act).
only case which expressly considers section 137 is
Jacki Byrne v State of
The facts of that case are different to those under consideration here.
Byrne’s case involved a contract of employment which
purported to contract
out of the Act.
Pagani found that section 137 of the Act does not address contracting out in
advance, as opposed to making an agreement in
respect of a specific incident
which may be the subject of a Complaint. The case discusses an implication of
section 137 of the Act
that there will be circumstances where an agreement not
to complain, may be an effective bar to proceedings. That can only be the
if the Commissioner does not consider the agreement to be unfair. In this case,
the Commissioner has specifically exercised
her discretion to accept the
Complaint despite the prior agreement not to complain.
Respondents had a full opportunity to make submissions to the Commissioner that
the Deed of Release should operate as a bar to
the Complaint, when she undertook
her analysis pursuant to section 137 of the Act. The Respondents were entitled
to seek a judicial
review under
Judicial Review Act
(Queensland) of the Commissioner’s decision to accept the
Complaint. They have not done so.
Respondents’ argument is in essence that the Tribunal has the power under
section 215A of the Act to bar the Complaint on
the basis of the compromise
recorded in the Deed of Release entered into between the parties on 18 February,
2008. They say that
the exercise of the power by the Commissioner under section
137 of the Act is irrelevant and that consistent with the decision of
Airways Ltd v Gubbins and Others
(1992) 28 NSWLR 26
, the Tribunal must have
the power to consider a compromise.
reject the Respondents submissions. The Tribunal only has a statutory
Its statutory
function is to hear a Complaint referred by the Commissioner to determine if the
Act has been contravened.
Respondents assert that section 137 of the Act is a power given to the
Commissioner and that it is not relevant to the exercise
of the Tribunal’s
discretion. It is said that the Tribunal is separate to the Commissioner and
has its own power to deal with
the matter under section 215A of the Act.
is true that section 137 contains a power given only to the Commissioner and
that the Tribunal is a body separate to the Commissioner.
However the link is
the Complaint as accepted by the Commissioner. The Complaint does not end once
the Commission processes are
complete. The Complaint is not made afresh in the
Tribunal. The original Complaint is referred to the Tribunal and must be dealt
with by it. The Complaint as referred, carries with it the character of a
Complaint assessed as able to be made despite an earlier
agreement not to
my view section 215A of the Act is a procedural provision intended to give the
Tribunal a capacity at any stage of the proceedings,
on its own initiative or on
the Application of a party to consider the substance of the Complaint and if the
Complaint is misconceived
or lacking in substance, or for any other reason
should be dismissed, then it may be dismissed.
a procedural provision, section 215A must be read to facilitate the object of
the Act to achieve a determination of the referred
Act does not give the Tribunal any power similar to section 137 or at all to
consider an agreement not to complain. For the Tribunal
to do so, clear words
would be required in the Act. Section 215A does not contain those clear
has anticipated the need for agreements not to complain to be considered. An
express power has been given to the Commissioner
to consider such agreements and
importantly an express power has been given to the Commissioner to over-ride the
common law effect
of the agreement for the purposes of the Act. Once the
Commissioner’s discretion has been exercised the substance of the
must be dealt with by conciliation and if necessary hearing and
determination. The Tribunal must direct itself to the substance
complaint alone. It has no other statutory power.
Accordingly,
I dismiss the Application. I make no order as to costs.
Fitzpatrick
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal Queensland
Explanatory Notes, p.
[1991] HCA 56
(1992) 174 CLR
(2007) QADT
(2004) QADT
(1998) 1 VR
27 November, 1998, No. H135/96
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (502 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter