URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/201.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v MEV [2025] QCA 201 (24 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
[2025] QCA 201
(applicant)
CA No 246 of 2024
SC No 7 of 2024
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
Sentence Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Bundaberg – Date of Sentence: 16 October 2024 (Crow
DELIVERED ON:
24 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
16 September 2025
Bond and Bradley JJA and Crowley J
to appeal be granted.
appeal be dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE
– GROUNDS FOR INTERFERENCE – SENTENCE MANIFESTLY
EXCESSIVE OR
INADEQUATE – where the applicant pleaded guilty to three counts of
supplying a dangerous drug to a minor aged
16 years or more – where the
applicant was sentenced to 2 years and 6 months’ imprisonment with
immediate parole release
after declaring almost 9 months in pre-sentence custody
– where the applicant has a lengthy criminal history containing drug,
property and dishonesty offences and offences of domestic violence – where
the applicant has several mental health conditions
outlined in
a psychological report, and a degenerative condition of the spine which
causes him chronic pain – where at sentence,
the Crown contended for at
least 2 years’ imprisonment and the applicant contended for 12
months’ imprisonment –
where the applicant contends that having
regard to yardstick cases, the sentence was outside the usual range of sentences
for like offending – whether the sentence imposed by the
sentencing judge was manifestly excessive in all the circumstances
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
, distinguished
, distinguished
R v Goodger
, distinguished
(2015) 256 CLR 550
[2015] HCA 39
R v Russell and Callaghan
, distinguished
A L Smith for the applicant
R J Marks for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the applicant
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Queensland) for the respondent
I agree with the reasons for judgment of Crowley J and with the orders
proposed by his Honour.
[2] BRADLEY
I agree with Crowley J.
[3] CROWLEY
The applicant seeks leave to appeal against a sentence of 2 years and
6 months’ imprisonment imposed upon him for three counts
of supplying
a dangerous drug, with a circumstance of aggravation, to which he pleaded
[4] The offences
concerned the applicant’s supply of methylamphetamine and cannabis to a
17-year-old female minor who was known
to him. The aggravating circumstance in
each case is that the applicant was an adult and the person to whom he supplied
was a minor who was aged 16 years or more.
applicant’s sole ground of appeal is that the sentence is manifestly
excessive in all the circumstances.
The offending
circumstances of the offending were set out in an agreed statement of facts
tendered by the Crown at the sentence hearing.
[7] On 16 August
2023, the minor asked the applicant to supply her with a “p” on
credit, a “p” being 0.1 grams
of methylamphetamine. The applicant
supplied her with slightly less than 0.1 grams, and later that day sent a text
message to her
confirming the quantity that he had supplied to her (
[8] On 18 August
2023, the applicant asked the girl whether she wanted “another p when ur
pay goes in”. She indicated
that she did, and the applicant offered to
arrange a lift for her to an ATM. The applicant told her to tell the driver
was 18, indicating that he knew she was a minor. The applicant later
supplied 0.1 grams of methylamphetamine to her (
September 2023, the applicant offered to supply the girl with a small amount of
cannabis by sending her a text message and
asking whether she wanted to have
“cones” with him. She did not respond to the text message (
The applicant
applicant was aged 44 years when he committed the offences and was 45 at
sentence. He had spent 266 days on remand in declarable
pre-sentence custody.
He had a very lengthy criminal history littered with drug, property and
dishonesty offences and offences of
domestic violence.
[11] In 2018 he
was sentenced by Judge Clare SC to 9 months’ imprisonment for an offence
of supplying a dangerous drug and a
concurrent term of 3 months’
imprisonment for possession of a dangerous drug. His offending on that occasion
involved supplying
of a small amount of methamphetamine and possessing 0.1g of
methamphetamine and 3.5g of cannabis.
[12] In 2019 he
was sentenced by Judge Rosengren to 2 years and 9 months’ imprisonment for
an offence of incest, being a domestic
violence offence, and to lesser
concurrent terms of imprisonment for various violent offences, contraventions of
domestic violence
orders, and an offence of attempting to pervert the course of
justice. The incest offence involved the applicant forming a sexual
relationship with a 15-year-old girl who had lived with his mother from about
the age of 2 years. She considered the applicant to
be her older brother. She
allowed the applicant to have sexual intercourse with her as he let her have
access to drugs. He subsequently
committed the offences of violence against
her, contravened a domestic violence order in which she was named as the
aggrieved, and
attempted to pervert the course of justice by writing a letter to
her while he was in custody, to be delivered to her by another
inmate upon his
release from jail, in which he urged her to go to the police and tell them that
she had made up things about him.
psychological report prepared by Professor Coyle, dated 2 June 2021, which had
been commissioned in relation to a civil claim
previously brought by the
applicant, was tendered on behalf of the applicant at the sentence hearing. The
report detailed the applicant’s
personal and family background, noting
that his parents separated before he was born; that he had been a witness to,
and victim of,
domestic violence in the home at the hands of his mother’s
subsequent partners; and that he had been subjected to physical,
psychological abuse by a teacher at school. Professor Coyle noted the applicant
had an extensive history of recreational
drug abuse, which the applicant
reported had commenced when he was about 15 years of age in an effort to block
out the abuse he had
suffered. Professor Coyle considered the criminal
behaviour the applicant later engaged in was a consequence of the sexual abuse
that had been inflicted upon him.
[14] Professor
Coyle’s preliminary opinion was that the applicant had Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder (PTSD) and comorbidities
of Persistent Depressive Disorder, with
anxious distress, Antisocial Personality Disorder and Polysubstance Use
Disorder, in remission
in a controlled environment. After noting that the
applicant’s psychological disorders were well-entrenched, Professor Coyle
further stated that he was “deeply pessimistic” about the
applicant’s prospects of remaining abstinent from drug
use on his release
from incarceration.
[15] In addition
to his mental health issues, the applicant suffers from Scheuermann’s
disease, a degenerative condition of
the spine which causes him chronic
applicant had previously been employed in various low skilled capacities,
including as a machine operator, shop assistant
and removalist. He was on a
disability pension at the time of the offending due to his physical disabilities
and mental health issues.
Sentence submissions
[17] During
the sentence hearing, the Crown submitted that the applicant should be sentenced
to at least two years’ imprisonment,
and that he should serve a third of
the sentence in custody before being released on parole. The Crown referred to
R v Alizadeh
[2017] QCA 269
[2020] QCA 10
, where the offenders
had each received sentences of 18 months’ imprisonment for offences of
supplying dangerous drugs to minors,
as comparable authorities.
[18] Counsel for
the applicant contended for a sentence of 12 months’ imprisonment, with
the period of pre-sentence custody
being declared and the applicant immediately
being released on parole. He submitted that the cases of
each involved more serious offending and that the
applicant’s offending warranted a lesser penalty than that imposed in
of those cases.
Sentencing remarks
sentencing judge reiterated the circumstances of the offending as set out in the
agreed statement of facts. His Honour emphasised
that Counts 1 and 2 were the
most serious, as they involved the supply of Schedule 1 drugs, while Count 3
involved cannabis and an
offer to supply, rather than an actual supply. His
Honour considered Count 2 was “perhaps a little more egregious”
Count 1. Regardless, his Honour considered the three supplies to be
“most serious offending”, particularly as the applicant
“chased” the child on two occasions to supply the drugs. His Honour
accepted that there was no evidence that the
applicant had corrupted the child,
inferring that she was already a drug user, but nonetheless considered he had
encouraged her by
providing drugs on credit. His Honour noted that the
offending needed to be strongly deterred and denounced.
sentencing judge detailed the applicant’s prior criminal history and
recounted the circumstances of his previous offending
for which he had been
sentenced by Judge Clare SC and Judge Rosengren. His Honour observed that the
applicant’s full criminal
history was “quite relevant” and
“shocking”.
sentencing judge summarised the details of the applicant’s personal
circumstances and background. His Honour accepted
the applicant had
a disadvantaged background, having been a victim of sexual assault as a
child, and that he experienced multiple
conditions which were said by Professor
Coyle to have developed as a direct result of the sexual abuse. His Honour
accepted the
applicant had serious issues with his mental health. The
sentencing judge otherwise described Professor Coyle’s report as
“mixed bag” and “double edged sword” for the applicant.
In particular, his Honour found Professor Coyle’s
pessimism with respect
to the applicant’s prospects of remaining abstinent on his release from
incarceration to be “deeply
troubling”, concluding that it showed
the applicant would have difficulty turning his back on drugs and may be seen in
courts again.
sentencing judge ultimately determined that it was proper to impose a sentence
of two and a half years for the Count 2 offence,
utilising the
approach and
taking into account the criminality for all three offences, and to convict but
not further punish the applicant for Counts
1 and 3. His Honour further noted
that the applicant had been in pre-sentence custody for nearly nine months,
which was essentially
a third of the sentence to be imposed, and therefore
he ought to be immediately released on parole after that period was declared
time already served.
[23] His Honour
then further stated:
“I am concerned with your terrible
criminal history that I ought to keep you in longer, but I consider, given your
mental health,
your problems with drugs, that there is some benefit to the
community of having you on parole a little longer, that is, having you
longer, drug tested longer to see if you can stay away from the drugs that are
part and parcel and a cause of much of the
misery in your life.”
Is the sentence manifestly excessive?
applicant contends that the sentence imposed is manifestly excessive in all the
circumstances. He submits that the sentence
imposed was outside the usual range
for like offending; did not adequately reflect the plea of guilty or the
mitigating features
of the case; that there was a misstatement of facts by the
prosecutor in relation to the applicant’s prior incest offence;
too much weight was placed on his criminal history and the sentence was
disproportionate to the gravity of the offending.
[25] Whilst it
is commonplace for arguments in support of a ground asserting that a sentence is
manifestly excessive to attempt to
identify or explain how or why the sentencing
discretion supposedly miscarried, it is to be borne in mind that the very
such a ground of appeal is that the cause of error is simply not
known. Error is said to be evident in the result, as it is “unreasonable
or plainly unjust”.
[26] Ultimately,
the task of this Court is to consider whether the sentence is so unreasonable or
plainly unjust, having regard to
the relevant circumstances of the offending and
the offender, and applicable sentencing principles and considerations, such that
error in the exercise of the sentencing discretion may be inferred.
[27] As French
CJ, Keane and Nettle JJ stated in
(2015) 256 CLR
intervention on the ground of manifest excessiveness or inadequacy is not
warranted unless, having regard to all
of the relevant sentencing factors,
including the degree to which the impugned sentence differs from sentences that
have been imposed
in comparable cases, the appellate court
is driven to conclude that there must have been some misapplication of
principle.”
[28] Putting
aside the applicant’s complaints about the weight given to particular
factors, two aspects of the applicant’s
submissions can be immediately
addressed and discarded.
[29] The first
is the point about the supposed misstatement of the facts concerning the past
incest offence committed by the applicant.
The applicant suggested that the
sentencing judge may have somehow been misled by the Crown’s written
submissions about the
circumstances of the offending, which included the
statement, “She had allowed that intercourse to occur after the defendant
her with drugs.” The applicant complains that this was
wrong as there was no evidence of an actual supply of drugs, simply
applicant had allowed the complainant to access drugs. Whilst the Crown’s
submission was inaccurately expressed,
it is of no moment. Quite aside from the
fact that there is no complaint of specific error in respect of this point, the
judge had the full sentencing remarks of the District Court judge,
which he had obviously read, and he did not misstate anything
offending in his own sentencing remarks. There is no reason to think that the
sentencing judge was somehow misled about
the facts of the prior offence.
[30] The second
point to dispel is the notion that the sentence is manifestly excessive because
it fell outside the “usual range”
for like offending. The
applicant’s argument seems to suggest that if the applicant’s
sentence is shown to be longer
than the range of sentences that have been
imposed in other supposedly comparable cases then manifest excess is
demonstrated. That
, the plurality stated, at [26]-[27], that comparable
“... can and should provide guidance as to the
identification and application of relevant sentencing principles...the analysis
of comparable cases may yield discernible sentencing patterns and possibly a
range of sentences against which to examine a proposed
or impugned sentence.
It does not mean that the range of sentences so disclosed is necessarily the
correct range or otherwise determinative of the upper
and lower limits of
sentencing discretion ... the sentencing task is inherently and inevitably more
complex than that.”
[32] Decisions
of other courts in sentencing appeals are not binding precedents. However, in
the context of determining whether a
given sentence is manifestly excessive,
unless there is a compelling reason not to do so, an intermediate appellate
court must have
regard to sentencing decisions of other intermediate appellate
courts in comparable cases as “yardsticks” that may serve
illustrate (although not define) the possible range of sentences
applicant here referred the Court to a selection of supposedly comparable cases
in an effort to make good his argument that
the sentence imposed upon him was
manifestly excessive. Most of the cases cited by the applicant can be put to
one side without
further analysis as they were simply sentences imposed at first
instance by other sentencing judges. It is the comparable cases
intermediate appellate courts that will provide the most useful
[34] A general
survey of the single judge sentences cited by the applicant shows that sentences
of between 9 months’ and 2 years’
imprisonment have in the past been
imposed on offenders for offences of supplying dangerous drugs to a minor. The
circumstances
of those cases varied. From my review of the cases, particular
factors which were identified as important in the sentencing exercise
the ages of the offender and the minor; the number of supplies; whether the
minor sought out the drugs; whether the minor
was corrupted by the offender, in
the sense that the minor had not previously used drugs; the number of different
minors supplied
to; the type of drug supplied; whether the supply was an actual
supply or a constructive supply; whether there was a commercial purpose;
the supply was made with the intention of a sexual encounter with the minor or
some other ulterior motive; whether the offender
pleaded guilty, and the timing
of that plea; and the antecedents of the offender.
[35] Irrespective,
I do not think the cases cited reveal any discernible sentencing pattern and
they certainly do not establish the
“usual range” of sentence for
offences of this kind. Rather, they simply show the range of sentences that
have previously
been imposed in some other cases involving the supply of
dangerous drugs to a minor. As yardsticks, they provide very limited
[36] The four
decisions of this Court referred to by the applicant also provide little
assistance. They are not really comparable
the offender was sentenced to concurrent terms of 18
months’ imprisonment for seven aggravated supply offences. The appeal
focused on a technical point concerning the nature of the circumstance of
aggravation for the offences for which he had been convicted
and sentenced upon
pleading guilty. Given the nature of the appeal, the Court only briefly
referred to the offender’s antecedents
and did not consider whether the
sentences imposed were manifestly excessive. It is therefore of no real utility
as an intermediate
appellate court decision.
the offender was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment, with
parole release after serving 8 months, upon pleading guilty to a
single offence
of supply of a dangerous drug to a 16-year-old minor. The minor was a
friend of the offender who regularly attended
the offender’s house to
smoke cannabis. She had previously taken speed and was encouraged by the
offender to take the methylamphetamine
but wished to take it by a method other
than injection. Honestly, but unreasonably believing that the minor was
agreeable to take
the drug by injection, the offender injected her with the
methylamphetamine. She suffered an immediate adverse reaction, including
a seizure, and was subsequently hospitalised. There was no element of
corruption of the minor and no ulterior purpose for the offending.
The offender
was 34 years old at the time of the offence. She had a prior criminal history
for offences concerning dangerous drugs
and was on probation at the time but had
never been sentenced to imprisonment. She had been educated to year 9; suffered
from psychosis
and satisfied the criteria for paranoid schizophrenia and for
mental and behavioural disorder due to multiple drug use and use of
psychoactive substances; and was on a disability support pension at the time of
the offence. She had not been taking her antipsychotic
medication, was using
drugs and was hearing voices at the time of the offending. Since the offending
she had been compliant with
her medication and engaged with mental health
concluding that the sentence was manifestly excessive, the Court noted that the
offender’s psychiatric condition impacted
her ability to respond to
efforts to deal with her drug addiction, reduced considerations of general and
personal deterrence and
made the imposition of actual custody beyond the three
months she had already served inappropriate. The Court allowed the appeal
resentenced the offender to 18 months’ imprisonment and ordered her
release on parole after the 87 days she had already
served under the
[40] The reasons
for the Court’s conclusion that the sentence in
manifestly excessive are quite different to the applicant’s case.
involved a single instance of offending by a woman with
long-standing mental health issues and a psychotic disorder. Principles
relevant to the sentencing of offenders who experience mental health conditions,
discussed in cases such as
R v Goodger
were engaged and largely
dictated the outcome.
[41] In the
present case, the applicant committed three offences and the sentencing
principles discussed in
R v Goodger
were not engaged. The sentencing
judge here noted that the applicant suffered from various health conditions, had
a terrible criminal
history and had struggled to turn his back on drugs. It was
for this reason that a lengthier parole period was imposed, because
sentencing judge considered that being monitored for a longer period of time
would assist the applicant in staying away from
R v Russell and Callaghan
[1995] QCA 454
Russell was convicted of 6 counts of aggravated supply of dangerous drugs to a
minor of 16 years or more, and Callaghan was convicted
of 5 counts of that
offence. The dangerous drug in each instance was cannabis rather than the
Schedule 1 drug methylamphetamine.
Russell was sentenced to 12
months’ imprisonment and Callaghan was sentenced to 9 months’
imprisonment. The offenders
there had supplied cannabis to three 14-year-old
girls, one of whom was “intimate” with both the offenders on one
There was no element of commerciality involved; the girls had
initiated contact with the offenders on each occasion; the offenders
they were 16 years old; and it did not appear that the offenders had introduced
them to smoking marijuana. The offenders
were aged 29 and 27 years
respectively, had quite serious criminal histories but reasonable work
[43] That fact
Russell and Callaghan
did not concern the supply of Schedule 1 drugs
is an important distinction. Amongst other things, the maximum penalty that
have applied to each of their offences was 20 years’ imprisonment,
compared to the maximum penalty of 25 years’ imprisonment
that applied for
Counts 1 and 2. The Court’s conclusion in that case, that the sentences
there were not manifestly excessive,
provides very little support for the
applicant’s case.
[2016] QCA 311
offender appealed against sentences imposed upon him after he was found guilty
at trial of offences of burglary, sexual assault
and supply of a dangerous drug
to a minor. The complainant there was a 17-year-old girl known to the offender
and with whom he was
obsessed. He committed the burglary and sexual assault
offences by breaking into her home, entering her bed and putting his hand
the front of her underpants, whilst masturbating himself. The supply offence
was the least serious of the offences. It occurred
involved the offender providing a cigarette to the minor and smoking it with her
as he attempted to apologise
for his earlier behaviour. He did not tell her,
but she subsequently discovered, that the cigarette contained cannabis. The
judge concluded that whilst the supply offence did not involve any
attempt to stupefy the complainant, the offender nevertheless
intended to make
her more receptive to his advances and it had involved deception by him about
the contents of the cigarette. He
was sentenced to a head sentence of four
years’ imprisonment for the burglary offence and concurrent sentences of
three years’
imprisonment for the sexual assault and 12 months’
imprisonment for the supply offence. The applicant was 48 years of age
time of the offence and 51 at the time of sentence; had a limited and dated
criminal history for minor offences, which was
not relevant; and had a
reasonable work record. The Court rejected his complaint that the head sentence
was manifestly excessive.
[45] Gesler
is a poor case for comparison. It involved no real consideration of the
sentence imposed for the supply offence and once more concerned
the Schedule 2
dangerous drug cannabis rather than the Schedule 1 drug methylamphetamine. The
lesser maximum penalty of 20 years’
imprisonment would also have applied
to the supply offence in that case.
opinion, the cases relied upon by the applicant do not demonstrate that his
sentence falls outside the “usual range”
of sentence for this type
of offence, nor that it is manifestly excessive in all the circumstances.
sentencing judge here took into account the applicant’s guilty pleas and
discussed at length his antecedents, including
relevant mitigating factors. His
Honour acknowledged his guilty pleas; described his multiple medical and mental
health conditions;
referred to the sexual abuse he had experienced as a child;
noted his physical disability and chronic pain; and referred to his problems
with drugs, to which he often resorted to assist with coping with the sexual
abuse he suffered. The weight to be given to these
various factors was a matter
for the sentencing judge, as part of the instinctive synthesis of all relevant
sentencing considerations.
[48] Whilst the
resultant sentence may be considered to be at the higher end of the appropriate
range in the circumstances, I do not
consider it to be unreasonable or plainly
unjust. The applicant had a shocking criminal history. He was 44 years old at
and the minor was 17. He committed three serious offences, two of
which had involved him “chasing” the child. As the
sentencing judge
correctly observed, offending of this kind is to be strongly deterred and
denounced. The sentencing judge did not
find the applicant to be remorseful and
was rightly concerned about his prospects of rehabilitation, particularly in
light of Professor
Coyle’s pessimistic opinion as to the applicant’s
ability to remain abstinent from drug use in the future.
[49] Indeed, it
was for this latter reason, coupled with the applicant’s prior criminal
history of drug related offending, that
the sentencing judge determined that the
applicant should be given the benefit of an immediate release on parole after
the 266 days
of pre-sentence custody was declared as time already served under
the sentences imposed, thereby allowing for a longer period of
supervision on
parole. That was an entirely reasonable approach in the circumstances.
[50] In the
circumstances, the applicant has not demonstrated that the sentence is
manifestly excessive.
[51] As the sole
ground of appeal has not been made out, I would order:
to appeal be granted.
[2003] QCA 175
[2004] 1 Qd R
House v The King
, at 504–505 (Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ).
At [28(7)].
, [50] (Bell J and
Gageler J, as his Honour then was).
Citing the principles
reiterated by the Court in
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
, 276, [32].
, [4] (Fraser JA);
[2025] QCA 103
, [6] (Burns J, Bond JA and
Bradley JA agreeing).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (235 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter