URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2008/45.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CAC, Re [2008] QGAAT 45 (5 June 2008)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL
[2008] QGAAT 45
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Application for Declaration of Capacity for Adult
Administration
Application
In the matter of CAC
MATTER NUMBERS:
2008/2365 2008/2367
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, Brisbane
DATE OF HEARING:
16 May 2008
DATE OF ORDER:
5 June 2008
DATE OF REASONS:
5 June 2008
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
C Endicott Deputy President
J Ford Member
L Willmott Member
CATCHWORDS:
TRANSFER FROM SUPREME COURT-CAPACITY-PRESUMPTION NOT REBUTTED-ENDURING
POWERS OF ATTORNEY-ADVANCED HEALTH DIRECTIVE-Where tribunal
adult’s capacity to make decisions required of a litigant
CASES QUOTED:
Gibbons v Wright
(1954) 91CLR 423
Adult Guardian) v Vera
Hagger, Declan James Barry and Albert Craig Ray
2001(Unreported)
[2007] QGAAT 6
Guardianship and Administration Act
Schedule 1, Schedule 4
Supreme Court of Queensland Act 1991
Mental Health Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
DECLARATION ABOUT CAPACITY
CAC had capacity for executing an Enduring Power of Attorney dated 5 January
CAC had capacity for executing an Advance Health Directive signed on or about 11
January 2007.
CAC has capacity for making the decisions required of a litigant in the conduct
of proceedings in the matter brought against
him by an Insurance company.
ADMINISTRATION
the application for the appointment of an administrator for CAC is
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
[1] CAC is 61 years of age having been born in June 1946. In December 2007 a
claim was commenced in the Supreme Court of Queensland
by an Insurance company,
the plaintiff, against CAC and two other parties seeking relief directed towards
recovery by the plaintiff
of funds held on behalf of CAC by an Investment
Management Company.
[2] In January 2008 solicitors instructed by CAC filed a Conditional Notice of
Intention to Defend the proceeding which disputed
the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court to entertain the claim against CAC on the basis that the
proceeding was irregular as:
(a) CAC is a
person with impaired capacity and under a legal incapacity and no litigation
guardian has been appointed; and
proceeding is an abuse of process as criminal proceedings brought against CAC in
relation to the matters the subject of the
civil proceeding were permanently
stayed as a consequence of the Mental Health Court in April 2006 finding that
CAC was not fit for
[3] In January 2008 CAC via his solicitors filed an application in the Supreme
Court seeking orders setting aside or staying the
proceeding. In February 2008
Justice Daubney of the Supreme Court made an order staying the proceeding as
against CAC until May 2008.
Justice Daubney transferred the proceeding as
against CAC to this Tribunal to the extent of determining the question as to
CAC has capacity for the proceeding and the question as to whether an
administrator should be appointed (generally and specifically
proceeding) for CAC.
The Issues and the Legislation
[4] The issues for the Tribunal are:
(a) Does CAC
have capacity for the matter;
(b) Is there a
need for an Administrator? If so, who should be appointed.
[5] The Tribunal is required to determine whether CAC has impaired capacity for
the matter before it can further consider whether
to appoint an administrator.
CAC is presumed to have capacity in accordance with
Guardianship and Administration Act
(the Act) and General
Principle 1 under Schedule 1 of the Act and the Tribunal must consider the
medical and lay evidence to determine
if the presumption of capacity has been
rebutted for CAC.
[6] The Act defines capacity as:
, for a person for a
matter, means the person is capable of-
(a) understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the matter;
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
(c) communicating the decisions in some way.
[7] The Tribunal when considering the appointment of an administrator must be
satisfied not only in regard to capacity but also of
the other matters set out
in section 12 of the Act as follows:
12 Appointment
The tribunal may, by order, appoint a guardian for a
personal matter, or an administrator for a financial matter, for an adult if
tribunal is satisfied—
(a) the adult has impaired capacity for the matter; and
(b) there is a need for a decision in relation to the matter or the adult
is likely to do something in relation to the matter that
involves, or is likely
to involve, unreasonable risk to the adult’s health, welfare or property;
(c) without an appointment—
(i) the adult’s needs will not be adequately met; or
(ii) the adult’s interests will not be adequately protected.
The appointment may be on terms considered appropriate
by the tribunal.
The tribunal may make the order on its own initiative or
on the application of the adult, the adult guardian or an interested
[8] If the Tribunal determines that there is a need for the appointment of an
administrator for CAC, the Tribunal must then have
regard to the appropriateness
considerations set out in section 15 of the Act when determining the person to
THE PARTIES
[9] As the hearing arose because the Supreme Court has
transferred the matter of determining CAC’s capacity for the Supreme
proceeding to the Tribunal, there is no applicant. In accordance with section
119 of the Act, the active parties are CAC and
The Public Trustee of Queensland
was represented at the hearing by MN.
[10] At the hearing the Tribunal joined CAC’s daughter, Ms MJ and
CAC’s friend and adviser, Mr MCP, as active parties.
The Tribunal gave
leave to FM, lawyer, to appear at the hearing for the Insurance company.
The Evidence
[11] In addition to the written material contained on the Tribunal file, all of
the parties attending the hearing were given the
opportunity to express their
views. These views where specifically relied on by the Tribunal are discussed
DOES CAC LACK CAPACITY FOR THE MATTER?
[12] CAC is presumed to have capacity to make his own decisions in accordance
with section 7 of the Act and General Principle 1 under
Schedule 1 of the Act.
CAC via his solicitors had in written
submissions
Supreme Court asserted that he is a person with impaired capacity in terms of
the definition in schedule 2 of the
Supreme Court of Queensland Act 1991
in that he is not capable of making the decisions required of a litigant for
conducting proceedings.
[13] It is recited in the written submissions that the Mental Health Court, in
April 2006 had decided that CAC was not fit for trial
and the unfitness for
trial is of a permanent nature. It was further recited in the submissions that
the Mental Health Court would
have had regard to the definition of “fit
for trial” contained in the
Mental Health Act 2000
“fit for trial, for a person, means fit to plead at the person’s
trial and to instruct counsel and endure the
person’s trial, with serious
adverse consequences to the person’s mental condition unlikely.”
The medical evidence
[14] CAC via a letter from his solicitors dated March 2008 and in his own letter
dated May 2008 provided the Tribunal with copies
of medical reports which he
relied on as evidence of his impaired decision making capacity. Dr HB,
neurosurgeon, in a report dated
18 August 2003 outlined CAC’s relevant
medical history: prior to 1998, CAC had undergone a number of operations and
radiotherapy
for an aggressive moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma
in the right temporal region. By 1998, he had developed an extensive
area in the
brain in the right frontal lobe of enhancing tissue and oedema.
[15] CAC underwent surgery on this right frontal brain lesion in April 1998
involving a right frontal craniotomy and excision of
radio necrotic areas of the
frontal lobe. There was subsequently persistent oedema of the right frontal lobe
and in July 1999 CAC
underwent surgery and further radio necrotic material was
removed from the right frontal lobe of his brain. CAC developed some focal
seizures and his craniotomy became infected. In August 1999 he underwent further
surgery necessitating removal of the bone plate
overlying the right frontal
[16] In 2000 scans showed progressing radiation necrosis of the inferior
temporal and middle frontal regions of the right part of
the brain. Revision
surgery was undertaken in March 2000. Scans taken in August 2000 showed no
indication of progressing radiation
necrosis. Subsequently CAC developed a
necrotic area associated with his craniotomy and he proceeded with surgery for
this necrotic
area of the scalp and bone between August 2002 and February 2003.
[17] Dr HB reported that at the time that CAC first consulted him in March 1998,
CAC had symptoms of headaches, tiredness and exhaustion,
lethargy, short term
memory dysfunction, mood swings and a labile personality. In 1999 CAC had
apparently contracted Ross River Fever
and/or Glandular Fever and presented with
fevers, tiredness and sleeplessness. Following surgery in March 2000 CAC had
headaches, was vague and uncertain on many issues, persisting mild
personality dysfunction, lethargy, tiredness and problems with
his memory.
[18] Dr HB reported that in August 2002 CAC still found himself occasionally
confused, forgetting where he may have parked his car
or what he might be doing
at any one point in time. On review in February 2003 CAC was still having
problems with concentration,
temperament and memory.
[19] TL, a clinical neurophysiologist, administered a battery of
neuropsychological tests to CAC on 6 July 2005. In her report dated
2005, Ms TL set out the results of her assessment as follows:
impairment in nonverbal intellectual functioning;
impairment in ability to sustain attention;
deficits in visual tracking and visual scanning;
impairment in selective attention, with high distractibility;
deficit in incidental learning, with poor ability to take in and recall
information unless effortfully trying to do so;
impairment in recall errors and discriminability (which information came from
which source);
(g) poor cued
recall (difficulty retrieving information stored using prompts or cues);
(h) mild to
moderate impairment in memory strategies for learning and storing information,
with his levels of disorganisation;
confabulation in recall;
impairment in Forced-Choice Recognition (ie was it “A” or
impairment in gross visuomotor speed and tracking;
impairment in speed of executive processing;
(m) moderate
impairment in producing words according to their meaning;
(n) moderate
impairment in visuospatial reasoning and analysis; and
impairment in executive skills, with poor planning and strategy generation,
impulsive responding, difficulty adjusting
to tasks, poor identification and
utilisation of errors, difficulty integrating feedback, cognitive perseveration,
disinhibition
and poor self monitoring.
[20] Ms TL provided her opinion as to how the global deterioration of
CAC’s cognitive abilities as revealed in her assessment
affected his
functioning relevant to his fitness for trial. She was of the opinion that CAC
did not have the cognitive ability to
follow the course of proceedings and his
version of accounts may be unreliable due to the breakdown of his memory
functions. Her
opinion was that CAC’s organic cognitive deficits limited
his ability to gain a reasonable grasp of the evidence given or to
counsel and he was likely to be overwhelmed and to become confused. She stated
an opinion that neither extra time nor structure
would facilitate his ability to
process information, particularly that relating to his memory and organisation
[21] Ms TL predicted that CAC would be less reliable and more inaccurate in his
recollection and retrieval of stored memories over
time. Ms TL expressed the
opinion that CAC did not have the cognitive ability to stand trial or to give
proper evidence.
[22] Dr CI, a consultant psychiatrist in clinical and forensic psychiatry,
conducted a psychiatric examination of CAC on 18 July
2005. In an extensive
report of 17 pages dated 23 August 2005, Dr CI diagnosed that CAC was suffering
from a neuropsychiatric disorder
which included a chronic hypomania which is an
abnormal elevation of mood. Dr CI stated that this euphoria is typical of
lobe dysfunction from trauma. Dr CI was of the opinion that CAC exhibits
orbitofrontal syndrome which gives rise to behaviours such
as impulsivity, a
loss of tact, a failure to plan ahead, and a lack of social restraint. Dr CI
considered that CAC had major problems
of an executive nature programming
himself into sequential actions, had difficulties developing strategies for
problem solving and
exhibited poor psychosocial judgement.
[23] On the question of fitness for trial on the criminal charges, Dr CI was of
the opinion that CAC was not capable of explaining
what happened in the banking
matters for which he was charged because of his inefficiencies and defects of
mind caused by the absence
of his right frontal lobe and part of his temporal
lobe. Dr CI was of the opinion that CAC was not able to cooperate in the enquiry
as to whether he did what he is charged with doing and he was incapable of
following the course of proceedings and incapable of instructing
his lawyers
prior to those proceedings. Dr CI was of the opinion that CAC did not have the
ability to apprehend the evidence against
him or to comprehend or to make his
defence in answer to the charges and he was unable to instruct his counsel as to
his version
of the facts to be conveyed to the court.
The evidence from CAC
[24] CAC was not legally represented at the hearing before the Tribunal. He was
accompanied by his daughter and his friend to support
him and he had prepared
several pages of type written submissions he wanted to make to the Tribunal. He
asked the Tribunal to make
an order to exclude the legal representative of the
Insurance company, Mr FM, from the hearing when he was making his submissions
the Tribunal as some of his evidence may prejudice a mediation which may be
arranged in the civil action. The Tribunal made an
order excluding Mr FM from
the hearing for part of the submissions made by CAC.
[25] In his submissions CAC outlined the history of his final years as a long
term senior branch manager with a Bank, his retrenchment
in 1993 from employment
with the Bank and the investment of his superannuation into a rollover fund with
a Bank. He revealed that
his late wife, XG, retired from employment with the
Bank in 1996 to care for him and she placed her retirement funds into the
fund with the Bank.
[26] CAC told the Tribunal that he had been diagnosed with an aggressive
secondary cancer in 1993 and he had undergone surgery which
entailed the removal
of his eye and subsequent radiotherapy in an attempt to eradicate remaining
cancerous tissue in his brain. He
confirmed the medical history from 1998 as set
out by Dr HB in his report. CAC told the Tribunal that as a consequence of his
and radiotherapy he experienced confusion and by 1999 a pronounced
deterioration in his mental capacity had become apparent. He had
worked hard to
restore his mental functioning and his verbal skills were good. CAC told the
Tribunal that the ongoing problems he
experienced were severe headaches,
deafness and tinnitus, confusion, short term memory loss and fatigue.
[27] CAC explained in his own words what the civil litigation was about. From
1993 to 2002 he had actively managed his investment
in the rollover account with
the Bank as he was interested in these matters due to his extensive experience
as a bank employee. The
rollover account gave a choice of investments in managed
funds. It was possible to switch between one type of managed fund to another
[28] CAC was aware that the listed unit price in each type of fund was published
each day. He was also aware that from 1993 to 1998
there was a two day delay
before changes in the share market were reflected in the listed unit price. He
used to watch for changes
in the share market each day, he would analyse in what
direction the market was heading and if there was a move up or down he would
then make a decision to switch managed funds to ride the share market position.
The two day delay in changes to the listed unit price
meant he could make
switches that always picked the right movement in the listed price.
[29] After the Bank’s merger with the Insurance company in 1998 the two
day delay in publishing the listed unit price was removed
but he continued to
made decisions on switches as he still followed the share market. It was still
possible to make a switch between
managed funds and the switch was processed as
at the date on the switch application form. He has always had good financial
skills and despite the medical treatment between 1993 and 2002 he was
still able to analyse the share market competently. In 2002
a new system was
implemented and switches were made as at the date that the applications were
received in the Sydney office.
[30] In New South Wales an investigation had found that some former bank
employees were using current bank staff to back date application
forms to gain
an advantage in financial transactions. A sweep was done of Queensland
investments and 12 accounts were found where
there had been a course of
successful switching between managed funds. His and his wife’s accounts
were among the accounts
identified by the investigation. He and his wife were
later charged with fraud.
[31] CAC told the Tribunal that during the committal proceedings for the
criminal charges he had been able to conduct an analysis
of the figures about
his switch transactions that had been put before the court by the police and he
believed that he had been able
to refute the allegation that it was
statistically impossible for his transactions to be so successful without some
fraud on his
part. By his analysis his switches were successful 60% of the time.
[32] In his submissions CAC stated that he had been declared mentally unable to
defend himself against the criminal charges and unable
to instruct counsel about
those charges. He has problems retaining and recalling information especially
when he is tired or under
stress. He has on occasion forgotten security codes
and he had confused his daughter’s house with that of her neighbour. He
agreed with the description given by TL that his brain was like an untidy filing
cabinet. He told the Tribunal that he does not remember
much about the details
of the switching transactions he made but he can recall his practice of watching
the share market on a daily
basis to make the switches. There are gaps in his
memory about these matters.
[33] The Tribunal asked CAC to explain the circumstances in which he made an
enduring power of attorney on 5 January 2007. He told
the Tribunal that after
his wife died in November 2006, he saw a solicitor to change his will and he
might have been advised at that
time to make an enduring power of attorney. He
appointed his two daughters as his attorneys to make financial and personal
when he has lost capacity. He understood that he can revoke the
enduring power of attorney if he no longer wanted his daughters to
decisions for him.
[34] CAC told the Tribunal that he cannot recall what was discussed at the
interview with the solicitor and he has not consulted
that firm of solicitors
since he made the enduring power of attorney. He understood what an enduring
power of attorney was as he
had had a great deal of experience with similar
documents when he was a bank manager. He considered that it was a simple task to
make an enduring power of attorney.
[35] CAC was asked to explain how he came to make an advance health directive.
CAC told the Tribunal that he had attended Dr MP who
is his plastic surgeon and
he completed the advanced health directive with him. The Tribunal pointed out to
CAC that the form also
appointed his daughters as his attorneys for
personal/health matters. The granting of this power was witnessed by a former
bank colleague,
a Mr DL. The attorneys accepted their appointment under the
advance health directive form on the same days that the attorneys accepted
appointment under the enduring power of attorney form. No decisions have been
made to date by the attorneys as CAC considers
that he can manage his own
[36] The Tribunal asked CAC to explain how many times he has instructed lawyers
in recent years. CAC told the Tribunal he first instructed
lawyers in a matter
associated with the Insurance company in about 2002 when he received a bill of
$100,000 by way of penalty from
the Australian Taxation Office alleging
withdrawals had been made over the Retirement Benefit Level when his rollover
account was
updated by the recording in one item of transactions that had taken
place over seven years. He instructed a firm of solicitors and
continued to
instruct that firm to act for him when he was charged by the police with fraud.
[37] The solicitors briefed a barrister, EC, to defend him in the criminal
matter and the barrister was the first person to have
raised doubts about
CAC’s capacity to stand trial and he arranged the involvement of Dr CI in
the matter. CAC had expected
that the dispute would end when the criminal
charges ceased with the death of his wife but when the Insurance company,
started the
civil action at the beginning of 2007 he decided that he needed a
high profile lawyer to knock the matter on the head. He instructed
Mr GO to act
[38] CAC told the Tribunal that none of the solicitors he had instructed since
2002 had declined to act for him on the basis that
he lacked capacity to
instruct them although some of the solicitors had raised queries about his
[39] CAC told the Tribunal that he would end up in a padded cell if he had to go
ahead with the civil action. He had no sleep before
the Tribunal hearing due to
the stress of having to appear. He is forgetful and he was having difficulty
understanding what the Tribunal
hearing was all about.
[40] The Tribunal asked CAC whether the evidence in the civil case was
predominately based on the written documents created at the
time of the switches
or whether there was witness evidence that needed to be responded to by him. CAC
told the Tribunal that he was
uncertain as to the extent of the evidence to be
adduced in the civil action against him but he understood that the case was
reliant on contemporaneous documents although there may be some witness
evidence as to his use of internal banking envelopes.
The evidence of his daughter, MJ
[41] MJ had provided written feedback to the Tribunal prior to the hearing. She
has regular contact with CAC over the telephone and
meets up with him for lunch
and dinner. She reported that CAC looks after himself very well, he makes sure
that his bills are paid,
he lives within his budget, and he copes with
assistance from his friend, Mr MCP. Ms MJ made reference to her father
exhibiting confusion
on occasions. Ms MJ confirmed that CAC still is able to
manage his own affairs. She gave evidence that he compensates for short term
memory loss by making lists and keeping notes of what he has to do.
[42] At the hearing Ms MJ told the Tribunal that her father has reduced his
social activities in the past few weeks so he could concentrate
on the Tribunal
issues. When her father is under stress he is more tired and confused. If the
litigation with the Insurance company
was taken away, her father would be able
to manage most every day activities very well.
The evidence of his daughter, DC and his friend, MCP
[43] The Tribunal had received written evidence from another daughter of CAC, Ms
DC, in similar terms to the written evidence provide
by Ms MJ and similar
written evidence from MCP.
Submissions by The Public Trustee of Queensland
[44] MN told the Tribunal that The Public Trustee of Queensland would not be in
a position to accept the role of litigation guardian
for CAC in the Supreme
Court action. If The Public Trustee of Queensland were to be appointed as
administrator for CAC for legal
matters, legal advice would have to be obtained
as to the litigation in which CAC is involved. The Public Trustee of Queensland
not accept responsibility for costs in the litigation and would not place
corporate funds at risk in becoming involved in the litigation
on behalf of CAC,
particularly if there was any doubt about the ability to obtain instructions
The evidence from HR
[45] The solicitor who was the witness to the enduring power of attorney made by
CAC gave a written statement to the Tribunal. Mr
HR stated that he had taken
instructions for countless enduring powers of attorney since he was admitted to
practice in 1985. He
had no detailed recollection of CAC who consulted him in
January 2007. Mr HR could state that CAC had handed to him written instructions
for a will which were comprehensive, appropriate to his circumstances and
demonstrated a clear understanding of the various issues
that arise when
considering a testamentary act.
[46] Mr HR raised the question of making an enduring power of attorney with CAC
and in accordance with Mr HR’s usual practice,
he discussed with CAC the
nature of the document, the type of decisions that could be made by the
attorneys, the ability to limit
the power of the attorneys, the ability to give
specific instructions to the attorneys, the fact that more than one attorney can
be appointed, the criteria to select an attorney, when the powers should
commence, and how the power can be revoked or brought to
[47] Mr HR stated that he believed that CAC was of sound mind and he understood
the nature and implications of the enduring power
of attorney. Mr HR stated that
he had received clear and concise instructions from CAC.
Submissions by the Insurance company
[48] Mr FM submitted that there was a difference between a person not being able
to recall the past and the capacity of a person
to provide instructions to a
solicitor during the course of litigation. People involved in court proceedings
can often have difficulty
remembering the facts in a claim but they can still
have the capacity to proceed with the litigation. Mr FM submitted that the test
for capacity to proceed with a civil action was different from the test of
capacity to proceed with a criminal action.
Discussion of evidence
[49] In determining the question of whether CAC has capacity for the Supreme
Court proceeding, the Tribunal commences with the presumption
that CAC has
capacity for the matter. The Tribunal is required to examine the evidence to
ascertain if that presumption can be rebutted.
[50] The Tribunal determines capacity by using the statutory criteria in
schedule 4 of the Act:
, for a person for a
matter, means the person is capable of-
(a) understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the matter;
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
(c) communicating the decisions in some way.
[51] It is the role of the Tribunal to determine capacity for a matter. It
discharges that role after examining the medical and lay
evidence available to
the Tribunal and applying the law to the findings of fact arrived at by the
Tribunal. The medical evidence
is only one part of the evidence base relied on
by the Tribunal to determine capacity. The evidence from CAC and from other non
witnesses forms the balance of the available evidence.
[52] The Tribunal has considered the evidence of Dr CI and Ms TL. That evidence
was specifically obtained for the question of whether
CAC was fit for trial on
the criminal charges. The opinions expressed by Dr CI and Ms TL looked at the
specific criteria for fitness
for trial i.e. “fit for trial, for a person,
means fit to plead at the person’s trial and to instruct counsel and
the person’s trial, with serious adverse consequences to the
person’s mental condition unlikely.”
[53] The criteria for fitness for a criminal matter focused on the capacity of a
person to instruct counsel and to endure a trial
without serious adverse
consequences being caused to the person’s mental condition. The capacity
criteria to be taken into
account by this Tribunal are quite different from the
criteria for fitness for a criminal matter. As a result, the opinions expressed
by Dr CI and Ms TL have to be analysed afresh using the criteria appropriate to
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
[54] In particular, how do the opinions expressed by Dr CI and Ms TL address the
capacity criteria to be applied by the Tribunal?
Dr CI’s opinion that CAC
was unfit for trial was not based merely on the finding that CAC had an acquired
brain injury. The
identification of a diagnosis is not in itself sufficient to
base a finding of unfitness for trial under the
Mental Health Act 2000
a finding of impaired decision making capacity under the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
It is necessary to look at how the diagnosed
condition relevantly impairs CAC’s capacity.
[55] Dr CI specifically framed his opinion on unfitness for trial on the
presence in CAC of the following deficits in functioning
deducted from certain
identified clinical signs:
(a) incapable
of explaining what had happened in the banking matters;
(b) unable to
cooperate in enquiries by his lawyers;
(c) incapable
of following the course of proceedings;
(d) incapable
of instructing lawyers prior to those proceedings;
(e) unable to
apprehend the evidence against him;
(f) unable to
comprehend his defence; and
(g) unable to
instruct his counsel of his version of the facts.
[56] Similarly, Ms TL framed her opinion on CAC’s unfitness for trial on
the deficits in functioning she had deducted from
the neuropsychological
assessment she had conducted:
(a) lack of
cognitive ability to follow the course of proceedings;
(b) lack of
reliability in his version of his actions;
(c) limited
ability to gain a reasonable grasp of the evidence;
(d) limited
ability to advise counsel; and
(e) tendency to
be overwhelmed and confused.
[57] The Tribunal had the opportunity to observe CAC during the hearing. He was
able to explain to the Tribunal without any difficulty
what had happened between
1996 and 2002 to give rise to the civil action brought against him by the
Insurance company. He appeared
to anticipate without evident difficulty the
rationale of the line of questioning from the Tribunal that queried how a person
capacity to instruct solicitors in a complex legal matter such as an
enduring power of attorney could at the same time lack capacity
to instruct
solicitors in a civil claim.
[58] He told the Tribunal that during the committal proceedings he had responded
to the evidence adduced by the police to the extent
that he had been able to
produce a mathematical analysis of the switch transactions to disprove the
prosecution’s allegations
that it was impossible for anyone to be as
successful as he had been in making switches without resorting to some type of
This example illustrates the extent of CAC’s ability in at least
2004 or 2005 to cooperate in enquiries made by his lawyers
during the course of
court proceedings.
[59] The Tribunal notes that CAC has instructed three firms of solicitors since
2002 and none of these firms have declined to accept
his instructions. The
solicitors were able to complete the work under their retainers and CAC’s
current solicitors are continuing
to act under instructions from CAC. There was
no evidence from any representative of the solicitors to the effect that CAC, in
opinion, lacks capacity to instruct them and the Tribunal notes the
evidence from HR that he was of the opinion that CAC had capacity
to instruct
him in 2007 in relation to the enduring power of attorney and will.
[60] CAC did not provide a health professional report which specifically
addressed the capacity criteria set out in the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
There was however some further medical evidence
provided to the Tribunal apart from the reports of Dr CI and Ms TL. CAC provided
Tribunal with a copy of the advance health directive signed by him in
January 2007. Dr MP certified that CAC was not suffering from
any condition
which would affect his capacity to understand the things necessary to make the
advance health directive and that CAC
understood the nature and likely effect of
the health care described in the advance health directive.
[61] An advance health directive is a complex instrument that contains a record
person will ever have to make.
It encompasses decisions about the extent of medical treatment to be provided
during the terminal
phase of an incurable illness, a coma and a persistent
vegetative state. It contains decisions about the use of life-sustaining
such as resuscitation, assisted ventilation, artificial hydration,
artificial nutrition and the use of antibiotics as a life-sustaining
Sections 41
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
set out the
criteria for assessing if a person has capacity to make a valid enduring power
of attorney and a valid advance health
directive. Those sections require a
person to have the capacity to understand the nature of the legal and health
issues that are
dealt with in those documents and to understand the consequences
of directing the options for future action in the manner set out
documents. In a leading case on the question of capacity to execute a document,
the High Court of Australia said in
mental capacity required by law in respect of any instrument is relative to the
particular transaction which is being effected
by means of the instrument, and
may be described as the capacity to understand the nature of the transaction
when it is explained.”
[63] These comments were reinforced in the Supreme Court decision of
Guardian (In Re Enduring Power of Attorney of Vera Hagger) v Vera Hagger, Declan
James Barry and Albert Craig
Court held that an enduring power of attorney was both more unfamiliar and more
complex (for most members of the community)
than a will. The Tribunal considers
that a high level of cognitive ability is required to make a valid enduring
power of attorney
and advance health directive.
the Tribunal when considering the issue of capacity to make a valid enduring
power of attorney referred for assistance to the publication
Ethics and Law
Professions
authors, Ian Kerridge, Michael Lowe and John McPhee, explain the concept by
reference to a range of “capacities”.
These include the capacity to
receive, comprehend, retain and recall relevant information; to integrate
information received and
relate it to one’s situation; to evaluate
benefits and risks in terms of personal values; to select an option and give
reasons for the choice; to communicate one’s choice to others; and
to persevere with the choice until the decision is acted
on. The Tribunal in the
present case has found this analysis of assistance when considering the content
of the capacity required
for a person to conduct civil proceedings in a court of
law as well as to make an enduring power of attorney and advance health
[65] The Tribunal was able to distinguish in the evidence of CAC the range of
capabilities discussed by Kerridge, Lowe and McPhee.
The Tribunal accepts the
accuracy of the evidence of Mr HR and Dr MP in their respective certifications
in the enduring power of
attorney and advance health directive as to the
capacity of CAC to grant the powers contained in those documents. The Tribunal
that CAC had capacity to execute the enduring power of attorney in January
2007 and to execute the advance health directive on or
[66] The Tribunal finds that CAC exhibited the ability to comprehend information
relevant to the issues to be determined by the Tribunal,
he was able to recall
and organise detailed information about his actions over the past 15 years, he
could integrate information
readily to his own situation, he exhibited the ability to evaluate the benefits
and risks of the outcome he sought from the Tribunal about his litigation and he
could annunciate cogent reasons as to why he was
seeking a particular outcome
from the Tribunal.
[67] The Tribunal finds that CAC had the capacity to initiate strategies to
maximise desired outcomes when he instructed his solicitor,
HR, in January 2007
to include in his enduring power of attorney the restriction that the power of
his designed attorneys to make
decisions about financial matters did not
commence until he had lost capacity. By doing so, CAC has chosen to remain
totally in control
of his affairs.
[68] The Tribunal finds that CAC manifested the capacity to act in a strategic
manner when he decided to engage a solicitor with
a high public profile to act
for him in the civil litigation rather than continuing with the firm of
solicitors who had acted for
him for the previous four years. At the Tribunal
hearing CAC established in the opinion of the Tribunal that he had capacity to
the consequences of quite complex matters when he asked the Tribunal
to exclude Mr FM from the hearing while CAC made submissions
aspects of his case so that his legal position would not be prejudiced in later
proceedings. These findings indicate
in the opinion of the Tribunal that CAC is
able to function with a high level of capacity for complex legal matters.
[69] The Tribunal accepts that as a result of his acquired brain injury CAC does
have features of impaired cognitive and emotional
functioning such as short term
memory problems, an altered mood state and a reduced ability to cope with
stress. However the evidence
of impaired functioning established by
neuropsychological testing and by clinical psychiatric examination is only part
of the evidence
that has informed the findings made by the Tribunal. The
evidence provided by CAC’s own actions since his legal problems first
manifested in 2002 and the evidence from one of his treating doctors and one of
his lawyers has also informed the findings made by
the Tribunal as explained in
these reasons.
[70] After taking these matters into consideration the Tribunal concludes that
the presumption that CAC has capacity for the Supreme
Court proceeding has not
been rebutted. The Tribunal is satisfied that CAC is capable of understanding
the nature and effect of decisions
to be made by him in those proceedings, of
freely and voluntarily making decisions about those proceedings and of
communicating his
decisions about those proceedings. In other words, the
Tribunal is satisfied that all three criteria for determining capacity under
Act are present in the case of CAC as to his making the decisions required of a
litigant for conducting proceedings in the Supreme
Court in civil
argument by First and Second Defendant 4 February 2008
(1954) 91CLR
2001(Unreported)
[2007] QGAAT 6
Social Science Press (1998)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (212 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter