URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/139.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gander & Anor v Gander & Anor [2025] QDC 139 (3 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Gander & Anor v Gander & Anor
[2025] QDC 139
MICHAEL JOHN GANDER (UNDER PART IV, SECTIONS 40-44,
SUCCESSION ACT
(First Applicant)
SUSAN COURTNEY GANDER (UNDER PART IV, SECTIONS 40-44,
SUCCESSION ACT
(Second Applicant)
STEVEN GANDER (AS PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE OF BRIDGET GANDER
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
3 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
Friday 26 September 2025 (on the papers)
Porter KC DCJ
application filed 5 September 2025 to set aside the costs order made by Barlow
DCJ on 16 December 2024 be dismissed.
respondent Steven Gander pay the applicants’ costs of that application.
The factual and procedural background
26 July 2024, the applicants filed an originating application under
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) for further provision out of the estate of
their mother Bridget Gander, who died on 28 October 2023. Although no grant of
representation has been made to the respondent, he has been made the respondent
as personal representative under the deceased’s
will. The parties appear
to have proceeded thereafter on that basis. The respondent is the son of the
October 2024, the respondent applied for summary dismissal of the originating
application. The application for summary
dismissal was heard by Barlow KC DCJ
on 16 December 2024. The gravamen of the respondent’s submission was that
the proceedings
should be dismissed as an abuse of process because there were no
funds in the estate out of which provision could be made and further
applicants did not show relevant need. The gravamen of the applicants’
submission was that there was a dispute on
the evidence as to the assets of the
estate and so summary dismissal was not justified.
[3] His Honour
dismissed the application for summary dismissal. He also ordered that the
proceeding be stayed until further order
and that the respondent pay the
applicant’s costs of the application (the
costs order
). No appeal
was brought against those orders.
[4] No party has
referred me to reasons given by his Honour on 16 December 2024. However, on the
submissions put before his Honour,
his Honour’s orders seem correct.
Summary dismissal of a family provision application will not ordinarily occur
where there
are disputed facts material to the basis of dismissal. Further,
there is nothing unusual about an order that costs follow the event,
allowing for the particular issues which can sometimes arise on costs orders in
family provision cases.
[5] On 9 July
2025, the applicants served a costs statement on the respondent. On around 31
July 2025, the respondent filed and served
objections to the costs statement.
The objections dealt in part with the issues raised on the costs statement but
also reiterated
the respondent’s contention that the estate was insolvent.
The objections were supported by an affidavit which went well beyond
legally relevant to the objections. The affidavit, amongst other matters,
ventilated the respondent’s complaints
allegations as to the funds in the estate being diverted to the respondent. It
also alleged breaches
(Cth), the personal and
financial support he provided his mother over her lifetime, errors by Judge
Barlow and the applicants’
lawyers and sought a variety of extravagant
orders which could not be made in a costs assessment.
respondent’
July affidavit reveals a lack of understanding of basic
principles of civil litigation. While that is understandable for a litigant
person, it remains that case that the affidavit is misconceived. Further, to
the extent it seeks to raise matters relevant
only to the applicants’
claim for relief under
, it is in breach of the stay imposed by his
Honour of those proceedings on 16 December 2024.
[7] On 1 August
2025, the respondent filed a notice of acting in person, though I infer he was
responsible for the 31 July affidavit
and objection.
[8] On 29 August
2025, the applicants’ filed an application for the appointment of a costs
assessor. The supporting affidavit
was brief and swore to the costs order, the
costs statement, the costs objection and the lack of agreement at the date of
the affidavit
regarding an assessor. That application was listed for hearing on
29 August 2025. I do not know if an order appointing an assessor
though that issue does not currently arise.
September 2025, the respondent filed an application in the proceedings. The
application was in the following form:
The Applicant applies to the
Court for the following orders:
Order 4 of the Honourable Justice [
Judge] Barlow KC made on 16
December 2024 be stayed or set aside pursuant to
Civil Procedure Rules 1999
the Applicant’s application for the appointment of a cost’s assessor
pursuant to
UCPR be dismissed.
no costs be awarded against the Applicant in relation to this application.
Grounds on Which the Orders Are Sought:
Applicant is the executor of the estate of Bridget Gander and has acted
throughout in good faith, without personal gain, and in
accordance with his
fiduciary duties.
costs order made on 16 December 2024 was obtained in circumstances where the
Applicant’s consent was either misrepresented
or not properly obtained,
and the order was made without full consideration of the executor’s
statutory protections under Queensland
succession law.
Applicant is entitled to immunity from adverse costs orders in his capacity as
executor, particularly where he has not acted unreasonably
or in breach of duty.
costs claimed by the Applicants are excessive, disproportionate, and not
reasonably incurred in the context of estate administration.
appointment of a costs assessor under
UCPR is predicated on the
validity of the underlying costs order, which is now challenged.
evidence has emerged demonstrating procedural irregularities, reputational harm,
and financial prejudice suffered by the Applicant,
warranting reconsideration of
the order under
application was made returnable on 11 September. It was supported by an
affidavit which made the following principal allegations:
(a) The respondent has acted in good faith and consistent with his fiduciary
duties as executor;
(b) His Honour’s costs order was made without the respondent’s
consent properly obtained nor was he given an opportunity
to contest the
(c) The respondent is entitled to immunity from adverse costs orders under
Succession Act
absent failure to act reasonably and cannot be
personally liable for acts as executor; and
(d) Fresh evidence has emerged since 16 December
2024 demonstrating “procedural irregularities, reputational harm and
prejudice”.
respondent’s application came before Judge Sheridan of this Court on 12
September 2025.
respondent attended by telephone. The applicants were represented by their
solicitor. The applicants’ solicitor was
willing to proceed and flagged
that on the material before the Court, the respondent did not make out any basis
to set aside the
costs order. He explained his submission that nothing in the
respondent’s material engaged the grounds for setting aside an
order under
the relevant rules, being Rules 667 and 668
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
). It is not necessary to outline those submissions,
except to note that the solicitor specifically observed that the fresh evidence
alleged was not identified, and even if it was, a reason for it not to have been
put before the Court at the original hearing was
[13] Her Honour
then explained to the respondent the difficulty in setting aside an order made
some 6 months prior which had not been
appealed. The respondent answered by
speaking about his dealings with his solicitors and the applicants’
solicitors. This
went on for some time and seemed to focus on his
dissatisfaction with the outcome of the
Ultimately, her Honour
made clear that nothing in his existing material justified setting aside the
costs order but offered the
respondent the opportunity to adjourn the matter and
put on further material. Her Honour put the respondent on notice that if he
continued with his application, he might be exposed to a costs
[14] Her Honour
made the following orders:
application is adjourned to a date to be fixed but such date shall be no later
than Friday 26 September 2025.
the respondent wishes to withdraw the application, a notice of withdrawal must
be filed in the registry and served on the applicants
by 4:00pm Friday 19
the application by the respondent is to be pursued, then any further affidavits
must be filed in the registry and served by the
respondent by 4:00pm Friday 19
September 2025.
no further affidavits are filed in the registry by the respondent in support of
the application by 4:00pm Friday 19 September 2025,
the application is
the application is withdrawn in accordance with order 2 or dismissed in
accordance with order 4, the parties are to file by emailing
the Associate to
her Honour Judge Sheridan, and serve on the other party, submissions as to costs
of no more than two pages in length,
by 4:00pm Friday 26 September 2025.
material filed by the respondent is to be served on the applicants by email to
the applicants’ solicitors at the following
rprygiel@frews.com.au
material filed by the applicants is to be served on the respondent by email to
the respondent at the following address: Merck5@bigpond.com
September 2025, the respondent filed a notice of withdrawal of application
a further affidavit, seemingly taking both courses contemplated by
orders 2 and 3. An outline of argument was also filed.
status of the withdrawal document was explained by the respondent in an email
sent to Judge Sheridan’s Associate on
Saturday 20 September 2025 and
copied to the applicants’ solicitors. That email stated that the
respondent had not served
the withdrawal and that it had been prepared as a
discretionary safeguard. That proposition and the other statements made in that
email were misconceived. In any event, the email communicated that the
respondent intended to press his application to set aside
the costs order.
23 September 2025, the applicant’s solicitors sent an email to her
Honour’s Associate confirming they were ready
to proceed with the
respondent’s application and seeking a hearing date later in the week
(bearing in mind her Honour’s
order that the matter be heard by 26
September).
12.54am on Wednesday 24 September 2025, the respondent sent another email to
Judge Sheridan’s Associate. The Court
did not invite that correspondence
nor did the respondent write with the consent of the other party. Indeed, he
did not send the
email to the other side at all. The email attached numerous
documents including affidavits previously filed, financial documents
bank statements, correspondence and a response to the costs assessor, Mr
Robinson. The covering email, inter alia, provided
personal information about
the respondent relevant to the proceedings which ask that the information
“remain strictly private
and confidential, for Her Honour Judge Sheridan
only”. It was unclear if that applied to all the attached documents, but
key submission was marked for her Honour only.
Court cannot act on evidence or submissions which are not provided to both sides
in a matter. It is a fundamental breach of
the rules of procedural fairness to
do so and it is apt to cause the other party to question the objectivity and
impartiality of
frustrates the fair determination of proceedings by preventing the Court from
having contrary evidence or submissions from
the other side which can put
evidence or submissions in a different perspective.
fundamental principles are reflected in the statutory ethical duties of
solicitors and barristers. It is sufficient to
set out the relevant rule from
the Australian Solicitors Conduct Rules (
) which relevantly
22.5 A solicitor must not,
outside an ex parte application or a hearing of which an opponent has had proper
notice, communicate in
the opponent's absence with the court concerning any
matter of substance in connection with current proceedings unless--
22.5.1 the court has first communicated with the solicitor in such a way as
to require the solicitor to respond to the court, or
22.5.2 the opponent has consented beforehand to the solicitor communicating
with the court in a specific manner notified to the opponent
22.6 A solicitor must promptly tell the opponent what passes between the
solicitor and a court in a communication referred to in Rule
22.7 A solicitor must not raise any matter with a court in connection with
current proceedings on any occasion to which an opponent
has consented under
Rule 22.5.2 other than the matters specifically notified by the solicitor to the
opponent when seeking the opponent's
respondent is self-represented. He is not bound by these rules. However,
non-compliance with the restrictions in r. 22.5
have consequences in law of the
kind outlined in paragraph
especially where a party is self-represented and not constrained by ethical
is a further consequence of those principles that a litigant cannot unilaterally
impose an obligation of confidence on the
Court in relation to such a
communication. The respondent was told exactly that in writing by her
Honour’s Associate by email
on 12 September 2025. On that day, at 8.48am,
the respondent sent an email to the Associate asking permission to submit a
confidential
summary to her Honour for consideration. The Associate responded
at 9.10am that it would not be appropriate for her Honour to accept
any material
without the respondent being copied in or the material being tendered in open
Court. His email sent on 24 September
set out in paragraphs
above, must have been written
knowing of that advice. The communications from the respondent contain evidence
and submissions not
previously contained in any affidavit or outline filed in
his application. Providing that material was also inconsistent with her
Honour’s orders which required any further affidavit to be filed by Friday
19 September. The communication was in breach of
that order.
Wednesday, 24 September Deputy Registrar Campbell sent an email seeking to
confirm a date for the hearing of the respondent’s
application. The
respondent referred the Deputy Registrar to Judge Sheridan’s Associate.
The implication presumably was that
he would not attend the further hearing. On
Wednesday afternoon the Deputy Registrar specified that the matter would be
the papers on Friday 26 September and that the applicants could file a
further outline, which they did. The matter was referred
The costs order should not be set aside
667 and 668 UCPR deal with the circumstances in which the Court may vary or set
aside an order. Rule 667(1) applies only
where the application is brought
within 7 days of making the order. It cannot apply here.
[25] Rule 667(2)
(2) The court may set aside an order at any time if—
(a) the order was made in the absence of a party; or
(b) the order was obtained by fraud; or
(c) the order is for an injunction or the appointment of a receiver; or
(d) the order does not reflect the court’s intention at the time the order
was made; or
(e) the party who has the benefit of the order consents; or
(f) for a judgment for specific performance, the court considers it appropriate
for reasons that have arisen since the order was
[26] Rule 668
only applies, in effect, if facts arise or are discovered after an order is made
that entitle a person to relief from
[27] In the
respondent’s first affidavit filed 5 September 2025, the respondent relied
on the matters set out in paragraph
above. None of those matters
properly engage rr. 667(2) or 668. The matters in (a) to (c), if correct, might
give rise to grounds
of appeal, but they do not engage the Court’s power
to set aside or vary the costs order. The matter in paragraph (c) might
if the real complaint is that the order was made in the respondent’s
absence. However, while it appears he was not present
at the hearing, he was
present by his solicitors and barrister.
[28] The matters
raised are in any event wrong in law. The Court has power to order costs
against a personal representative and such
an order binds the personal
representative personally and in relation to the whole of the personal
representative’s assets.
The personal representative is however, entitled
to indemnity from the estate for a costs liability incurred while acting as such
unless they have acted unreasonably. The costs order says nothing about the
entitlement to indemnity and does not involve a finding
that the respondent
acted unreasonably. It merely orders costs against the personal representative.
The fact that the indemnity
might not be a valuable one is a matter for the
personal representative, not the applicants. The cases and statutes referred to
in paragraph 7 of the resdponent’s 19 September affidavit are consistent
with that analysis.
[1968] P 675
is concerned with the entitlement to indemnity from estate
assets of an executor holding probate.
[1892] UKLawRpCh 180
[1893] 1 Ch 547
provides that where an executor obtains a direction from the Court that he or
she is authorised and justified in pursuing or defending
litigation, he or she
is protected from allegations of breach of duty in doing so if full disclosure
is made to the Court. In these
circumstances, an executor is entitled to
indemnity from the estate where an adverse costs order is made. Here, the
respondent did
not seek any such direction to protect his entitlement to
indemnity. Section 53(2)
Succession Act
deals with protecting the
validity of payments in good faith by an executor under a grant of probate where
the grant is shown to
be invalid or is set aside. That has no application
[30] Finally, I
refer to the matter in paragraph
above. As the solicitors for the
applicants submitted, in the absence of details, nothing in that general
assertion justifies recourse
[31] I now turn
to the further submissions filed on 19 September and the supporting affidavit.
Those submissions tend to repeat the
submissions outlined in paragraph
. So far as I can determine, the
only material addition is an allegation that that an affidavit of a person other
than the applicants
filed in the proceedings contained misrepresentations, that
“a document used in Court” omitted a critical page and that
applicants’ evidence misrepresented his conduct. These allegations fall
far short of showing that the costs order was
obtained by fraud. To set aside
the order on the fraud exception the application
(a) The evidence involving fraud must be newly discovered since the hearing;
(b) The evidence could not have been found at the time of the hearing by using
reasonable diligence;
(c) The evidence was so material that it would probably have affected the
outcome; and
(d) If there was perjury, the evidence was so strong that it would be decisive
at a rehearing.
respondent’s vague allegations fail to meet these requirements.
[33] The balance
of the affidavits and submissions filed by the respondent involve attempts to
reagitate the same issues as those
agitated in the summary dismissal application
namely, that the estate is insolvent and that the applicants should accept that
correct. They also reagitate the other complaints that the respondent has
mother’s affairs. Those are matters for the trial of the originating
application. The real difficulty which the respondent
had before Judge Barlow,
and still has on this application, is that he does not understand that
conflicting allegations are to be
resolved at trial, not in interlocutory
applications.
[34] There is no
basis in the material for the costs order to be set aside. The application is
[35] In reaching
this conclusion, I have not considered the material referred to in paragraph
above for the reasons given in
. Additionally, that material (to
the extent it is new) was provided in breach of the orders made by her Honour
for the filing
of material to be relied upon by the respondent on the further
hearing of his application and there is no good reason to ignore that
receive that further material.
Material on the application
the informal manner in which the application developed, I specifically identify
the material I have relied upon.
[37] As the
application involved a challenge to Judge Barlow’s costs order, I have
considered the material read before his Honour
being Court Documents 2, 3, 4, 5,
7, 13 and 15 along with the outlines filed at Court Documents 12 and 14. It was
impossible to
understand the respondent’s arguments without having regard
to that material. I also had regard to his Honour’s orders.
regard to Mr Gander’s application and supporting material filed in Court
being Court Documents 23, 24, 27, 28 and
29. I also had regard to the
submissions from the applicants dated 25 September which I have placed on the
[39] I have also
had regard to a transcript of the hearing before her Honour which I have marked
Exhibit 1 and her Honour’s
orders. I could not put the further material
sent by Mr Gander after that hearing in context without having regard to that
transcript.
[40] I have also
had regard to several of the documents which the respondent sent to her
Honour’s Associate and to the Deputy
Registrar with the intention that
they be considered in the application, despite the irregular nature of that
correspondence. However,
I have not considered everything, only the
communications which appeared relevant to this application.
considered the email correspondence discussed in paragraphs
(Exhibit 2),
(Exhibit 3),
(Exhibit 4) and
(Exhibit 5).
[42] Finally, I
refer to the email and attachments noted at
. For the reasons given above, I did
not act on that communication in deciding this application. I considered it
only insofar as
necessary to identify that it contained new evidence not
previously filed and to note that the “Executor Withdrawal and Procedural
Record” document contained no submissions which assisted the respondent in
his attempt to set aside the costs order. Indeed,
those submissions show an
inability in the respondent to appreciate the issues which arose on his
application. The email and attachments
are Exhibit 6 in this
application.
The respondent’s communications with the Court
respondent informed her Honour that he had asked his solicitors if he could
appeal, and they said no. He said he received
no advice about the matter, just
a refusal. Whether that is a fair reflection of what he was told, it is plain
he knew his solicitors
would not appeal. He chose not to appeal in those
circumstances.
[44] He then
pursued this application to re-open the costs order. Almost from the filing of
his application, there was a constant
stream of communications with the
Associate to Judge Sheridan and to the Civil List Manager. Ultimately, the
respondent was instructed
to send emails only to the Deputy Registrar as a way
of controlling his constant stream of communications.
[45] I can see
from the respondent’s affidavits and the communications that he is very
emotional about the issues relating to
the originating application and to his
mother’s estate. That emotion seems to be the principal cause of his
communications
with the Court. However, it is no excuse for doing so. The
respondent’s communications are almost always not properly made.
absorb the time and resources of the Court to no purpose. They cause confusion
in the conduct of the proceedings and put the
applicants to unnecessary costs.
[46] It also
seems that the respondent does not understand how legal proceedings are
conducted. Litigation cannot go on forever.
As a general rule, parties get one
chance to put on evidence and submissions. Once the hearing is over, no more
evidence or submissions
are ordinarily permitted, and none are permitted without
the Court’s direction. These are necessary disciplines that allow
to be resolved and disputes to be finalised.
[47] For these
reasons, the respondents repetitive communications with the Court must end.
ensure that occurs, the respondent should not communicate with an Associate of
the District Court or an officer of the District
Court, including sending any
email or telephoning, that concerns any matter of substance in connection with
proceedings 2062/24 or
any other proceeding, outside of a hearing in Court of
which the applicants have been had sufficient notice unless:
(a) The Court has first
communicated with the respondent in such a way as to require him to respond to
the Court, or
(b) The applicants or their solicitors have
consented to the respondent communicating with the court in specific terms and
their consent
the respondent communicates with the
[49] To avoid
any doubt in Mr Gander as to what he should be doing in the future, I make the
following points:
(a) A prohibition on communicating about any matter of substance prohibits
sending any communication which contains evidence, submissions,
arguments or
complaints about the proceedings;
(b) It does not prohibit communicating about purely procedural matters. That
means dates and times for hearings or requests for a
matter to be listed for
directions, or requests to attend by video link at a hearing. Of course, there
must be a proper reason for
any such a request, and such requests cannot include
arguments or evidence;
(c) The exception in
when the Court invites the respondent to communicate about a matter or makes an
order authorising a communication;
(d) The exception in [48](b) means what is says. The respondent cannot
communicate about any matter of substance without the agreement
applicants. They can therefore stop such a communication occurring. If that
occurs and the respondent wants to mention a
matter in Court, he should approach
the Court for a date for the matter to be mentioned before a Judge with the
applicants presence.
However, no such mention should be sought except for a
proper reason.
[50] If the
respondent does not respect these limitations, it might be necessary to make
formal Court orders imposing those limitations.
Failure to comply with such
orders, if made, can be a contempt of Court which can result in fines or
imprisonment.
urge Mr Gander to respect the limitations set out in paragraph
. A good start would be to not
communicate about this judgment. His application to set aside the costs order
is at an end. If he
is dissatisfied, he can appeal.
applicants seek costs of the application to set aside the costs order. The
respondent’s position on 16 September 2025
was hopeless, as the
applicants’ solicitor explained. Her Honour explained the risk of a costs
order if he persisted. He
persisted, despite her Honour’s warning. The
respondent must pay the applicants’ costs of the proceedings. It would
have been open to the Court on this application to order costs on the higher
indemnity basis. I do not do so on this occasion, but
if Mr Gander pursues any
other hopeless proceedings or applications, costs on the indemnity basis will
Legal Services
Commissioner v
[2019] QCAT 357
Monroe Schneider
Associates (Inc) v No 1 Raberem Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 367
(1992) 37 FCR 234
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (461 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter