URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Isermann v Professional Property Inspections Pty Ltd & Ors [2025] ICQ 9 (19 June 2025)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF
Isermann v Professional Property Inspections Pty Ltd & Ors
[2025] ICQ 009
DEBRA ISERMANN
(appellant)
PROFESSIONAL
PROPERTY INSPECTIONS
respondent)
KAREN HANCOCK
respondent)
NOEL HANCOCK
(third respondent)
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
19 June 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
12 June 2025
Davis J, President
Appeal dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES –
INTERFERENCE WITH JUDGE’S FINDING OF FACT – where
the appellant
brought a claim for compensation against the respondents under the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
– where the respondents made an offer
to resolve the appellant’s claim at a conciliation conference –
appellant indicated their agreement to the respondents’ offer to
settle the claim in an email to the Queensland Industrial
Relations Commission
Registry – where the terms of the agreement were to be drafted into a
formal deed and later executed by
the parties – where, before the deed was
executed by the parties, the appellant retracted their agreement to the
respondents’
offer in a further email to the Commission Registry –
where the appellant sought to continue her claim against the respondents
where the respondents brought an application to prevent the appellant from
pursuing her claim in light of her agreement to
the offer to settle the
proceedings – where the Commission found that the appellant was bound by
her agreement to settle the
proceedings – where the Commission dismissed
the appellant’s claim – whether the appellant was bound by their
to the respondent’s offer to settle the proceedings –
whether the Commission erred in dismissing the appellant’s
Industrial Relations Act
Industrial Relations (Tribunals) Rules 2011
Australian Postal Corporation v Gorman
[2011] FCA 975
Dey v Victorian Railways Commissioners
(1949) 78 CLR 62
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways
(1964) 112 CLR 125
[1964] HCA 69
Professional Property Inspections Pty Ltd & Anor
[2025] QIRC 63
King Tide Company Pty Ltd v Arawak Holdings Pty Ltd
Masters v Cameron
(1954) 91 CLR 353
[1954] HCA 72
Zoiti-Licastro v Australian Taxation Office
(2006) 154 IR 1
REPRESENTATIVES:
The appellant appeared on her own behalf
The respondents were
represented by the second and third respondents
appellant, Debra Isermann, appeals a decision made by the Queensland Industrial
Relations Commission
to summarily
dismiss her application for compensation for an alleged breach of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
[2] Professional
Property Inspections Pty Ltd, the first respondent (which I will call “the
Company”) conducts a business
of inspecting houses and providing reports
for use in the real estate industry. Karen Hancock (the second respondent) and
Noel Hancock
(the third respondent) control the Company.
[3] Ms Isermann
commenced her employment with the company on 7 June 2023. After doing some
training work with another inspector employed
by the Company, Ms Isermann met
with Mr Hancock at a shopping centre at Mount Cotton.
[4] Ms Isermann
alleged that during her meeting with Mr Hancock, he said and did things which
constituted discrimination on the basis
of sex and sexual harassment.
course, the matter came to be conciliated in the Commission.
[6] During the
conciliation conference, the respondents produced footage taken by CCTV cameras
within the shopping centre. It is
common ground that the persons depicted in
the footage are Ms Isermann and Mr Hancock, and that the occasion depicted in
the footage
is the meeting where the improper conduct allegedly occurred. The
footage, which was produced does not show any improper conduct,
but the footage
only shows small parts of the meeting.
conference, which occurred on 15 August 2024, the respondents made an offer to
Ms Isermann to settle the complaint. The
Commissioner conducting the conference
adjourned, giving Ms Isermann four days to consider the offer.
[8] Consistently
with usual practice, those parts of the conference which were not regarded as
“private”, and where all
parties were present with the Commissioner
in the conference room, were recorded. When the parties separated into private
areas, there was no recording.
[9] During the
private sessions, the offer was made and it was agreed that the offer would be
open for acceptance for four days.
[10] Before the
conference concluded, this exchange occurred:
“COMMISSIONER:
Okay. Well, we’ve resumed the recording. Thank you, parties, for your
time in participating in these
two conferences. Fortunately, we’ve been
able to resolve the matter by agreement at this point, however,
respondents have made an offer for the consideration of the complainant and have
agreed that the complainant can have until 4
o’clock on Monday next week
to consider whether she will or won’t accept the offer to resolve the
matter by agreement.
In the event that the complainant does accept the offer
to resolve the matter by agreement, and what will occur is
respondents’ representative will draft a deed of agreement in the usual
which, as we’ve discussed,
includes confidentiality,
non-disparagement, full and final settlement of all matters, and a payment of a
financial amount to the
complainant upon both parties executing or signing the
agreement, okay?
MS ISERMANN: Okay.
COMMISSIONER: And if that’s a course that the parties adopt, then
it’s useful, Ms Isermann, if you provide your bank
account details,
current as of now, to the respondents’ legal representative, so that there
can be no quibble about the monies
going into your correctly nominated account,
MS ISERMANN: Okay.
COMMISSIONER: Now, in the event that you decline to accept the offer, as
I’ve relayed to you, the respondents made clear that
they would be raising
that matter if this issue went all the way to a hearing and you lost, okay?
I will look into the Form 29
issues that were, you know, let drift a little, so I’ll follow those up,
and I’ll likely issue an order that they
– that those two
notices be complied with, as they weren’t objected to within the requisite
timeframe - - -
MS ISERMANN: Okay.
COMMISSIONER: - - - okay? Now, in the event that the complainant decides
not to accept the offer, then as I mentioned, you’ll
let the Industrial
Registry know that the matter’s to be allocated to someone else to hear
and decide - - -
MS ISERMANN: Okay.
COMMISSIONER: - - - all right?
MS ISERMANN: Yep.
COMMISSIONER: Okay. All right. I think that’s it. Thanks very much,
everyone.” (emphasis added)
[11] In the
third line of the first passage recorded above, appears the word
“fortunately”. It is obvious from the context
that there was an
error in the transcription. The word should be “unfortunately”.
[12] Four days
later, on 19 August 2024, Ms Isermann sent an email both to the Registrar and
the respondents. That email was in these
to the offer
made by the respondents at conciliation,
to finalise the
. I understand an order will be drawn up by the QIRC, funds to be
deposited as below.” (emphasis added)
[13] In the
email were bank account details to facilitate a payment by the respondents of
the agreed compensation amount to Ms Isermann.
August 2024, the Registrar responded to Ms Isermann:
you for your email confirming that you are accepting the Respondent’s
offer. The Commission does not make an “order”
to this effect. In
the usual course, the Respondent will prepare a deed for you to sign and then
the funds will be deposited.
Once the funds have been deposited, please ensure to sign and file a Form 27
– Request to discontinue proceedings.
This email is sent on behalf of the Chambers of Industrial Commissioner
[15] There was
no further correspondence between the Registrar and Ms Isermann until a Notice
of Non-Party Disclosure was answered
in circumstances which I now explain.
[16] At the
conciliation conference, Ms Isermann expressed concerns that the CCTV footage
which was produced had been manipulated
by unfair editing.
[17] Ms Isermann
had previously, on 22 March 2024, issued a Notice of Non-party Disclosure
against Daniel Catanzaro of Powercat, an
entity which is involved in the
management of the shopping centre at Mount Cotton. That notice had not been
complied with by the
time of the conciliation conference. On 16 August 2024,
Commissioner McLennan made orders to enforce that notice, including an order,
relevantly:
“(1) Pursuant to r 64H(2) of the
Relations (Tribunals) Rules 2011
(Qld), Daniel Catanzaro must comply with
the Form 29 – Notice of Non-party Disclosure issued on 21 March 2024
by 27 August 2024
(2) That the complainant must supply a copy of this order to Daniel Catanzaro
by 4.00pm on 20 August 2024
[18] It can be
seen that service of the notice upon Mr Catanzaro was to occur on 20 August
2024, which is the day after the deadline
for acceptance of the offer.
Commissioner McLennan explained in the conciliation conference that the orders
she intended to make
concerning the Notice of Non-party Disclosure would operate
if Ms Isermann “decline[d] the offer”.
[19] Notwithstanding
that the offer was accepted, Ms Isermann has, consistently with the express
terms of the order, served the notice
upon Mr Catanzaro.
August 2024, Mr Catanzaro produced what evidence he had in compliance with the
order of 16 August 2024. In an email he
explained that the recording system
overwrites itself after a period, and so the recordings were now lost. He
explained, that he
had received an earlier request for the footage from Mr
Hancock. Mr Hancock requested a download of footage over a two-hour period
which, for technical reasons Mr Catanzaro explained, was not possible. Using
his mobile telephone, he downloaded four short clips
from the footage, which he
sent to Mr Hancock. His full response to the Notice
“Dear Registrar & Parties,
RE: AD/2023/141 – Isermann & Professional Property Inspections
Pty Ltd and Hancock
I refer to the above matter and the order dated 16 August 2024 for
information to be supplied by me pursuant to the Form 29 Notice
of Non Party
Disclosure and say as follows:
is important to note that I am only an employee as a facilities manager of
Powercat Realty Pty Ltd and I believe that the notice
and order should in any
event have been directed to my employer and not me.
the above, I advise that I have with the consent of my employer provided all
copies of records held by my employer and/or
myself that relate to this matter
and I believe that I have fully complied with the notice that was previously
provided to me. I
believe that the Complainant has mislead the tribunal about
what has been provided by me.
also wish to advise that prior to the first communication from the Third
Respondent I had never met or had any dealings with the
Third Respondent and to
my knowledge, neither had my employer.
prior to the first contact from the Complainant on or about 8 March 2024 I had
never met or had any dealings with the Complainant
and to my knowledge, neither
had my employer.
or about 25 October 2023 I recieved an email request from the Third Respondent
for copies of CCTV footage that may have been held
by my employer for a specific
date of 7 June 2023. This very first communication from the Third Respondent did
not indicate why this
material was required.
Third Respondent emailed again on or about 22 November 2023 again requesting
copies of CCTV footage from the centre from 7 June
2023 from approximately
midday to 2:00pm
”. Again at the time no explanation was
given as to the reason for this request.
is important to note that at the time the CCTV system used by my employer did
not have the ability to download a 2 hour recording.
After receipt of the email
I attended the site and did a fast review of the recording on the system at the
time and could not see
anything of note (such as a slip and fall or
a result of this I then emailed the Third Respondent and said to the effect
that I could not see anything of note, what is it that you are looking
for, I’m unable to download 2 hours of footage and we
need permission to
release footage
above was explained to the Complainant as part of their request for information
on or about 26 March 2024 and I provided to her
copies of the relevant emails
and text messages between myself and the Third Respondent –
attached email chain named 2024.03.26 Email to Debra Iserman Responding to Form
then obtained approval from my employer and forwarded to the Third Respondent a
form for signing to release CCTV footage. This was
signed and returned by the
Third Respondent on 21 December 2023.
some point (I do not recall exactly when) I prepared 4 small recordings using my
phone. One at the beginning of the meeting, two
of the middle of the recording
and one at the end of the meeting. This was a random selection by me as I could
not see anything else
receipt of the signed release form I provided copies of the 4 clips to the Third
Respondent. This is the last that I heard
of the matter until contact was made
on or about 7 March 2024 by the Complainant requesting the similar recording as
requested by
the Third Respondent.
8 March 2024 I informed the complainant;
13.1 Due to storage
limitations the footage on the hard drive is overwritten with new footage.
13.2 That as a result of a request made by the Third Respondent previously we
had 4 recorded clips that we had provided to the third
Respondent.
13.3 We had no other recordings that we could provide.
13.4 I advised her that upon signing and returning the CCTV release form we
could provide her with these 4 clips.
Complainant signed and returned the form on 8 March 2024 and I provided the four
clips to her via WhatsApp on the same day for
which she acknowledged receipt
see attached screenshot
Complainant emailed again on 8 March 2024 requesting more footage. I again
responded on the same day explaining there was no
other footage in
to this there is ongoing communication from the Complaintant questioning the
order of the clips and requesting additional
was made clear to the complainant that there was no other CCTV footage and that
there was no methodology that was adopted by me
or requested by other parties in
preparing the clips.
18. I note that each clip provided has a date
and time stamp on it which informs the viewer of the relevant order.
or about 22 March 2024 I received a notice directed to myself which from my
perspective seemed to request exactly what had already
been provided by me to
the Complainant.
I attach a copy of the email response to the Complaintent
dated 26 March 2024 which clearly shows I complied with the requirements
Form 29 Notice of Non Party Disclosure
Complainant then forwarded through another request. I was advised by my
employer not to respond further to the email because
we had already provided
everything that was relevant and in our possession.
or about 16 August 2024 I received a copy of an Order from the Complainant.
This Order seem to again request exactly what was
previously requested under the
Form 29 and which material as set out above had already been provided.
as it has become clear that the Complainant is misleading the tribunal as to my
compliance with the Form 29 I have decided
to write this explanatory email to
you setting out my compliance.
the sake of clarity I attach all emails and correspondence relating to this
matter that have already been passed between myself
and Complainant and which
demonstrate my compliance with the Form 29.
I wish to repeat that
there is nothing further that can be provided either by myself of my
[21] Ms Isermann
sent an email on 27 August 2024 to the Registrar, Mr Catanzaro and the
respondents in these terms:
“If you’re wanting to
explain- Why would you record 4 random clips of your own choice- because you
didn’t see anything
of note? What of “note” were you looking
for, apparently you gave footage to the respondents without a reason, at the
time where’s as I had to tell you why I wanted the footage before you
would release it to me, but apparently Noel Hancock requested
footage without a
Apparently you had no method when deciding on 4 snippets of footage that you
randomly chose?
However, that lead you to look for a slip and fall incident upon his request
Who gave you direction to take it upon yourself to record 4 random clips of
choice and because you didn’t see a slip/ fall or
accident-there was
nothing of note.
The footage wasn’t requested due to a slip and fall incident?
Apparently you received no information about what the footage was required
for or why it was needed, so you wouldn’t have been
looking for, what you
say was” anything of note except a slip or fall?
When I requested the footage from you I had to tell you why I needed it and I
also wasn’t authorised to have the footage unless
I actually appeared in
that footage, so excuse me if I don’t find that section of your
explanation to be truthful, but let’s
go with me being deceptive for your
Please do not accuse me of being deceptive, I’d requested an
explanation from you, why footage was cut, and I was told (email)
issues now it’s shows in your statement to the QIRC that you chose 4
random spots to record on your phone- no technical
issues, a choice you made
because you could download two hours of the full transparent meeting.
You saw nothing of note because no one told you what they were looking for,
nothing was disclosed from the respondent, so it was taken
for granted by you
that you were looking for a slip or fall- but when I requested the footage
months after the respondent, you needed
me to tell you why I wanted it and what
it was for?
The many emails show and you have ignored me, I asked you why the the footage
was out of context and cut into 4 snippets of 4.39 secs-
that why I’m at
QIRC because I have had resistance when trying to find the truth, so it was
never technical issues it was you
and your choice of 4 random clips you chose,
to record on your phone-
There is an email between you and Noel Hancock, where you ask him what he is
looking for, you haven’t included his response
to that email to me when I
requested any information regarding the requests for footage by the other
There is also a txt message from Noel Hancock asking you to look at the end
of the footage to see what that shows. I don’t
believe you included all
emails/ txt messages between the both of you, and he certainly hasn’t.
Again, I would suggest that you refrain from accusing me of being deceptive-
your email proves to me that it is you that has been
deceptive. If you
couldn’t supply the full truthful recording, you had no right to make the
decision to take your mobile phone
and decide to take 4 random clips totalling
4.39 secs out of a full meeting that was two hours
August 2024, the Registrar responded:
“We refer to the below
correspondence from Mr Catanzaro and Ms Isermann. The correspondence has been
placed on file.
The Commission is of the view that this matter has finalised as Ms Isermann
has accepted an offer to resolve the matter from the Respondents.
If this is no
longer the case, please urgently advise.
This email is sent on behalf of the Chambers of Industrial Commissioner
August 2024, Ms Isermann sent a further email to the Registrar and the
respondents’ solicitors:
“Due to feeling very upset and
attacked by the latest correspondence, and the admission by Daniel Catanzaro,
the cctv footage
delivered was random and only at certain points of the
incident, was at his hands he decided what he would only supply-now knowing
the time it was requested by the Respondent he had the full footage- there was
no technical reasons at fault. He knew the respondent
was looking for the
footage for a sexual assault sexual harassment case going to court. He
deliberately cut the footage knowing
it was needed for evidence- it is clearly
seen on the respondents form, when he requested the footage so to hear that he
had no idea
why the respondent was wanting the footage is a deliberate lie.
I have felt sickened and bullied in the ruse to attack my character and push
my mental well-being into a dark place.
Due to feeling physically and realising the boys club is still very much in
existence in 2024, it has set me back, therefore missing
the deadline to on the
settlement.”
[24] Various
correspondence passed, including with the respondents’ lawyers. On 3
September 2024, the Registrar sent an email
to Ms Isermann recording that Ms
Isermann had accepted the offer and inquiring as to when she would sign and
return the deed. In
reply, Ms Isermann sent this
Obviously I’ve received the proof that the
footage was indeed tampered with after I agreed to take the settlement.
4 mins 39 secs of footage- out of context was never meant to prove anything
except that the footage had been tampered with, no technical
issues at all,
which I was told.
On the other hand the respondents relied on the tampered footage for a
different reason.
Conveniently all that I had alleged and described in writing, on the human
rights commission form is missing because, the footage
has been tampered with
and the now admission from the person who decided he would make the decision of
what he would cut out of the
full recording, and what he’d keep to arrive
at 4 small snippets, not showing anything of note!
The footage was requested after the human rights conciliation so it was known
by the respondent what he needed to have disappear from
the footage and like
magic it did.
Receiving aggressive emails from the respondents lawyer is inappropriate and
her saying, what I say has no merit, is upsetting, and
plain ridiculous as a
lawyer she knows the footage is not whole, and because it’s been tampered
with by the shopping centre
management (Daniel).
One would opine, directed by the respondent who clearly had conversations and
then filled in the form saying he wanted it due to a
sexual harassment claim, is
no accident that only 4 min 39 sec is returned.
Daniel, then looking for what, in his opinion would be anything of note?
Who is this person who involved himself in a legal hearing and decided to
tamper with the footage, he shouldn’t have been looking
for what the
respondent requested, knowing it was going to be used in front of the QIRC- what
should have happened is, he would be
bound supply the full recording, (he had
the full recording at that time), not a new version of a recording wanted by the
respondent,
via what’s app, don’t think that how it works.
Tampered footage is not evidence. I have no idea what else he’s done
to the footage, and how he’s achieved the snippets
Iconically, Im the one being accused of being a deceptive person, by all
parties and just looking to money grab as the respondent
lawyers stated at the
conciliation. The respondent chose to engage a lawyer, his costs are his
problem not mine, so again I don’t
need the lawyer throwing her aggression
at me in her email to me. That in balance of power is evident.
She is nothing to me but the respondent lawyer and quite frankly,
that’s enough said.
Is there another direction for me in the light of the new information, or are
you telling me, I must sign the
agreement.”
apparent from the correspondence, the respondents’ solicitors had, by this
stage, prepared a deed and submitted it.
Ms Isermann refused to sign the deed.
She said that it contained terms with which she did not agree. In argument
before me, she
referred to a provision which records that she had sought and
obtained legal advice. Ms Isermann submits, correctly it seems, that
factually incorrect.
application was then made to the Commission to strike out Ms Isermann’s
claim for relief on the basis that it had been
compromised. Ms Isermann
resisted that application, but the Commission found for the
respondents.
This is an appeal
from that decision.
The proceedings before the Commission
[27] Mr and Mrs
Hancock filed a written submission which contained a number of allegations made
in rather inflammatory language.
The only thing of substance was a submission
made based on
to the effect that a
compromise to settle Ms Isermann’s claim occurred at the conciliation
conference, and that the proposed
deed was simply intended to record the
contract that had been made.
[28] Ms Isermann
responded with a submission. It is appropriate to set out Ms Isermann’s
written submissions in full:
“1. I don’t believe the
case against the respondent’s should be struck off, I request it to be
continued, in light
of the new evidence received.
I did agree to take a token amount of $500 offered at the last
conciliation process
, the reason I decided to take the offer was because I
was so tired of sitting opposite the respondent’s and their lawyers,
having my character attacked, being accused of the matter being a “money
grab” words to the effect, I have a “pre
occupation with my
appearance”, I’m “lying” etc, and not being able to say
anything back to these people
in those moments, was nothing more than a case of
the victim being attacked by his attacker and his crew. An imbalance of power
with verbal diatribe.
3. I watched (R2) Karen Hancock sit alongside her (R3) husband each time, not
able to look me in the eye, but smirk with her husband
as each lawyer, that
changed from conciliation to conciliation continued to say, none of it happened
because it’s not seen
within the footage, being supplied by them.
4. Noel Hancock had beaten me to the footage, because I never knew footage
was in existence until the first conciliation conference.
Also, knowing that
the person who cut up the footage, was totally bias in favour of the
respondent’s, had already deleted
the full footage after meticulously
cutting in to it, it hit me pretty hard.
5. I had always alleged foul play when it came to the footage, but
didn’t have any proof at that stage, because the original
footage was
gone, of course. The respondent- Noel Hancock had managed to produce a
distorted version of that day, thinking her had
his smoking gun.
6. I wasn’t giving up on trying to prove my case, I realised every
case submitted to QIRC doesn’t have to come with footage
to prove what you
are alleging happened to you, but knowing the manipulated version was of no help
7. I was feeling deterred, annoyed that others were obviously happy to assist
the respondent’s to manipulate the situation,
having no regard that I was
alleging sexual harassment by respondent(1) which is not ok, (women should not
have to be ok, about a
man’s unwanted advances or their touch, whilst
going to sign an employment contract. A wife who sat by his side enabling his
behaviour, turning a blind eye to what is apparent. The footage was cut up for
his benefit, (at the very least you’d think
she’d wonder why
it’s cut up in snippets and she couldn’t see the full footage) she
sat alongside this person,
having no voice while he controlled the narrative.
She sat in silence as he yelled at me in QHRC with his threats.
8. I felt pity for her, that she is willing or maybe intimidated by him
herself, to go along with his story, even though she can see
with her own eyes
the footage is tampered with-and that’s no coincidence. It was obvious to
me all the people involved were
closing ranks, not willing to supply information
and ignoring the orders of the court to comply with the supply of that
information.
A cover up was in play.
9. I continually felt sickened in his presence and hearing his voice was
disturbing to me, his arrogance is to be expected, after
what he did to me, but
hard to stomach.
10. I was feeling down trodden fighting an unfair battle against this married
couple. A security company gone silent and even as
I submit this submission,
I’m now being threatened by that security company (SecTech). The other
person, Daniel Catanzaro,
controlling the footage at the Mt Cotton shopping
centre, only too happy to destroy evidence.
11. The man made scenario felt unbelievable. I was feeling overwhelmed and
experiencing the “boys club” still very much
in existence in 2024.
A wife who sits by, enabling her husband’s behaviour, as if this is just
happening to her husband because?.
12. It made me nauseous all the deception at play was effecting my mental
state of mind.
I accepted the offer, hoping I’d never have to see
either of the respondent’s again, hear his voice again, and a battle
fight my case against other men, unwilling to be transparent, so I accepted the
offer. However before I had signed the agreement,
I received a copy of a email
sent to QIRC. The email was from Daniel Catanzaro.
13. The email sent was to obviously bash my character, to inform the
commission that I was deceptive and misleading the tribunal,
quite a bold email
from a person who actually interfered with evidence, chopped footage up for the
respondent to submit to QIRC.
This email is why I decided against accepting
the offer I had already said m, I’d accept.
14. The email from Daniel Catanzaro forwarded to QIRC 27/08/24 contradicts
his original version sent in an email to me 26/03/2024,
explaining why the
footage had come to be. He had always claimed technical issues. SecTech- Jake
Meredith wouldn’t come forward
with information about the footage or the
technical issues, the form 29 ignored, and the respondent’s attempt to
water by submitting a document list to all-parties on 27/06/24, now
naming SecTech as the makers of the footage, they have always
been aware it was
Daniel Catanzaro, employee of Powercat management, at the Mt cotton shopping
centre who is the maker and supplier
of the footage to Noel Hancock(3).
15. Whilst trying to attack my character and bring my so called deception, in
trying to mislead the QIRC,(his words) Daniel Catanzaro
gave a different version
of how the footage came to be. Version no. 2 the correct version.
16. He now had, a different version of the reason behind the tampered
footage, ( p,11) contradicting a previous version of blaming
technical issues.
He was admitting in this email, he took his mobile phone and decided to take
grabs of the footage, stating he
saw nothing of note. He randomly selected
footage for no apparent reason (not even 4.39 secs of continuous footage but cut
up snippets
with footage missing), for Noel Hancock(3).
17. I have absolutely no interest in what Daniel Catanzaro thinks or his idea
of what is “nothing of note” to him, and
neither should the
18. Daniel said, he needed to get permission from their legal department to
supply the footage to Noel Hancock. In the application
for release of cctv
footage dated 20/12/2023 sent to Powercat legal advisor, (Michael Catanzaro a
family member to Daniel Catanzaro)
it’s clearly seen-R1 had stated,
“Evidence in a sexual Harassment case”. The legal advisor, Michael
(appearing on the PowerCat website). As a solicitor involved in a
giving the legal go ahead, to supply a request for footage to
be used in a
court, would have to know, tampering with footage is a criminal offence. The
original footage should be kept on file.
The laws for supplying footage going
before a court, is it can’t be tampered with, it would be inadmissible
unless in its
entirety. Tampering with footage changes the reality.
19. It’s now been established, at least in Nov-on 22&24, these
parties had discussions about my allegation, going before
the QIRC, knowing the
legal process was in progress. When the discussion began footage was available
in its entirety and should
have been supplied in full, not sent through the
what’s up app, most people are aware you can’t send lengthy
via a message app. I believe this was a part of the ruse that was
going on, cutting the footage up so it didn’t show anything
of note, not
because there was nothing of note.
20. Daniel Catanzaro and his family are in property management, just like the
respondents(1-3) they could be associates, but
Daniel Catanzaro isn’t
an investigator, and is not an adjudicator in a sexual Harassment claim, his
opinion isn’t valid
. His tampering wasn’t legal. I was treated
like an insignificant woman and fed a lot a rubbish, I had to sift through.
He was trying to sink my character, to justify himself possibly after being
made aware I’d agreed to an offer
, but unfortunately for
respondent’s(1-3) he had moved a little too fast with his attack on me at
If it had not been for his new version, new evidence in his attack, I
would have discontinued and taken the token offer.
21. The email from Daniel Catanzaro has back fired, on him and the
respondent-Noel Hancock. Daniel Catanzaro forgot that he had to
have a good
memory, if he was going to continue to stand by the respondent and continue to
I changed my mind on taking the
22. I did not sign the agreement emailed to me,
I notified the
respondent’s and the QIRC on 3/09/24 that I’d changed my mind due to
new evidence
and not agreeing to the terms in deed of release. No money had
been exchanged by this time.
23. On the 12/09/24- 9 days later respondent(3)
Noel Hancock knowing full
well, the decision to take the offer had changed
, still deposited the $500
into my bank account.
24. I believe this matter needs to be continued and the cover up exposed,
this has not been easy, it is not fun but I can’t
continue to be
intimidated, discriminated against or threatened, even if I stand alone with
only my word.
25. The respondent- Noel Hancock, dumping the money into my account after
learning the above, was another tactical manoeuvre. I believe
the tampered
footage was a tactic to intimidate me, to have me walking away from the matter,
after both conciliation conferences-
because the footage was always in place as
a tool to threaten me with costs if I proceeded (much like the new threat from
I’d received today) Both lawyers saying, my allegations had no
chance of success.
26. I believe The respondent- Noel Hancock with the help of others set out to
scare me away, to make me feel like no one would believe
me, because he had the
“nothing of note” footage. The true version is what the missing
footage isn’t showing-the
way I’m being treated, creating a lot of
threats, coming at me.”
(emphasis added)
Commissioner referred to the emails of 19 August 2024 from Ms Isermann to the
Registrar, the email of 21 August 2024 from
the Registrar to Ms Isermann, the
email from Mr Catanzaro of 27 August 2024, the email by the Registrar to the
parties on 28 August
2024, Ms Isermann’s email to the Registry of 30
August 2024, and the emails between the Registrar and Ms Isermann of 3 September
referring to some procedural matters, the Commissioner then directed herself to
the classic statement of the law made in
parties who have been in negotiation reach agreement upon terms of a contractual
nature and also agree that the matter
of their negotiation shall be dealt with
by a formal contract, the case may belong to any of three cases. It may be one
the parties have reached finality in arranging all the terms of their
bargain and intend to be immediately bound to the performance
of those terms,
but at the same time propose to have the terms restated in a form which will be
fuller or more precise but not different
in effect. Or, secondly, it may be a
case in which the parties have completely agreed upon all the terms of their
bargain and intend
no departure from or addition to that which their agreed
terms express or imply, but nevertheless have made performance of one or
the terms conditional upon the execution of a formal document. Or, thirdly, the
case may be one in which the intention of
the parties is not to make a concluded
bargain at all, unless and until they execute a formal contract.
In each of the first two cases there is a binding contract in the first case
a contract binding the parties at once to perform the
agreed terms whether the
contemplated formal document comes into existence or not, and to join (if they
have so agreed) in settling
and executing the formal document; and in the second
case a contract binding the parties to join in bringing the formal contract
existence and then to carry it into execution. Of these two cases the first is
the more common. Throughout the decisions on
this branch of the law the
proposition is insisted upon which Lord
expressed in
Rossiter v Miller
[(1878) 3 App Cas 1124 when he said that the mere fact
that the parties have expressly stipulated that there shall afterwards be
formal agreement prepared, embodying the terms, which shall be signed by the
parties does not, by itself, show that they continue
negotiation.”
Commissioner referred to the emphatic language of Ms Isermann’s email of
19 August 2024, namely, “I agree to
the offer made by the respondents at
conciliation, to finalise the
The Commissioner
also referred to the written submissions made by Ms Isermann, where she admitted
that she did make the
[32] As to the
submission by Ms Isermann that the deed did not reflect the bargain, the
Commissioner directed herself to the statement
of principle in
Zoiti-Licastro
v Australian Taxation
where it was
observed that the relevant consideration is not whether the deed properly
reflected the agreement, but whether a valid
agreement was originally
[33] Having
found that there was a binding agreement to compromise Ms Isermann’s
claim, the Commissioner relied upon
Australian Postal Corporation v
to conclude that
“the cause of action has been extinguished”. The Commissioner then
allowed the respondents’ application
to dismiss Ms Isermann’s claim.
The current appeal
Isermann’s appeal is pursuant to
Industrial Relations
, which provides, relevantly:
557 Appeal from
(1) The Minister or another person aggrieved by a decision of the commission
may appeal against the decision to the court on the ground
(a) error of law; or
(b) excess, or want, of jurisdiction.
(2) Also, the Minister or another person aggrieved by a decision of the
commission may appeal against the decision to the court, with
the court’s
leave, on a ground other than—
(a) error of law; or
(b) excess, or want, of jurisdiction.
Section 565
565 When leave for appeal must be given
If an application for leave to appeal is made under
section 554
the Court of Appeal, court or full bench—
(a) must give leave if it is satisfied it is in the public interest to do so;
(b) may not give leave other than under paragraph (a).”
[36] Nothing in
Ms Isermann’s written submissions before the Commission seriously raised
duress or undue influence. The only
issue before the Commissioner was whether
or not Ms Isermann’s claim had been lawfully compromised by the acceptance
offer made by the respondents at the conciliation conference.
Industrial Relations (Tribunals) Rules 2011
required Ms
Isermann’s application to appeal to state “concise grounds of the
Ground 1 of Ms
Isermann’s appeal was in these terms:
1. Unfair and
prejudicial evidence allowed into a conciliatory process.
QIRC fundamental
rules of evidence-
evidence must be relevant to the issue in the issue to be admissible.
Inadmissible
evidence: evidence that is not relevant or reliable or is not legally obtained
is considered inadmissible and cannot
be presented in a court.
Fairness: the right to procedural fairness ensures that all parties will be
given a reasonable opportunity to present their
follows is a series of allegations as to the way in which the Commissioner
conducted the conciliation conference. Most
of these matters were not before
the Commission on the hearing of the strike-out application. There was no
application to adduce
fresh evidence or to rely on fresh grounds on appeal.
[39] Ground 2 is
expressed in this way:
Ground 2. Ineffective Deed of
follows is a number of complaints about the form and content of the deed.
[41] Ground 2
can be ignored. The question is whether there was an agreement to compromise
the claim. If there was, then the terms
of the draft deed are of no
significance.
[42] Ground 1,
as articulated in the application to appeal, is also all but irrelevant.
However, on the hearing of the appeal the
real question was litigated, namely,
whether an agreement was reached as a result of the acceptance of the offer made
at the conciliation
conference, and so it is appropriate to review the
Commissioner’s judgment on that issue.
application before the Commissioner was to summarily dismiss Ms Isermann’s
claim. Although the Commissioner did not
specifically record that she had
referred to the well-known principle that summary dismissal is only ordered in
the clearest of circumstances,
the Commissioner made a positive finding that Ms Isermann had compromised her
claim by accepting the offer made.
Tide Company Pty Ltd v Arawak Holdings Pty
Bond J (as his Honour
then was) neatly summarised the contractual principles relevant to this appeal
as follows:
“[12] The appellant’s case below principally
sought to prove that a contract had been formed by the application of a
offer and acceptance analysis.
[13] The application of the classical theory of contract formation requires
a consideration of the terms of an alleged offer and
the terms of the alleged
acceptance. If the acceptance corresponds with the offer, then so long as the
other requisite elements exist
(namely intention to be legally bound,
consideration and certainty
then a legally binding contract will, generally speaking, have been formed.
[14] A complication which sometimes arises is that the offer and acceptance
analysis reveals that the parties contemplated a subsequent
formal document,
classes of case. In
such cases, the decisive consideration is an objective assessment of whether, as
at the time in question, the
parties intended to bind themselves to the terms of
a particular contract, in advance of the creation of the formal
[15] It remains to note that it is not controversial that conduct occurring
after the date a contract was allegedly formed by acceptance
of an offer is
admissible on the question of whether a contract has been formed as
[45] Here, the
question is whether, objectively assessed, the parties intended to be bound to
the terms of the settlement upon acceptance
of the offer, or whether there was
merely an agreement to agree, provided the terms of the deed could be agreed
upon. Whether the
parties fell within the first or second of the three
possibilities identified in
Masters v Cameron
is not significant.
[46] As observed
by Bond J, the actions of a party after apparently entering into an agreement
are relevant to the extent they reflect
on, and thereby are probative of, proof
of the intention of the party at the time of contracting, objectively
ascertained.
[47] Here, the
evidence in favour of the conclusion reached by the Commissioner is
overwhelming.
respondents made an “offer” which was available for acceptance. In
the conciliation conference, the Commissioner
made clear to both parties that Ms
Isermann had until 4 pm on the following Monday “to consider whether she
will or won’t
accept the offer
to resolve the matter by
agreement”. The Commissioner explained that if the offer was accepted,
then a deed of agreement would
be prepared. The Commissioner made it clear that
if Ms Isermann declined to accept the offer, then the notice of non-party
issues needed to be dealt with.
[49] Everything
said by the Commissioner in the presence of the parties when they reconvened
indicated that the matter would be finalised
by Ms Isermann’s acceptance
of the “offer” which had been made.
response by Ms Isermann to the offer was both emphatic and unambiguous. The
email of 19 August 2024 is in the terms: “I
agree to the offer made by the
respondents at conciliation,
to finalise the matter
email, Ms Isermann does not refer to a deed, but she says that she understands
that an order will be drawn up by
the QIRC and that the funds will be deposited
into her account. The only order that she could have expected to be drawn up by
QIRC was one dismissing her claim. The funds to be deposited, as referred
to in her email, was the monies the subject of the offer
that she had accepted.
In the email of 19 August 2024, not only is Ms Isermann accepting that the
matter has been settled by her
offer, but she is seeking to have the respondents
perform their part of the bargain that she has made and she is seeking to have
the Registrar put the agreement into effect by a formal order.
[51] There was
no rebuke by Ms Isermann of the contents of the Registrar’s email of 21
August 2024, which was consistent with
the matter having been settled.
August 2024, the Registrar, in her email, asserted that the matter had settled.
In Ms Isermann’s response of 30 August
2024, she did not assert to the
Isermann, in her email of 3 September 2024, did not assert that the matter had
not been concluded by agreement upon the acceptance
of the respondents’
offer, but, rather, complained about what she saw as the CCTV footage having
been tampered with.
[54] When the
respondents brought their application to strike out her claim, Ms Isermann, as
already observed, filed a written
submission.
There, she did not
cavil with the notion that the claim had been settled, but, by paragraph [1] of
her submission, thought it should
“be continued, in light of the new
evidence received”. She followed that assertion by accepting that she
agree to take a token amount of $500 offered at the last conciliation
process” in paragraph [2]. After admitting that agreement,
explained why she decided to take it. In paragraph [12] she said, “I
accepted the offer”. In paragraph [13]
she explained that she
“decided against accepting the offer I had already said... I’d
accept”. She said in paragraph
[22] that she had “changed my mind
due to new evidence”. A similar comment was made in paragraph
Conclusions and orders
[55] At the
conciliation conference the parties understood that Ms Isermann could accept the
offer made at the conference, provided
she did so within four days. The
intention of the parties, objectively ascertained from the evidence to which I
have referred, was
that acceptance by Ms Isermann would conclude the claim, but
the terms of the agreement would be later documented. Ms Isermann accepted
offer and her claim was compromised. Her claim ceased to have any prospect of
success once she accepted the offer. From that
point, her rights merged into
the settlement.
Commissioner was right to dismiss Ms Isermann’s claim summarily, and it is
appropriate to order that the appeal be
Isermann v Professional
Property Inspections Pty Ltd & Anor
[2025] QIRC 63.
Notice of non-party
disclosure.
This extract has been
faithfully reproduced notwithstanding the appearance of obvious errors.
This extract has been
faithfully reproduced notwithstanding the appearance of obvious errors.
This extract has been
faithfully reproduced notwithstanding the appearance of obvious errors.
This extract has been
faithfully reproduced notwithstanding the appearance of obvious errors.
Isermann v Professional
Property Inspections Pty Ltd & Anor
[2025] QIRC 64.
[1954] HCA 72
(1954) 91 CLR 353.
This extract has been
faithfully reproduced notwithstanding the appearance of obvious errors.
Isermann v Professional
Property Inspections Pty Ltd & Anor
[2025] QIRC 64
[1954] HCA 72
(1954) 91 CLR 353
Isermann v Professional Property Inspections Pty Ltd & Anor
(2006) 154 IR 1.
Isermann v Professional
Property Inspections Pty Ltd & Anor
[2025] QIRC 64
[2011] FCA 975.
Rule 139(2)(c).
Dey v Victorian Railways
Commissioners
(1949) 78 CLR 62
General Steel Industries Inc v
Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
at 129-130.
[2017] QCA 251.
Seddon, R Bigwood and M Ellinghaus,
Cheshire & Fifoot’s Law of
(2012, 10th Australian edition, LexisNexis Butterworths) at
[1954] HCA 72
v Universal Music Australia Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWCA 313
per Bathurst CJ at
[15], per Beazley P (with whom Meagher JA agreed) at [64]-[65];
Feldman v GNM
Australia Ltd
[2017] NSWCA 107
per Beazley P (with whom McColl and Macfarlan
JJA agreed) at [68].
v GNM Australia Ltd
[2017] NSWCA 107
per Beazley P (with whom McColl and
Macfarlan JJA agreed) at [90]-[91].
Reproduced at
paragraph [28] of these reasons.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (280 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter