URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/57.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Z41 and Legal Services Commission [2025] QICmr 57 (28 August 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
Z41 and Legal Services Commission
[2025] QICmr 57
Application Number:
Respondent:
Legal Services Commission
Decision Date:
28 August 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS - NEITHER
CONFIRM NOR DENY -request for documents containing applicant’s
information or identifying applicant’s company - whether the existence of
responsive information can be neither confirmed
nor denied -
Information Privacy Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied
to the Legal
Services Commission (
) under the
Information Privacy Act 2009
access to documents containing his personal information or otherwise identifying
him or his company.
LSC decided,
under section 69 of
the IP Act, to neither confirm nor deny the existence of documents sought by the
applicant applied
to the Office of
the Information Commissioner (
) for an external review of that
the reasons set out below, I affirm the LSC’s decision to neither confirm
nor deny the existence of the requested
Reviewable decision
decision under review is the LSC’s decision dated 14 February
Evidence considered
submissions, legislation and other material I have considered in reaching my
decision are set out in these reasons (including
footnotes).
making this decision, I have had regard to the
Human Rights Act 2019
), particularly the rights to seek and receive
information, privacy and
reputation.
I consider a
decision-maker will be ‘
respecting, and acting compatibly
’ those rights, and others prescribed in the HR Act, when applying
the law prescribed in the IP Act and the
Right to Information Act 2009
I have acted in
this way in making this decision, in accordance with section 58(1) of the HR
Act. I also note the observations
of Bell J on the interaction between
equivalent Victorian legislation,
it is perfectly compatible with the scope of that positive right
in the Charter for it to be observed by reference to the scheme of,
principles in, the Freedom of Information
Issue for determination
issue for determination is whether the LSC was entitled, under section 69 of the
IP Act, to neither confirm nor deny the existence
of the documents sought by the
Relevant law
the IP Act, an individual has a right to be given access to documents of an
agency, to the extent they contain the individual’s
information.
This right is
subject to limitations, including grounds for refusal of
69 of the IP Act allows a decision-maker to neither confirm nor deny the
existence of a document which, if it existed, would
contain prescribed
information. This provision is intended to apply in situations where, due to
the specific wording of the request,
revealing whether the agency has the
requested documents would reveal information to which an agency would normally
be entitled to
refuse access.
‘Prescribed
information
as including
personal information the disclosure of which would, on balance, be
contrary to the public interest, under the
Right to Information Act
Determining
this issue essentially requires a decision-maker to conduct a hypothetical
public interest
exercise, making a judgment as to where the balance of the public interest would
lie were requested documents to exist.
This involves a notional application of
the public interest balancing test prescribed in section 49 of the RTI Act,
including identifying
public interest factors that would favour disclosure and
nondisclosure, assuming the existence of requested
in this decision should be taken to either confirm or deny the existence of the
requested documents.
applicant claims he has documentary evidence that a barrister or barristers have
acted inappropriately and
unlawfully.
He also claims to
know that the LSC hold the requested documents. The applicant has not provided
any information to OIC, beyond his
assertions, which independently confirms his
knowledge of the LSC holding documents containing his personal and business
information.
If the requested documents existed, would they contain personal
information?
the reasons that follow I find that, if the requested documents existed, they
would contain personal information.
information
information
or an opinion, including information or an opinion forming part of a database,
whether true or not, and whether recorded
in a material form or not, about an
individual whose identity is apparent, or can reasonably be ascertained, from
the information
the wording of the access application, it is reasonable to expect that, if the
requested documents exist, they would contain
the applicant’s personal
information. While information that is only about the applicant’s company
would not, of itself,
be ‘personal
information’,
any such information, if it exists, would likely be very limited given the
company name includes the applicant’s
first and last
also consider it reasonable to expect that, if the requested documents exist,
they would contain the personal information of an
individual or individuals
other than the applicant. The primary role of the LSC is to investigate
complaints about lawyers. To my
knowledge, the applicant is not a lawyer and his
company does not provide legal services. It is reasonable to assume that
information
the LSC holds about the applicant or his business, if it exists,
would be in the context of the LSC having received a complaint about
person who is a lawyer.
the existence of the requested documents were confirmed, it would also be
reasonable for the applicant to conclude they relate
to a lawyer or lawyers he
or his business have dealt with in some capacity. This would, in turn, enable
the identity of the individual
or individuals to whom the requested documents
(if they exist) relate to be reasonably ascertained, as well as the fact of a
having been made against them.
Accordingly,
if the requested documents were to exist, it is reasonable to expect that both
disclosure of these documents and the
confirmation of their existence would
disclose the personal information of other individuals.
If the requested documents existed, would disclosing the
personal information, on balance, be contrary to the public interest?
the reasons that follow I find that, if the requested documents existed,
disclosing the personal information would, on balance,
be contrary to the public
‘public interest’
refers to considerations affecting the
good order and functioning of the community and government affairs for the
well-being of citizens.
This means that, in general, a public interest
consideration is one which is common to all members of, or a substantial segment
of the community, as distinct from matters that concern purely private or
personal interests.
RTI Act identifies various factors that may be relevant to deciding the balance
of the public interest.
deciding whether disclosure of information would, on balance, be contrary to the
public interest, a decision-maker
identify any
irrelevant factors and disregard them
relevant public interest factors favouring disclosure and nondisclosure
balance the
relevant factors favouring disclosure and nondisclosure; and
decide whether
disclosure of the information in issue would, on balance, be contrary to the
public interest.
do not consider any irrelevant
arise in this case and I
have not taken any into account in making this decision.
Factors favouring disclosure
response to OIC’s preliminary view, the applicant
he knows that
the LSC hold documents containing his personal and business information
disclosure may
allow or assist inquiry into possible deficiencies in conduct or administration
of LSC, for example by revealing:
nature and extent of the applicant’s personal and business information
held by LSC
reason or reasons why LSC has his personal and business information
purpose or purposes for which his personal and business information is being
circumstances in which LSC obtained his personal and business information,
including whether it was obtained lawfully
personal and business information is being protected and stored; and
accuracy and completeness of his personal and business
information.
it is dishonest
for the LSC to claim
‘information that does exist does not’
for LSC to have
not taken any action in relation to the unlawful and improper conduct by a legal
professional is anomalous, and ‘
possibly evidence of maladministration,
corruption, incompetence or negligence’
mentioned at paragraph [
requested documents exist, they would contain the applicant’s personal
information. The IP and RTI Acts recognise
a public interest in a person
receiving access to their own personal information held by
I afford significant
weight to this factor favouring disclosure.
of the requested information, if it exists, would allow the applicant to check
its accuracy and completeness. However,
the applicant has not provided any
reasons or evidence to suggest the LSC holds inaccurate or incomplete
information about him or
his business. The phrase ‘
could reasonably be
expected to
’, as it appears in many factors listed in schedule 4 of
the RTI Act,
requires that the
relevant expectation is reasonably based. There must be real and substantial
grounds for expecting the relevant
occurrence, which can be supported by
evidence or reasoning.
consider there is a reasonable basis to expect that disclosure of the requested
information (if it exists) could reveal
that information held by the LSC is
incorrect, out of date, misleading, gratuitous, unfairly subjective or
irrelevant.
I find that this factor favouring disclosure does not apply.
applicant’s submissions also raise the following factors favouring
disclosure:
allowing or
assisting inquiry into possible deficiencies in the conduct or administration of
an agency or official
revealing or
substantiating that an agency or official has engaged in misconduct or
negligent, improper or unlawful
informing the
community of the government’s
and enhancing the
government’s
accountability;
reasons for a government decision and any background or contextual information
that informed the
4 requires reasonable grounds to enliven an expectation that favours these
disclosure factors. To the extent the applicant
submits disclosure could reveal
that the LSC have obtained, held, used or stored his personal or company
information inappropriately
or unlawfully, the applicant has not provided any
reasons or evidence to support these assertions. I consider this is speculative,
rather than an expectation for which reasonable grounds
Accordingly, I do not
consider that this submission gives rise to these factors favouring
disclosure.
However, I have
considered these factors below with respect to the applicant’s other
submissions.
speaking, if the requested information exists, I am satisfied its disclosure
could reasonably be expected to reveal actions
taken by the LSC in response to a
complaint or complaints, reveal reasons and background information for the
LSC’s decisions,
and enhance the government’s
accountability.
on the information before me, I do not consider that disclosure of the requested
information, if it exists, could reasonably
be expected to allow or assist
inquiry into possible deficiencies in conduct or reveal or substantiate that the
LSC has engaged in
misconduct or negligent, improper or unlawful conduct. I
find that, of the factors listed at paragraph [
], only the accountability and
transparency fac
only in the general sense discussed at paragraph [
]. I consider these factors deserve
moderate weight.
Factors favouring nondisclosure
mentioned at paragraphs [
LSC were to hold any relevant information, it is reasonable to expect this would
be in the context of having received a
complaint about a lawyer.
fact of a complaint having been made about a person is their personal
information within the meaning of section 12 of the IP Act.
The RTI Act presumes
that disclosure of third party personal information would give rise to a public
interest harm.
I also consider
disclosure of the requested information, if it exists, could reasonably be
expected to prejudice the protection of
the right to privacy of other
individuals.
While the applicant
submits the LSC could redact or de-identify the requested documents to protect
the identity of other
individuals,
I consider that any
information about the applicant or his company occurring in the context
described at paragraphs [
] would likely be inextricably
intertwined with information about another person.
applicant claims personal knowledge of the matters at hand and the identity of
the relevant legal professional or professionals.
I am satisfied that subjects
of complaints, complainants and any witnesses are entitled to protection of
their right to privacy in
terms of their connection with matters complained
I also note that there
can be no restriction or condition on the use, dissemination or republication of
information released under
In those circumstances,
even if the requested information were to exist and the applicant was aware of
the matters claimed, I do
not consider this reduces the weight to be afforded to
these factors favouring nondisclosure.
afford significant weight to these factors favouring
nondisclosure.
the role of the LSC as discussed in paragraph [
], the requested documents (if they
exist) would likely include information about, or provided by, complainants or
witnesses. For
this information, I also afford significant weight to the factors
favouring disclosure which relate to protecting an agency’s
obtain confidential
and the flow of information to a regulat
Regulatory agencies such as the LSC rely upon information
provided by community members to enable and assist it to perform their
regulatory functions. I am satisfied that routinely disclosing this information
would, if it exists, tend to discourage individuals
from coming forward with
information and cooperating with the LSC, as they may consider that their
identity and other personal information
could be released to other
This, in turn,
could reasonably be expected to negatively impact the LSC’s ability to
obtain this type of information in
Complainants reasonably expect that complaint information
they provide to an agency to assist it to discharge its functions will
in confidence unless, and until, it becomes necessary to disclose it for the
purposes of an inv
factor favouring nondisclosure arises where disclosure could reasonably be
expected to prejudice the fair treatment of individuals
and the information is
improper conduct.
This factor
only applies where the information is about allegations that have been
unsubstantiated. If the requested information
were to exist and give rise to
this nondisclosure factor, the weight I would afford this factor would depend
upon the individual
circumstances of the case, including the severity of any
documented allegations and the nature of the expected prejudice that could
from disclosure. In any case, even if this factor favouring nondisclosure does
not apply, I would be satisfied that the strong
public interest factors
favouring nondisclosure identified above are sufficient to outweigh the public
interest in disclosure of
the requested information.
Balancing the public interest
balancing the public interest, I have had regard to the pro-disclosure bias of
the IP Act.
have afforded significant weight to the factor favouring disclosure of the
applicant’s own personal information, if it exists.
I have also afforded
moderate weight to the factors relating to the LSC’s accountability and
transparency.
the other hand, I have afforded significant weight to the nondisclosure factors
safeguarding personal information and privacy.
For information that is about or
has been provided to the LSC by complainants or witnesses, if it exists, I have
also afforded significant
weight to the nondisclosure factors safeguarding the
LSC’s ability to obtain confidential information and the flow of
information
to the LSC.
have also considered the factor favouring nondisclosure which arises where
disclosure could reasonably be expected to prejudice
the fair treatment of
individuals and the information is about unsubstantiated allegations of
misconduct or unlawful, negligent or
improper conduct. Regardless of whether
this factor applies, I am satisfied that the other nondisclosure factors
identified at paragraph
] are strong
enough to comfortably outweigh the factors favouring disclosure of the requested
information, if it exists. In those
circumstances, I consider the factors
favouring nondisclosure are determinative.
Accordingly,
I find that disclosure of the requested information (if it exists) would, on
balance, be contrary to the public interest
and access may be refused on that
Other matters raised by the applicant
the review, the applicant submitted that the LSC failed to properly articulate
the nature and extent of the information it
holds and the specific reasons why
releasing this information would not be in the public
Section 69(2) of the
IP Act confirms that an agency may give a prescribed written notice of its
decision that does not include the
details mentioned in sections 199(a) or (b)
of the IP Act. Instead, that provision enables the agency to state that it
neither confirms
nor denies the existence of documents but, assuming their
existence, they would be documents to which access would be refused under
section 67 to the extent it comprised prescribed information. I am satisfied the
decision under review complied with the requirements
of section 69(2) of the IP
Act. The purpose of a ‘neither confirm nor deny’ decision is to
permit an agency to not acknowledge
the existence or non-existence of requested
information where doing so would cause the kind of detriment that section 69 of
Act is designed to prevent. For the LSC to explain the nature and extent
of the information it holds in response to the applicant’s
request (if it
exists) would defeat this purpose.
applicant submitted
that, unless
the LSC can reasonably demonstrate that his personal and business information
pertains to an ongoing investigation,
there is no legitimate reason to deny
access. In support of this submission, the applicant cites schedule 3, section
10(6) of the
schedule 3, section 10(6) is an exception to the exemptions at subsections (4)
and (5), and neither of these exemptions are in
issue for this review, I find
that it does not apply to the requested information.
applicant has also claimed that it is dishonest for the LSC to claim
‘information that does exist does
The applicant
submits that it is anomalous, and ‘
possibly evidence of
maladministration, corruption, incompetence or negligence’
has not taken any action in relation to such matters. To the extent these
submissions raise public interest factors favouring
disclosure, I have
considered them. Otherwise, it is not within the Information
Commissioner’s jurisdiction to investigate
the conduct of other government
completeness, I also note that the Information Commissioner has reporting
obligations under section 126 of the IP Act if she is
of the opinion that there
is evidence on review of disciplinary matters. There is nothing before the
Information Commissioner on
this review that enlivens this obligation. In any
event, I note that the Information Commissioner is not required to account to
applicant for any action taken, or not taken, under section 126 of the IP
the reasons set out above, I affirm the reviewable
and find that LSC was
entitled to neither confirm nor deny the existence of the requested documents
under section 69 of the IP Act.
have made this decision under section 123 of the IP Act as a delegate of the
Information Commissioner, under section 139 of the
Acting Principal Review
Date: 28 August 2025
On 22 November
On 1 July 2025 key parts of the
Information Privacy and Other
Legislation Act 2023
(Qld) (IPOLA Act) came into
force, effecting changes to the IP Act and
Right to Information Act 2009
(RTI Act). As the applicant’s application was made before this
change, the IP Act and RTI Act as in force prior to 1
July 2025 remain
applicable to it. This is in accordance with transitional provisions in Chapter
8, Part 3 of the IP Act and Chapter
7, Part 9 of the RTI Act, which require that
applications on foot before 1 July 2025 are to be dealt with as if the IPOLA Act
not been enacted. Accordingly, references to the IP Act and RTI Act in this
decision are to those Acts as in force prior to 1 July
2025. These may be
accessed at
https://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/view/html/inforce/2024-12-31/act-2009-014
https://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/view/html/inforce/2024-12-31/act-2009-013
respectively.
Decision dated 14 February
On 14 February
Under section 123(1)(a) of the IP
Sections 21(2) and 25 of the HR
XYZ v Victoria Police (General)
[2010] VCAT 255
(16 March 2010) (XYZ) at [573]; and Horrocks v Department of
Justice (General)
[2012] VCAT 241
(2 March 2012) at [111].
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
XYZ at [573]. This approach, in the
context of the IP Act and RTI Act, was endorsed by Judicial Member DJ McGill SC
in Lawrence
v Queensland Police Service
[2022] QCATA 134
, observing that
the Information Commissioner ‘was conscious [of the right to seek and
receive information] and considered that
the application of the Act gave effect
to the requirements of the
Human Rights Act
. I see no reason to differ from that
conclusion.’
Section 40 of the IP
Section 67(1) of the IP Act
provides that access may be refused to information in the same way and to the
same extent as information
may be refused under section 47 of the RTI Act.
In schedule 5 of the IP Act.
The term ‘public interest’
refers to considerations affecting the good order and functioning of the
community and government
affairs for the well-being of citizens. This means
that, in general, a public interest consideration is one which is common to all
members of, or a substantial segment of, the community, as distinct from matters
that concern purely private or personal interests,
although there are some
recognised public interest considerations that may apply for the benefit of an
individual: Chris Wheeler,
‘The Public Interest: We Know It's Important,
But Do We Know What It Means’
[2006] AIAdminLawF 2
(2006) 48 AIAL Forum 12
Nadel and Queensland Police Service
[2020] QICmr 19
(6 April 2020) at [15].
Submission received 15 July 2025.
section 12 of the IP Act.
Trading Pty Ltd and Office of Industrial Relations; R97 (Third Party)
(15 March 2023) at [41].
However, there are some recognised public interest considerations that may apply
for the benefit of an individual.
Schedule 4 of the RTI Act lists factors that may be relevant when deciding
whether disclosure of information would, on balance, be
contrary to the public
Section 49(3) of the RTI
Including those identified in
schedule 4, part 1 of the RTI Act.
Submission received on 15 July 2025.
Schedule 4, part 2, item 7 of the RTI
Including schedule 4, part 2, item
12 of the RTI Act.
See Murphy and
Treasury Department
[1995] QICmr 23
(1995) 2 QAR 744 (Murphy)
, citing Re B and Brisbane
North Regional Heath Authority
[1994] QICmr 1
(1994) 1 QAR 279 (Re
B and NBRHA) at [160]. See
also Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd v
[1986] FCA 35
(1986) 10 FCR 180.
4, part 2, item 12 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 2, item 5 of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 2, item 6 of the
Schedule 4, part 2, item 3 of
the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 2, item 1
of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 2,
item 11 of the RTI Act.
Murphy at [44]
and Re B and BNRHA at [160].
4, part 2, items 5 or 6 of the RTI Act.
Giving rise to the factors favouring disclosure at schedule 4, part 2, items 1,
3 and 11 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4,
part 2, items 1, 3 and 11 of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 4, section 6 of
the RTI Act.
A factor favouring
nondisclosure of information: schedule 4, part 3, item 3 of the RTI Act. The
concept of ‘privacy’
is not defined in the IP Act. OIC has adopted
the Australian Law Reform Commission’s definition of the concept, being
of an individual to preserve their personal sphere free from
interference from others: “For your information: Australian Privacy
and Practice” Australian Law Reform Commission Report No. 108 released 11
August 2008, at paragraph 1.56.
Submission received on 15 July 2025.
See, for example, Alsop and Redland City Council
[2017] QICmr 27
(2 August 2017)
at [32] and F60XCX and Queensland Ombudsman
[2014] QICmr 28
(13 June 2014) at
[32] and [75].
FLK v Information
Commissioner
[2021] QCATA 46
Schedule 4, part 3, item 3 and part 4, section 6(1) of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 3, item 16 of the
Schedule 4, part 3, item 13 of
the RTI Act.
Suskova and Council of the
City of Gold Coast
[2015] QICmr 31
(27 November 2015) at [28]; Y39 and
Brisbane City Council
[2021] QICmr 51
(13 October 2021) at
W34 and Department of Agriculture
and Fisheries
[2013] QICmr 10
(8 March 2023) at
Y39 and Brisbane City Council
[2021] QICmr 51
(13 October 2021) at
Schedule 4, part 3, item 6 of the
Section 64 of the IP
Under section 47(3)(b) of the RTI
External review application
received 14 February 2025.
received on 15 July 2025.
Schedule 3,
section 10(6) provides that information is not exempt information under
subsections (4) and (5) of that section if it
consists of information about the
applicant and the relevant investigation has been
Submission received on 15
On 24 July 2025, OIC
informed the applicant by email that, if he had concerns about the conduct of a
government agency or its employees,
he could make a complaint to the Queensland
Ombudsman or the Crime and Corruption
Commission.
K77 and Department of State
Development and Infrastructure (Office of Industrial Relations)
[2024] QICmr 24
(5 June 2025) at [30]; T51 and Townsville Hospital and Health Service
(7 November 2024) at [38].
Under section 123(1)(a) of the IP Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (447 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter