URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2025/281.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Xynias v Stones Corner Village Investments Pty Ltd [2025] QSC 281 (31 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Xynias v Stones Corner Village Investments
[2025] QSC 281
RIGAS XYNIAS, MICHAEL BOUBARIS AND BEN CHEE
(applicants)
STONES CORNER VILLAGE INVESTMENTS PTY
LTD (ACN 120 299 078)
(respondent)
Trial Division
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court of Queensland at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
31 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
7, 8 and 10 October 2025
The applicants seek to be heard as to the
precise form of orders and costs, but I propose to make the declaration sought
in paragraph
one of the originating application.
CATCHWORDS:
LANDLORD AND TENANT – RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL TENANCIES LEGISLATION
– OBLIGATIONS, PROHIBITED TERMS AND PROTECTION FOR LESSEES
ALTERATIONS OR INTERFERENCE TO PREMISES – where the applicants operate a
pharmacy from leased premises in a shopping
centre owned by the respondent
– where the respondent as lessor and owner of the premises provided a
Relocation Notice to the
applicants seeking to relocate the pharmacy to a new
premises nearby to allow for the demolition of the shopping centre and building
of a new development – where the applicants seek a declaration that the
Relocation Notice is void and of no effect –
whether relocation for the
purposes of demolition and reconstruction is permitted under the relocation
clause of the lease –
whether the lessee must be relocated to an
alternative premises within the same “Complex” or “retail
shopping centre”
and whether the proposed alternative premises fulfils
this criteria – whether the alternative premises offered by the lessor
“reasonably comparable” within the meaning of the relocation clause
of the lease and s 46D(2)(b) of the
Retail Shops Leases Act 1994
(Qld) – whether the Relocation Notice is void and of no
CONTRACTS – GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES – CONSTRUCTION
AND INTERPRETATION OF CONTRACTS – whether the proposed
works by the
respondent are properly described as redevelopment within the meaning of the
relocation clause of the lease
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Retail Shops Leases Act 1994
(Qld), ss 5A, 5B, 5D,
Cheng v Sydney Markets Ltd
[2024] NSWSC
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority
149 CLR 337
Electricity Generation Corporation (t/as Verve Energy) v
Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
(2014) 251 CLR 640
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP
[2004] HCA 35
(2004) 218 CLR 451
Skiwing Pty Ltd v Trust Company of
Australia (No 3)
[2004] NSWADT 94
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty
(2004) 219 CLR 165
Trust Company of Australia Ltd v Skiwing Pty
[2005] NSWADTAP 9
Western Australian Rugby Union v Australian
Rugby Union Ltd
[2017] NSWSC 1174
F L Harrison KC with S Carius for the applicants
D Williams for the
SOLICITORS:
Conomos Lawyers for the applicants
Batch Mewing Lawyers for the
applicants are pharmacists who operate a pharmacy from leased premises in a
shopping centre known as Stones Corner Village
situated at 401-405 Logan Road,
Greenslopes (but more colloquially known as Stones Corner).
respondent is the current owner and lessor of the Stones Corner Village, more
particularly described as Lot 1 on Registered
Plan 12119, County Stanley, Parish
Bulimba, Title Reference 17332111.
applicants hold a registered lease in respect of Shop 4/5 on the ground floor of
the Stones Corner Village bearing dealing
number 715893773.
[4] On 30 April
2025, the respondent provided to the applicants a notice purporting to relocate
the pharmacy business to another building
situated at 409 Logan Road,
Greenslopes.
applicants seek a declaration that the Relocation Notice is void and of no
effect. The Relocation Notice was given to the
applicants in the context of the
fact that the respondent proposes to demolish the premises at the Stones Corner
Village and build
a new development, and accordingly seeks to relocate the
pharmacy to a new premises nearby so as to permit the demolition of the
to take place.
Background to the proceedings
first-named applicant, Mr Xynias has operated the pharmacy from Shop 4/5 within
the Stones Corner Village shopping centre
since about 1993. Since 2012 he has
operated the pharmacy with his two business partners, the second and third named
applicants.
applicants were granted a registered lease over Shop 4/5 on 27 August 2012. The
term of the lease was then extended by a
registered amendment to the lease such
that the lease now expires on 26 August 2027, with one five-year option to renew
until 26 August 2032, subject to the valid exercise of the
[8] The Stones
Corner Village shopping precinct is a substantial suburban shopping precinct
which opened in 1987 and previously contained
some 25 tenancies. The precinct
is now substantially empty, the only lessees remaining in occupation being an
Aldi store, a café/coffee
shop and the pharmacy in question.
[9] The first
issue arises out of the construction of cl 13.24 of the lease which permits
relocation of the pharmacy for the purposes
of refurbishing, redeveloping or
extending the premises. Here the question is whether relocation for the
purposes of demolition
and reconstruction is permitted by cl 13.24.
[10] The second
issue is whether relocation must be to an alternative premises within the same
“Complex” or “retail
shopping centre”.
[11] The third
issue is whether the alternative premises which have been offered by the lessor
is “reasonably comparable”
within the meaning of cl 13.24 of the
lease and s 46D(2)(b) of the
Retail Shops Leases Act 1994
Terms of the lease
[12] Clause
13.24 of the lease provides as follows:
to New Premises
(1) the Lessor proposes to carry out works to refurbish, redevelop or extend
the Building in which the Premises is situated during
the Lease Term or any
Further Term (the Relocation Works); and
(2) the Relocation Works cannot be carried out practicably without vacant
possession of the Premises;
then the Lessor may from time to time relocate the business of the Lessee
from the Premises to another location in the Complex (a
) under this clause.
(b) If the Lessor wishes to carry out a Relocation, it must give the Lessee
a written notice (a
Relocation Notice
) containing:
(1) sufficient details of the proposed Relocation Works to indicate a
genuine proposal that the Relocation Works:
(A) are to be carried out within a reasonably practical time after the
Lessee’s business is relocated; and
(B) cannot be carried out practically without vacant possession of the
Premises; and
(2) details of the reasonably comparable alternative premises (the
) to be made available to the Lessee including:
(A) a plan showing the location of the New Premises; and
(B) the Lessor’s best estimate of the annual rent payable for the New
Premises, adjusted to take into account the difference
in the commercial values
of the Premises and the New Premises (the
(3) the day by which the Lessee must vacate the Premises, which must be at
least 3 months from the date on which the Relocation Notice
is given to the
Lessee (the
Relocation Day
(c) Within 1 month after receiving the Relocation Notice, the Lessee may
give the Lessor a written notice terminating this document
(a Lessee Termination
(d) If the Lessee gives a Lessee Termination Notice, this document
terminates on the Relocation Day.
(e) If the Lessee does not give a Lessee Termination Notice, then the Lessee
is deemed to have accepted the Lessor’s offer
of a lease of the New
Premises (a New Premises Lease) in accordance with the Relocation Notice and
this clause.
(f) For the removal of doubt, the Lessor may withdraw its Relocation Notice
at any time before the Lessee may give a Lessee Termination
Notice, in which
case this document must continue without any relocation.
(g) Deleted intentionally.
(h) The Floor Area of the New Premises must not be greater nor smaller by
more than ten per cent of the Floor Area of the Premises,
unless the Lessee
otherwise consents.
(i) The New Premises must be fitted out by the
Lessor to a standard comparable to that of the Premises at the time of the
fitting-out,
including the removal of the Lessee’s Property from the
Premises and the installation of it in the New Premises. The Lessee
cooperate with the Lessor to enable the fitting-out work to be carried out.
(j) The New Premises Lease must:
(1) commence on the day following the Relocation Day;
(2) be for a term equal to the balance of the Lease Term applicable after
the Relocation Day;
(3) require payment of the New Rent by the Lessee from its commencement;
(4) otherwise contain the same covenants and guarantee as apply to this
document as if it was a continuation of the Lease Term.
(k) The Lessee and the Guarantor must within 14 days after written request
by the Lessor, sign and deliver to the Lessor:
(1) a surrender of this document and a discharge (capable of immediate
registration) of any dealing concerning this document; and
(2) the New Premises Lease and guarantee and all other documents that the
Lessor may reasonably require (the
New Lease Documents
) to facilitate the
registration of them.
(l) The Lessor must pay;
(1) the Lessee's reasonable legal costs, lease duty (if any and limited to
the balance of the Lease Term) and registration fees for
the New Lease
Documents; and
(2) the Lessee's reasonable costs of the Relocation to the extent that may
be required under the RSL Act (if the RSL Act applies
to this document);
in full satisfaction of any Claim by the Lessee for any loss, damage or
compensation concerning the Relocation.
(m) Except to the extent otherwise specified in this clause or required by
legislation, as from the Relocation Day the Lessor and
the Lessee mutually
release and discharge each other from any Claim they may have against each other
under this document, but without
affecting any liability of the Lessee under
this document up to and including the Relocation Day.”
[13] Clause
13.24 of the lease effectively mirrors ss 46D - 46G of the RSLA. In particular,
s 46D provides:
46D Lessor’s relocation
(1) If, under the retail shop lease, the lessor requires the lessee’s
business to be relocated, the lessor must give the lessee
a written notice under
this section (a
relocation notice
(2) A relocation notice must state each of the following─
(a) sufficient details of the proposed refurbishment, redevelopment or
extension to indicate a genuine proposal that─
(i) is to be carried out within a reasonably practicable time after the
lessee’s business is relocated; and
(ii) can not be carried out practicably without vacant possession of the
leased shop;
(b) details of the reasonably comparable alternative retail shop to be made
available to the lessee;
(c) the day by which the lessee must vacate the leased shop (the
relocation day
(3) The relocation notice must be given at least 3 months before the
relocation day.
(4) If the leased shop is within a retail shopping centre, the alternative
retail shop detailed in the relocation notice under subsection
(2)(b) must be
situated within the centre.”
[14] Some of the
terms in cl 13.24 are defined terms under the lease. For
Definitions
means the building and all other improvements (above or
below ground level) erected on the Land.
(a) the Land and all other land that the Lessor may at any time
incorporate into the Complex for any purpose;
(b) the Building and all other improvements (above or below ground level)
erected on that land; and
(c) the Lessor’s Fixtures;
but excludes any land, buildings or improvements that the Lessor may
determine do not form part of the Complex.
means the land described on the Front sheet.”
[15] It can be
accepted that the Lease is subject to the regulatory overlay of the RSLA which
includes the following relevant definitions:
5A Meaning of
retail shop lease
retail shop lease
is a lease of a retail shop.
(3) Also, a
retail shop lease
does not include a lease of
premises located in a retail shopping centre if─
(a) the premises are not used wholly or predominantly for carrying on a
retail business; and
(b) at the time the lease is entered into, either–
(i) if the premises are located on a level of a multi-level
building—the retail area of the level is 25% or less of the total
area of the level; or
(ii) if the premises are located in a single level building—the
retail area of the building is 25% or less of the total lettable
area of the
[16] Section 5B
of the RSLA provides:
5B Meaning of
Retail shop
means premises that are─
(a) situated in a retail shopping centre; or
(b) used wholly or predominantly for the carrying on of a retail
[17] Section 5D
defines a retail shopping centre as follows:
5D Meaning of
retail shopping centre
retail shopping centre
is a cluster of premises having all
of the following attributes─
(a) 5 or more of the premises are used wholly or predominantly for carrying
on retail businesses;
(b) all the premises─
(i) are owned by the 1 person; or
(c) all the premises are located in─
(i) 1 building; or
(ii) 2 or more buildings if–
(A) the buildings are adjoining; or
(B) if the premises are owned by the 1 person—the buildings are
separated by common areas or other areas owned by the owner
or a road; or
(C) if the premises are not owned by the 1 person—the buildings are
separated by common areas or a road;
(d) the cluster of premises is promoted, or generally regarded, as
constituting a shopping centre, shopping mall, shopping court
or shopping
[18] Pursuant to
s 46E of the RSLA, within one month after receiving the Relocation Notice, the
lessee may give the lessor a written
notice terminating the lease. If the
lessee does not give that notice, then the lessee is taken to have accepted the
offer of a lease of the alternative retail shop mentioned in the
Relocation Notice. By s 46F of the RSLA then, unless the lessor
and the lessee
agree otherwise, the terms and conditions of the lease mentioned in s 46E(3),
being the new lease, are the same as
the terms and conditions of the existing
Issue 1 – Clause 13.24 of the lease (refurbish,
redevelop or extend)
construction issues of this clause fall to be determined, together with the
factual determinations.
[20] The first
issue is whether the proposed works by the respondent are properly described as
redevelopment within the meaning of
cl 13.24(a)(1) of the lease, “... to
carry out works to refurbish, redevelop or extend the Building in which the
Premises is
situated ...”. No party contends the works are, or could be,
refurbishment or extension.
respondent intends to demolish the whole of the building and reconstruct new
premises. The lessor submits that demolition
is the first step in
redevelopment.
[22] When giving
the Relocation Notice the respondent stated:
redevelopment requires demolition of the Premises on the ground floor because a
basement will be built directly underneath
the current Premises. Accordingly,
the redevelopment cannot be carried out without vacant possession of the
[23] There is no
demolition clause as part of this lease, and any precontractual negotiations
dealing with the inclusion or otherwise
of a proposed demolition clause are
irrelevant to the construction of cl 13.24. The lease contains an entire
agreement clause.
[24] Whilst the
word “demolition” does not appear in the lease, it does appear in
the RSLA as a defined word, and in conjunction
with the term “demolition
clauses”. The word “demolish” is defined in the RSLA
, a building, includes carry out
substantial repair, renovation or reconstruction of the building that can not
practicably be carried
out without vacant possession of 1 or more leased shops
in the building.”
[25] Elsewhere,
the RSLA provides for a lessor’s liability to pay compensation in respect
of early termination of a lease arising
from demolition (s 46K and s
applicants submit that the relocation works are expressly limited to
refurbishing, redeveloping or extending the building
in which the premises are
located, and that those same words appear within the relocation provisions of
the RSLA. As such, the applicants
submit that where the words in a statute are
transposed into a contract either by choice of the contracting parties or
of law, the same meaning should be given to the words in the contract
as they have in the statute. Accordingly, the applicants submit
that where the
choice of words in the lease did not include demolition, the words
“refurbish, redevelop or extend” should
not be construed as
including the separate concept of demolition. Rather, the drafting leads to the
conclusion that the separate
concept of “demolition” was excluded
from this lease.
respondent submits that to carve out “demolition”, which is merely
the first step of “redevelopment”,
would be to defeat the evident
commercial purpose of cl 13.24 being, to permit redevelopment with appropriate
safeguards.
[28] There was
no genuine dispute as to the relevant principles of construction. In construing
commercial contracts, the meaning
of the words used in the contract is to be
determined objectively by what a reasonable person would have understood them to
The lease must be interpreted
objectively by reference to its text, context and
This requires attention
to the language used by the parties (text), the commercial circumstances which
the document addresses (context)
and the purpose of the transaction and the
objects which it was intended to secure
The whole of the
instrument needs to be considered, and evidence of surrounding circumstances is
admissible to assist in the interpretation
of the contract only where the
language is ambiguous or susceptible to more than one meaning, but it is not
admissible to contradict
the language of the contract where it otherwise has a
plain meaning.
The court must
prefer the construction that best promotes the purpose of the
demolition is the first stage of redevelopment, initially is, an attractive
argument because of its obvious correctness
in the context of building
construction. The respondent relies in part upon the Brisbane City Council
redevelopment approval which
comprises demolition followed by reconstruction.
Had the respondent sought only to demolish the premises, and merely clear the
for sale, the respondent might not have satisfied the requirement that it
was carrying out “redevelopment” because no
new premises were to be
constructed,
but here, demolition
is merely the first stage of the redevelopment process.
[30] However, in
my view that argument ought to be rejected for the following reasons.
[31] First, the
text used does not include demolition.
[32] Second,
under the RSLA a Relocation Notice can be given for the purposes of
“refurbishment, redevelopment or extension”
but does not on its face
pertain to demolition. Relocating for these purposes is contained within div 9
sub-div 1 of the RSLA, whereas
a termination notice must be given in the context
of a “genuine proposal to demolish the building” is contained within
div 9 sub-div 2. It can be accepted therefore that the notice for relocating
for refurbishing, redeveloping or extending involves
different considerations to
notices which might be given in respect of termination arising out of
demolition. Redevelopment is therefore
contextually different to
demolition.
[33] Third, the
Relocation Notice requires, under cl 13.24(a) that the business of the lessee
will be relocated “to another
location in the Complex ...”. While I
would be a relocation to another location “in the
Complex” when the complex itself is to be demolished. The only way
read cl 13.24 harmoniously is to interpret demolition works as being outside the
scope of the relocation works as contained in
[34] Fourth, the
respondent’s construction requires what it describes as an ambulatory
approach at the time of the notice.
Because s 5D(1)(a) of the RSLA defines a
“retail shopping centre” as “a cluster of premises ... 5 or
more of which
are used wholly or predominantly for carrying on retail
businesses”, the respondent submits the language uses the present tense
(“are used”), denoting a continuing factual state. Here, the
evidence demonstrates that by April 2025 the Stones Corner
Village no longer
satisfied the definition in s 5D of the RSLA, because fewer than five retail
tenancies were trading within the
centre. Accordingly, the respondent submits
that the requirements of the RSLA generally, and in s 46D(4) specifically,
cannot apply
where the centre no longer satisfies the definition of
“retail shopping centre”. Further, the respondent contends that
protections afforded by the RSLA are protections premised on the dynamics of a
functional shopping centre environment, which
would not be applicable to the
Stones Corner Village when only three tenants remained there.
“ambulatory” reading of the RSLA is inconsistent with the
Act’s proper purposes, the express object of
the Act being to promote
efficiency and equity in the conduct of certain retail businesses in Queensland.
Adopting the respondent’s
construction, a landlord of an existing retail
shopping centre would only need to remove a number of tenants, reducing the
number to less than five and the provisions of the RSLA would no longer
apply. The remaining tenants would then not have any protection
under the RSLA,
which they were otherwise afforded before other tenancies ceased to operate
within the shopping centre. Rather than
promoting efficiency and equity in the
conduct of those retail businesses, it would create uncertainty and inequity by
changing the
regulatory framework which applied to those retail shop leases
which changes arose from the conduct of other tenants, or the landlord,
which the affected tenant had no control.
[36] Fifth, the
respondent contends that the applicants’ construction produces absurdity
because it would require a landlord
to relocate a tenant “in the
Complex” in circumstances where the complex itself is to be demolished.
Rather than producing
absurdity, this submission supports the applicants’
construction that “refurbish, redevelop or extend” was not
to encompass demolition because relocation to another premises within that
complex which was to be demolished would be nonsensical.
[37] I do not
accept the respondent submission that the requirement to relocate a tenant
within the centre “where the centre
has ceased to exist in any real
sense” would ossify protections long after the commercial rationale had
passed because it ignores
the other provisions of the RSLA which provide for a
circumstance in which a demolition notice can be given. Pursuant to s 46H of
the RSLA, a retail shop lease is taken to include ss 46I to 46K if the lease
provides for its termination by the lessor if the building
in which the leased
shop is situated is to be demolished, requiring vacant possession of the leased
[38] Contrary to
the respondent’s submission, that a tenant cannot be relocated in the same
complex, lends weight to the argument
that relocation was not intended to
capture circumstances of demolition.
the circumstances, I find that demolition is not encompassed by cl 13.24. As a
consequence, the Relocation Notice is void
and of no effect. While that
conclusion would be enough to make the declarations sought by the applicant, I
turn to consider the
other issues.
Issue 2 – Relocation
within the Complex?
[40] Next, cl
13.24 requires that the relocation be “... to another location in the
Complex ...”.
property into which the respondent seeks to relocate the applicants is at 409
Logan Road. It is no part of the original
shopping centre known as the Stones
Corner Village, which is 401-405 Logan Road. The alternative premises are what
might best be
described as a standalone street-front shop. 409 Logan Road is
physically separated from the Stones Corner Village by another property,
407 Logan Road, which is occupied by a Lifeline store.
[42] 409 Logan
Road was previously a vacant premises, but sometime in 2024 the building was
rebranded by the respondent placing a
sign upon it reading “Stones Corner
Village”. No tenant occupied the space.
[43] Under the
terms of the lease, “Complex” means, as defined at [14] above,
firstly, the “Land” described
on the Frontsheet. That Land was Lot
1 on Registered Plan 121119, County Stanley, Parish Bulimba, Title Reference
17332111. No
party contended that the Land described on the Frontsheet is the
same as the Land at 409 Logan Road; plainly it is not.
[44] However,
the definition of Complex goes on to include “... and all other land that
the lessor may at any time incorporate
into the Complex for any purpose
...”. The respondent submits therefore that the premises at 409 Logan Road
land” that the lessor has “incorporated” into
the Complex “for any purpose”.
respondent submits that the words “incorporate into the Complex” do
not impose a contiguity requirement such
that the land must be physically
adjoining or structurally continuous to the original complex, and to read a
contiguity requirement
into the construction would contradict the broad language
of the term. Rather, the words “all other land” and the words
“for any purpose” are of very wide import, and when read together
with the words “into the complex”, signals
that incorporation may
occur for commercial, branding, redevelopment, or other purposes as the lessor
determines. Accordingly, the
respondent submits the words are of significant
breadth and should be given their full effect.
difficulty with the respondent’s construction in my view is that what the
respondent is purporting to do is not genuinely
incorporating other land into
the Complex but rather substituting the leased tenancy that was within the
complex with some other
leased tenancy outside the complex when the complex is
demolished.
contractual right to “incorporate” other land into the
“Complex” must be approached by reference
to the natural and
ordinary meaning of the words “incorporate” and
“Complex”. I accept that one of the defining
features of a complex,
in particular a shopping complex, is that the component parts of it are
interconnected and located on the
same site. This allows for physical
interconnectedness within the complex as well as for shared customer flow and
use of amenities.
Accordingly, 409 Logan Road is not capable of being
incorporated into the complex because it is not contiguous with the Land as
defined in the lease, nor could there be any interconnectedness to 409 Logan
Road when it is separated by an independent retail space.
Furthermore, the
buildings of the kind within the Complex are quite different to the building of
the kind located at 409 Logan Road.
The Complex is a large retail shopping
centre connected by a series of covered walkways between the various retail
tenancies. In
contrast, 409 Logan Road is a freestanding shop front that does
not answer the description of a retail shopping centre.
[48] Whilst it
can be accepted that the definition of “Complex” as set out at [14]
above suggests a broad definition –
“... all other land ... may at
any time incorporate into the complex for any purpose” – the reading
of the word
Complex throughout the terms of the lease to incorporate separate
standalone properties “into the Complex” merely by
branding sign upon it, is not the proper contextual reading of the word
“Complex”. Most obviously, to read
cl 13.24 by the expanded
definition “... to another location in the Complex ...” would, on
the respondent’s reading,
mean that the lessor could incorporate, by
merely rebranding, any generally proximate retail space “into the
while at the same time causing the entire Complex to be
demolished. Such is not a proper reading of the definition of either
or “incorporate”.
[49] In the
circumstances, for this second reason, I find that the Relocation Notice is void
and of no effect because purported relocation
is not to another premises within
the Complex.
Issue 3 – “Reasonably comparable
alternative premises”
resolution of either the first or second issues is enough to conclude that the
Relocation Notice was not a valid notice and
accordingly, to grant the
declarations which the applicants seek. Nevertheless, I turn to consider
whether the premises at 409 Logan
Road are a “reasonably comparable
alternative premises” within the meaning of cl 13.24(b) of the
term “reasonably comparable” alternative as it is contained in cl
13.24 of the lease and s 46D(2)(b) of the RSLA has
barely been considered in
Queensland,
and the same
terminology is not used in the relocation provisions of most Retail Shop Leases
legislation elsewhere in Australia.
Only Victoria also uses the phrase “reasonably comparable” in its
relocation provision.
states which do not have a similar comparability requirement, the relocation
provision has nevertheless been interpreted
to mean alternative premises that is
comparable in terms of size, aspect, commercial value or
[52] “Reasonably
comparable” is not the same as identical. Reasonable comparability
denotes a notion of considering the
amenities, location, configuration, size,
services, lease terms and other aspects of the leased premises for the purposes
of determining
whether it is fair and appropriate in all the circumstances to
allow the lessor to rely upon the relocation clause in the lease.
Necessarily,
the court must weigh the differences and similarities of each premises in order
to reach a judgment as to whether the
alternative premises is “reasonably
comparable”. Authorities from other jurisdictions which used the term
“alternative”
shop or retail premises without the descriptor
“reasonably comparable”, are generally unhelpful to the analysis,
having been a deliberate legislative choice to avoid language with
descriptors such as “similar” or “commercial
similarity”.
[53] Whilst
relocation necessarily involves some disruption to the tenant’s business,
which no doubt most tenants would find
undesirable, that, of itself, is not a
relevant consideration. The commercial contractual terms to which the parties
have agreed
must be given utility. As such, the tenant must be taken to have
agreed to the disruption for the contractual purpose (redevelopment,
refurbishment and extension) so long as the alternative premises are
“reasonably comparable”.
[54] A number of
experts gave evidence relevant to this issue, and although all of their evidence
was received, subject to some minor
objections, ultimately the question of
whether the alternative premises is reasonably comparable is a matter for the
existing pharmacy is approximately 257 square metres, plus a trade out area
(included in the lease) of 14.2 square metres,
all over one ground floor space,
accompanied by an exclusive licence of approximately 12 square metres for
storage. By comparison,
the alternative premises is
269 square metres, split across two levels. The ground floor/street level
comprises an area of 214 square
metres which is approximately 83.5 per cent of
the existing premises.
trade out area is included in the calculations, the new premises are smaller
again, being only 79 per cent of the existing
Those figures do not
take into account a small area of three square metres in the alternative
premises located under the stairwell
which are below regulation height, which
would make the alternative premises smaller again.
[56] Of the 269
square metres of the alternative premises, the upstairs area is 55 square
metres. Whilst the overall size of the
premises including the first floor might
not be dramatically different to the existing premises, the fact that it is over
rather than one is a matter of some significance in this case to
which I will return.
[57] Pursuant to
cl 13.24(h) the floor area of the new premises must not be greater nor smaller
by more than ten per cent of the floor
area of the existing premises, unless the
lessee otherwise consents. The applicant does not consent.
[58] The ground
floor and the first floor of the alternative premises are not, currently,
internally connected. As one looks at the
premises from Logan Road, the ground
floor is accessed by a door placed about centre of the shop front. To the far
right-hand end
of the premises there is a set of stairs accessing the
first-floor level only. That set of stairs has direct access onto Logan Road,
not into the ground floor of the premises. Some witnesses described it as a
public stairwell, and that is an accurate description
to the extent that it is
not stairwell internal between the two floors, but a stairwell onto Logan Road.
For a range of reasons,
to which I will return, that limits the useability of
the upstairs part of the premises.
[59] Accepting
for the time being that the downstairs area of 409 Logan Road is useable as a
pharmacy, it would be a pharmacy of some
size difference, which difference is
not immaterial.
size difference is not a factor in favour of reasonable
comparability.
Two levels rather than one
[61] I have
referred at [58] above, to the stairs which currently provide the only access to
the upstairs part of the alternative
premises. I am satisfied that currently the
two areas of the alternative premises are quite separate.
[62] Mr Xynias
contended that the practical and commercial operation of his pharmacy required
that the pharmacists had a line of sight
throughout the entire pharmacy so as to
be able to responsibly administer and oversee the sale of items, whether they be
prescription
or non-prescription medication or other services. Whilst there was
some significant dispute amongst the expert evidence as to whether
regulatory controls or limitations which would affect the obtaining of approval
for a two-storey pharmacy as opposed to
a pharmacy all on one level, ultimately
the configuration issue does not fall to be considered particularly by reference
regulations.
satisfied that the upper level cannot be practically used as part of the
pharmacy. Even assuming that some items of stock
that did not require a
pharmacist’s supervision could be placed up there, such as those also
able to be purchased in a supermarket
(e.g. band aids, hair products, face cream
etc.), it can hardly be supposed that it is practical to expect customers to
some purchases on the ground floor, and then walk out of the shop, onto
Logan Road, and up a flight of stairs to purchase other
items. Alternatively,
it is impractical for customers to select items on the first floor and then walk
downstairs to pay for them,
journeying onto Logan Road first before locating a
cash register on the ground floor.
respondent’s suggestion that the upstairs could be used for storage or
staff amenities is no answer to this. Currently,
the storage facilities used by
the pharmacy are 12 square metres, and only part of it is being used. At the
alternative premises,
the first floor is 55 square metres, far more than the
applicants require for storage. The upstairs area is not therefore suitable,
required, for storage. In any event, even if it was used, it would require staff
to transport items for storage such a boxes up
a set of stairs, in contrast to
the storage area currently available directly adjacent to the loading dock. The
amenity of such a
storage area suggests it would be a feature that is not
reasonably comparable to the existing premises.
[65] I find that
the upstairs of the alternative premises is practically of limited use to the
applicant who required a relatively
small storage space and, I accept, does not
have a requirement for significant administration or similar staff amenity
[66] Furthermore,
in circumstances where the access to the upstairs area is not via an internal
staircase, but by a publicly accessible
staircase from Logan Road directly to
the upstairs level, I think it can safely be concluded that the upstairs level
is of little
practical utility to these applicants.
[67] There was
evidence that the respondent intended to install a lift inside the ground floor
to connect to first floor, but it had
not been installed by the date of the
hearing; rather it was scheduled for a date in December. Even assuming a lift
had been installed,
a premises that requires the pharmacy to operate over two
floors would be a significantly different premises to the one now operated
the applicants. In short, a lift is no real answer.
configuration over two floors is not a factor in favour of reasonable
comparability.
Location generally
alternative premises has street frontage on to Logan Road whilst the existing
premises is, as I have already said, within
a larger retail shopping centre,
albeit one that is largely empty.
difference in location carries with it, firstly, different passing foot traffic.
It can be accepted that the prospects of
spontaneous purchases at the pharmacy
from persons who are otherwise attending the Aldi store, or the coffee shop, is
foot traffic
that may not be available to the pharmacy as part of a strip shop
centre. The effect on the business by the difference in passing
foot traffic is
difficult to determine. Whilst Mr Chapman was called to provide an expert
opinion as to the commercially significant
differences between the current
premises and the alternative premises, he did so, in part, by reference to a
foot traffic report
which measured the relative number of personal mobile
devices in area, comparing the numbers moving past each of the premises. That
evidence was not particularly helpful because it did not separate mobile devices
carried by people on foot (those who might go into
the pharmacy for a
spontaneous purchase), from mobile devices in vehicles merely driving past.
applicants contend that their current premises are in close proximity to a
national supermarket which is drawcard for their
business and generates foot
traffic. It is true that there is no supermarket close to the alternative
premises, but neither is it
clear that the existing supermarket will continue to
remain in the shopping centre. Whilst there are a range of other shops in the
general vicinity of the alternative premises, it is fair to infer that they
might not draw the same amount of foot traffic as a large
supermarket.
[72] Whilst Aldi
and the coffee shop might bring spontaneous shoppers to the pharmacy, it cannot
be supposed that the pharmacy continues
to benefit from its position more
broadly in a large retail shopping complex when by far the majority of the
tenancies are vacant.
[73] Next, Mr
Xynias complains that the alternative premises are further away from the medical
centre at Stones Corner from which
many patients receive scripts which they then
fill at the pharmacy. Against this, the respondent contends that the line of
from the medical centre to the pharmacy is clearer from the alternative
premises than where the pharmacy is currently located inside
the retail shopping
centre. In my view, there is no appreciable difference between a slightly
further away, but more visible pharmacy
from the medical centre to a closer, but
less visible pharmacy.
[74] Taking into
account the general location issues, in my view, this aspect is reasonably
comparable.
Car parking and security
[75] In the
current retail centre, there is carparking for approximately 240 cars.
Naturally not all of those are available solely
for the customers of the
pharmacy but easy parking access, whether it is to Aldi, the coffee shop or the
pharmacy, is almost certainly
assured by access to such a large number of car
parks. The alternative location offers five car parks at the rear of the
in an open-air facility. Were that parking to be used by the six
members of staff, it follows that there would be little if any
parking available
for customers.
without allowing for staff parking, the reduction in car parks is a matter of
some considerable significance as the alternative
premises are likely to be a
destination of their own for customers, as opposed to a convenience whilst
attending at another destination
such as Aldi or the café, hence parking
becomes more important.
[77] Whilst the
larger number of car parks available within the retail complex would have at one
time serviced a much larger number
of tenancies within the complex, the fact
remains that that significant number of car parks are now available for the use
three remaining tenants: Aldi, the pharmacy and the café. This
makes the useability of the centre for customers a matter
of real significance
when compared to the very limited number of car parks available at the
alternative premises.
issues regarding parking are that the parking in the shopping centre currently
provides for free parking for two hours.
In contrast, there are no parking
bays, free or otherwise, in front of the alternative location, rather there is a
No Standing zone
and a Bus zone, as well as a No Parking zone outside the post
office box directly opposite the premises. There are 10 two-hour parking
and three 15 minute parking bays further away on Logan Road, between Jeavons
Lane and Old Cleveland Road, but they are some
distance from the alternative
location. All weather access to those parking bays is not achievable in the way
access is to the current
available parking. What parking there is at the
alternative location is dramatically limited compared to what is available
[79] The lack of
parking also creates a difficulty having regard to the nature of the business,
being the supply of scheduled medications,
narcotics and other drugs. That car
park at the back of the proposed premises does not benefit from the casual
presence of other
customers to the shopping centre, with the attendant security
risks for staff or other persons delivering drugs or narcotics to the
[80] I find the
substantial difference in the parking arrangement to be a factor significantly
against the alternative premises being
reasonably comparable to the existing
Delivery access
[81] The loading
bay in the existing premises is accessed via a flat car park level. This allows
bulk stock to be delivered by a
pallet truck. The delivery area has direct
access to the storeroom where supplies are kept. Daily orders, which Mr Xynias
can consist of up to 30 cartons per day, can then be delivered by trolley
to the pharmacy. The alternative premises has a loading
bay at the bottom of a
set of stairs. Naturally enough, trolleys and pallets cannot be taken up and
down the stairs. Whether it
is staff or delivery drivers, someone will have to
carry stock up and down stairs making delivery of bulk stock difficult to
delivery access is not a factor in favour of reasonable
comparability.
relativities of rent are difficult to assess. According to Mr Cameron, a
property valuer, there is a rental variance for
stores internally within
shopping centres which are generally higher than rent in smaller strip centres
or freestanding building
such as that in the alternative premises. He concluded
that the rent variance at the existing tenancy of some $946 per square metre
gross, versus $751 per square metre gross at the alternative tenancy, provided
sufficient relativity between the two premises having
regard to the two
different types of premises that they are. While accepting the correctness of
that premise, it does rather demonstrate
that from a commercial perspective, the
desirability of a premises inside a shopping complex is reflected by the higher
rental prices
which lessees are prepared to pay versus the lower rent for the
freestanding or strip shop premises reflecting, no doubt, the perception,
the fact, that it is more desirable to be within a retail complex than outside
[84] While I
consider that the rent offered for the alternative premise is proper for that
premises, the fact that it is some 79 per
cent of the existing premises does
reflect, in my view, the general lack of comparability of the two
Leasing arrangements
respondent is the owner of the existing premises, but the lessor of the
alternative premises; the owner of the alternative
premises being a company
Agilitas Pty Ltd. As such, the lease that has been offered to the applicants at
the alternative premises
is a sub-lease. The applicants correctly submit that
there are a number of difficulties with that arrangement that makes the lease
the alternative premises not reasonably comparable.
[86] First, the
applicants would not stand in a contractual relation with Agilitas and their
leasehold interest would be vulnerable
to Agilitas’ rights under the Head
Lease; a situation which does not exist under the present arrangements.
[87] Second, the
respondent purported to cure that vulnerability by proffering an undertaking
from Agilitas not to terminate the lease
while the applicants remain in
occupation. The undertaking was offered by Mr Stockwell who is the director of
both the respondent
and Agilitas. Expressly, the undertaking was not offered to
the court, it was offered to the tenant. As such it was asserted to be
contract between the sub-lessor and the tenant. In that form, it seemed to me
the undertaking was unlikely to be worthwhile, and
the applicants do not accept
it. It was not, for example, accompanied by an undertaking not to dispose of the
shares in Agilitas.
[88] Third,
because the undertaking came late in the trial, it did not accompany the
purported Relocation Notice. As such, the late
giving of it does nothing to
address whether the Notice was valid at the time it was given.
[89] Fourth, the
sub-lease could not offer to the applicants the ability to display stock outside
the perimeter of the pharmacy, in
the common mall walkways, as permitted by the
terms of the existing lease. Mr Xynias had negotiated a term to the existing
to trade out 995 millimetres from the lease line and to use the seasonal
mall space for displays. He described this trading as “critical”
maintaining his supplier agreements and promotional income. The alternative
premises, being on Logan Road, likely has little if
any facility to trade in
such a substantial way outside the premises because that would be to encroach
onto the public footpath.
[90] The terms
of the new lease, in my view, are unlikely to be reasonably
comparable.
Commercial similarity?
respondent also relied on the evidence of Jeremy McKinnon of Think Economics to
offer an opinion, from an economic perspective,
as to the commercial and
functional similarity between both premises.
McKinnon was not concerned with the operation of the applicants’ business
model at either premises, but rather whether
the alternative space was
“fit for purpose” and could sustain the levels of sales at the
alternative premises. Mr McKinnon
concluded that the existing premises were
operationally superior because there would be more expense associated with
operating over
two levels such as CCTV and increased staffing. Nevertheless, he
found that the alternative premises were “fit for purpose”.
particular, Mr McKinnon reviewed the sales history, turnover figures and
financial statements of the applicants’ business
and concluded, relevantly
(a) front-of-shop retail sales were the smallest component of the
business’s sales representing approximately 15 per cent of
total sales in
2025 and 16 per cent over the period between 2023 to 2025;
(b) dispensary sales were the second largest component contributing to some 40
per cent of total sales in 2025 and averaging 37 per
cent between 2023 and 2025;
(c) online sales accounted for the largest share of turnover representing 44 per
cent of total sales in 2025 and an average of 48
per cent between 2023 and 2025.
[94] From this
analysis Mr McKinnon concluded that the move to the alternative premises was
unlikely to have a significant financial
impact upon the business given that the
majority of reported sales were not dependent upon the physical shopfront
location, and that
the dispensary sales were unlikely to materially change
having regard to the ongoing proximity to the medical centre. As such, he
concluded that the relocation of the pharmacy to 409 Logan Road would “...
not materially diminish the functionality of the
McKinnon’s analysis that dispensary sales would remain the same in either
location because of the proximity to the medical
centre is not borne out. Mr
Xynias gave evidence that only 20 per cent of dispensary sales came from scripts
from the Medical Centre,
the other 80 per cent from shoppers who were in and
around Aldi. As such, being removed from close proximity to the Aldi would
have a material impact on dispensary sales.
[96] Whilst I
can accept Mr McKinnon’s assessment that the alternative space was
“fit for purpose”, that is not
the test. In my view, this criteria
is finely balanced, but I would conclude in favour of reasonable comparability,
the significance
overall of online sales being a compelling
Other amenity issues
[97] There are
other amenity issues which it seems to me are not comparable between the two
premises. For example, currently toilets
are accessible to the public by a key
being obtained from a tenant within the complex. The proposed toilets in the
alternative premises
do not provide for public access whatsoever. Whilst I find
that this is a minor issue, it is still not generally
comparable.
Conclusion on reasonable comparability
[98] I conclude
that the alternative premises are not reasonably comparable because:
(a) the layout over two levels is significantly different, as well as generally
impracticable, for the applicants’ business;
(b) the practically useable size of the alternative premises is appreciably
smaller than the existing premises, taking into account
that the upstairs part
of the premises are not genuinely useable by the applicants;
(c) the different availability in car park access between the two premises is
most significant;
(d) the accessibility generally of the alternative premises is significantly
inferior to the existing premises when receiving and
transporting deliveries to
the premises; and
(e) the leasing arrangements are materially less favourable in the alternative
[99] Balancing
those features against comparable features (location, proximity to the medical
centre and commercial similarity), I
conclude that the alternative premises is
not reasonably comparable within the meaning of cl 13.24 of the lease. As a
consequence,
the Relocation Notice is void and of no effect.
applicants seek to be heard as to the precise form of order, and on the issue of
costs. It follows however, subject to those
submissions, that I propose to make
a form of order whereby there is a declaration that, on the proper construction
(a) the registered lease 715893773 between the respondent as lessor and the
applicants as lessee of Lease Shop 4/5 situated in a
building at 401-405 Logan
Road, Greenslopes in the State of Queensland, which lease is more particularly
described as Tenancy T4/5
on part of the ground floor of a building erected on
the land owned by the respondent as shown hatched or edged in black on the
plan annexed to Appendix 1 of the Lease; and
Retail Shop Leases Act 1994
the Relocation Notice issued by the respondent to the applicants on 30 April
2025 is void and of no effect.
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP
[2004] HCA 35
(2004) 218 CLR 451
at 461-462;
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm
(2004) 219 CLR 165 at 179.
Electricity Generation
Corporation (t/as Verve Energy) v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
(2014) 251 CLR 640
Codelfa Construction Pty
Ltd v State Rail Authority
(1982) 149 CLR 337
at 350-352;
Australian Rugby Union v Australian Rugby Union Ltd
[2017] NSWSC 1174
Codelfa Construction Pty
Ltd v State Rail Authority (NSW)
(1982) 149 CLR 337
at 350-352.
Acts Interpretation Act
Greater London Council
[1986] 2 WLR 628
, where demolition for the purposes of sale was not
classified as “redevelopment”.
Enidran Pty Ltd v Mirvac Funds Ltd & Anor
[2000] QSC 476
Lincoln & Ors v Lutwyche Shopping Centre Pty Ltd
[2018] QCAT
Leases Act 1994
Retails and Commercial Leases Act 1995
Business Tenancies (Fair Dealing) Act 2003
Commercial Tenancy
(Retail Shops) Agreements Act 1985
(WA) all use the term “alternative
shop” without the words “reasonably comparable”;
Leases Act 2022
(Tas) uses the term “reasonably comparable alternative
premises” but the Act has not yet commenced;
Leases (Commercial and
Retail) Act 2001
(ACT) uses the term “alternative comparable
Retail Leases Act 2003
Skiwing Pty Ltd v Trust
Company of Australia (No 3)
[2004] NSWADT 94
Trust Company of Australia
Ltd v Skiwing Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWADTAP 9.
Cheng v Sydney Markets
[2024] NSWSC 755
257sqm x 83.5% = 214.59
257sqm + 14.2sqm = 271.2 x
79% = 214.24sqm.
National Health
(Community Pharmacy Authority Rules) Determination 2018;
Pharmacy Business
Ownership Act 2024
Medicines and Poisons (Medicines) Regulation
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (307 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter